S3486 12294493 58985
Haec summum vatem Shirleium pingit Imago, Solem sic reddit debilis umbra suum: At si nativâ fulgentem luce videbis, Exhibet en propriâ picta Tabella manu W. Marshall sculpsit, 1646.
SIX NEW PLAYES, Viz. The BROTHERS. SISTERS. DOUBTFULL HEIR. IMPOSTURE. CARDINALL. COURT SECRET. The Five first were acted at the Private House in BLACK FRYERS with great Applause. The last was never Acted. All Written by JAMES SHIRLEY Never printed before. London, Printed for Humphrey Robinson at the Three Pigeons, and Humphrey Moseley at the Prince's Armes in St. Paul's Curch-yard. 1653.
THE BROTHERS, A COMEDIE, AS It was Acted at the private House IN BLACK FRYERS. WRITTEN By JAMES SHIRLEY. Never Printed before. LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Robinson at the Three Pigeons, and Humphrey Moseley at the Prince Armes in St. Paul's Church-yard. 1652.
To his truly Noble Friend THO: STANLEY Esq SIR, The Memory and Contempla∣tion of good Offices recei∣ved, which, by their own na∣ture, and impulsion, have inclined other men to bee active in their returnes, have not wrought me into so much boldness; For when I considered my obligation to your favors I was still deter∣red by their greatness and number; For in my poverty I had thoughts not without Ambition to reach them with some merit, but when I was studying to proportion my gratitude, I fell much lower than when I was the object of your mercy. The way to releeve my self, is no more to look at what you have confer'd, but on
the bestower, for I have now learn'd to sepa∣rate you from your benefits, and to convey my self into your pardon, by the exercise of your Charity. Thus in place of cancelling my former debts, I put your vertue to a new disburs∣ment: Witness this Composition, which after its birth, had in my thoughts a dedication to your name, although it but now took the bold∣ness to wear it in the forehean both as an Or∣nament and preserver. You were pleas'd to grace it with your fair opinion, when it was re∣presented, and though it appear not in that naturall Dress of the Scene, nor so powerfull, as when it had the soul of action, yet your smile upon it now will give it second animati∣on; by which I shall derive after so long a si∣lence, a Confirmation of my happiness, in be∣ing still received Sir Your most humble Servant IAMES SHIRLEY.
The Prologue. TRoth Gentlemen, I know not what to say Now I am here, but you shall have a play; I hope there are none met but freinds if you Be pleas'd to hear me first, I'le tell you true, I doe not like the Prologue, 'tis not smart, Not aery, then the play is not worth a— What witty Prologues have we heard? how keen Vpon the tyme, how tickling o'the spleen? But that wits gone, and wee in these sad dayes In corse dull fleam, must preface to our playes, I'le shew you what our Author meant should be His Prologue,—Gentlemen, he shall pardon me I dare not speak a line, not that you need To fear a satire in't, or wit in deed. He would have you beleeve no language good, And artfull, but what's cleerly understood, And then he robs you of much mirth, that lyes I'th' wonder, why you laugh at Comedies. He saies the tymes are dangerous, who knowes What treason may be wrapt in giant prose, Or swelling verse, at least to sense? nay then Have at you Mr. Poet, Gentlemen, Though he pretend fair, I dissemble not, 'are all betray'd here to a Spanish plot But doe not you seem fearfull; as you were Shooting the bridge, let no man shift, or stir, 'le fetch you of, and two houres hence you may (If not before) laugh at the plot, and play.
The Persons. Don Carlos. Luys his Son. Don Ramires. Sonnes to Ramyres. Fernando Francisco Don Pedro a Noble man. Alberto, a Gentleman, lover of Jacinta. Thodoro, brother to Don Carlos. Jacinta daughter to Don Carlos. Alsimira, a Noble Widdow. Felisarda, Teodoros Daughter Physicians. Notary. Confessor. Servants. Scene Madrid.
THE BROTHERS. ACT I. Enter Francisco, Iacinta, Felisarda. Francisco. I Take my leave Iacinta, and cannot wish you More happiness than you possess. Iacin. You must Dissemble, or it is within your wishes To make you self, Francisco, mine, which would be A fair addition to me, in my faith Of that most noble love you have profest. Fran. When you but dare to own me, I am past The fear of any destiny that can Enter Don Carlos and Servant Divide us—but your Father. Your own virtue Be still you guard. I do not like this watch Upon our meeting, pretty Felisarda. Exit Car. Tel Signior Francisco I would speak with him. I do not like his frequent visites: though His birth and generous parts deserve to march With men of honorable name, I am Without ambition to sacrifise My daughter to his pension for life. Enter Francisco Fran. Your pleasure sir? Car. Hath hitherto Francisco Been to affect you in the list of those
I held my freinds. Fra. I hope no forfeit made By me, hath lost that good opinion You plac'd upon me. Car. I cannot tell How you may be transported with desires Above my thoughts t' allow, I would not have My silence, and the free access y' have had To my house, (which still is open to wise guests,) Betray me, or my Daughter to the mirth And talk of men i'th' Plassa, My estate Doth walk upon sound Feet, and though I make No exception to your blood, or person, sir, The portion I have fixt upon Iacinta, Beside the wealth her liberall Aunt bequeath'd her, Is more than your thin Younger brother's fortune Should lay a siege, or hope to. I am plain. Fr. And something passionate (if I understand you) Without a cause. I am a gentleman, With as much sense of honor, as the proudest Don that doth ride on's foot cloth, and can drop Gold to the numerous minutes of his age And let me not be lost for want of that, Deserves not to be nam'd to fill the ballance Against true honour—let me tell you sir, Virtue and blood are weigh'd against themselves, You cannot know the price of these, when either Scale is not poiz'd with things of the same nature. Car. Y'are very right, and therefore I do weigh My Daughters wealth against your fortunes sir, I tke it they are things in the same specie, And ind it cafie to distinguish, yours Can hold small competition, and by A consequence that Fathers use t' infere, As little hope to equall in affections. Sir I must tell you I esteem Iacinta
Fit every way to meet your Elder Brother, Whose Birth will intrest him so much in that Full fortune which your Father now is Lord of, Your expectations may prompt you look Without much curiositie for a Bride, Fran. I shall believe thy soul is made of Atomes, That placeth so much happiness in Dust. asid Sir, I can quit your Jealousie, my thoughts Levell beneath your Daughter, and shall be Happie if you consent I may devote My applications to Felisarda, your Neece. Car. Is it my Neece? I ask your pardon. Nay then be welcome, and t'encourage you, Although her Father a poor Gentleman My brother, by the malice of the sea And winds, have lost what might have rank'd him even With some that ride upon their reverend mules, I'l find a portion for her, if you strike Affectionate heartes, and joy to call you Nephew. Pray be not angry, that I take a care To place my own, where I may see it answerd With State, as well as Family. Fran. You shew A provident Father. I shall not then B' indanger'd to your scruple, if I address My services to her, whose humble fortune, In the relation to your blood, and nobleness, Is wealth enough to me? Car. I wish it prosper. Fra. You have much honor'd me. Exit, Car. That scruple's vanish'd. These are considerings, with which Parents must Timely prevent the folly, and the fall Of Children, apt to lose themselves in shadowes And gaudy apparitions. Enter Servant. Ser. Your Son
Is come from Salamanca Sir. Car. I hope Philosophy hath by this time tam'd his wildness, I have been carefull not to feed his riots. Hee's welcome; my next studie is to choose A wife for him, Servant, With him a Gentleman. That seems of noble quality. Enter Luys and Alberto. Luys. Your blessing, Next vvhich 'tvvil be a happiness, if you Embrace this noble Gentleman Don, Alberto, To whose affection I have been engag'd. Alber. Our studies grew together, and or loves. Car. You do an honour to us. Lu. If he thrive Upon his fair intents sir to my Sister, Whose character he ha's took delight to hear From me sometimes, it will enlarge our honor. Car. He has improved in language—his estate? Lu. Six thousand ducats sir per Annum clear In his possession, beside The legacie of a Granam when she dyes That ha's outliv'd 6. cats within their family. Car. This tasts again of the old humor, hee's Not setled yet. Lu. Your pardon sir, I cannot With any patience think of an old wman, They are agues to my nature, she that lives To three score is a witch, and fit for fuell By the Civill law. I hope my mother's well. Sir I beseech you, be not you mistaken, I am not what I was, I'm strangely alter'd From the wild garbe, and can discourse most gravely Of any thing but old and toothless women. Do not you think it fit, she should be burn'd sir,
That lives within an Hospitall till the roof Consume to dust, and no more left for covering Than is kept up in one continued Cobweb, Through which the birds may see her when she creeps Under a spiders canopie; what think you? Speak your own conscience. Car. A young wife will cure This angry heat of blood. You are most welcome, Command my house, and if you can affect My Daughter, for whose love (as my Son here Prepares me) you took this paines, I shall Make equall propositions. I knew Your Father well, Don Roderigo, who Gave up his life with honor 'gainst the Moores. Once more y' are welcome: Son Luys shew The way to your Sister, and bid her entertain Your friend with all the love her modesty, And my commands may prompt her to. Alber. You much oblige my services. Lu. Remember Don Conditions, if my Sister and you join Your coppiholds, I have a life must be Maintain'd till the old man dye, hang his pension, Two'not keep me in salads. I'le conduct you. Exe. Alb. & Luys. Car. I like his person well, and his calm gesture Speakes for his other composition. The estate is competent, my Daughter is Obedient, which rich Parents call a blessing, Whose wisdom is to advance their name, and fortunes. Enter Don Ramyres My Son is all my studie now. My noble Don Ramyres, you look cheerfull. Ramy. 'Tis a good omen, I ha' buisness w'ee uch as cannot despair your entertaiment; You have a Daughter. Car. I would you had one;
should be willing to translate a Son, d by his mariage be most proud to call ur Daughter mine. amy. You are next a Prophet, Signior, And but the Sexes differ, speak my thoughts; is harmony on both sides; to be short let our gravities not waste time, and breath our affaires, give the Young leave to court And spin out dayes in amorous circumstance; Son Fernando, I need not call him Heir, birth concludes it, I would commend fair Iacinta: 't can be no dishonour Family to mix with mine. Tis an addition a luster rather to our blood. Tis my affection to you Daughter, which confirm'd rvation of her virtue, makes this tye between 'em; I may safely you will assure a portion that fortunes will deserve, who must enjoy I possess, unless you disaffect person, or decline his education, ich hath not spar'd my coffers to advance him he best form of Gentleman. ar. I want of tongue to answer this our freedome, and the bounty of your nature, Towards my Daughter, and so far am from Exception to Fernando, there's no Cavalliero In Spain I wish to thrive so well in her opinion. Ramy. T will be his encouragement, If he entrench upon noothers interest, I mean not to except, how well he can Deserve her nobly from a Rivall, if Her heart be not contracted, this were to Engage'em both to loss of Peace, and Honor,
Perhaps betray a Life. Car. You argue nobly, She is yet Mistris of her thoughts, and free, While her Obedience doth keep in trust Her heart; till I direct it, which shall be To love, and choose your Son to live within it. Have I said home? Ramy. You have. When they have met We may conclude the Doury, and confirm Our mutuall assurances, till then farewel. Exit. Car. I like this well; Ramyres has A fortune for a Grande. Don Alberto Must now excuse me, if my vote preferre Fernando, whom my Daughter must accept Or forfelt me. The new guest is not warm In his access, and sha'not feel with what Soft art, and subtle wayes, I steer her passion; Yet were Alberto's state ten Maravides Above Ramyre's, I should place him first. Fame is an empty noise, Virtue a word There's not a Jew will lend two Ducate; on. He is return'd, I must prepare Iacinta. Exit. Enter Ramyres and Fernando. Fer. I hope my past life hath not sir so ill Deserv'd, you should be jealous of my duty When you command, although in things of this High nature, man being nothing more concern'd, Next the divine considerations, Than in the choyce of her that must divide The joyes and sufferings of his life, a Son May modestly insist upon the privilege That Love by his great charter hath conferr'd On every heart, not to be forc'd, yet I Freely resign my will, and what men call Affection, to that object you present me. Ramyr. Apply your self then to Don Carlo's daughter
Shee's young, fair, rich, and virtuous, and I've had Full treatie with her Father, who expects Your visit. Fer. Young, fair, rich, and virtuous, Four excellencies seldom met in one; She cannot sure want servants, that commands Under so many titles. I could wish, (So much I have ambition to be thought Obedient sir,) she were but one of those. Ramy. She is all, and one. Fer. My duty were not less If I forgave my self a happiness To perfect your comands; sir, I am ready, To try my fortune. Ramy. There is no fear of thy repulse, and when Thou dost confirm her gain'd to thy affection, My greatest act, and care of life is over. Go on and prosper. Exit Fer. He is passionate, And like the fury of the winds, more loud By opposition; such a providence May be mine one day when I am a Father, And he for whose advance my cares are meant, Like me, may with a fair and formall shew Disguise his thoughts too, yet I am to blame, For my affection to a dream, a thing With which my eyes only converst, to hazard A Fathers love, and the rich peace it brings; Enter Francisco. I'l uncreate the face I dote upon And be my self, or—what? my brother? Now Francisco, you met my father? Fran. Yes, and he Lookes as some newes had much exalted him. You are not so merry in the face, what Is't? Ferd. Nothing.
Fran. You held no controversies with him? Ferd. no. Fran. I cannot guess he was angry by his smiles; How did you part? Ferd. exceding kindly. Fran. What changes your complexion? Ferd. Th'art deceived. Pre'the' how do men look that are in love? Fran. Why? as they did before; what alteration Have you observ'd in me? Ferd. You have then a Mistris, And thrive upon her favours; but thou art My brother, I'l deliver thee a secret, I was at St. Sebastians last Sunday At Vespers. Fran. Is it a secret that you went to church? You need not blush to tell your ghostly Father. Ferd. I pre'thee leave thy impertinence; there I saw So sweet a face, so harmless, so intent Upon her prayers, it frosted my devotion To gaze on her, till by degrces I took Her fair Idea through my covetous eye, Into my heart, and know not how to ease It since of the impression. Fran. So, proceed. Fer. Her eye did seem to labour with a tear, Which suddenly took birth, but overweigh'd With it's own swelling, drop'd upon her bosome, Which by reflexion of her light, appear'd As nature meant her sorrrw for an ornament; After her looks grew chearfull, and I saw A smile shoot gracefull upward from her eyes, As if they had gain'd a victory o'r grief, And with it many beames twisted themselves, Upon whose golden threads the Angells walk To and again from heaven. Fran. I do beleeve By all these metaphors, you are in love; I see you have a fancie, but proceed,
And be not melancholy. Ferd. I have told thee all. Fran. This is indeed a vision; you have But seen her all this while, if I may counsell you You should proceed, her face is nothing when You have perus'd the rest. Ferd. Tis dangerous. Fran. You must excuse me Brother, There can be no hurt in a handsome woman, For if her face delight so much, what will The enjoying of so sweet a pile of beauty? Ferd. Thou hast infus'd a confidence, I will Embrace this counsell, you shall with me Brother, And see how I behave my self, the Lady Is not far off. Fran. Withall my heart, I'e pawn My life you shall enjoy her; what is she Of flesh, and blood, that will deny, when she Is fairly courted? may I know the name Of this lov'd Mrs? you may clear your thoughts, I dare have no design to wrong your love. Ferd. What think you Brother of the fair Iacinta? Fran. Don Carlo's Daughter? Ferd. To that happy coast I now am sayling; we lose time, clap on More wings thou feather'd God; thou hast put fire Francisco into my drooping thoughts, and as They had already bargaind with the wind, They are aloft, and chide loves lazie motion. Fran. A word before you fly; but is Iacinta Your Mistris then? Ferd. The beautifull Iacinta. Dost think I sha'not prosper? what is she Of flesh and blood, that can deny, when she Is fairly courted? add to this my happiness, That shee's the Mistris, whom, from all her sex My Father hath made choice of for my courtship;
He hath already treated with Don Carlos, And 'twas his last command, I should address My present visit to her. Fran. Very well; If this be truth, you need not trouble wings To overtake this Lady, to my knowledge (I'm serious now) she has bestowd her heart Vpon a friend, who has already fortified Himself against the world, that would oppose His title to't. Ferd. From what intelligence Have you gaind this? her Father knows it not. Come, these are but subtle pretences scattered By some, who cunningly thus hope to make Themselves a victory, by cutting off More fruitfull expectations, this must Not disingage me, prithee walk. Fran. I can produce my Author, here, Fernando. And with my blood defend that interest She gave me, with intent I should preserve it. Ferd. How, is she yours Francisco? Fran. Mine, if hearts Have power to make assurance. Ferd. Tis some happiness I have no stranger to oppose, whose high And stubborn soul would not release this treasure But make me force it through his blood. Francisco And Fernando are two rillets from one Spring, I will not doubt he will resigne, to make Me fortunate; or should his will be cold And some close thoughts suggest I had no privilege By Eldest birth, but came a slie Intruder Upon his right of love, there is a tye Of Nature and Obedience to a Father Will make him give this blessing from his bosom, And strip his amorous soul of all his wealth That may Invest my wishes.
Fran. I read not this In any of the reverend Casuists; No inequality being in our blood The la of nature meant we should be equal; It was first tyranny, then partiall cuto me, Made you more capable of Land. Would you Be lord of us, because you are first born, And make our souls your tenants too? when I've Nam'd you my Elder brother, I exclude All servitude; Justice that makes me love you Carries an equall law to both; Nay I can love you more if I consider you (Without the chain of blood) a friend, than all The bonds of nature can enforce me to; In both relations give me leave to love you As much as man, but not resign my Mistris. You ascend higher, and perswade by what Obedience is owing to a Father, They give us life, a good Son keepes it for him, And every drop bled in their cause, a glory; I can acknovvledge this, and sacrifise Life, Fortunes, a poor recompence to lose (Were they all multipli'd) to shew my duty; But these are things may be resign'd, a Mistris Is not a vvealth in ballance vvith the vvorld, But much above the poize of all it's happiness, And equall vvith our honor, riveted Ito our sol, it leaves her not, vvhen death Hath ook this body off, but flies vvith it Moe svvift, t love it in the other vvorld. Ferd. You are very paionate. Fran. I am very j, And you sall find it brother e'r you tvvine With my Iacia, mine, if vovves may give Posseion of each other's soul. Ferd. No more
May she be worthy of thy heart, till mine Do entertain a treason to divide you; But I, to satifie my Father, must Present my self, and trust me, will so manage My love to her, as thou shalt have no cause To Interpret me a rivall. O Fracisco Our loves are of a kindred, for mine is Devote to Felisarda, to her Cosen Poor Felisarda. Fran. Theodoros Daughter? Ferd. We never yet chang'd language, nor doth she Imagin with what thoughts I honour her; But here is the distraction, thou canst not Expect more opposition from  Carls, Than I must from my Father, if he knew Where I have plac'd my heart. Fran. Let us assist Each other then, till time, and some kind arres Mature our love. Ferd. Let Fathers look at wealth, tis all their Saint: Hearts are freeborn, and love knows no constraint. Exet ACT II. Enter Luys and Iacinta. Luis HOw do you like Alberto Sister? is he not A gallant Gentleman? Iacin. For what good Brother? cannot Judge his Intellectualls, But we have plentie of more proper men Spain. Luys He ianexcellent Scholar, He was still Emperour in the Schooles, and since He studied Logick and Philosophy, He was the flow'r of's time at Salamanca. Iacin. Tis pittie he should be gather'd then.
Lu What be gather'd? Ia The flower you talk on. Lu. If you affect him Sister, he may grow, And you may keep him still for seed please you. Ia. And sell him out at sowing time to Gardners. Lu Come, you must love him. Ia. Ha's he the Black-art? I know not how Magick or Philters may Prevail, and yet he lookes suspitiously. Lu. You think y' are witty now, d'ee hear, you must Affect him for my sake. Ia. Now you speak reason; I may for your sake dote upon him, Brother, This is a conjuration may do much. Lu. Well said, Thou art my Sister, this good nature shews it. And now I'le tell thee, I ha' promis'd him As much as mariage comes too, and I lose My hoor, if my Don receive the canvas. He ha's a good estate, and I have borrow'd Considerable monies of him Sister, Peeces of eight, and transitory Ducats. Ia. Which must be paid. Lu. Not if you marry him; Conditions have been thought on. Ia. How? conditions? Lu. And some revenew was convenient To do things like a Gentleman, I may Tell you, my Father is a litle costive, Purse-bound, his penfion cannot find me tooth-picks, I must live till he dye 'tis fit you know; Alberto ha's an Exchequer, which upon Thy smiles will still be open. Ia. Very good; Then you upon the matter have sold me to him To find you spending money?
Lu. No, not sold; W' are at no certain price; summes have been lent In expectation, or so, and may again. Ia. You deserve Brother I should hate you now. Lu. 'Tis all one to me, so you love him; For my part I deire but my expences. Ia. What if another man supply your wants Upon the same conditions of my love? Lu. I am indifferent, so I have my charges, My necessary wine and women paid for, Love where you please your self; I am but one, I would not see him want that's all, because My Father is not yet resolv'd about His going to heaven. Ia. Well sir, for Don Alberto, You shall be his advocate no more, and there's A Fee to bribe your silence in his cause. Lu. Why, thank you sister,—will you dye a virgin? Ia. Why do yo ask? Lu. I would speak for somebody, tell me but whom You have a mind to, and I'le plead for him, And if he be a Don he will consider it; You may give me what you will, besides. Ia. When I Resolve, You shall be acquainted. Lu. But d'ee hear, Untill you do resolve, I would lose no time, Tis good keeping a freind, and a warm client; You may look lovingly upon Alberto, And let him hope at all adventures, in Two moneths you may be otherwise provided And he may hang himself, i'th meane time Some favours now and then to the poor Gentleman Will doe him good, and me no hurt, besides You'l please my Father in't, whose vote is for him, And that's a thing materiall. I am
To meet with Don Alberto, and some Gentlemen, I will preserve his confidence, and tell him I ha' talkd with thee. Have you any more Of this complexion? cause I know not what Occasions I may have to keep my credit With men of mark and honour, vvhere I am going; You are my Fathers darling, and command His yellovv Ingots; tother Doblon D'oro. Ia. So I may bring a rent-charge upon my self. Lu. The tother drop of orient mercie, come. Ia. You care not vvhat accounts I give my Father. Lu. Thou hast tvventy vvayes to cosen him, vvedge i Into the next Bill, he vvears Spectacles, And loves to read—Item for pious uses. Can it be less to help a brother? vvell said. Ia. Let not this feed your riot. Luys By no means. I am for no Carthusians to day. Enter Carlos, Fernando, Francisco, and Felisarda. Farevvell dear Sister—vvho is that? Ia. My Father Lu. I cannot indure that old mans company. Exi Car. I am past complement, and must acknovvledg Your fair intentions honor us, she is no Goddess Of beauty Sir, but let me without pride Boast my self blest, Fernando, in her virtues, And that which crowns em all, obedience. Iacinta, Entertain this Gentleman With all becoming thoughts of Love, his merit (Out of no rash, but mature judgement,) hath Prevaild with me, to name him to the first And noblest place within your heart. Ferd. Untill this hour I never had the confidence More than to think of love, and hide a flame That almost hath consum'd me. You may think
It worth a smile, and that I only flourish To shew my vanity of wit or language, But when you understand that I bring hither No young affection, but a love took in Long since at my ambitious eye, it may Beget your gentle thought, or will, to cure me. Iac. Pardon me, if the more you strive to print A truth on this short story of your passion, The more I find my self inclin'd to wonder, Since you seem to inferre, You took in the Disease at fight of me, I cannot be So ignorant, as not to have receiv'd Your Name and Character, but never kn fore, when you did grace us with a visit▪ And how then at such distance you contracted A danger so consuming, is above, My knowledge, not my pittie, if you could Direct me to the cure with Virgin honor. Car. So, so, I leave you to the amorous Dialgue, Presume you have my voice. Iac. Sir, with your pardon, You lead me to a Wilderness, and take Your self away, that should be guide; do you Engage me to affect this Don Fernando n earnest? Car. Yes. Iac. You did direct my love o Don Alberto. Car. I dispence with that ommand; you may by fair degrees, and honor, Quit his addresses, and dispose your self istris and Bride to Don Ramyres heir. Felis. It does not thus become you sir, to mock Virgin never injur'd you; he is our elder Brother, I am here beneath he levell of his thoughts, i'th' nature of servant to my Cosen, and depend
Upon my Uncles charity. Fran. May I be Curst in my own affections, if I Delude thee, though to atchieve our best desires We seem to dissemble thus before Don Carlos. This is a secret yet to poor Iacinta. Car. You have my will; obey it. Ia. Hath Francisco broken his faith already? Car. May you both joy, where you have plac'd your loves. You apply close Francisco. Exit Fran. With your good favour, I fairly hope. Ferd. Your Father's gone Iacinta. Ia. I should be Equally pleas'd if you would leave me too. Felis. This is a change. Ia. Unkind Francisco hear me. Fran. Tis my meaning. Brother I ha' prepard Your story there with Felisarda; lose No time. Ferd. Iacinta, clear your thoughts agen, And ardon that I took a shape to fright you; I shall not grieve to see Francisco prosper, And merit all your favours, since my hopes Must thrive, or have their Funerall here. Ia. Are we So ble Francisco? th'ast a noble Brother. Ferd. I may suppose my Brother, Felisarda, Hath made it now no secret, that I love you; And since our stars have so contriv'd, that we Have means to assist our mutuall ambitions, D not you make their influence unprofitable; Tis the first boldness I ere tooke to visit you, Alhough my eyes have often with delight And satisfaction to my heart observ'd you: elis. You seem a noble Gentleman, and can take
But litle glory to undo a Maid, Whose Fortunes cannot bring you any triumph. Ferd. How mean you fairest? Felis. Not to be flattered Sir Into a sin, to cure my poverty; For men whose expectations are like yours, Come not with honour to court such as I am, (Lost to the World for want of portion) But with some untam'd heat of blood. Fer. I dare With conscience of my pure intent, try what Rudeness you find upon my lip, tis chast As the desires that breath upon my language. I began Felisarda to affect thee By seeing thee at Prayers, thy vertue wing'd Loves Arrow first, and 'twere a sacrilege To choose thee now for sin, that hast a power To make this place a Temple by thy Innocence. I know thy poverty, and came not to Bribe it against thy chastity; if thou Vouchsafe thy fair and honest love, it shall Adorn my fortunes, which shall stoop to serve it In spight of friends or destiny. Fran. My Brother Knows my whole Interest in thee, to whom My Fathers care directed him, but we Thus mutually resolve to aid each other. Ia. This must be wisely manag'd of all sides; Parents have narrow eyes. Fran. Our meeting thus Will happily secure us from their Jealousie; Our Fathers must not know this countermarch. Enter Carlos. Car. Ha; I like not this; Fernando at busie courtship With Felisarda, and Francisco so Close with my Daughter.
Iac. Las we are betrai'd. Felis. My Unkle. Ferd. You are her Kinswoman, and of her bosom, I prechee in my absence, plead to air Icinta for me; as an earnest of My , accept this trifle from me. Car. 'tis a jewell. Felis. Without this reward I should solicite sir your cause, and do My duty to Don Carlos, who desires it. Ferd. I take my leave. Fran. Madam, I shall be proud To call you Sister, but you will prepare Another happiness if you vouchsafe To speak for me to pretty Felisarda, She's bound to hear your counsel and obey it, If I may owe this favour to your charity. Iacin. Your goodness will deserve more. Fran. I must follow him. Exit. Car. Do you take notice Felisarda, that You live here on the bounty of an Unkle? Your Father had but ill news from the Indies. Felis. Sir, as your goodness wants no testimony, I shall attend it with all humble services. Car. How durst you in the presence of my Daughter, Maintain such whispers with Fernando, ha? Felis. Sir, he was pleas'd— Car. No more, I here discharge you. Iacinta, I'l provide one to attend you With less relation to your blood. I'l hear Of no deence, away—out of my dores. Go to your Father Signior Teodoo: Hi ships may rise agen were sunk by th' Hollander, And Flet from St. Thome, he may prefer you To some Rich Don, or who knows but you may, Born on the Plumes of his estate, be made
In time a proud Condessa, so adios Mi illustre Sennora Felifarda. Exit. Ia. Thus have I heard a tall ship has been wrack'd By some strange gust within the Bay: his passion Admits of no dispute. O my poor Cose, I fear my turn is next to be an exile, Thy absence must deprive me of Francisco, Who can no more glad his Iacintas eyes, With a pretence to visit thee. Felis. Tis not My fear to suffer want so much afflicts me, As that I must lose you, but he returnes. Enter Carlos with a Letter, and Servant. Car. Don Pedro de Fente Calada comming hither, With Don Alberto, and my Son? Serv. Yes sir, the Count desires to see Iacinta Whom your Son has so commended, and sent me To give you notice. Car. Ha Iacinta, retire To your closet, and put on your richest Jewels, A Count is come to visit you; Felisarda There may be some more art us'd in her dress, To take the eyes of greatness. Iac. Sir you speak As I were meant for sacrifice, or sale; The Cunt Don Pedro— Car. No reply; be carefull, And humble in your office Felisarda, And you may live, and eat here, till Iacinta Provide another servant to attend her, Which may be three whole dayes; my anger is Not everlasting; bid my Wife come to me. Enter Alira. expect an honourable guest, the Count Don Pedro, To see our Daughter, whom I have commanded
To appear with all her riches to attract him. Alsi. If his Intents be honourable, I have heard Don Pedro loves a hansom Donna. Car. He had better cool his hot blood i'the frosen Sea, and rise thence a rock of Adamant To draw more wonder to the North, than but Attempt to wrong her chastity. Enter Don Pedro, Luys and Alberto. This from Don Pedro is an honor binds The service of our lives. Ped. Noble Don Carlos. Alsi. If we had been prepar'd, we should have met This grace with more becoming Entertainment. Ped. Tis fair, and equall to my wishes,—she He ki∣ses Does smel of rosted Garlick; this your Sister? Enter Iacinta and Felisarda. Luys That is my Mother, here is Iacinta Sir. Ped. She has a tempting shape, I now am pleas'd. I Use to kiss all; hum a pretty thing? To Phelis. Car. I like not his busie eyes on Felisarda. Alber. You will be faithfull to me? Luys Who, I faithfull? how shall I live else? Car. Son Luys. Alber. Madam. Ped. Will you be pleas'd admit Don Pedro, by The Title of your srvant, to presume Somtime to wait upon you. Iacin. It were pride And sawcy ambition sir in me, to think You can descend so much from your great birth, To own a name, and office so beneath you. Ped. I that before thought women easie trifles, And things which nature meant only to quench High flames in man, am taken with this Lady. Luys thou hast wrong'd the fair Iacinta, Thy praise was thyn, and cold, Spain is not rich
Enough to boast her equall: and I love her. Luys Oh she will be to proud to know it Sir. Ped. Proud, she must be, whose eyes have such com∣mand. She has a pretty servant too, Luys, I like 'em both. Luys How, both? Ped. They will do well, One for a Wife, the other for a Concubine. Luys It will becom your high blood. Ped. Say I kiss Her white hand, and present her with these Pearls? Luys Your honor shall command. Ped. Your Daughter has a most magnetick face, And I pronounce her happy, your consent Confirmes her mine. Car. Ther's nothing in my blood, or fortune, but Don Pedro shall command. I was Propheticall? Come hither Alsimira, wouldst imagine? Hee's taken with Iacinta, and hath praid Already my consent. Alis. Believe not all That great men speak are Oracles, our Daughter— Car. If she be stubborn, uncreates her self, Be you wise, and counsell her to this ambition, Or thus I loose you all; ha turn away, That Faery shees a Witch, the Count talks with her. Alb. I hope you hold me not Sir less deserving Than when you gave me free access to plead My service to your Daughter—if that Don— Car. Sir you too much prejudicate my thoughts must give due respects to men of honor, Nor is it fit I should impose upon The Freedom of Iacintas love. Alb. Y'are noble. Car. My Lord. Alb. I do not like this Don.
Luys Th'art of my mind, I do not like him neither, And yet the blackbirds in the bush, see what present e would give my sister. Alb. Did she refuse it? Luys I never mean she shall, what wrong my friend? Yet I'l take all, and let him hang himself; (embraces him: If he would send his ey, I would undertake To  'em to the Ieweller, they would off, Fo  toadstones. Have no fear, my Mother Is for you too, you must fee both your Advocates. Car. Iacinta. Iacin. Sir. Luys She takes her self much honor'd. Ped. You oblige. Luys Let me alone to carry things. Be confident to trust me with your honor, If it would pawn for any thing. [aside] Iac. I'm not perfect How to neglect Alberto yet, and must I Throw off Fernando, but new Entertain'd By your command? the World will censure strangely. Car. The World will praise thy wisdom, & my care; Or if some giddy tongues condemn what's good, Must wee be servile to that fear, and lose That which will make us Judges of their folly, And damn it with a frown of state? they'r fooles That dote upon those shaddowes, Idle talk, The slime of Earth-worms, that doth shine to cosen Infants, 'tis fit wee raise our thoughts to substances. Iac. Let modesty and nature plead a little, If I appear not found to Entertain him. I may collect more strength by time and counsell, And for your satisfaction dare profess My Lord hath too much grac'd the low Iacinta With a pretence so noble, but I should Be held not worth his person, and too light
At his first breath of courtship to fall from My Virgin strength, and give my self his captive. Car. I shall alow that ceremony; the Count Makes an address. Ex Alsi. Felisard. Ped. I must use thrift in my delight, my eyes Are prowd, and must be taught by absence how To value such a Mistris. I do miss the chambermaid. Car. It will become me to attend. Ex. Alber. & Iacin. Ped. Your pardon. I'l take it for an honor, if your Sonne Be pleas'd—but to my coach? Luys. Oh my good Lord! So much I am your creature, if you knew But where to match me, I would be your coach-horse. Exe. Pedro & Luys. Car. So, so, Iacinta's starres do smile upon her, 'Twil be a match, were but my Son as fair In expectation of a bride, I'd write Nl ultra to my cares, he is to aery And volatile, a wife would timely fix him, And make him fit to manage my estate. Enter Luys. But he returnes, I'l feel his pulse. Luys, thou seest how near Iacinta is to happiness. Luys I did some office in't, she may thank me. I first inspir'd his Lordship. Car. Such a providence To build thy self a Fortune by some brave And noble mariage would become thy study, And make thy Father willingly resign His breath, with confidence to know thee wise To govern what my Industry hath gatherd; What think'st thou of a wife? Luys. I think little sir.
What should I do with a Wife? Car. Imitate me, and study fame, and wealth To thy posterity. Have I with care Acquir'd such an estate, that must not last Two Generations? Luys. The way to make it Last, is not to think of Wiving; for my part (Sir with your pardon, if I may speak freely) I had opinion once I was your Son, But fearing by your narrow exhibition You lov'd me not, I had a controversie Within my thoughts, whether I should resolve To geld my self, or turn a begging Frier. Car. A begging Frier? Luys Tis as I tell you Sir; This last I fixt upon, and ha' been studying Where I conveniently might raise a sum To compass a hair shirt Sir, To make triall before I thrust my self Point blank into the Order. Car. Thus wild Sons interpret still A prudent Father; but you may discharge Your Jealousies, unless it be your own Devotion to be chast, and live a recluse. Luys For that I can be ruld; I ha' not liv'd After the rate of hating any women But I can hear of Mariage, if it be Your pleasure: but these Wives Sir are such tickle Things, not one hardly staid amongst a thousand; Beside, unless you finde one very rich A man may cast a way himself, and get A bundle of Beggeries, Mouths, that day and night, Are open like Hell Gates, to feed; I would not Hazard my Freedom, and the blessings Heaven Has lent you Sir, upon a Wife with nothing. Car. Thy pension doubles for that word; in Earnest,
How much I like this wisdom; take this Purse, I will have no account, and find me out A wealthy Maid or Widdow but not ugly. Luys No? not ilfavourd Sir, if she be rich? A little old or crippel'd? Car. I wo'not ha' thee Mary a crooked, deform'd thing, because She may have children— Luys Not, unless she have An Infinit wealth to make 'em strait sir; I'le marry a witch so she have mony sir. Car. No, on no terms a Monster. Luys Then I wo'not. And now it comes into my mind, they talk of A young rich Widdow, Donna Estifaniar, What do you think of her? Car. Thou hast nam'd one To my own desires, she lives a Widdow still, But she has refus'd many brave Dons. Luys. No matter, I like her sir the better. Car. She gives good entertainment. Luys I will have her If you but say the word. I wear a charm To catch a Widdow; but this Purse will hardly Last till we finish, I must do things with honor. Car. Thou shalt be furnish'd like my Son; kneel down And ask me blessing, I do long to give it thee. Luys I have your blessing here. Car. Ile find thee out Some Jewells to present thy Mistris too. Luys 'Two'not be much amiss, the Gold will go The farther Sir. I know not how this Exit Car. Came about, unless Don Pedros coming to My Sister ha' made him mad, & wrought this miracle. How carefull he was I should not mary one
Deform'd, I ha' chose the hansomest things thus far, And I mary with a Witch at these years, let the Devill Ride my wild Mare to death; and now I Consider on't I wo'not have the Widdow For fear o'th' worst, yet I'l to her, And make a business on't to keep the old Mans Baggs in motion; this with some good Husbandry, and no play, may last a Fortnight, Tis very Gold: yes, it will pay some scores, Maintaine my Negro, and a brace of Whores. Now fiddles do your worst. Exit. ACT III. Enter Ramyres, Fernando. Ramy. How, no success? where lies the opposition? Don Carlos equall with my self profest His free desires, and to dispose his Daughter To meet thee with all loving entertainments. What can she argue to thy birth, or person, Attended with so plentifull a fortune? I must believe thy courtship dull and faulty: When I was at thy years and spring of blood I wound my self like air among the Ladies, Commanding every bosom, and could dwell Upon their lips like their own breath, their eyes Doubled their Beams on me, and she that was Of hardest composition, whom no love Could soften, when I came with charm of language, Her Frost would strait dissolve, and from her eyes Her heart came weeping forth to woo me take it. Ferd. Yet you that did with a Magnetick Chain Attract so many, could possess but one; I came not to Don Carlos house with cold
Or lukewarm thoughts, but arm'd with active fire That would have melted any heart but hers, Bound up with ribs of treble Ice against me, By which I found there is another fate That governs love, against whose secret doom In vain is eloquence or force. Ra. So Obstinate? Ferd. Nothing that I could say In my own cause, could make her tongue or looks Promise an expectation to thrive By any after service, this disdain I did resent, as it became my honor, And now confirm'd against her pride, have thought Of somthing, that with your consent, may tame Her scorn, or punish it to her repentance. Ra. Name it. Ferd. She has a Kinswoman lives with her, Felisarda Daughter to Signior Teodoro, A trade fall'n Merchant, Brother to Don Carlos, This Felis▪ that now lives on the charity of her Uncle, Half servant, half companion to Iacinta, And fair, I would pretend to love, observe me sir, And in their presence court her as my Mistris; Me thinks I see already how Iacinta Doth fret and frown. Ra. I like it well. Ferd. To see her Cosen so prefer'd, it is The nature sir of women to be vext When they know any of their servants court Another, and that love they thought not worth Their own reward, will sting 'em to the soul, VVhen ti's translated where it meets with love, And this will either break her stubborn heart, Or humble her. Ra. But what if this pretence, By such degrees convay avvay your heart,
That when Iacinta comes to sense, you cannot Retrive your passion from the last, or say Felisarda should believe you, and give up Her heart to your possession, when you Are by your first desires invited back, What cure for Felisardas wound, if you Affect her not? although I like that part Of your revenge, I would not have my Son Carry the hated brand of cruelty, Or hear Fernando broke a Ladies heart; But live upon his clear, and honest truth, And if Iacinta have not valued him, Find his own estimation in some other By fair and noble Courtship; Virtue is Above the gaudy shine of Gold; and if My Son love where his honor cannot suffer, The want of Dower, I can forgive. Ferd. You now, read exc'lent charity, and like a Father, It is the harmony I would hear, I chide My fears that did suspect you would prefer Wealth in a Bride; there is no beauty, or estate, compar'd To that resulteth from the soul; I dare Now ope this narrow Closet, and present The name I love above the World, it is Sir Felisarda, equall in her blood, Within whose vertuous poverty More Treasures are containd, than in those veins Of earth, which opend by our slaves, do bleed Such floods of Gold into the lap of Spain. Pardon my long concealment of her name, Twas sin against your virtue, and once more Speak in that blessed Language, I may hope To call this Virgin mine. Ra. How long have you Been taken with this female holiness? Ferd. Before Iacinta was propounded, this
Took firm possession of my faith. Ra. Thou hast discoverd thy destruction, foolish Boy. Was this your policy to be reveng'd Upon Iacinta, whom my providence Elected to preserve our name and family, To  upon a Begger? thou hast flung A fire into my brain either resolve To perfect  command, and throwing off That  thou hast prai'd, prefer Iacinta To the best  within thy hart, and marry her Or live a stranger to me, and divested Of all those rights, hich nature, and thy Birth Have slater'd thee with hope to find; expect not Alive, the stipend of a Groom to feed thee, Nor dead,  naked charity of a shroud To hide thee from the Worms. Ferd. Or▪ call back That  sentence, it were sin to let This passion dvvell upon you, nor vvould Heaven, Whose eyes survey our frailty, suffer So vvild a rage possesse you. Ra Tis vvithin thy ovvn obedience to divert it. Fed. When you have heard vvhat I can say more, You vvill chide your fierce command. a. What Riddles this? Ferd. Iacinta is already made anothers, and my force Upon  vowes, can be no less than sacrilege. Ra. This is some nevv pretence. Ferd Sir, not to vvast your patience, she hath given Her self by holy contract to Francisco. Ra. Thy younger Brother? Ferd. This I knovv vvill calm Your fury, and those eyes that threatend lightning VVith smiles applaud Franciscos fate, and praise y disobedience. Ra. Franciscos Mistris?
Ferd. His wife confirm'd by vows, & change of hearts, I had it from themselves, when either strove Whose circumstance should credit most their story, Her tear or his conclusive groan, to seal Their mariage, but both were equall sir, What curse had I deserv'd, that should divorce This Innocent pair of lovers? Ra. All this talk Which foolish thou interpret'st thy defence, Hath but inlarg'd thy folly, and that act Which in Francisco I commend, upbraides Thy own degenerate baseness: shall thy brother Who carries all his portion in his blood Look high, and carefull of his honor aim At fortunes, and with confidence atchieve His glorious end, and shall his Elder brother Ingag'd by nearest tye to advance his name, Lye beating in the common tract of guls, And sacrifice his birth and expectations To a cozening face, and poverty? instead Of adding mon'ments, that to the world Should be his living Chronicle, to bury His own, and all the antique honors (he Ne'r sweat for, but were cast into his blood) Within a dunghill? thou hast forfeited Thy birthright, which Francisco shall inherit, Nor shall the loss of my Estate be all Thy punishment; hear and believe with horror, If thou renounce not her that hath bewitch'd Thy heart, Felisarda, and by such a choice I shall affect, redeem this scandall nobly, Fernando from this minute I pronounce Heir to his Fathers curse; be vvise or perish. Exit. Ra. Ferd. Why does not all the stock of thunder fall?
Enter Francisco. Or the fierce winds from their close Caves, let loose, Now shake me into Atoms? Fran. Fy noble Brother, what can so deject Your Masculine thoughts? is this don like Fernando! Whose resolute soul so late was arm'd to fight With all the miseries of man, and triumph With patience of a Martyr? I observ'd My Father late come from you. Ferd. Yes Francisco, He hath left his curse upon me. Fran. How? Ferd. His curse, dost comprehend what that word caryes Shot from a Fathers angry breath? unless tear poor Felisarda from my heart, He hath pronounc'd me heir to all his curses. Does this fright thee Francisco? thou hast cause To dance in soul for this, tis only I Must lose, and mourn, thou shalt have all, I am Degraded from my birth, while he affects Thy forward youth, and only calls thee Son, Son of his active spirit, and applauds Thy progress with Iacinta, in whose smiles Thou maist see all thy wishes waiting for thee, Whilst poor Fernando for her sake must stand An excommunicate from every blessing, A thing that dare not give my self a name, But flung into the Worlds necessities, Untill in time with wonder of my wants turn a ragged statue, on whose forehead ach clown may carve his motto. Fran. Will it call is blessing back if you can quit your love o Felisarda? she is now a stranger o her Unkles house, I met one of his servants ho told me on some Jealous apprehension,
Don Carlos had discharg'd and banish'd her. Ferd. He could not be so barbarous. Fran. You know her Fathers Poverty. Ferd And her Wealth of Virtue. Fran. It is worth your Counsell, To exmin what you may preserve, if wisely You could perswade your heart to love some nother— Ferd. What was't Francisco said? Fran. Whose equall Birth, And Virtues, may invite a noble change. Ferd. Do not you love Iacinta? Fran. Most religiously. Ferd If you can but contrive your hearts at distanc And in contempt of honor, and your faith Sacred to Heaven, and love, disclaim your Mistris, I may be happy yet, what say? I know Iacinta's Wise, and when she understands How much it will advance, her charity— Fra. Our case is not the same with your's good brother▪ Wee have been long acquainted, to contract Affections, if I understand, your loves Are young, and had no time for growth. Ferd. Do not wound me. Tis false, by Love it self thou hast deserv'd I should forget thee now; dost thou consider Love, (that doth make all harmony in our soul, And seated in that noblest place of life, The heart) with things that are the slaves of time, And that like common seedes, thrown into Earth, It must have leisure to corrupt, and after Much expectation, rise to name and vigor. Love is not like the child that grows, and gets By slow degrees perfection, but created Like the first man, at full strength the first minute, It makes a noble choice, and gains from time To be call'd only constant, not increas'd.
Preserve thy own affections, and think mine Noble as they, I shall suspect thy love To me else; prethee leave me. Fran. I'l obey, And study how to serve you. Exit. Enter Felisarda. Ferd. Ha, tis Felisarda. Felis. Turnd out like one that had been false, where shall Poor Felisarda wander? were it not To ask a Fathers blessing, I would visit Some Wilderness, e'r thus present my self His burden and his sorrow. Enter Pedro. Ped. Had you no relation to Iacinta pretty one? Felis. I was her servant. Ped. Come, you shall be my Mistris; they have us'd Thee scurvily, I will provide thee a lodging. Felis. I shall not use your bounty sir for that. Ped. Thou art a hansom Dona, here's a Pistolet, Meet me i'th'evening, wot? Felis. Where, and for what? Ped. The where, at thy own choice, the what, thy honor. Felis. You are not noble. Ped. Don Pedro will Embrace thy buxom body. Ferd. You must unhand this Virgin. Felis. For goodness Sir, Add not your anger to my sufferings. Unhappy Felisarda. Ped. Is she a friend of yours Signior? Ferd. She is not for your sinfull knowledge Don. Ped. Baser los manos, adios Signiora. Diabolo! My blood is high and hot, unless I marry timely, must seek out a Female Julip. Exit. Felis. Don Carlo's fear of you was my first error, But I accept my banishment, and shall Humble my self to my poor Fathers Fortune;
You will be sir dishonour'd to be seen With such a walking misry. Ferd. Thy Unkle Hath plaid the Tyrant with thee, but lose not Thy vertuous courage; how our stories meet And challenge kindred in affliction! Oh Felisarda! I do suffer too, And for thy sake, thou shalt know more; til I Salute thee at thy Fathers house, preserve Good thoughts of thy Fernando, and accept This litle Gold, no bribe against thy honor. Felis. My best return must be, my Prayers. Exit. Ferd. Farewell. Tis not impossible my Father may Retract his cruelty, and by time, and some Discreet wayes yet be wrought to like, what now His passion wo'not let him see, her virtue. How many Seas are met to wrastle here? Exit. Enter Iacinta and Alberto. Iac. I love you sir so well, that I could wish You were a Witch; Alb. A Witch, your reason Lady? Ia. Then twere within the circle of your art B some device to rid me of Don Pedro, Or if you could by any spell but get My Father disaffect him— Alber. A Witch? thats a way about, I were best cut his Throat a little. Iac You 're much beholding to my Brother sir, He still commends you; such an Advocate Deserves his fee. Alb. Unles my cause succeed He has been feed too much; your Brother, Lady, Preserves a noble friendship; if I were sure You would be mine Iacinta, I could tarry Till your Father dye.
Iac. But how can you procure Don Pedro to have patience so long, Whom my Father pleads for and prefers? Alber. There, ther's the mischief, I must poison him; One Fig sends him to Erebus, tis in Your power and wit to spin out time, I may Invent a means for his conveyance. Ha! Enter Carlos, Estefania, Luys. Ia. The Lady Estefania. Car. Welcome again, This is an honour to us, where's Iacinta? Salute this noble Lady. Ha, Luys, Hast thou prevail'd already? Luys I'm i'th' way you see, She has not been observ'd they say to walk So freely with some men that boast more favour. Enter Pedro. Ped. What makes the Lady Estefania here? I like not their converse, this day is ominous. Exit. Car. Was't not the Count Don Pedro that retird? VVhat object here displeas'd him? Alber. Ha, ha, didst see the Don? Car. Preserve your mirth—I must be satisfied. Exit. Luys I'l lay a thousand Ducats that my costive Don has been tampering with my VViddow, I Observ'd (when I by chance let fall discourse) How much he was an amorous servant to Iacinta, she chang'd her color and did make Such business how my Sister did affect him, That I may guess, though I make use on't otherwise To the old man, to keep the pulses of His Purse in play, she came to examin chiefly How matters here proceeded; well, if she love him— Alber. Shee is thy Mistris. Luys My Mistris? yes, but any man shall mary her. Alb. How?
Luys. She is a Widdovv, Don, consider that, Has buried one vvas thought a Hercules, Tvvo cubits taller, and a man that cut Three Inches deeper in the say, than I, consider that too, She may be cock a tvventy, nay for ought I knovv she is Immortall. Alb. What dost vvith her? Luys Faith nothing yet, And have but little hope, I think shee's honest. Alb. Do's she love thee? Luys At her ovvn perill, vv'are not come to articles; There is not vvit in vviving, give me a vvhore; But that I ovv thee money, thou shouldst never Marry my Sister neither? Alb. Not Iacinta? Luys No, nor any other simpering piece of honesty, If I might counsell thee, vvhile any vvench Were extant, and the stewes inhabited; Is't fit, a Freeborn Gentleman should be chain'd Tenant for life to one? Hang mariage shackles, Ty the Tovvn Buls to'th'stake, vve must have concubins. Iac. Don Pedro vvas too blame, and trust me Madam He shall find nothing here t' advance his triumph. Estef. You are Virtuous Iacinta; I presum'd When I should land my sufferings on your knovvledge, You vvould excuse my unexpected visit. Iac. My Brother has been Just in the relation Hovv he pursues my love, but I shall be Happy to serve your Justice, and must tell The noble Estefania, my heart, By all that love can teach to bind a faith, Is plac'd vvhere it shall never injure vvhat Your mutuall vovvs contracted; I smile not With mine ovvn eyes upon him, 'tis my Fathers Severe command to love him, but this story Cleer'd to my Father vvould secure us both.
Estef. If any faith or service in me can Deserve this goodness, cheerfully employ it. Iac. I will be confident to use your Virtue. Enter Carlos. Estef. I will refuse no office. Iac. My Father comes most aptly. Alb. Ha, ha, ha, have pitty on my spleen, I shall crack a rib else, ha, ha, ha. Car. You are very mery, Don Alberto; Son, You may be of the counsell too, this house Is mine I take it, I advise you would Frequent it less. Alb. How Sir? Car. I do not like your visits, And to remove the cause, my Daughter is Already sir dispos'd, to one above Your birth and fortune, so fare-you-well. You understand, now laugh and pick your teeth. Daughter— Alb. Did you hear this Luys? Luys I, the old man raves. Alber. Must not frequent his house. Luys Would 'twere in a flame, so his mony and I Were out on't. Alb. But thy Sister— Luys Would be refin'd i' th' fire, let her burn too. Alb. My friend, if I have not Iacinta, There are certain sums of money— Luys I am not of your mind Don, the sums are most uncertain. Come, you did laugh too loud, my Father is A Stoick, but despair not; go to your lodging, I'l see thee anon, and either bring thee money Or else some reasons why I do not bring it, We won't go to Law, I'l pawn the widdow Rather than thou shalt want; go say thy prayers, And shew thy teth no more, till I come to thee.
Now the business here? Exit Alber. Car. Wee have agreed Iacinta, And he to morrow privately Will at the Church expect thee; tis an age Till I salute the Bride to this great Don, Whose thoughts are wing'd t' enjoy thee, and resolve No more delay, prepare to meet this Honor. Luys To morrow? this must be crost. Car. My next ambition Madam will be perfect▪ To call you by some nearer name; my Son— Est. Is a most noble Gentleman, I know not Where lives so clear a merit. Luys. Oh sweet Madam. Car. Iacinta. Luys I have a sute to you. Est. To me? Luys Only that you would not dote too much upon me, A gentle easie sober pace in love Goes far, and is much better than a gallop; if you please We may hold one another in hand, and love This seaven yeares, without sealing and delivering. Est. Withall my heart. Luys You'l do me a pleasure Madam. Est. You instruct well. Luys This Courtship is not common. Est. I confess it. Car. Son Luys. Luys Sir. Car. Let her not cool. Luys And she do, I know the way to heat her again. Est. I will not yet reveal my abuse Iacinta, And if you please to favor a design, I have a plot may serve to both our happiness. Iac. I'l obey. There is a trembling in my heart.
Car. You must not leave us yet Madam. Est. You may command me. Luys My Don so rampart, ther's somthing in this pannier Shall spoil your match to morow; Don Alberto, When I disclose, shall worship me: be drunk, Cancell arreers, and beg to lend more money. Exe: ACT IV. Enter Ramyres, Francisco & Notarie. Ra. 'Tis most exactly done, and firm. Notar. I could, Omiting or inserting but a word, or particle, Trouble the whole conveyance, And make work for the law till doom's-day: but— Fran. Is't possible? Notar. You do not know the quirks of a Scrivano, A dash undoes a Family, a point, An artificiall accent i't'h wrong place, Shall poyson an Estate, translate your Land In Spain now into either of both Indies, In less time than our Gallions of Plate Are sayling hither; but you are my friend, And noble benefactor. Ramy. Ther's more for your reward. Notar. I humbly thank you Signior. Su Criado. Fran. Farewell. Notar. Su Servidor. Exit. Ramy. This deed makes thee my Heir Francisco, and Will like a powerfull spell upon Don Carlos, Whose soul is superstitious upon Wealth, Win his consent to make Iacinta thine. Fran. Sir, I cannot say my duty shall deserve it Since nature, and religion, without all
This bounty challenges my best obedience. Enter Fernando. Ramy Away, thy sight Is my disease. Fer. Your blessing sir I kneel for. Ramy. What Impudence is this? wilt thou subscribe To take off mine, thy curse on Felisarda? For I do hate her heartily; disclaim All promise, contract, or converse for ever, I'm else inexorable. Fer. Sir. Ramy. His eyes shoot poyson at me, ha? he has Bewitched me sure, what coldness thus invades me? Ther's somthing creeping to my heart. Franscisco? ha▪ Possess this gift of thy Inheritance; Convey me to my chamber, oh—Fernando, If thou dost hope I should take off my curse, Do not approach my sight, unless I send for thee. Fran. Forbear good Brother; Diego, Rodergo, Your hands t' assist my Father, one go for his Physician. Enter two Servants. Fer This turn is fatall, and affrights me, but Heaven has more charity than to let him die With such a hard heart, 'twere a sin, next his Want of compassion, to suspect he can Take his Eternall flight and leave Fernando This desperate Legacie, he will change The curse into some little prayer I hope, And then— Enter Servant and Physician. Serv. Make hast I beseech you Doctor. Phys. Noble Fernando. Fer. As you would have men think your art is mea Not to abuse mankind, employ it all To cure my poor sick Father.
Phis. Fear it not sir. Ex. Phys. Serv. Fer. But there is more than your thin skill requir'd To state a health, your Recipes perplex't With tough names, are but mockeries, and noise, Without some dew from Heaven, to mix and make 'em Enter Servant. Thrive, in the application: what now? Ser. Oh sir, I am sent for the Confessor, The Doctor fears him much, your Brother saies You must have patience, and not Enter Sir; Your Father is a going, good old man, And having made him Heir, is loth your presence Should interrupt his Journey. Exit. Fer. Francisco may be honest, yet me thinks It would become his love to interpose For my access, at such a needfull hour, And mediate for my blessing, not assist Unkindly thus my banishment. I'l not Be lost so tamely, shall my Father dye And not Fernando take his leave—I dare not. If thou dost hope I should take off this curse, Do not approach untill I send—'twas so, And 'tis a law that binds above my blood. Enter Confessor and Servant. Make hast good Father, and if heaven deny Him life, let not his charity dye too. One curse may sink us both, say how I kneel And beg he would bequeath me but his blessing▪ Then though Francisco be his Heir, I shall Live happy, and take comfort in my tears, When I remember him so kind a Father. Confes. It is my duty. Exit. Fer. Do your holy office. Those fond Philosophers that magnifie Our human nature, and did boast wee had
Such a prerogative in our rationall soul, Converst but little with the World, confin'd To cells, and unfrequented woods, they knew not The fierce vexation of community, Else they had taught, our reason is our loss, And but a priviledge that exceedeth sense, By nearer apprehension, of what wounds, To know our selves most miserable. My heart Enter Physician and Francisco. Is teeming with new fears—Ha, is he dead? Phy. Not dead, but in a desperat condition, And so that little breath remaines wee have Remitted to his Confessor, whose Office Is all that's left. Fran. Is there no hope of life then? Phys. None. Fer. Is he not mercifull to Fernando yet? no talk of me? Phys. I find he takes no pleasure To hear you nam'd: Francisco to us all He did confirm his Heir, with many blessings. Fer. And not one left for me? oh take me in Thou gentle Earth, and let me creep through all Thy dark and hollow crannies, till I find Another way to come into the World, For all the Air I breath-in here is poyson'd. Fran Wee must have patience Brother, it was no Ambitious thought of mine to supplant you; He may live yet, and you be reconcil'd. Fer. That was some kindness yet Francisco; but I charge thee by the nearness of our blood, When I am made this mockery, and wonder, I know not where to find out charity, If unawares a chance direct my weary And wither'd Feet to some fair House of thine, Where plenty with full blessings crowns thy table, If my thin fac betray my want of food,
Do not despise me, cause ' was thy Brother. Enter Confessor. Fran. Leave these imagin'd horrors, I must not Live when my Brother is thus miserable. Fer. Ther's somthing in that face looks comfortably. Confes. Your Father sir is dead, his will to make Francisco the sole Master of his Fortunes s now irrevocable, a small Pension He hath given you for life, which with his blessing s all the benefit I bring. Fer. Ha, blessing; speak it agen good Father. Confes. I did apply some lenitives to soften His anger, and prevail'd; your Father hath Revers'd that heavy cenure of his curse, And in the place bequeath'd his prayer and blessing. Fer new created by his charity. ceremonies are behind, he did 'd within our Covent, Sepulture to me, I am confident will give me leave— Fran. His will in all things I obey, and yours Most rend Father; order as you please Body; wee may after celebrate ith all due obsequies his Funerall. Fer. Why you alone obey? I am your Brother: My Fathers Eldest Son, though not his Heir. Fran. It pleas'd my Father sir to think me worthy f such a title, you shall find me kind, you can look on matters without Envie. Fer. If I can look on matters without Envie? Fran. You may live here still. Per. I may live here Francisco? Enter a Gentleman with a letter onditions? I would not understand his Dialect.
Fran. With me, from Madam Estefania? Gent. If you be Signior Francisco. Fer. Sleighted? I find my Father was not dead till now. Croud not you Jealous thoughts so thick into My Brain, lest you do tempt me to an Act Will forfeit all agen. Fran. This is Iacintas character [Reads]—Fail not to meet. As you timely will prevent the danger of my rape. My soul! Estefania can instruct you all particulars— My service to your Lady, say I shall obey her commands. Exit Gent. Fer. Is that an Inventory you peruse? Fran. Fernando you must pardon me, ther's somthing Of Essence to my life, exacts my care, And person, I must leave you, we may seasonably Confer of things at my return. Iacinta. Exit. Fer. Tis clear I am neglected, he did name Iacinta too, in triumph, and is gone, Big with his glories to divide 'm there, And laugh at what my constant love hath made me. My heart is in a storm, and day growes black, Ther's not a star in Heaven will lend a beam To light me to my ruine. Felisarda! That name is both my haven, and my shipwrack. Exit. Enter Alberto and Luys. Alb. Excellent. Luys You'l give me now a generall release For all the sums I ow you? Alb. Thou hast blest me. Luys. I was born to do you good; about it presently Now you know where to ambush, away I say And get comrads: Iacinta and my Mother Is all the carriage, you may know the coach By the old womans cough ere it come neer you, She has a desperate malice to one tooth left Still in her gums, till she has shook that out;
You wo'not need a warning peece, farewell. Alb. Farewel, why whats the matter? you shanot leave me; Thy Mother wo'not know thee in a Visard. Luys You must excuse me friend, I would Joyn w'ee I'th' urprise, but that— Alb. What I prethee? Luys I have extraordinary business, that concerns me As neer as life. Alb. May not I know'? thou art going To the Widdow now, thy Mistris. Lu. Tis a business of more consequence; Dost think I would leave thee, and there were not Such a necessity? Alb. For what? Luys And there were no more Sisters in the World, You must excuse me. Alb. Nay, nay, we must not part, unless I know This mystery, some reason vvhy you leave me. Luys If you vvill needs knovv, there's a vvench staies for me, The toy I told thee on; farewell Alberto. Alb. But vvill you leave such business and a friend? Luys Business? art thou a Gentleman & vvouldst have Me leave a Ladie I ha'not seen this three year For business or a friend? I must to her; if I had a heart Ten Tu of Iron, This Female Adamant vvould dravv it to her, I feel it going; I do tell thee Don, There is no business so materiall In nature as a vvench, and if thou art my friend Thou vvouldst leave my Sister novv in such a cause And bear me company, I must be drunk, And she must pick my pocket too, that is Another secret vvhen vve meet together That never failes. Alb. Why art thou desperate?
Dost not thou fear thy body? Luys A wench is Physick My body has been us'd too, leave thy prating, And let me take my course. Alb. And you be so resolute— Luys I must give you one advice before you go; VVhen my Sister's in thy custody, observe The time and place, and things convenient, And stand not fooling about ceremonies But put her to't. Alb. Thou wouldst not have me ravish her? Luys. Yes but I would, Shee's no Sister of mine if she cry out For such a business, she has more wit. Alb. VVas ever such a mad-cap. Luys I'l not pray for thee. Alb. I sha'not prosper if thou dost. Luys Thy hand, Ile drink thy health, & hang thy self. Farewell. Exeunt. Enter Iacinta and Estefania. Iac. You tell me wonders Madam, Don Ramyres Dead, his Son Fernando disinherited, And young Francisco made his heir? stef. I took Franciscos word. Iac. Tis strange. Estef. Your stars smile on you. Iac. Yet I much pitty the poor Gentleman. Est. Busie your thought about your own, Francisco— Ia. Hath promis'd not to fail? Est. He waits where he can easily observe How soon the coast is clear to visit you. Ia. So, so, thus hooded The day cannot distinguish our two faces, And for your voice, you know how to disguize it By imitation of my cold and hoarseness,
And when you come to Church— Este. Let me alone, there I'l produce the Contract, Which will surprise Don Pedro, and your Father, To see me challenge him, I ha' prepar'd the Priest too, Whose holy Eloquence may assist, how ever This will give you opportunity to perfect Your wishes with your servant, put the rest To fate Iacinta. Iac. I hear some approach, retire into my Closet.— Enter Carlos and Pedro. Car. Iacinta. Iac. Sir. Car. Not thy voice recover'd? Ia. A violent cold— Car. Count Pedro must salute you ere we go. Pedro Impute it to devotion, that I make Such hast to be within thy armes, One kiss and I shall carry with me Another soul, and count with Joy the minutes I am to expect this happiness. Car. Iacinta you follow with your Mother in the Coach; My Lord I wait you. Ped Ther's Heaven upon her lip. Iac. He has kist, and took his leave I hope. Enter Estefania. I must owe all my happiness to you sweet Madam, I had been lost without your art to help me. Este Love wo'not leave his votaries. Cough within. Iac. I hear my Mothers cough, I ha' finish'd And you must act your part: Exit. Enter Alsimira. Als. Come are you ready Daughter? the Coach stayes. Esty. I attend Alsi. Don Pedro will cure your cold before the morn∣ing. Enter Francisco and takes away Iacinta. Enter Teodoro and Felisarda. Teo. What duty Felisarda shall we pay
To Heaven for this last care of us? Let not thy eyes, Although thy grief become 'em, be in love With tears, I Prophesie a joy shall weigh Down all our sufferings, I see comfort break Like day, whose forehead chears the world; if Don Fernando love thee, he is a Gentleman, Confirm'd in all that's honorable, and cannot Forget whom his own vertue hath made choice To shine upon. Felis. Unless my Innocence, Apt to believe a flattering tongue, see not The Serpent couch, and hide his speckled brest Among the flowers; but it were sin to think He can dissemble, Father, and I know not, Since I was first the object of his charity, I find a pious gratitude disperse Within my soul, and every thought of him Engenders a warm sigh within me, which Like curles of holy Incense overtake Each other in my bosom, and enlarge With their Embrace his sweet remembrance. Teo. Cherish Those thoughts, and where such noble worth invites, Be bold to call it love. Felis. It is too much Ambition to hope he should be just To me, or keep his honor, when I look on The pale complexion of my wants; and yet Vnless he loves me dearly, I am lost, And if he have but mock'd me into faith, He might as well have murdered me, for I Shall have no heart to live, if his neglect Deface what my affection printed there. Teo. There is no feare of his revolt, lose not His character. I must attend some business.
If Don Fernando visit thee, preserve His fair opinion, and thou maist live Above thy Uncles pitty. Felis. Will you leave me? Teo. My stay shall not be long; the Garden will With smiling flowres encourage thee to walk, And raise thy drooping eyes, with hope to see A spring like theirs, upon thee. Exit. Felis. Why should I Give any entertainment to my fears? Suspicions are but like the shape of clouds, And idle forms i'th' air, we make to fright us, I will admit no jealous thought to wound Fernandos truth, but with that chearfullness, My own first clear intents to honour him Can arm me with, expect to meet his faith As noble as he promis'd—Ha! tis he. Enter Fernando. My poor heart trembles like a timerous leaf, Which the wind shakes upon his sickly stalk, And frights into a Palsey. Fer. Felisarda! Felis. Shall I want fortitude to bid him welcome? Sir, if you think there is a heart alive That can be gratefull, and with humble thoughts, And Prayers reward your piety, despise not The offer of it here; you have not cast Your bounty on a Rock, while the seeds thrive Where you did place your Charity; my joy May seem ill drest to come like sorrow thus, But you may see through every tear, and find My eyes meant Innocence, and your hearty welcome. Fer. Who did prepare thee Felisarda thus To entertain me weeping? sure our soules Meet and converse, and we not know't; there is Such beauty in that watry circle, I Am fearfull to come neer, and breath a kiss Upon thy cheek, lest I pollute that Cristall,
And yet I must salute thee, and I dare With one warm sigh meet, and dry up this sorrow. Felis. I shall forget all misery; for when I look upon the World, and race of men, I find 'em proud, and all so unacquainted With pitty to such miserable things As poverty hath made us, that I must Conclude you sent from Heaven. Fer. Oh do not Flatter Thy self poor Felisarda; I'm Mortall, The life I bear about me is not mine, But borrow'd to come to thee once again, And ere I go, to clear how much I love thee— But first I have a story to deliver, A tale will make thee sad, but I must tell it, There is one dead that lov'd thee not. Felis. One dead That lov'd not me? this carries sir in nature No killing sound; I shall be sad to know I did deserve an Enemy, or he want A Charity at death. Fer. Thy cruell Enemy, And my best friend, hath took Eteranll leave And 's gone, to heaven I hope, excuse my tears, It is a tribute I must pay his memory, For I did love my Father. Felis. Ha! your Father? Fer. Yes Felisarda, he is gone, that in The morning promis'd many years, but death Hath in few hours made him as stiff, as all The winds, and winter, had thrown cold upon him, And wisper'd him to marble. Felis. Now trust me, My heart weepes for him, but I understand Not hovv I was concern'd in his displeasure; And in such height as you profess. Fer. He did
Command me on his blessing to forsake thee; Was't not a cruell precept, to inforce The soul, and curse his Son for honest love? Felis. This is a wound indeed. Fer. But not so mortall; For his last breath was Balsom pour'd upon it, By which he did reverse his malediction; And I that groan'd beneath the weight of that Anathema, sunk almost to despair, Where night and heavy shades hung round about me, Found my self rising like the morning Star To view the World. Felis. Never I hope to be Eclis'd agen. Fer. This was a welcome blessing. Fe. Heaven had a care of both; my joyes are mighty. Vouchsafe me sir your pardon if I blush And say I love, but rather than the peace That should preserve your bosom, suffer for My sake, 'twere better I were dead. Fer. No, live. And live for ever happy, thou deserved'st it. It is Fernando doth make hast to sleep In his forgotten dust. Felis. Those accents did Not sound so cheerfully. Fer. dost love me? Felis. Sir. Fer. Do not, I prethee do not, I am lost, Alas I am no more Fernando, there Is nothing but the Empty name of him That did betray thee, place a guard about Thy heart betime, I am not worth this sweetness. Felis. Did not Fernando speak all this? alas He knew that I was poor before, and needed not Despise me now for that. Fer. Desert me goodness
When I upbraid thy wants. 'Tis I am poor, For I ha' not a stock in all the World Of so much dust, as would contrive one narrow Cabin to shroud a worm; my dying Father Hath given away my Birthright to Francisco, I'm disinherited, thrown out of all, But the small Earth I borrow, thus to walk on; And having nothing left, I come to kiss thee, And take my everlasting leave of thee too. Farewell, this will perswade thee to consent To my Eternall absence. Felis. I must beseech you stay a little sir, And clear my faith▪ Hath your displeased Father Depriv'd you then of all, and made Francisco The Lord of your Inheritance, without hope To be repair'd in Fortune? Fer. 'Tis sad truth. Felis. This is a happiness I did not look for. Fer. A happiness? Felis. Yes Sir, a happiness. Fer. Can Felisarda take delight to hear What hath undone her servant? Felis. Heaven avert it. But 'tis not worth my grief to be assur'd That this will bring me nearer now to him Whom I most honor of the World; and tis My pride, if you exceed me not in Fortune, That I can boast my heart, as high, and rich, With noble flame, and every way your equall, And if you be as poor as I Fernando, I can deserve you now, and love you more Than when your expectation carried all The pride and blossoms of the spring upon it. Fer. Those shadowes will not feed more than our fan∣cies; Two poverties will keep but a thin table; And while wee dream of this high nourishment,
Wee do but starve more gloriously. Felis. 'Tis ease. And wealth first taught us art to surfet by; Nature is wise, not costly, and will spread A table for us in the Wilderness; And the kind Earth keep us alive, and healthfull, With what her bosom doth invite us to; The brooks, not there suspected as the Wine That somtime Princes quaff, are all transparent, And with their pretty murmurs call to tast 'em. In every tree a Chorister to sing Health to our loves, our lives shall there be free As the first knowledge was from sin, and all Our dreams as Innocent. Fer. Oh Felisarda? If thou didst own less Virtue, I might prove Unkind and marry thee, but being so rich In goodness, it becomes me not to bring One that is poor, in every vvorth, to vvast So excellent a Dower, be free, and meet One that hath Wealth to cherish it, I shall Undo thee quite, but pray for me, as I, That thou maist change for a more happy Bridgroom; I dare as sson be guilty of my death, As make thee miserable by expecting me. Farwell, and do not wrong my soul, to think That any storm could separate us two, But that I have no fortune now to serve thee. Felis. This will be no exception sir, I hope, When wee are both dead, yet our bodies may Be cold, and strangers in the Winding sheet; We shall be married when our spirits meets. Exeunt. Act V. Enter Carlos, Pedro. Pe. Your daughter does not use me well Don Carlos. Car. I know not what to think,
Some great misfortune must be the cause. Ped. Not yet appear? they might, And they had crept like Tortoyses, Ariv'd Before this time. Car. There is some strange disaster. Ped. The Coach orethrown, and both their lives Endanger'd, can but excuse 'm. Enter Alsimira. Oh my Lord, Don Carlos. Ped. The Tragick voice of women stricks mine eare. Car. Alsimira? Ped. Madam. Car. Where is our Daughter? Alsi. My fear almost distracts me, she is gone, Stoln, ravish'd from me. Ped. Ha. Alsi. An armed Troop In Visards forc'd her from my coach; and heaven Knows where they have hurried the poor Iacinta. Car. A troop of armed Devils. Ped. Let them be A legion, they are all damn'd. Al. Nay they were men and mortall sure. Ped. I w'on'ot leave one soul amongst them all. Car. Mine is in torment. I'th' hope and height of my ambition To be thus cros'd! how scap'd you? Alsi. Alas I was not young enough, I offer'd My self to bear her company, and suffer As much as she did, but one boysterous fellow With a starch'd voice, and a worse vizard, took me Just here above my Sciatica, and quoited me Into the coach agen upon my head, I had a larum in't for half an hour, And so I scap'd with life. Ped. Did they sue her with any rigor? Alsi. To say truth they were gentle enough to her.
Ped. That mollifies▪ and they may live. Car. Hell overtake 'em, lets return, they had better Committed incest, than this rape. Ped. They had better ravish'd Proserpine before Don Lucifer's own face. I am all fury. Exeunt. Enter Alberto and Estefania. Alb. Pardon my dear Iacinta, It was love That threw me on this act, I had no patience To see thee forc'd into a mariage By a covetous Father, whose devotion Is only Wealth and Title; I esteem No danger, if at last the fair Iacinta Smile and allow this duty; let not silence Deprive me longer of thy voice, whose every Accent will please, though it pronounce my sentence; There's death in this Eclipss too, sweet dismiss Thy ungentle veil, and let thy eyes make bright This melancholy air, that droops and dies For want of thy restoring beams. Est. Now sir, What think you of your Mistris? Al. You are the Lady Estefania I take it. Est. Yes, you did take me from the coach Alberto But by a consequence I find, you thought Iacinta in your power, I could have told you, Had you discover'd sooner what you were, Where to have found your Mistris, but shee's now Above your hope, and by the priest ere this Made wife to Don Francisco. Alb. To Don Pedro? Est. It was not sir impossible that I (Had not your violence prevented me) (By a plot between Iacinta and my self, To take her place and person in the coach) Had by this time been married to Count Pedro, Whom I have povver and Justice sir to challenge
If Contracts carry weight. Al. Have I so long Ly'n beating at the bush, and is the bird Fled to Francisco? Est. I should shew I had A passion sir, and sense of this captivity, But that I find 'twas error, and not will Lead you to this; and your own loss now made Irreparable, helpes to tye up my anger. Al. Madam, I must confess a wrong, and dare Submit to let your anger punish me, For I despise my self, now I have lost My expectation, and if you please To think I had no malice in this act To you, You can propose no satisfaction I shall esteem a penance to repair you, As far as my poor life, if you'l direct it. Est. 'Tis nobly promis'd sir. You shall redeem In my thoughts what is past, if you be pleas'd To make my stay no longer here; I have No desperate aim to make Don Pedro yet Know how to right me, or make publick what Should bind his honor to perform. Al. Was not Luys Madam entertain'd your Servant? Est. I shall make known the story if you walk But to Don Carlos House. Al. You shall command me. Exeunt. Enter Carlos, Alsimira, and Servant. Car. No newes yet of Iacinta? Al. None. Car. He must Not live in Spain, nor in the World, if my Revenge can overtake him, that has stoln My Daughter; could you not by voice or habit Guess at the ravisher? Ye are traitors all. Alsi. Now I consider better, I suspect Alberto one of the conspiracie,
Some voice did sound like his. You know he lov'd her. Car. Ha! Alberto? Alsi. And how he might engage some Ruffians To cross Don Pedro. Car. 'Twas he, where's Luys? I do not like his absence, thei'r both guilty; My own blood turned a rebell? send for the Alcaides, They shall both trot like theeves to the Corrigidor. Where is Count Pedro? Alsi. Gon in search of his lost Mistris. Car. When all things were ripe, The very Priest prepar'd to seal our Ioyes, A work my brain did labour for, and sweat With hope to see accomplish'd, undermin'd? And in a Minute all blown up? Alsi. Have patience She may be found agen. Car. But how my Lord May be inclin'd to accept her foil'd, or wounded Enter Luys drunk. In fame— Alsi. Luys is here. Car. Borachio, here's a spectacle! more affliction? Where is your Sister, whats become of Iacinta? Lu. My Sister and Iacinta are gone together. I know all the business. Alsi. Where is she? Lu. She is very well, I know not where she is. But Don Alberto is an honest Gentleman, And has by this time done the feat. Car. Confusion— Lu. You think you had all the wit, it was my plot. You may thank heaven that you are old, & ugly, to Al∣si. You had been no Mother of this World. But sir, I have some newes would be deliver'd privately. Mother of mine, avant. Car. Th'art not my Son. Was ever man so miserable? away Thou spunge; get him to sleep,
Alsi. I dare not medle with him. Exit. Lu. In sobriety a word. Car. Where is Alberto? Lu. Where every honest man should be a bed, with my Sister, Old man, I ha' consider'd o' the former mater we talk'd on And would do things like a dutiful son, but I find that a Wife is not altogether of convenient for me as a— Car. Will none deliver me? Lu. They are somewhat slug, Now I have found out an excellent tumbler, That can do the Somerset, please you to be acquainted with her, and give me your opinion, She shall play with all the stews in Christendome, for all your are worth, if I live, and yet she is but 17 there's a peri∣winkle, I had a Gemini, before I went to travell, And I am bound in conscience, if you think fit, to see her well Provided for— Car. With whips, i'l have her skin flead off. Lu. Her skin flead off? dost thou know mortal man What thou hast said? I tel the Don, nothing can come neer Her in the shape of an Officer, she is a very Basilisk & wil Kill em with her eyes 3 score yards point blank, but you May talk, & do your pleasure with her, for I came a Purpose to bring her to your lodging, if you love me, Do but see her, it shall cost you nothing, you shall Be my friend, hang money? Car. Thus will my state consume, vexation! What shall I do? when you have slept, Luys I'l tell you more, attend him to his Chamber And make his Door fast. Luys You vvill consider on't, upon those terms, I vvil go Sleep at vvinckling. Exit. Car. And vvo'not all this take a vvay my senses? My Son is lost too, this is all a curse For my ambition and my Avarice. Enter Alsimira and a servant with a Letter. Als. Nevvs Don Carlos from our Daughter. Car. Ha, a Letter! 'tis Iacintas hand.
Alsi. Knovv'st vvhere she is? Ser. Yes Madam, and her resolution Carl. reads. To attend her Father, with my Master Don Francisco If Don Carlos please to admit 'em, the matters done. Alsi. What matter? Ser. They are as fast as any Priest can make em. Car. Wife to Francisco, now his Fathers heir? That's some allay, if it be true, she writes, Don Pedro was contracted to Fstefania, who supplied Her person in the Coach—twas not Iacinta was ravish'd Then, Don Pedro was not noble, after he had made faith, To intangle my Iacinta. Hum, say they shall Be welcome. Ser. They are present sir. Enter Francisco and Iacinta. Car. I am nor yet collected, but if this Paper be justified, I receive you both. Peruse those wonders Alsimira. Iacin. Sir, though by the tye of nature you may chal∣lenge All duty, this is done so like a Father It exceeds all your care. Fran. Let this confirme, I bring a fortune not to be despis'd, But were I Master of the World, I should At price of all my wealth, think this a treasure Purchac'd too cheap. Car. My blessing and my prayers, I'm new created, And bow to that great providence; all Joy Spread through your soules; this is not much amiss. Fran. But what's become of Madam Estefania That took Iacintas place? Alsi. Forc'd from the Coach By Don Alberto, thinking her my Daughter Iacin. That part of our plot fail'd, but my intents Were fair, and to assist this injur'd Ladie Ser. Don Pedro sir. Enter Servant. Car. You shall for some few minutes.
Withdraw into that Chamber, in his passion He may be violent, leave me to moderate. Fra. I shall obey you sir. Exit. Enter Pedro. Fed. Was ever man of my great birth and fortune Affronted thus? I am become the talk Of every Picaro and Ladron, I challenge A reparation of my honor; where's Iacinta? tis a plot, a bace contrivement To make my name ridiculous, the subject Of every scurrill language. Car. My Lord with pardon Of your Altesa, y'are not Injur'd here, Unless I have been faulty in too much Observance, and desires to serve your person, VVith almost sacrifice of my Daughter. Ped. Ha! too much to me? Car. I would you had remembred How much your Honor was engag'd before, By Contract to another, when you mock'd The Innocent Iacinta, now not mine. Ped. VVho hath traduc'd my fame, or mention'd me VVith that dishonour? I disclaim all Contracts. The unconfin'd Aire's not more free, than I To all the World, except your beauteous Daughter. Car. Do you know the Lady Estefania? Ped. Dares she make saucie claim? my breath dis∣solves it If every Lady whom we grace with our Converse should challenge men of my Nobility— Car. I wish my Lord you could evade it, for The honor of my Family; if your conscience Or Art can nullifie that Ladies sinterest I am resolv'd—my Son Luys shall Aside Then marry With that Widdow, I have no other Ambition. Ped. You are wise, and I
Am fortified to clear my self thought-free Enter Alberto, Estefania with a Letter. From any promise to that sullen Madam. Ha! tis Iacinta, and she wears the Jewell I did present, conspicuously; I ask No reason for thy absence, let me chain My darling in this amorous curl, tis happiness Enough to repossess thee, not the policie And power of Hell shall separate us agen. Este. It is but Justice sir. Ped. Ha! Estefania. Alb. Do you know her sir? Este. Do You know this character? Ped. Conspiracy. Est. When this is read Don Carlos You will imagine he has wrong'd your Daughter. Car. Is this your hand Count Pedro? Ped. Mine—tis counterfeit Upon my honor, and I thus dissolve Thy insolent claim. Este. Nothing can bind I see A false heart Car. This must give you freedom Madam, If you release his hasty vow. Este. Faith cannot Be compeld sir. Ped. These are all Impostures; I take my self into my self. Alb. What shall become of her my noble Count? Ped. I pitty her But cannot cure her wound, and if you be Her friend, advice her to contain her passions, And wisely love one that can entertain it. Alb. You hear this Madam? Este. And can smile upon His violated fath. Car. Now for Luys, To strike in with the Widdow,
Servant. Hee's a sleep. Car. Ile wake and quicken him. Exit. Este. Hadst thou bin worth my love, I should have held Thee worth my anger shadow, of a Lord. Thy greatness I despise, and think thee now Too poor for my revenge, and freely give Thee back thy barren promises, and when I read in story, one that has been perjur'd, I'l write Don Pedro in the place of him That brok his faith, and thank my fate t' have mist thee. Alb. If you please Madam, while he is i'th' humor Of being base, I'l make him gather up These paper reliques, which he shall make him self Up into rolls, and having swallowed 'em For Pills, thank you, his Physick was so gentle. Este. It will be too much time & breath lost on him. Alber. It will become me Madam to attend you. Exit Este. Ped. So, she is taken off' and my path free To Carlos Daughter. Enter Carlos and Luys. Luys. Contracted to Don Pedro? say. Car. She was, where is Estefania? Ped. Gone with Alberto; proud to wait upon The Lady I neglected. Car. Follow 'em Luys? I do not like he should insinuate Now she is free, and his hopes desperat in Iacintas love. Luys How long have I slept sir? Car. Thou dost dream still, persue the Widdow now Or never look at such a fortune. Luys Is she gone with Alberto? what if I say, I have lain with her, and that shee's with child by me? Car. That would stain both your fames; away and welcom When thou return'st, and she confirm'd. Luys Ile confirm her, or confound somebody,
No more, I am awake, this is Don Pedro I'l talk with him first, vvill you justefie, The Widdow is a Widdow still, and sweet For all your Contract, that you have not been My rivall as they say after the flesh, And that you did not know I had a mind, Or not a mind, to do the deed of Matrimony? Ped. Not I upon my honor. Luys You are vvitness—novv to Alberto. Car. Manage the business temperatly. Luys Let me alone to be temperate, if I do not cosen Some body, let me never drink Sack agen. Exit. Car. What think you of Iacinta novv my Lord? Ped. As on the Saint I pay my chief devotions. Enter Fernando. Fer. I come to seek one, that I late call'd Brother, But he hath forfeted that Name, and Justice Weary of such a prodigy in nature Hath arm'd me thus in he revenge, Don Carlos, Obscure him not, no darkness can protect him, My svvord shall forrage every room like lightning, No Cave but it shall visit, and through ribs Of steel compell my passage to his heart, Although I meet him in his Mistris Armes, The lovers Sanctuary, I dare force Francisco, And vvith my Svvord cut the Embrace that chains him, Rather then he shall glory in my ruines, And revell out, those honors, vvith her, he Took from my blood. Enter Francisco with a Parchment. Fra. It shall not need Fernando. Ped. Hum, here is like to be a bloody business, I'l not disturb 'em. Exit. Car. As you are Brothers, by your Fathers dust That should sleep quiet in his Urne, by her Dear name that gave you life, that novv prayes for you,
Chide this unnaturall furie. Fra. VVhat demands Fernando? Fer. My inheritance wrought from me By thy slie creeping to supplant my birth, And cheat our Fathers easie soul, unvvorthily Betraying to his anger for thy lust Of wealth, the love and promise of two hearts, Poor Felisarda and Fernando now Wither at soul, and rob'd by thee of that Should cherish virtue, like to rifled Pilgrims Met on the way, and having told their story, And drop'd their even teares for both their loss, Wander from one another. Fra. Tis not sure Fernando, but his pasion (that obeys not The counsel of his reason) would accuse me, And if my Father now, since spirits lose not Intelligence, but more active when they have Shook off their chains of flesh, would leave his dwel∣ling, And visit this course orbe agen: my Innocence Should dare the appeal, and make Fernando see His empty accusations. Fer. He that thrives By wicked art, has confidence to dress His action with simplicity, and shapes To cheat our credulous natures; tis my wonder Thou durst do so much injury Francisco As must provoke my Justice, to revenge, Yet wear no Sword. Fra. I need no guard, I know Thou darst not kill me. Fer. Dare I not? Fra. And name thy cause, tis thy suspition not Fran∣cisco Hath wrought thee high and passionate, to assure it, If you dare violate, I dare possess you Withall my title to your Land. Car. How is that?
Will you resign the interest to such A fair Estate, and wrong my Daughter sir? Fra. Let him receive it at his perill. Fer. Ha! Fra. It was my Fathers act, not mine, he trembled To hear his curse alive, what horror will His conscience feel, when he shall spurn his dust, And call the reverend shade from his blest seat, To this bad World again, to walk and fright him? Car. I am abus'd Fer. Can this be more than dream? Fra. Sir you may cancell it, but think withall How you can answer him that's dead, when he Shall charge your timorous soul for this contempt To nature and Religion, to break His last bequest, and breath, that seal'd your blessings? Car. These are fine fancies. Fer. Here, and may it prosper, Where my good Father meant it, I'm orecome. Forgive me, and enjoy it, I may find Some Earth that is not thine, where I may dy And take up a dark Chamber, love Iacinta, And while I seek out where to be forgotten Live happy, and devide the spring between you, Enter Ramires, Felisarda, and Teodoro, a loof. Fra. So, so, all's well agen. Ram. Fernando stay. Fer. Ha, my Father and Felisarda? Car. Don Ramyres and my Neece? Fer. Are they both dead? [Fer. Kneels. I dare kneel too, they do converse. Don Carlos Do not you know that shape? 'tis wondrous like Your Neece. Car. And that your Father, ha! Fer. How long hath Felisarda been a sad Companion to the shades? I did not think To find thee in this pale society, Of ghosts so soon. Felisar. I am alive Fernando,
And Don Ramires still, thy living Father. Fra. You may believe it sir, I was o'th' counsell. Fer. It is a joy will tempt me, wish to live Here, without more ambition to change For blessings of the other World; and is My Father willing that wee both should live? Car. Men thought you dead. Ramir. It lay within the knowledge of Francisco and some few By this device to advance my younger Son To a Mariage with Iacinta sir, and try Fernando's Piety and his Mistris Vertue, Which I have found worth him, and my acceptance, With her I give thee what thy birth did challenge. Receive thy Felisarda. Fer. 'Tis a joy, So flowing, it drowns all my faculties, My soul will not contain I fear, but lose And leave me in this extrasie. Car. I am cheated. Ra. Not so, what dower you add above that fortune, Descends upon her by your Sisters Legacie Francisco shall deserve, with a proportion Enter Francisco and Iacinta. Out of my state; live, and be happy both, You shall not want a Father in my care. Our children thus increas'd Don Carlos, 'tis Our shame if we neglect 'em; Teodoro You now may call me Brother. Thes. I'm honor'd. Car. Well, take my blessing too, love her Francisco. My bounty is to come, and if my Son But finish with his Mistris—hee's return'd, Enter Luys. Where is the Widdow? Lu. Sure enough. Car. And Don Alberto. Lu. I ha made him sure too, I ha pepper'd him. Car. How? Lu. In your ear, I ha cut his throat, do none persue me?
Car. I hope thou hast not kil'd him? ha! Lu. You hope to late, I could not help it, you said He was my Rivall. Car. Not to loud. Lu. Where, where shall I obscure me, the Alcaides Will be here presently, and search for me. I left him giving up the ghost, at a cranny I made into his side, through which a man Might see into his midriff. Car. Art thou desperate? Lu. Beside one window that did look into his lungs, From whence his wind came strong enough, In six hours sail to dispatch a Carrack to the straightes. Car. I'm mad. Lu. I should neglect my life, but 'twould not sound well With your honor that Don Carlos Son was hang'd, Or put into the Gallies; are they not come yet? Car. I am undone, there is no safety here, Make fast those doors, and by the Postern gate Thou maist escape, take the best Horse, away. Lu. I shall want money sir. Car. Come follow me? This accident I fear will quite distract me. Lu. You must dispatch me quickly sir, there is No staying to tell the money, gee't me in lump, I'l count it afterwards, good sir make hast. Exit. Lu. & Car. Ra. Something hath hapned that doth fresh Perplex him. Fra. Where is Don Pedro? Enter Pedro. Fer. Hee's here. Ped. The storm is over sure, I hear no noise, Toledos are asleep, Iacinta? have I found my love? Fran. Here 'twas lost indeed, I must allow no such Familiarity With my Wife. Ped. How? married? Ia. 'Tis most true my Lord. Ped. You have not us'd me thus?
Fra. It had been Impious to divorce your heart From Estefania; My good Lord, wee know Your Lordship is religious in your promises. Ped. I defy all Estefanias, Lady you are civill. To Fe∣lis. Fer. It will become my care so to preserve her My Honorable Count. Ped. Honorable? It appeares not by these contempts. Ramyr. Your Lordship cannot want a Female Furni∣ture. Enter Alberto and Estefania. Ped. I must have some body now I'm prepar'd, my blood Will take it ill, would I had Estefania; Shee's here, Madam I hope you have A better faith than to believe I was in Earnest, Don Pedro is only at your service. Este. 'Tis too late sir, this Gent. is witness, Of your surrender, and is now possest Of all that's mine. Al. It was your Noble bounty, For which I cannot study a return More apt than to resign to your good Lordship, My Interest in Iacinta, give you joy Count. Such a rich Widdow serves my turn. Ped. So so, If I consider well this is but Justice. Enter Carlos. Car. Ha, are not you Don Alberto: fetch back Luys. Al. The very same sir, and this Lady is my Wife, Please you salute her. Enter Luys. Luys Sir for the credit of your wisdom talk not, The man you see's alive and married too, With my consent, alas I ow'd him mony, That Widdow has paid all, I must be honest, I had no heart to leave you so unsatisfied, These sums must go for other debts,
My debts do clog my conscience, and are better When they are timely paid sir, then let run With their long Teeth to bite your state hereafter, And if when I am free you dare but trust me— Car. Was ever Father cheated thus, come hither, How darst thou be so impudent? Lu. I cannot help it sir, unless you dye Or give me better means, I shall make bold With these devices, you are my Father sir, And I am bound— Car. To cosen me? Lu. All must be mine, and if I pay my self a little before the day, You shall be no loser when you come to reckon, This sha'not make a breach twixt you and I, They are honest men I ow this money too, When I am cleer prescribe me any method And rank me like your son, I will deserve You shall forget my wildness, and acknowledge me A convert without blemish to your family. Rami. I must be Intercessor. Iacin. And we all. Car. I'l think upon't. Ped. Since I cannot have Iacinta, I desire I may have her Brother. Lu. Not in marriage. Fed. I like his wit, his spirit, and his humor, Do not you love a wench? Lu. Yes sir. Ped. Thou sha't never want. Lu. Wenches? Ped. Wee'l live together, and▪ if thy Father Be not bountifull, thou shalt command my fortune. Lu. You speak nobly. Ped. Ladies, I ask your pardon Unless you hold me desperate, disdaine not That I may this day wait upon your triumph, And to each Bride offer some guift to expiate My folly and offence.
Rami. You are too bountifull. Car. Y'are all my guests to day. Rami. I beg your next Remove may place the Scen' of Joy with me, My house shall be much honor'd, lead the way With Verse and Wine let Poets crown this day. Exeunt omnes. Epilogue. Pedro. SO so, your dangers over, and the state Secure, as when our Fleet in Eighty Eight Was fir'd and scatter'd, to confirm it true Here is Don Pedro taken Prisoner too, I'm at your mercy Gentlemen, and I Confess without a rack conspiracy, So far as my poor part i'th' Play comes too, But I am innocent from hurt to you, And I dare quit the rest from any plot Meant but to please, if you believe it not I dare make oath, your hands can do no less Than certifie your friends what I confess. FINIS.
THE SISTERS, A COMEDIE, AS It was acted at the private House IN BLACK FRYERS, WRITTEN By JAMES SHIRLEY. Never Printed before. LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Robinson at the Three Pigeons, and Humphrey Moseley at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's Church-yard. 1652.
To the most worthily Honoured William Paulet Esquire. SIR, COmposiions of this nature, have here∣tofore been graced by the acceptance, and protection of the greatest Nobility (I may say Princes) but in this age, when the Scene of Drammatick Poetry is changed into a wilderness, it is hard to find a pa∣tron to a legitimate muse. Many that were wont to encourage Poems, are faln beneath the poverbiall want of the composers, and by their ruins are only at leasure o take measure with their eye, of what they have been. Some extinguished with their fortune, have this happiness, to be out of capacity of further shipwrack, while their sad remaynes peep out of the sea, and may serve naked marks, and caution to other Navigators, Malignant stars the while! In this unequall condition of the time, give me leave to congratulate my own felicity, that hath di∣rected this Comedy unto you, who wear your no∣bleness with more security, than titles, and a name that continues bright and impassible among the constellations in our Sphear of English honour. I
dare not detain you, Sir, with too long a Preface; if you please to entertain these Papers, as the modest tender of my service, I shall receive it as a most kind influence upon me; and you will engage to all your commands, the humble heart of Sir, Your faithfull Honourer, IA. SHIRLEY.
Prologue at the Black-Fryers. DOes this look like a Term? I cannot tell, Our Poet thinks the whole Town is not well, Has took some Physick lately, and for fear Of catching cold dares not salute this Ayr. But ther's another reason, I hear say London is gone to York, 'tis a great way; Pox o'the Proverb, and of him say I, That look'd ore Lixcoln, cause that was, must we Be now translated North? I could rail to On Gammar Shiptons Ghost, but 't wo' not doe, The Town will still be flecking, and a Play Though ne'r so new, will starve the second day: Upon these very hard conditions, Our Poet will not purchase many Towns; And if you leave us too, we cannot thrive, I'l promise neither Play nor Poet live Till ye come back, think what you do, you see What audience we have, what Company "To Shakespear comes, whose mirth did once beguile "Dull hours, and buskind, made even sorrow smile, "So lovely were the Wounds, that men would say "They could endure the bleeding a whole day: He has but few friends lately, think o' that, Hee 'l come no more, and others have his fate. "Fletcher the Muses darling, and choice love "Of Phoebus, the delight of every Grove; "Vpon whose head the Laurel grew, whose wit "Was the Times wonder, and example yet, `Tis within memory, Trees did not throng, As once the Story said to Orpheus song. "Johnson, t' whose name, wise Art did bow, and Wit "Is only justified by honouring it:
"To hear whose touch, how would the learned Quire "With silence stoop? and when he took his Lyre, "Apollo dropt his Lute, asham'd to see "A Rival to the God of Harmonie. You do forsake him too, we must deplore This fate, fot we do know it by our door. How must this Author fear then, with his guilt Of weakness to thrive here, where late was spilt The Muses own blood, if being but a few, You not conspire, and meet more frequent too? There are not now nine Muses, and you may Be kind to ours, if not, he bad me say, Though while you careless kill the rest, and laugh, Yet he may live to write your Epitaph.
Persons. FArnese, Prince of Parma. Contarini, a Noble man. Antonio, Uncle to the Sisters. Frapolo, the chief Bandit. Bandits. Longino Strozzo Rangino Pachequo Lucio, Paulina's Steward. Servants to Paulina. Giovanni Stephanio Fabio. Piperollo, Sonne to Fabio, Countrymen. Citizens. Petitioners. A Scholar. Pulcheria disguised, and under the name of Ver∣gerio. Sisters. Paulina Angellina Morulla, Wife to Fabio. Gentlewomen. Scene parma▪
THE SISTERS. ACT I. Enter Frapolo, Longin, Pacheco, Rangone, Strozzo, and other Banditi. Lon. I Like not this last Proclamation. Ra. Nor I. St. It startled me to read it. Fr. Did you read? tis a fault Strozzo a fault! I'l have no theef hereafter learn to read; Threaten us with long winded Proclamations? We are safe within our Woods, and Territories, And are above his Edicts; Have not wee A Common-wealth among our selves, ye Tripolites? A Common-wealth? a Kingdom; and I am The Prince of Qui-Vala's, your Sovereign theef, And you are all my Subjects. Lo. We are— Fr. And is there one so base to change Complexion, Because we are proscrib'd? I'l be no Prince. I have a grudging on me to be honest, And leave you to the fear of hemp, and hunger; Have I by stratagems so oft preserv'd you, When you were howling out your lives, and lead Away in Dog-couples by rusty Officers? And are you struck dead with a Paper pellet? Your bloud turn'd Whay, because there is reward Promis'd to bring our heads in? I renounce you— Land Rts—
Pa. Most excellent Frapolo, they recant; A little humane frailty may be pardon'd. Fr. Shall theeves, whose predecessors have been Kings, And conquer'd worlds, be factious, and schismaticall? I speak not for my self, but your own sakes, Whose Impudence, and art in valiant theft, Hereafter, may advance you to be Princes. Lo. You have confirmed us. Fr. You were best be rogues, and one betray another, To get the base reward; do, lose your honour, Live branded▪ and be pointed at i'th' street, There goes a Rascall that betrai'd his Prince, Or cut the throat of his Comrade, this will Shew well i'th' Chronicles—Stand fair you varlets, Because we cannot tell whose heart is treacherous, I will examine all your Phisnomies, And in whose face soever I can find A scandalous line, or look that may beget Suspition of a Man that wo'not die An honourable Rebell, and defie The Laws, I'le shoot him presently. Lo. Hang Laws, And those that make 'em, Conscience is a Varlet; Stand fair and shew complexions. Fr. Ye are all valiant, honest theeve landers, And I will be your Prince agen, and dy w'ee, As boldly, as they dare invent— Ra. Hang Cowards. Fr. I will not have you theeves among your selves. Lo. How's that, and please thy Excellence, not theeves? Fr. Not theeves one to another; but Religious— There is a kind of a Religion We Outlaws must observe. St. I never knew Religion yet, and 'twill be now unseasonable o learn.
Ra. I'l be of no Religion. Fr. Who was so bold To say he would have no Religion? What man is he, hopes to be drunk, to whore, To scpe the wheels, the Gallies, and the gallowes And be of no Religion? L. He says right. Fr. Yee shall be of what Religion I please. Pa. Tis fit we should, Frapolo is our Monarch. Fr. And yet I must consider of some fit one That shall become our trade And constitutions; hum! Silence. St. Nay, nay Prince, take time to think on't, Ther's no hast. Fr. I have thought, And you shall be no Pagans, Iews, nor Christians. Lo. What then? Fr. But every man shall be of all Religions. Ra. I like that well. Fr. Why should I clog your Conscience or confine it? Do but obey your Prince, and I pronounce You shall live Grandees, till the State Phangs catch you▪ And when you come unto the Wheel, or Gibbet, Bid figo for the World, and go out Martyrs. Omnes. A Prince, a Prince! Fr. Provided, that no theef Makes a Confession at his Death, or peach His Tribe, or make a shew of penitence, To make the Butter-women melt, and draw Compassion from the toothless musty rabble; This will exclude the benefit of that Canon Declares you Martyrs for the Cause. Scout and discover. A noise within. Exit Longino. Ra. Tis a howling voice. Fr. What Cry was that?
Enter Longino. Lo. Of one, whose pocket has given up the Ghost, And with the fear his body should do so, He howles O'this fashion. They put on Vizards: Fr. Bring him to our presence. Piperollo brought in. Pi. Gentlemen, tis very cold, I beseech you Do not strip my Skin off, you are not sure I shall go to a fire when I go out of This World; and yet as I am I confesse I shall yield very little burn'd. Lo. Knock out his brains. Pa. Pistoll him. St. Cuts throat. Pi. Gentlemen, hear me—I am very sorry, I had no greater sum—but if you please To reprieve a poor wretch, I may do you service, And if you knew my inclination, You would not be too Cruell. Fr. To what are you inclin'd Sirra? Pi. I have been commended for a Dexterity At your fellonious trade; for Gentlemen, I have been a Pickpocket of a child, and have These many years been thought a pretty house-theef▪ Mary I have not yet breeding abroad With such deserving men, but I shall be Most glad to learn, and if you please t' accept Me to your tribe, I have Intelligence Where money lyes hid, and very few Spirits To guard it. Fr. Be confident, and be cover'd. Lo. Let him be one of us. Fr. Be brief, where is this treasure? Pi. I have an old Father, and Mother, Gentlemen, Please you bestow a visit upon them;
They have some Goldfinches, having new sold A peece of Land, was given 'em by the rich Vincenzo, Father to the famous, proud Paulina, now his heir. Lo. The glorious Daughter Of old Vincenz? she's a Semiramis. Pi. The very same; if you would visit her, I am acquainted with the house. Fr. Wee'l take a time to think on her; to th'point, What ready money has your Father Sirra? Pi. Tis but two days ago since he receiv'd Six hundred Pistolets, I can direct To a Cedar Chest, where the fine sum lies dormant. St. What Servants has your Father? Pi. Alas none, they are miserable Hinds, And make me all the drudge, you need not fear The Court-du-Guard; if you please let me go An honest theeves part, and furnish me Wih a Devills complexion, to hide my own, I will conduct you. Fr. A very honest fellow! Pi. I do not love to be ingratefull where I'm kindly us'd, my heart is honest. Fr. Is he thy own Father? Pi. My own Father and Mother Sir, the cause Would not be so naturall else, and meritorious. Fr. A precious rogue, fit him instantly With a disguise, and let him have that face The Devill wore in the last anti-masque. Pi. It cannot be too ugly Sir to fright 'em. Fr. But if he fail in any Circumstance— Pi. 'Tis not far off, I know the nearest way. Fr. Or give the least suspition to betray you, Be sure you cut his throat. Lo. We shall. Pi. I thank You Sir, d'ee think I'l be a Traytor?
Lo. Come first along with us. Exeunt. Fr. You heard this fellow name the proud Paulina, Her Chests are worth the rifling. Pa. The Castle is impregnable she lives in. Fr. Was that spoke like an understanding theef, A true Bandit? How I do blush for thee? Was not the Orchard of Hesperides Watcht by a fierce, and flaming Dragon, robd? Shall wee despair to reach her golden Apples? Wee'l make discovery of the place, and persons, Put it to Fate, let Stars do what they please; Mercury is a Stronger theef than Hercules. Exeunt. Enter Giovanni Stephanio. Gio. What a brave time have we had, since our Old Master died? St. Though he were a gallant man, his Daughter Makes his Memory burn dym, and (compar'd To her) he liv'd but like a Hermit in a Cell, She is all Magnificent, a , Every hair of her head worth stellyfying. Gio. But my Lady, for so we must call her, May be of kin to Lucifer for pride; How many brave Gentlemen hath she despis'd, When once their blister of Love broke out, And they made offer of Mariage? Enter Antonio, Angellina. Ste. Here is her Sister Angellina a virgin Of another constitution, their two natures As different are, as the two Poles, our Mistress Cannot be so Tyrannically proud As she is sweet, and humble. Gio. That's the reason her Father left her only As much as would commend her to a Nunnery. St. Her Uncle dotes upon her. Gio. He does love her.
St. Tis an old blunt brave fellow; but he has Quite lost our gallant Ladies good opinion, He is out of grace. Ex. Ant. Ang. Gio. Because he would correct her insolence, Who oblig'd by her father to the care of Her governour, wo'not tie up his Counsell, Which he enforces sometimes so passionately, It is a sport to hear her contempt of his gravity. Enter Paulina, Antonio. He has met my Lady, I see a quarrell In their looks already, let us withdraw Behind that Lobby, we may hear, and Laugh securely. Exeunt. An. How long have you been speechless? am Not I your Uncle? why do you look so scurvily? I do not think you are a Princesse yet, And therefore take the boldness to salute you, Without the Ceremony of Petitioners That haunt your Ladiships charity; or if You thought me despicable, your Sister has Deserv'd your smile. Pa. It may be so— An. Buffoones, That make an Idoll of you, and can pawn Their Souls to flatter you, should be entertaind, And Courted to your vanity. I blush for you; Will nothing bring you into sense of Honour Or Modesty? I ha done. Pa. It will become you; You do presume too much. An. Presume? why, are Not you Paulina am not I Antonio Your Uncle? speak. Pa. I do remember Sir, I calld you so, while you preserv'd your wits,
And may acknowledge you again, upon Sober Conditions, and your Senses perfect. An. Sober Conditions? am I Drunk, Gipsey? What flesh is able to forbear. Dost hear? Thou hast drunk a Devill. Pa. I did not see him in my Cup. An. And he has sweld thee to this monstrous pride, More than thy Sex beside; if thou goest on At this rate, thou wilt make Lucifer an Ape, He must be thy Disciple. Pa. The Old thing raves: An. Thing? what thing? thank heaven thou Art a woman; I would beat thee into a Poltise— When didst thou say thy prayers? Pa. You know I keep a Chaplain. An. Thy Soul wants desperate lancing; Ther's an eternall Ulcer in thy heart, Te Witches cannot suck it dry, there is A bath of Poyson in thee. Pa. I shall pity him; A Posset, and to bed with him, his head Does want the benefit of sleep; how wild The good man looks? An. Thou art— Pa. The Mistress of this Castle as I take it, Without your Legacy. An. I could rail upon the dead for't; dost thou not fear Thy Fathers ghost should haunt thee? Pa. I never think upon him, and it was His providence to leave me an estate, To keep me from those Malancholy fancies, And I will have you my caprichious Uncle Know, in the Circle of these my Dominions, I will have no Competitor. An. Dominions? Was ever such an insolence? are not you
Some Queen conceald? Pa. I am Independent, and sole regent here. An. So so, Where's your Nobility? they are to blame Not to attend— Pa. Who waits? Enter Giovanni, Stephanio. An. But they do want white Staves, this is Not State enough. Pa. It shall be mended, let them be remembred. An. She's in earnest—and If I were worthy to advise you Madam, Your grace should be a little more reserv'd, And entertain none that did treat of Mariage To your private conference, untill they had In publick receiv'd audience like Ambassadors. Pa. I like the Counsell well, it shall be so, The next that comes shall find it my good Uncle. An. She's incorrigible. What if you commanded those that do attend Your person to observe you on their knees Sometimes, they must be humble to your highness; I can forget my gray hairs, name, and bloud, And teach your Servants duty. Pa. The example Will edifie the houshold, and you may, By fair degrees rise to our Princely favour. Enter Lucio. Lu. Madam, the Lord Contarini is arrived The Castle. Pa. He comes a woing to me, let it be Your Office reverend Uncle to acquaint him, Our pleasure is to give him Audience To Morrow in full State, untill when Uncle, Make it your care, his entertainment be Such as becomes the greatness of his bloud,
And one, on whom the Prince, we know, bestows His speciall grace. An. D'ee har sweet Niece? be not you transported; This is no dream, the man is no mock-lord. Pa. I'l be a Princess here, as you directed, If he can humble himself to Ceremony, Promise him honourable access, and freedom, If the Conditions please him not, he may Return, and leave our Court. Exit. An. Is this in Nature? well I'l follow her, And if she be not past al shame, and senses, I will humble or confound her. Exit. ACT II. Enter Longino, Strozzo, Binding Fabio, and Morulla. Mo. AH sweet Gentlemen, we are very poor, And have a great Charge. Str. We do come to ease you of your charge. Fa. Pity my age. St. You must then pity our youth. Enter Piperollo visarded with three bags. Pi. Here, share and share like. Mo. Alas we are undone. St. What shall we do with them? Pi. If you have bound her hands and feet, you May try whether she be a Witch or no, there's A Pond in the backside, if she swim, so— For him? Fa. Have some compassion, tis our whole estate. Lo. You have a Son, a pious child we hear.
St. He will not let you want. Mo. Alas poor boy, he little thinks what we With care and providence laid up for him Should thus be lost. O pity Gentlemen. Pi. Boh—Lets away. St. I begin to find a kind of a compunction, Let us be charitable theeves for once— Lo. And return half, What say you? Pi. Not a gazet, y'are not such foolish theeves; Part with present money? part with my life first. St. Not to your Parents? Pi. We use them well, because we do not carry Their Cowes away; there they have Cheese, and Butter, Bread comes by nature, and they both can glean, There's water in the Well too; not a penny— If you will be so charitable, defalk From your own shares, mine is a just theeves part; I look for thanks, distribute your own alms; These things must be employ'd to better uses. Is a Father, and Mother considerable To ready mony; oh! fie—boh! St. Then we must over-rule you. Trips up his heels. Pi. Ah what do you mean? St. Baul and betray your self at your own perill. We will be bold with your theeves part— Come neerer—Look you good Woman, You shall not lose your thirds, say you have met With honest theeves; this shall suffice at present, Which we but borrow neither, that you may not Suspect our payment, you shall have security, This honest man bound for't, and so we leave you. Fa. Tis money. Mo. And left one of their fellows bound. Fa. Do we not dream Wife? I dare not come neer Him.
Mo. They are gone, I'l see his complexion; Who's this? Fa. Our own Son Piperollo? Pi. Pray Father give me your blessing, ah— Mother do not stone me to death with that Money bag, I am your Son. Mo. My Son?  know thee not. Pi. A liar, you know Mother, is worse than a Theef; do not destroy the hopes of your Family, Alas, I was drawn in, and made a theef In my own defence, they swore to cut my throat Else, do you think I had so little grace— Mo. Did they so? I'l try what I can do. Sh draws her knife. Pi. Oh my quibibles! sweet Mother▪ remember You were a woman in your days, that knew What's what, and the true difference of things. I am a man yet, your forgivenesse may Make me a true man. Libbing, and hanging Are no helps to posterity, I am your own Sweet flesh and bloud—Oh. Mo. Kick him out of doors. Pi. I thank you, this Correction may do me good; Gently, ah gently; shall I not ask you blessing, A twelve-month hence? Both Never. Pi. I wo'not. My Mother has a deadly life with her leg. Fa. Boh, you tadpole. Exeunt. Pi. I shall do no good o'this trade. Now to my wits, this is no world to starve in. Exit Enter Lucio, Giovanni, Stephanio, with white Staves. Lu. This is very fine; do not these Staves become us? But will my Lady be thus mad, and give
The Lord Cntarini Audience in such State? She takes upon her like a very Princess. Gio. But is't not strange her Uncle should thus humor her? Ste. He gave her the first hint, which she pursues To his vexation. Luc. But will my Lord stoop to this mockery? Gio. He is prepar'd by her Uncle; 'twil be sport, If she but carry it with pride enough. Gio. Let her alone. St. And if my Lord wants confidence— Gio. I think her impudence will make him blush, And put him out; I have seen a Counterfeit With such a Majesty compose himself, He thought himself a Prince, could frown as scornfully, And give his hand out to great Lords to kiss, With as much grace, as all the Royall bloud Had musterd in his veins. Lu Some Monarch Of Innes a Court in England sure; but when His reign expires, and Christmas in the grave Cold as the Turkies coffind up in crust, That walk like Ghosts, and glide to severall Tables, When Instruments are hoarse with sitting up, When the gay triumph ceases, and the treasure Divided, all the Offices laid up, And the new cloathes in Lave der, what then? Gio. Why then the man that kist his highness hand O'r night, may justle him for the wall next morning, And have it too; if he come off with all His wits the Play is paid for, and he fit For travell. Enter Contarini, Antonio, Vergerio, they whisper. My Ladies Uncle, and the Lord Contarini. Ver. My Lord Contarini expects when he May have the happiness to present his service
To your great Lady. Lu. We shall Sir acquaint her. Ver. Your Office Sir? Lu. Her Steward. Ver. Yours I pray? St. Mine, Treasurer. Gio. Mine, Controller. Ver. I kiss your hands; this may be worth my Lords Curiosity. An. For the mirths sake, my Lord be pleas'd, you may Do an act of Charity and restore her Senses; I'l wait on you again. Exit. Con. Now Vergerio? Ver. The expectation is increas'd, her Officers Observe the State; were your affections earnest And I my Lord your Mistresse, I should trust Her pride. Con. Unless she ravish me. Enter Antonio. An. She's upon entrance, her madness holds, Your confidence may convert her, shees my Neece And I am sorry for it. Enter Paulina attended in State, Angellina, Ladies. Pa. Give him accesse. Con. What Ladies that stands on her right hand? An. Her younger Sister, that does vex me as much With her humility, as the other with Her impudence. Con. An excellent peece, Vergerio. Ver. Which my Lord? Con. Madam, the glory of your time and Nation, Whose looks do shine with Majesty, and shoot A flame t' undoe the admirer, O call in Some beams that wait upon the thrones of light, Or I shall fall your sacrifice, and not finish
What my great Master gave me in charge. Lu. Has the Prince a mind to her himself. St. Tis not impossible. Pa. Speak on my Lord. An. Gipsey, she does believe the lightning of her eys Will blast indeed, how scornfully she squinnies? Con. I come from the great Sovereign of hearts, Whose glorious monarchy uncircumscrib'd, Extends to all the habitable world, Where ever land or loverstretch'd his arm, Whose Scepter's not like that of common Kings, But a bright golden shaft feather'd with sighs, And headed with a flame, which finds access, Like subtill lightning to the most secure, And stubborn Cell that ever yet inclos'd A humane thought— Lu. He flies high. Gio. Tis his arrow— Pa. Speak this great name. Con. The most immortall Prince of Love— Gio. A high and mighty Prince indeed. Lu. Tis not our Prince of Parma then? Con. Unto your beauty Madam, that makes sweet The breath of Fame, in his name I am sent To offer up a Servant, rich with wonder, And humble thoughts that honour you; who can See those perfections and not adore The Divine Owner? Brightness that offends The innocent eye that gazes, is in you The cure of blindness, and the filmes that hang Upon the humble sight, fall off and vanish, That it may take new life and light from you. An. Is she not yet ridiculous to her self? Con. I can leave Cupids Court to live with you, And all those bowers, where an eternall spring Makes every flower in love with it's own beauty.
The wind whose airy wings convey all sweetness That sense can entertain, I would exchange But to be near your breath; and think there dwels A harmony in your voice, above the airs Of all those charming Birds by love selected From every wood to be his quire. I fear I am too bold, and may be thought to wander; If Madam you accept my amorous vows, Which live yet in the weak expression Of him that honours you, time will produce A white and fortunate hour to crown our loves With nuptiall happiness. Pa. You have relation To the Court of Parma, your name Lord Contarini, you have no Message from you Master? Con. Madam your fame hath fild his Court, and he Presents by me his Princely wishes of Your happiness, and should he see your person, Like mine, his heart I fear would melt into A stream of Love and Admiration. Pa. Sir, we accept in good part greeting from The Prince, but you have no commission To treat for him; the substance of your own Affair will ask our pause, we will take time To answer, which till you receive, you may Command our Court. Exeunt Paulina, Servants Angellina stayes. Ver. Proud folly! Ant. Prodigious impudence! Con. What think you Signior? Ant. I am confounded, I'l to her agen. Exit. Ang. When shall I awake? This sure is but a dream, the Gentleman Cannot so much mistake his time and Language. Con. I came with Curiosity to see Her pride so talk'd of, but my heart I feel
Is taken with an object of true sweetness. Is't not a lovely figure? say Vergerio. Ver. If but her mind answer that fair proportion, My Lord she is worth love, but being Sister To a woman of such pride— Con. I prethee leave me. Ver. She is very beautifull; my Lord is taken. Exit. Con. Lady, but that ther's story for your births, I should make judgment by your modest face, This arrogant woman could not be your Sister. Ang. Sir, if your expectation be not answered With her full worth, I shall beseech you name her With less disgrace, (our bloud so neer) it cannot Be gratefull to my ear, to hear her blemishes. Con. I was prepar'd before to meet this goodness; These words and looks become that innocent spring From whence they flow, vertue hath such an army About your heart, ther's nothing can approach Ill to betray it, or proceed from you But warranted by honour. An. I know not, But sure my Lord, you talk too fine a language For me to understand; we are far from Court, Where though you may speak Truth, you cloath it with Such trim and gay apparell, we that only Know her in plainness, and simplicity, Cannot tell how to trust our ears, or know, When men dissemble. Con. By your own love To truth, you must beleeve me, when I say, Although it took beginning from this visit, I love no beauty but your self. Ang. You said you lov'd my Sister, and exprest Your passion in such mighty phrase and fancie I thought your soul had made a business on't, Pardon the weakness of my faith if I
Dare not believe this change. Con. Your Sister, Lady, I came to visit, not affect, I heard, And had a purpose but to try how neer The wonder of her pride (pardon sweet Virgin) Came to a truth, nor did I Court her with The language of a meaning lover; but Prepared by your Vncle, meant to make her see Her miserable folly; I dare not Present such Mockeries to you; suspect not This hasty address; by your fair self, I love you. Ang. My Lord, If I beleev'd this, reall Courtship, I should not entertain your honour with a A fruitless Expectation, but declare, Besides my want of fortune, beauty, birth, To make me worth your love, I am already Contracted by my Father to Religion, Whose will I cheerfully obey, and wait When my good Uncle will dispose me to A Nunnery. Con. A Nunnery? Ang. Where for So great an honour you pretend to me A most unworthy maid, I'l offer up My prayers, that you may choose a heart more equall To your own love, and greatness. Enter Antonio, Paulina, and Servants. Con. Nay you must Not leave me so, we are interrupted, you May trust me fair one with a neerer Conference, Exeunt. Pa. Alas poor old man. Ant. The Old man before your borrowed Ladiship Is bold to keep his head warm, and to tell you You are a Puppet, take that to your titles Of honour. Pa. So Sir, none restrain his insolence?
Ant. I'l make him swallow down his staff of Office That stirs. I ha'not done. Canst be so impudent To think his Lordship does not laugh at thee? Your eys the thrones of light? a brace of Lanthorns, In which two snufs of Candle close to th'socket, Appear like fire-drakes, and will serve to light A traveller into a Ditch. You Madam Majesty, And the glory of a Nation? Tho'art a disease to Honour, Modesty, A Feaver in thy Fathers bloud, a Gangren Upon his name, a Pox upon thee for't; Ther's one disease more, yet I have not done. Pa. My Charity may invite, if these fits hold, Some close provision for you 'mong mad men; I do command you leave my house. Ant. I wo'not, I'l fire the house; dost hear? thou wo't burn well, Th'ast Oil enough about thy face, and all Thy body Pitch, very combustible. But I'l not be damn'd for thee, now I think on't, And since no Counsell will prevail, I'l save My self. Before I go, give but a reason Why thou dost slight this gallant Lord, and squint As if he were Groom or Foot man. Pa. I'l tell you, You would have the truth. Ant. If thou canst speak any. Pa. I do esteem my self More equall for his Master. Ant. Who, the Prince? Pa. No, the blind Prince of Love, you are wise Uncle, But I am out of Poetry. Ant. I think I were best cut off thy head, and save The Laws a labour—Ther's no talking to her. Pa. I am of your mind Uncle, you may edifie Your charge, my younger Sister, she's not proud,
Pray take her w'ee, shee'l become the Cloister; Go, and be mortified together, take her, I am weary of her. Ant. And I of thee; She shall be further off too, thou'lt infect her, Although her foolish Father, (yet he was My Brother) I have not power to speak Well o'th' dead, gave thee his whole Estate, I have a fortune, dost thou hear? I have, And to vex thee, thy Sister shall have that, I'l see, and I can make her proud, I'l do't; She shall have Servants, Suters, Fidlers, Flatterers, Fine Cloathes, and all the food that can provoke Yo glorifie her sense; I have bags to spare, She shall not to a Nunnery to vex thee, I say again she shall not, wee'l have humours; The to'ther Pox upon thee, and farewell. Pa. I fear he's mad indeed. Let me have Musick, This talk has made me Melancholy. Exeunt. ACT III. Enter Lucio, Piperollo. Lu. FOr thy Mothers sake thou shalt be entertain'd. Pi. An under Butler would fit me rarely, Ther's none i'th' house that shall be sooner drunk, Nor oftner for my Ladies credit Sir. Lu. Can you write? Pi. And read in print Sir. Lu. Art thou faithfull? may a man trust thee? Pi. For more than I'l speak on; trusted? I was bound For two Gentlemen lately, that could not take up Five hundred Pistols upon other security,
My Father and Mother knows it; I shall never Endure a theef for a thing that I know, alas You know I am a neighbors child, my mother Was your good Ladies nurse. Lu. Do not I know thy Mother? Pi. Better it may be, than I know my Father. Lu. Till some Office fall i'th' house, you shall serve me, And ride with me, to receive my Ladies Rents. Enter Controller Giovanni. Gio. Mr. Steward, yonder are the rarest fellows, In such phantasticall habits too, they call Themselves Mathematicians. Lu. What do they come for? Gio. To offer their service to my Lady, and tell for∣tunes. Lu. Have they no chief? Gio. Yes a quaint philosophicall fellow, they call Him a Caldean, a great Schollar, they do Not come for money like your starch'd fac'd Egyptians, but carry things for the credit of The Mathematiques honourably; my Lady hath Given the Caldean her Nativity, who is to consult With the Ephemerides, and give account how The Stars wil dispose of her. Pi. We shall know all our fortunes then. Gio. The worst of his train can discipher hands, Tell foreheads. Pi. And Noses. Gio. One at the first sight did but whisper to my Ladies Gentlewoman, and she did so blush Through her Tiffany. Pi. That's no great matter, I have seen one blush Through a Plaister of Paris. Lu. How's that? Pi. A kind of French painting Sir. Gio. Well said Piperll; I have entertain'd him; but my Lady.
Enter Paulina, Gentlewomen. Pa. The Caldean Pleases me, I long to hear my fortune, If it be good he shall have a reward To cherish his great Art, and worth my bounty; What if my Stars should frown? Didst bid 'em follow? Ste. They are all ready Madam. Pi. Musicall knaves. Enter Longino, Rancone, Pacheco, Strazzo, in queint disguises. A Song. Beauty and the various grace, That adorn the sweetest faces, Here take their glorious throne; may he That is the God of Archerie, Never aim one angry Dart, But soft, and gentle as your heart, Court it with flame, and rich perfume, To light, and sweeten, not consume. Pa. Not the Caldean come yet? my thoughts are Inflam'd with fierce desire to know my Destiny; You have skill Gentlemen; but I'l expect The judgment of your Master on my Fate; When the great man of art returns acquaint me. Exit. Ste. Come my friends, lets lose no time; Sir. Lo. I am for you to the extent of my Art Signiour. Ra. If it please you, let me peruse your hand. Lu. 'Tis at your service. Pi. Please you to examine my Palm; can you Tell me learned Sir, what is past? Pa. You know that already. Pi. 'Twill be a satisfaction to me, if you can Make it appear, that you know something In that point. Lo. A Fracture in the Mercuriall line, and the
Mount of Saturn ill characted! you are [Strazzo picks Neer a misfortune Sir. [Stephani. pocket. Ra. Iupiters Mount is well form'd and colour'd A Cross conspicuous, the Suns Mount well Figur'd, and linca solis, without any intersection, Lu. Your Iudgement upon that Sir? Enter Antonio. An. More Anticks yet? What Nation have we here, Fortune flingers! Str. You shall know yours immediately. An. Her house is open for these Mountebanks, Cheaters, and Tumblers, that can foist and flatter My Lady Gugaw; Every office open, When Poor men that have worth and want an Alms, May perish ere they pass the Porters lodge; What are you Sir? Str. One of the Mathematicians noble Signior. An. Mathematicians? Mungrell, How durst thou take that learned name upon thee? You are one of those knaves that stroul the Country, And live by picking worms out of fools fingers. (Cato. Str. And something out of your trunks, my reverend An. Busie the raskals are, how the rogues stink? I'l send your Regiment a Quarter-master. Exit. Str. Now to my other gamester. Pa. You have been— Pi. What Sir? Pa. In your ear—a theef. Pi. He has a Devil; good Sir not too loud. Pa. And you shall be— Pi. Hang'd I warrant you. Pa. Let me see tother hand. Pi. Shall it scape with burning? Ra. You shall be a Lord. Lu. A Lord. Ra. Hum, yes, a Lord infallibly.
Pa. You shall be a Knight Sir. Pi. Of the theeves Order, and wear my rich Collar of hemp; is't not so? Pa. An honourable Knight, upon my word. Lu. A Lord—Pray give your opinion. [To  on ino. Lo. Your hand—you shall be a right worshipfull— Lu. One of your tribe told me I should be a Lord. Str. And shall be us'd accordingly, Lords are transito∣ry. Strozzo picks Lucoes pocket. Lo. Let me see tother hand. I marry Sir, this line Cleeres the doubt, and markes you right Honourable, which makes up the tother half Of your fortune Signior, these two parallell lines From the dexter angle to be the Mount of Sol, Has made all plain, you must be a Lord. Pi. He has given you a very good reason Sir, A man can have but half his fortune in one Hand, and two right worshipfulls makes up One right honourable; these are rare fellowes, I am predestinate to be a Knight, The Stars may do their pleasure, I obey. This should be the Caldean. Enter Frapolo, Castruehio be whispers to the rest. Fr. I have narrowly observed the Castle, and Where the treasure lies, I know my Lady In honour will entertain us this night, and When they are asleep wee'l take our opportunity To rifle her Exchequer, boyes, mean time Let me alone to humour her proud Nature; I will so claw her ambition. Lu. In the interim, I'l put a question to His Astrology. Sir, If you please till my Lady Return to satisfie her Seward, and oblige him By your Art, one of your under Mathematicks Has given me a Comfortable Destinie. Fr. Your hand. When were you born?
Lu. I know not Sir. Ran. A Lord—[R. whispers Fr. No Matter, Venus in the Ascendent with Sol, being Lady of your seventh; hum, hum, With Iupiter, designes you to be a Lord. Lu. They all agree; the miracle of learning! One question more I beseeth you Sir, I Am to ride with my Man to receive my Ladies Rent to morrow through the Forrest— Fr. Go to. Lu. Now I desire to know, whether we shall be Rob'd in our return or no? Fr. What time do you think precisely to come Back Sir, for we should know the very minute. Lu. The Money is ready Sir, and we do purpose, In your ear— Fr. Yes, you shall be rob'd, ther's nothing in Nature to prevent it. Pi. Will they kill us, and please you? Fr. No, they shall not kill you, they shall only Take your money, and break your pate, that Will be all. Pi. Why let 'em rob us Sir, the loss of our Money Will be an evidence of our preferment, and you May have more assurance to be a Lord, and I of my Knighthood—My Lady Sir. Enter Paulina. Fr. Madam, the Stars shine with their full beams Upon you, Who by me their interpreter, salute You with a glorious fortune: For Leo's Lord of your Horoscope in the right angle of heaven, and a royall Fixt Sar calld Regulus, or the Lions hart, culminating With him, and a naturall reception between Mars, And Sol Lord of the tenth, being in the first with Mercury and Venus in the house of honour, besides A Conjunction of Iupiter and Luna in Pisces, in The house of Mariage, I must give Iudgment.
Pa. I shall beseech your cleerer language. Fr. You shall be Married to a Prince, it is inevitable. Pa. A Prince? Lu. May not I come to be a Lord then? Pi. And I a Knight? Pa. When shall I see him? Fr. He shall within few days visit your Castle, Drawn hither with the fame of your person, And bravery. I need not instruct you to entertain Him with State and Ceremony becoming his Excellence, but if he Court you not into his arms, I will renounce the Stars, and say there is no Truth in Astrology. Pa. How my thoughts swel already. Fr. She has swallowe'd it. Pa. Give him five hundred Pistolets. Fr. Do not wrong so much One that does honour you; as I bribe not The Stars to tell me their Decrees, I dare not For money sell their Secrets, and if any That have relation to me presume To take a Iulio— Lo. By no means Madam— Pa. I like it that no Mercenary ends Guide 'em to flatter me. [A Drum  off. Lo. Is not that a March? Exit. Pi. If it entrench not too far upon your art, This Prince, Sir, has a Name. Fr. And rules this Province, Fernese is a Bachelour. Pa. The Prince of Parma? My bloud refines in every vein already, Dull heavy Souls that are content to drudge In humble thoughts. Enter Longino and whispers to Frapolo. Lo. I Fear we are betraid;
The Countries up and marching to the Castle, We may be all surpriz'd let us to, horse— Exit. Pa. Deny not, Sir, this night an entertainment, Such as my Castle yields, it sha'not spread To receive guests more welcome. Lu. A Drum Madam. Exit. Ra. Must we not stay and rob the house to night? Er. Madam, my art foretells I cannot be Safe to remain here, at my return I wo'not baulk your Castle, i'th' mean time Cherish high thoughts, your Stars do call you Princess, So kissing your fair hand— Pa. Make me not so unhappy. Fr. There is no dispute with Destinie, I take my humble leave, away to horse. Exeunt. Pa. This more amazeth me, what danger should Provoke this hast, if it prove their concernment, I must believe they do converse with Fate, And trust to them as Oracles; a Princess? Was not my Soul Propheticall? Enter Lucio. Lu. Madam, some accident hath rais'd your tenants, They march in fury this way, in strange postures And Arms, as if they came to storm the Castle. Enter Piperollo. Pi. Madam, we are all undone, the Clubs are up, Your Tenants are turn'd Rebels, and by this time Entred the Hall; and threaten to surprize I know not whom; But the Caldea, and His troop are vanish'd, they foresaw this tempest. Pa. What should this mean? Enter Countrymen armed. I Come on you men of lusty Chine, Dear Lady Be not affrighted, Captain of thy Guard Am I, thy naturall Tenant, and thy Vassall; Where be these Sunburnt Aethiopians?
I wo'not leave one Canting Rogue alive. Pa. What Aethiopians, what Canting Rogues? Do not your Clounships know me? I Know our Princess? We honour thee, and rise in thy defence; Where be these theeves? we heard there were A Regiment, that came to Cheat and Plunder. Pa. Y'are a Knot Of knaves and fools, and shall repent this insolence; You that command in chief, good Captain Bumbard, May teach your Raggamuffins face about, Was it your stratagem to fright my guests? I Your Uncle told us Madam, and commanded. Pa. Was it his plot? he's still my enemy. I Pardon us Madam, We came simply hither to do you service; Kneel, or we shall all be stript out of our Tenements. Pa. My Uncle has abus'd you, But this submission takes our anger off, Continue dutifull to my Commands, And you shall be remembred; Piperollo— Exit. Pi. I know the Buttery Madam; follow me, It is my Ladies pleasure you be drunk, And thank her grace ye keep your Copiholds; Dee you bring up the rear, I'l march in front. Exeunt. Enter Antonio, Contarini. Ant. Passion O'me, it is to great an honour, Refuse a man of your high bloud and name, That Courts her honourably? I could beat her. Con. 'Tis not impossible at my return To find a change. I must to Court agen. Ver. The horses my Lord are ready. Con. Vergerio— Ant. What a Baggage 'tis, shees all for the Nunnery, She sha'not have her will, I'l undo my self But I'l destroy this Modesty; if I could
But make her proud there were some hope on her. Ver. My Lord you may command, but how unfit, I am to manage this affair. Con. Thou hast a powerfull Language, it prevail'd On me when I first saw thee, since which time I have not deserv'd unkindly from thee, and This trust speaks more than Common favour. Ver. Make me his advocate to Angellina? An. My Lord, if you can still preserve these thoughts Of honour to us, leave her to my Counsell. Con. Most cheerfully, I am not desperate; This Gentleman I'l leave to wait upon her, Who is privy to my Counsells, and affection. An. Your Lordship hath found trust in him, but that Sha'not excuse my care, to make her know Her happiness, and the Honour of our Family, By meeting your commands. She's here. Enter Angellina, Francescina. Francescina tell me, what hope of your Mistress? How does thy Counsell work? does she pray less Then she was wont? or listen now and then When thou talk'st wantonly, does she smile upon't? Fr. Between our selves, I put her to a smiling Blush. Ant. What said she, tell me on thy modesty, When she found her dear delight, the legend Of the Saints remov'd, and Ovids tales of Iupiter put in the place? Fr. She said, that Iupiter Was a most sensuall Heretick, and the cestus That Venus wore was not St. Francis girdle. Ant. How did she like the picture of Leander, Swimming the Hellspont upon his back? How that of Cleopatra kissing Antony? Fr. She Says that Queen was none of the poor Clares,
But one bread up in black Aegyptian Darkness; All I can say, she is not desperate, I sing no Anthems to her. Ant. What says she to her dancing Master? Fr. She is past her honor; that's a precious fellow, She'l laugh to see him gamboll with his limbs, His head flies like a Ball about the room; You'd think he were at Tennis with it. Ang. Though in the guilt and knowledge of my own Defects, to answer such an honourable Esteem of me, I dare not yet presume To meet it; I shall want no pious thoughts For this so great a bounty to a poor Desertlesse Virgin. Ant. Hang your pious thoughts And love my Lord. Con. Not for the wealth of Parma Should my Cause force one cloud upon her face Or put her eys to the expence of tears, It shall be argument for me to hope, If she accept this youth to wait upon her, Who may in some auspicious hour, prepare me A gentle seat within her heart, mean time I leave upon your Virgin lip the faith, Of your true Servant Lady. Ant. I'l attend you To horse my Lord. Exeunt. Ang. Poor miserable maid, Faln now beneath the pity of thy self; My heart, on which so late a flame of Heaven Stream'd comfort in my holy resolutions, Is fil'd with love, but not of Contarini, Whose passion may deserve anothers welcome, I prethee Francescina take thy Lute And let me hear thy voice. Fr. I can sing Venus and Adonis to you.
Ang. Any thing. Fr. Or will you hear the pleasant Dity How fair Calisto first became a Nunne. Ang. I prethee do not name a Nun, the flame That I feel here deserves no Vestall name. Fr. I'l do my best to fit you, Ther's no such tool in nature as a Chambermaid To work upon her Mistress. Exeunt. ACT IIII. Enter Frapolo, Longino, Strozzo, Pachcco, with the rest. Fr. IT was a fatall business to lose such An opportunity. Lo. My Lady was wound up so rarely. St. We were betraid for certain; 'twas high Time to scud, and get into our Territories; Now we are safe in our Grots, secure as The Minotaur, and keep the clew of our Own Labyrinths. Pa. We lost a rare design, but in my opinion, Tis better scouting here with our heads on, Than have 'em carryed in by Clowns at the Court rate. Fr. The ignorant Rogues would nere ha 'sold Them to their worth. Lo. And they dare as soon venter upon Hell, As Shoot their heads into this Furnace. Fr. But this Claridiana sha'not scape so, I am resolv'd to visit her again, and I am Glad I prepar'd another expectation, these Difficulties shall make our next attempt More glorious.
Lo. Those shapes will conjure up the Bores again. St. She does expect the Caldean. Fr. Hang the Caldean. I have a new device Shall scoure the Castle; and make Dame Guinever with all her pride, thank and adore The invention. Lo. How dear Frapolo? how? Whooting within. Fr. Scout and discover, Strozzo. Str. I see but two men coming down the Hill. Fr. Cannot their worships travell with less noise? Lo. They durst not be so confident without a number, 'Tis good to be secure, the noise approaches, Lets to our shells. Fr. Do you lie perdue still. They retire. Pa. I do not like their confidence, these may be The enemies scouts, lets non engage to soon For fear of a reserve. The State has threatned To send their Vermin forth. Fr. Obscure: close, close. Enter Lucio, Piperollo. Lu. What dost thou mean? Thou hast a mind to be rob'd indeed. Pi. I would have art maintain'd in reputation, You know my Lady is to be a Princels, And you must be a Lord, and I be dubbed, But if we be not rob'd, I know not how To trust the Mathematicks or the Stars; I am afraid all the Bandits are hang'd, A thousand Pistols should not fear to travell. Lu It is not wisdom to proclaim our charge, Though I could be content to be a Lord, I am not over hearty, theeves are theeves, And life is precious, prethee lets make hast. Pi. Illo ho ho, Think upon your honour, are there no Gentlemen? No wanting Gentlemen that know how to spend
A quantity of Gold? There is no thief in Nature. Str. The Gentleman Is very merry, they that mean well, and Have their wits about 'em, do not use To call upon our Tribe. This is a plot, A very plot, and yet the Coast is leer, Now I may reach their voice. Pi. It wo' not be, was ever men distrest so? Lu. Come we are well yet Piperollo, if The Stars Decree our robbery, it will follow. Pi. I pray Sir lets sit down here, as you hope to Be a Lord, we must do our endeavour and help The Fates. Do but hear reason Sir. Str. 'Tis my proud Madams Steward, and our quondam Fellow thief; they were told their fortunes To be rob'd; Here had been a purchase lost If I had not lain perdue. You shall be Disparcht presently, never fear it. He Whistles. Lu What's that? I do not like that tune. Pi. Hum, I am not in love with that Quailpipe. I could dwindle, but that I have a strong Faith in the Mathematicks▪ Theeves and be Thy Will. Lu. If they should cut our throats now—this is Your folly; would I were off. Pi. Would I were a Knight in an embroidered Dish clout. Have a good heart Sir, ther's No more to be said in't, let the Stars take Their course, 'tis my Ladies money—and if We be rob'd, we are so much the neerer to preferment. Enter Frapolo and the rest. Lu. Ah sweet Gentlemen take but the Money— Pi. 'Tis ready told; nay, nay, we are friends; Give us but a Note under your hands for My Ladies satisfaction, that you have received It Gentlemen.
Lu. You need not trouble your selves to tell it Gemen, It is all right. Lo. So, so, wee'l take your words. Pi. I should know that vizard, the garments That you wear too I have seen Old acquaintance? Fr. Does he know you? cut his throat. Pi. No Sir, I do not know him, nor any man, nor My self, I was not once rob'd before, neither Did I help any man to rob my own Father and Mother; I knew no Cedar chest I, I disclaim it, nor Was any man that I know left bound for the Money; ye are all honest Gentlemen, And I congratulate our good fortune, that you Came so luckily in the very nick, we had carried Home the money else in good sadness—Sir, We are made for ever—rare Mathematicians! Fr. What's that you talk sirra of Mathematicians? Pi. It pleased some of the learned tribe to visit My Lady not long since, but they are well I Hope, they told us we should be rob'd, and 'Tis done; blessed Caldean! Fr. What became on 'em? Pi. They scap'd a scouring, for my Ladies Cinicall Uncle, in meer malice to learning, rai 'd The Towns upon 'em, perswading the hobbinolls They came to rob the house; but honored Be the Stars, they brought 'em off at the Back gate. Fr. They seem honest fellows, let 'em live, and Pass. Lu. We humbly thank you Gentlemen, come Piperollo. Pi. And yet, now I remember, there wants a Circumstance, my pate is not broke yet, That was a Clause, the Caldean was a little Out.
Fr. I had forgot, will you be prating sirra? [Fi. breaks his head. Pi. Now tis done, I thank you, dear Gentlemen, I thank you▪ go forth and be a Knight; Mathematician I adore thee, it bleeds; Where are you Sir? all is compleat, and my Head is broke according to prophecie. Oh Admirable Caldean! Exeunt. Lo. We have not lost all my Ladies money, but To your plot Frapolo. Fr. This hath ripend it, and I appear a Blazing Star already. Str. What's the mystery? Fr. You know I am your Prince. Lo▪ 'Tis Acknowledged. Fr. We will in State visit the proud Paulina, I am the Prince Farness, and you Are all my Lords and privy Counsellors Bear up for honour of your Prince. Lo. I apprehend it, 'tis a most rare design, She will be mad to meet it. Pa. Will you marry her? Fr. I cannot tell, there may be a necessity, But when I ha' the wench, her Plate and Jewels, And other sums, I have cast already whither We must transport our selves—wee'l divide all. Lo. And the wench too? Fr. No not the wench, untill I cast the Concubine; Remember who I am, the choice of flesh Is my prerogative; no murmuring, You shall provide our Robes. Str. Now we are rogues to purpose. Fr. I am your Prince, and the worst theef A States-man. Omnes A Prince, A Prince. Exeunt. Enter Angellina, and Francescina. Ang. Where is Vergerio?
Fr. I know not Madam. Ang. Madam? I prethee leave that folly, I am no Lady, call me Angellina. Fr. I'l call you Madam, 'tis a name in fashion, What do you want to justifie that title? Have you not Beauty, Jewels, Gold at pleasure? Fine Cloathes, high Food, and men as motley, as The Ambassadors to wait? does not your Uncle Allow you all that can make up a Lady? Pardon my boldness Madam, I beseech you. Enter two Gentlewomen. Ang. What are these? Fr. The Gentlewomen were commended, Madam, Most excellent in their Art about great Ladies; And come to tender you their humble service. 1 Most proud if you accept our duties Madam. Fr. Look you, they're proud already, they have no∣thing But their trade to live on; she with the face Spotted with Ermins, hath been late in France, And knows the mode to a Mathematicall point, She has the theory of Song, but lost The practick part by sitting up a nights; She danceth still, can talk in severall languages, And has the art of every game, to instruct A novice Lady— Ang. To lose time. Fr. And what Age, do you think the other Gentlewoman Carries? that simpers so? the miracle Of Painting! she presents scarce five and twenty, But if you credit Church Records, she numbers But five short of threescore, Medea had No charmes like her, to preserve youth, and beauty; She hath the art of making eys, new hair, And Ivory teeth, hath skill in making fruitfull, And is an excellent Midwife; she hath cur'd
A man that had no Nose, and a Court-Lady That had no Tongue. Ang. These are transcendent qualities; Since tis my Uncles pleasure, they may wait, But not to serve me. One knocks. Fr. Who's that knocks so modestly? 'Tis not your Dancing-Master, nor the Doctor, They have more confidence. 'Tis the Parsons Nephew, come from the University, Some say a pretty Schollar, and a wit; Hath an Ambition to kiss your hand And tender his first fruits. Ang. What's that? Fr. Some Poetry. 1 By any means Madam, you must be flatter'd, Great Ladies cannot live els. Ang. Let him enter. Enter Schollar. Sch Darling of beauty, fairest Angellina, Thus low the Muses bow, and send by me An abstract of your self; oh make the Paper More white by kissing your fair hand, and with Your breath, like a soft Western gale, perfume These lines created in your praise. Ang. What's heer?—I am A stranger to you Sir, and to your language, These words have no relation to me; I pity men of your high fancy, should Dishonour their own names, by forming such Prodigious shapes of beauty in our sex. If I were really what you would commend, Mankind would flie me; get a Painter Sir, And when he has wrought a woman by your fancy, See if you know her again; were it not fine, If you should see your Mistress without hair? Drest only with those glittering beams you talk of? Two Suns instead of Eys, and they not melt The forhead made of Snow; no Cheeks, but two
Roses inoculated upon a Lillie? Between, a pendent Alablaster Nose? Her Lips cut out of Corall, and no Teeth, But Strings of Pearl; Her Tongue a Nightingales; Her chin a rump of Ivory, and so forth? Would not this strange Cimera fright your self? And yet you take the boldness to present us, And think we must applaud, and thank you for Our selves made Monsters by your art; no more Of this for shame; lose not your time and honour In this fantastick Idoll; you will say, The world is peevish, and not kind to virtue; Give him ten Pistolets to cure hs poverty, There are good seeds in him and they may Grow with some Cherishing. Sch. You are enough To vindicate your Sex, I shall not blush To write your story. Fr. You shall owe me Sir An Anagram, and a Poesy too for My next Ring. Sch. You shall command my faculty, My dearest Abigall Exit. Fr. Thank you sweet Sir Roger. Enter four Citizens. 1 Is her Ladiship at leasure? Ang. What are these? 2 We are humble suter Madam for your Favour. Ang. Speak your request. 1 I am a Tailor Madam That holds intelligence with forein Courts To furnish Ladies with new Fashions, And I have patterns of the strangest shapes That ever Ladies long'd for. Ang. I believe it. 2 I have the ambition to own the name
Of your Perfumer Madam. 3 your Jeweller; What think you of that Carcanet sweet Madam? The Pearls are Orient, I have a Diamond The Sultan gave one of his Concubines, It weighes—20 caracts, if it please you Madam, To wear it in the Court, and I'l attend Your Ladiship six moneths hence to pay me for't; I know your Uncle Madam. Ang. This is his plot. Fr. By all means take it. Ang. Excuse me; what are you? speak your desire. 4 I would present you Madam with a pair Of curious Spurs. Ang. For what use prethee? 4 For what you pleae, I see all men of trade Apply themselves to gain relation to you, And I would be your Spurrier. Ang. Do Ladies wear Spurs my friend? 4 They may in time, who knows what may be done, If one great Lady would begin, they ride Like Men already; 'tis all one to me, So I may have the Credit of your name, And privilege to swell above my neighbors. Ang. When I stand, Gentlemen, in need of your Professions, I'l send for you, i'th' mean time You shall need no Solicitour. Omnes. Your Servants. 4 Buy a Spur. Exeunt. Ang. I prethee let me not be troubled with This kind of People Francescina; Ladies Have a fine time, if they be all thus visited. Fr. You are rude and fawcy fellows to intrude So far without my Ladies licence. Ang. What makes thee so impatient? will they not Be gone?
Fr. Gone? here's a new regiment is pressing forward Ang. What are they? Fr. Beggers. Ang. How? Fr. And tell me I abuse your Charity, To keep off their Petitions; we must have A Court-du-guard, I think, and Centries plac'd At every dore. Ang. I prethee let 'em enter. Enter three Petitioners. Fr. The room will not be sweet again this three days; But if it be your pleasure—know your distance. Ang. The blind, and lame, what's your condition Sir? 1 As miserable Madam as the Sea, That swallow'd all my wealth, can make a man, That once commanded thousands, I blush to beg But Nature too impatient of sterving Compels me to this boldness, you may soon Peruse my tragick story there. Gives a Paper. Ang Good old man! Fr. What is his loss to you? 2 My Petition too; A poor blind man, that hath lost more by fire Than his estate valued a thousand times; And 'tis but equall, fire should spoil my eys, That ravish'd me of all, was precious to 'em, A wife and pretty Children. Ang. Burn'd? 2 All burn'd; And what my eys cannot afford their memory My poor heart weeps in bloud. 3 I am a Souldier That in my Countries service lost my limbs; I've had more lead in bullets taken from me Than would repair some Steele. Fr. Ring the bells,
That was a loud one! 3 I have given wounds have kil'd the lookers on With horror of their gaping, and have march'd Ten miles a day thus deep— Fr. In dirt? 3 In blood. Fr. Upon those wooden leggs? An. Poor souls! I pitty 'em here honest men, Divide this bag, and pray for my good Uncle. Omnes. Blessings on you, Madam. 2. Equall division, come. 1. Stay, in the first place, I brought you hither, Therefore my part is most considerable. 3. I'l have no Prerogative. 2. Nor I. 1. But I will. Do not I know you both for cheating Rascals? Thus are good meanings cozen'd, and you sha'not Lose your reward; send for some Officers. 2, 3. We are betraid. Ex. 2, 3. Ant. My Uncle. Ant. They have found their eyes and leggs again, Neece I observe your Charity, but you see not The inside of these things, and I did mean And hope these sums might serve your self; Some Ladies would have considered A new Gown and trinkets; Francescina, I see little amendment, she'l undo me In pious uses. Fr. She has entertain'd these Gentlewomen. Enter Vergerio. And that young Gentleman does good upon her. An. I like it well, he's carefull of my Lord, And if she meet his honorable treaty, She may learn Pride at Court, should our Art fail. She smiles—I wo'not interrupt 'em.
Enter Giovanni. Gio. My Lady entreats the presence of her Sister. An. Do's she entreat? Yes, you may visit her Sir if you please, I'l trust her to your conduct. Ver. 'Tis my ambition to attend her. An. Hark you, Remember who you are, and carry things For the credit of my heir, and one that must be Right Honourable shortly, if I hear Thou flout'st her, thou sha't have another Gown And Petticoat embroider'd, or but beat her And put me to a pension; fare you well, Francescina wait, wait all upon you Mistress. Exeunt. Enter Paulina. Pa. No news yet of the Prince? he fill'd my dreams Last night, it was a golden glorious slumber; Me-thought we both were led into a Temple, Where all our rites of Mariage were perform'd In the presence of a thousand Angel-Cuids. Enter Piperollo, and stumbles. Pi. 'Twas my devotion Madam, to present you The News, I could not break my neck upon A better cause. Pa. Is the Prince come? Pi. The Prince is at your service; though I slipt At Chamber door, it is my happiness To be the first Messenger. Pa. Of what? Pi. I desire no reward Madam, 'tis sufficient I know what will become of us all, you Remember the Caldean; all has happen'd, I thank Astrology. Pa. For what? Pi. Your money is gone, your rents have been recei∣ved, And my head broke to purpose; things are visible.
Enter Lucio. My Master can confirm it. Pa. What's this prodigie? Lu. Madam 'tis done, we have been rob'd. Pa. How? Lu. As the Caldean and the Stars would have it, Just to a minute. Pi. Rare Mathematician! Pa. I'l hang you both, P. You may, and be no Princess. Pa Did he foretell this loss? Pi. Is my pate broken? Do I live, and hope To kneel, and say, If please your Grace, to call Him Lord, and answer to a Knight? -we 're made. Pa. Be at a distance, If there be truth in the Caldeans Art, These inconsiderable losses are A new presage of my approaching greatness. Enter Stephanio, and Longin, disguizd. St. One from the Prince. Lo. His Highness Farnese, Madam, greets your Ladiship, and intends to be your Guest this night, Pa. It will be an honour My life must ow him duty for. Pi. Do not you feel a Lordship creep up By your short ribs? Lo. His Grace is not far off. Pa. Present the humble duty of his handmaid, And say my Castle droops til it receive him; Lo. I shall Madam. Pa. We must prepare to meet and entertain him; All things have been Prophetical. Pi. My very good Lord. Lu. Right Worshipfull Piperollo. Exeunt. Enter Vergerio, Angellina, Servants aloof. Ver. In my pity
That so much innocence should not be lost On faithless Contarini, I have landed Upon your knowledge this unhappy secret. Ang. Promis'd his faith to another? twas ill done, To work my Uncle, and destroy my thoughts Of a religious life. Ve. You may collect Those pure desires again, Heaven will be soon invited, and a second Resolve confirm that happiness. Ang. May we not, Without so  forsaking of the world, Be capable of blessing, and meet heaven At last, though erring Nature guide sometime Out of the nearest way? Ver. Yes Angellina. Av. I must be no Votary, But when you turn a Fryer then, Ver. How Lady? An. Sir you have merited for this discovery All that I am to serve you, and unless You help me in this Labyrinth, I must Live in despair of Freedom. Ver. Any service; There's so much sweetness in you, I could lay My life a Sacrifice, be confident I must be left of heaven, when I forsake you. An. And I dare trust your Virtue with a secret I have not told my Ghostly Father. Fr. I know not what opinion my Lord has Of his smooth Advocate, but I should gather By Symptomes of my Mistress, she is sick Of the younger Gentleman. Ver. I dare not hope This blessing, 'tis an honour plac'd on me That has no value, I am a stranger, An. You are no stranger here.
Ver. Your Uncle too— Ang. May erre in his election. Ver. But his anger— Ang. My prayer and tears may soften. Ver. Do not dress Your eys with sorrow Angellina, this Too gracious an influence upon Your servant must command my utmost duty. Upon this white hand I breath out my heart, And when I pay affection to another Mistress, in Your revenge, her beauty blast me! But we may be observ'd. Ang. Be all my guide. Ver. This must be marag'd wisely, we are lost els. Ang. We are now arriv'd the Castle Francescina. Fr. We attend. Exeunt. Enter Prince Farnese, Contarini. Fa. I am obscur'd sufficiently. Con My life on't. Fa. Here are great preparations, and the people Flock as to see some triumph, this Paulina Will be ador'd i'th' Country. Con. But her Sister, With an extreme of sweetnes, and humility Will take the wonder off, she so transcends. Fa. Your words fall from you, I have observd my Lord, with too much passion; She's but a woman, and may be no miracle, When a clear eye is Judge. Con. Sir I owe All that I am in fortune, name and greatness Unto your person, next whom, give me leave To say I rate no expectation Equall to be her servant, yet I find Her cold to those desires, that court her with All honour, I snall humbly beg, your grace
When you converse, will interpose your favour, And by your Mediation perfect all That can be nam'd my happiness. Far. You express A strong Captivity in so small acquaintance; Well my Lord trust to me; is this her Castle? Enter Piperollo. By your favour Sir. Pi. Speak quickly whats your business? Far. Is this Paulina's Castle? Pi. Plain Paulina? and is this her Castle? My friend you want some breeding, she that owes This Palace, for a Prince hath made it so, Is not far off; turn your eys backward Sir, And tell your self without a perspective What man is coming towards us? Far. Worthy Sir. Pi. Put of your hats and hear his name, Farnese The Prince of Parma's there, I kist his hand, My breath is since the sweeter. Far. The Prince, where? Pi. You'l find him with my Lady whom he came To visit, if you'l promise to be drunk, Take what's a secret yet, he comes to marry her, Or ther's no truth in Stars, she is to be His spouse; farewell, and thank my worship heartily. Exit. Con. This fellow's mad! Fr. He kist the Princes hand, What mystery is this? Con. See, they approach. Far. I am not lost sure in this cloud, they march In State this way. Loud Musick. Enter Frapolo, Paulina, a Train of Gallants and Ladies, Vergerio, Angellina. Ang. How, an Impostor?
Ver. Sure I know the Prince. Aug. Conceal it yet. Far. What Gentleman is that? Lon. The Prince of Parma Sir. Con This will be worth observing. Far. Do we not both dream? that Paulina? How disdainfully she moves? Con. That's her younger Sister upon whom Vergerio waits. Far. He knows I am the Prince. Con. How do you like her Sir? Fa. Ha? tis not fit to tell thee. Con. Does she not answer my Character? Fa. On my heart a fair one? Con. Pray tell me how you like her Sir. Fa. Not yet. I am lost in wonder of her sweetness. Bid Vergerio bring her to Antonio's; I'l be his guest to night. Con I shall obey Sir. Pi. Make room for the Prince, fellows bear back; You are not to be Knighted friend I take it. Fa. Thus can the flame of Heaven with subtill art, Leave the skin whole, yet quite consume the heart. Exeunt. ACT V. Enter Contarini, Antonio. An. MY Neece has had a pretty warm night on't, 'Tis a bold knave to take the Prince upon him I did believe the noyes, and was considering How to contrive my peace with her good grace.
Con. You have no fear to suffer now? Ant. I thank Your Lordship, that has made my house and knowledge So fortunate, by the presence of our great Farnse, 'tis an honour makes me young; And yet this Rascal troubles me, that durst Come in the Princes name, and charge my Neece So home too; Is't not reason Sir? Con. Of highest nature. Ant. Let him then tast the Law; yet I commend His Spirit, that would scorn to die for Felonie, And when his head goes off the shame and grief May help to break her heart: I do not love her, And then my Girl, my Angellina's heir, And you her Lord and mine. Con. My hopes are fair, The Prince himself having vouchsaf'd to be My Advocate. Ant. He must command all here. Enter Farnese, and Angellina. 'Tis a good Prince, and loves you well, and let me Without boast, tell you my Lord, she brings No common Blood, though we live dark i'th' Country I can derive her from the great Usini, But we have been eclips'd. Far. Contarini leave us. You may stay Antonio; Is't not an honour to your Family A Prince should court your Neece into his arms? Ant. I must confess, 'tis good enough for such A Baggage, they will make together Sir, A most excellent shew upon the Scaffold. Far. The Impostor, and Paulina's pride, takes off Your understanding; I do court your Neece Fair Angellina. Ant. How Sir? Far. And as becomes a Princess. Ant. Your Grace is merry.
Far. I know not, but there's Magick in her eyes. An Magick? and she be a Witch, I ha' done with her. Does he love Angelina? Please your Highness— Do you affect this Girl? Far. Religiously. An. And have you all your Princely wits about ye? Far. This Language is but coarse. I tell you Sir The Virgin must be mine. An. Your Whore? Far. My Princess. An. That's another matter. Far. Shew your obedience, You have commands upon her as a Father. An. I know not what to say, but I'l perswade; Hark you Neece, you hear what the Prince says, 'Tis now no time to think of Nunneries. Be rul'd then, and love somebody; if you have Promis'd my Lord, I say make good that promise, If not, the Prince is worth considering. The Gentleman will make you a round Iointure. If thou beest free, love him, to vex thy Sister, Who may upon submission be receiv'd To Grace, and rise in time a Madam Nurse To your heir apparent. I have done my duty. But this is no great honesty, to cheat My Lord. I see the greatest men are flesh And blood, our souls are much upon a making; All men that are in love deal with the Devil, Only with this difference, he that dotes Upon a Woman is absolutely possest; And he that loves the least is haunted With a Familiar. Enter a Servant Ser. Old Fabio Sir your Tenant, with much business In's face, desires to speak with you, I could hardly Keep him from pressing in, his Wife he sayes Is Lunatick.
Ant. We shall all be mad shortly, Where is the Knave? Exit. Ang. I dare do Sir as much to shew my duty As any Maid alive; I dare dye for you. Fa. And yet you dare not love. Ang. Not in that sense You invite me to. Far. My Courtship carries No stain to fright you, what I have propounded Is worth the Ambition of a greater Lady; Though you profess so liberally, I find Your cunning, and because I have so much Descended from my Title, you assume This unbecomming Nicety, take heed, I can be angry. Ang. As you are a Man That passion may come neer you Sir; and as You are my Prince, you may command my death To follow and Appease it, but you said you lov'd me. Far. I doe, if you can wisely entertain it▪ An. Then you must love my honor, A Virgins wealth, for every honest Man Or Woman has an honor, and that has Engag'd my heart already by a Contract; This tye dissolv'd with justice, I should kneel To ask your Princely favour. Far. I am answer'd. Who waits? call my Lord Contarini hither. Enter Contarini. Con. Sir. Far. You might have mock'd another person, And not have made me a ridiculous story To your Mistress Sir. Con. I understand you not. Far. Engage me to mediation for her love, With a pretence how much my act should honor
Your faint hopes, when you are conscious of a Contract, already past between you. Con. Contract Sir? She never yet gave me any language Did promise hope, she still concluded me With going to a Cloister. Far. How's this fair one? An. It is most sure I am contracted. Con. To whom? An. Vergerio your Lordships Agent. Con. That boy betray me? In whom I took delight, made him my friend, He play the Traytor? I'l be reveng'd upon His heart. Far. Contain your passion Contarini, Her beauty had apower above my friendship, It well might shake his faith, and yet 'tis strange. Call in Vergerio. Enter Vergerio. Ver. I have heard all, And come to meet my sentence. You're a Prince Gainst whom I dare not lift a thought; I see What storm is rising, yet let this, great Sir, Invite your mercy to me, I have made No breach against your love, and that which was My fault to his, may be excus'd, by what He felt himself love, not to be resisted. This Virgin I lay claim to, and her vowes No Subject must compell me to resigne; But if the Prince think me unfit, and call This treasure from my bosome, and can place His love, where I so chastly have delighted, I will not keep a thought that shall repine, When I am miserable in her absence, But give my interest cheerfully; to you, My Lord, I answer, I have made no trespass,
And shall, so please your highness to be Iudge, Make it appear. Con: Was ever such an impudence? This presence does protect him, I should els Write treason on his heart; But Angellina I pity thy undoing, how canst thou Expect a truth from him, betrays his Master? An. My Lord, you have been faulty sure, and this (not worthy to be call'd a loss of me) Was meant by Providence to wake your faith, That's owing to another. Far. Possible? The Vice-roy of Sicilies Daughter? Pulcheria. Con. Pulcheria here? Ver. Here Contarini. Con. Ha. prov'd a Woman, oh my shame and folly! Ver. Pardon my too much love, that made me fear You had forgot Pulcheria, though you left Your vowes and me at Sicily, when you were Embassadour from the Prince. Con. Whence embarqu'd Thou brought'st me news Pulcheria was dround, And thou for her sake entertain'd my servant, Welcome, at once receive me and forgive me. Fa. I had your promise, were this contract void In honour, nor will take from my own merit To think when your considerate thoughts come home, You can pretend excuse to your own happiness, Which lest you may suspect, let us in state Visit Paulina, and unmask that counterfeit Which hath usurp'd our name. Ver. Sir we attend you, Con. This blessing must require a spacious soul, Mine is too narrow to receive. Exeunt. Enter Steward, and Piperollo. Lu. I am not yet created honourable.
Fi. Sir, things must have their time, but will his high∣ness Remove so suddenly, and carry my Lady To th' Court with him? tis a most sweet young Prince. Lu. Order was given to pack up her plate, Her gold and Jewels, for he means to have Tiltings and triumphs when he comes to Parma. i. There it is fit we should expect our honours. I will attend the Prince. Exit. Enter Contarini. Con. Signior Luio. Lu. Your good Lordship. Con. Pray tell my Lady, I would kiss her hand, And shall present news will secure their welcome. I come from the Prince. Lu. The Prince my Lord? He is within— Con. A small march off the Castle, and commanded Me to prepare her, that he comes to be Her guest. Lu. My Lord, I will acquaint some of the bed-cham∣ber, but, When did your Lordship see his Highness? Con. I left him at the Park gate. Lu. This is the nearest way unless his highness Have leap'd a window, or can walk invisible. Your Lordship may have some conceit. I'l go Sir. Exit. Enter Piperollo. Pi What is the meaning that ther's such a guard Upon our Castle? 'tis besiedg'd, and no man Suffer'd go forth; this is some Lord or other By his stradling. Enter Lucio, Longino, Strozzo, and the rest. Lo. From the Prince? that he? Pi. 'Tis as I tell you Sir, ther's a little army, Surrounds the Castle. Lo. They have no order from his highness.
Str. We are betraid agen. Lon. Sir, would you speak with the Prince? Con. Why have you such a thing within the Castle? Who dares be so much Traitour to usurpe That title? Wher's that Puppet, Gentlemen? Lu. That is his Secretary. Pi. The rest are Lords and Privie Counsellors. Ca. We are undone. Enter Farese, Vergerio, Angellina, Attendants. Lo. Tis he, the very he, I dare not look on him; Oh for an impudence worth a Chronicle, To outface him now, it were a possible thing, If People would believe— Lu. I'l tell my Lady, they are vanish'd; hum, I do not like that face. Exit. Far. Come hither fellow, whom do you serve? Pi. I know not Sir. Fa. What Prince have you within? Pi. The prince of Darkness. Fa. What is this fellow? Pi. a Knight o'th' Post, the Pestle is too honourable. Fr. Where is your Excellent Lady? Pi. I have a guess If things go on, as I suspect, she will be— Fr. Where? Pi. At her wits end very shortly. Fr. An ingenious fellow? Pi. I have convers'd a little with the Mathematicks, Sir, Who is that Gentlewoman, not that I am ignorant, But to satisfie a doubt? Ver. She is one that may be The Prince of Parma's Lady, when the Priest Hath done his Office. Pi. If I be not mistaken Here comes the Princesse, that is Angellina The younger Sister.
Enter Paulina. Pa. It is my wonder you that have the face And garb of Gentlemen, should dare to be So insolent, to affront our person, And his, to whom your hearts and knees owe reverence. Far. Command the Impostor forth, Seize on the Traitors. Enter Longino. Lo. His Grace will be here presently, fear not Madam, I would venter a Neck-breaking at some window, And be content to crawl away a Cripple; But there's no hope to scape the Multitude That will be scrambling for my limbs. Great Sir, I challenge the privilege of the last Bando, Kneels. He that can bring Frapolo the chief Bandit, Beside what was proclam'd other reward, Shall have free pardon for all past-offences; To that Grace I appeal, and here produce Frapolo. Enter Frapolo, Strozzo, &c. Pa. This amazeth me. Fr. Can you stand The dazeling Sun so long, and not be struck Blind for this bold affront? what wildness brought you In multitudes to fright my happy peace, And this good Ladies, my most vertuous Consort? Lo. He bears up still! Fr. Have all my cares and watchings to preserve Your lives, and dearest liberties, deserv'd This strange return, and at a time when most Your happiness is concern'd, since by our Mariage With this sweet Lady, full of grace and beauty, You may expect an Heir to bless your Countrey. Con. Will you suffer him? Fr. 'Tis time your Prince were dead, and when I am Companion to my Fathers dust, these tumults Fomented by seditious men, that are
Weary of Plenty, and delights of Peace, Shall not approach to interrupt the calm Good Princes after Death enjoy. Go home, I pray depart, I rather will submit To be depos'd, than wear a power or title That shall not all be dedicate to serve you; My life is but the gift of heaven, to wast it For your dear sakes, my People are my Children, Whom I am bound in Nature and Religion To cherish and protect. Perhaps you have Some grievance to present, you shall have justice Against the proudest here; I look not on Nobility of Birth. Office, or Fortunes, The poorest subject has a Native Charter And a Birth-right to th' Laws, and Common wealth, Which with an equall, and impartial stream, Shall flow to every bosom. Str. Pious Prince! Far. I am at a loss to hear him; sure I am Farnese, if I be not lost by the way. Pi. Stand off Gentlemen,—let me see—which? Hum! this—no, th'other. Hum! send for a Lion And turn him loose, he wo'not hurt the true Prince. Far. Do not you know me Sir? Fra. Yes, I know you too well, but it stands not With my honor; what composition? Far. Who am I? Gentlemen, how dare ye suffer This thing to talk? if I be your Farnese. Fra. I say I am the Prince, Far. Prince of what? Fra. Of Rogues, and please thy Excellence. Pa. How? Fra. You must excuse, I can hold out no longer These were my Subjects Sir, and if they find Your Mercy, I'm but one, whose head remov'd, Or nooz'd, this Lady will be soon a Widdow,
Whom I have not deceiv'd, 'twas her Ambition To go no less than Prince, and now you have one, During this Gentlemans pleasure. Pa. What scorn shall I become? Far. Let him be guarded, and all his puppet. Lords. Enter Antonio, Fabio, Morulla. An. News, news, excellent news; I shall leap Out of my flesh for joy. Sir I have undertook For your pardon to this reverend couple, They heard my Neece was to be maried To the Prince, and thought it treason to conceal— Far. What? An. Paulina is not my Neece, no blood of mine; Where is this Lady and her Pageant Prince? The truth is, she is not Paulina, but their Own Daughter. Fra. Possible? then we are both cheated. An. Whom she obtruded on our Family When our Paulina died an Infant, with her, A Nurse to both; Does your Grace apprehend? Fab. We do beseech your pardon. An. Now Angellina thou art heir to all. Pip. By all this Circumstance you are but my Sister! Con. The Prince is prov'd a Prince of Theeves. An. Why ther's a Baggage and a Theef well met then. I knew she was a Bastard, or a Changeling. Pau. Where shall I hide my shame? O curst Ambi∣tion! Ant. Give you joy Sir, my most illustrious Nephew, Joy to thy invisible Grace. Fra. Thanks to our loving Uncle: Far. Take hence the Traitors. Ang. Sir I beseech a pardon to their lives. Let nothing of my story be remembred With such a Tragedie, 'tis my first Petition. Far. I must not deny thee; all thank her Virtue; Live you, and love that Gentlewoman; But
It were a sin to innocence, and our honor Would encourage Treason by example, If they should scape all Justice, take 'em to Custody: Frapalo, we confine you to this Castle, Where If she please your Bride may accompany you Till we determine otherwise. Fra. 'Tis some mercy; but I shall be getting Children, and two nothings Wo'not maintain a Family, 'twere as good To hang me out o'th' way, 'ere Charge come on, Or take away my tools, I shall be working. Far. Provision shall be made you shall not sterve Nor surfet Sir. Ang. Because I call'd her Sister, I will contribute something to their fortune. Far. What thy own goodness will direct; and now Remove the Scene to Court, to perfect there My own, and Parma's happiness; pride has Met with severe reward, and that high justice (That Governs all) though envy break with her Own Poyson, calls the Amazed World to see What blessings wait upon Humility. Exeunt. FINIS.
Epilogue. Frapolo. GEntlemen, do not say you see me; I have made an escape from the Prince and Paulina; his graces word is but mortall, and not security enough for me; for all this Sun-shine he may hang me, when I come to Parma, for an example, and therefore I have chosen, rather to trust to my legs, than a reconcil'd State-Enemy. Two'not be worth your glory to betray A man distrest, whom your own mercy may Preserve to better service; rather then Go back I'l stand your Iustice Gentlemen. I've plaid the thief, but you, as the case stands, May save or kill, my lif's now in your hands.
THE DOUBTFUL HEIR A Tragi-comedie, AS It was Acted at the private House IN BLACKFRIERS, WRITTEN BY JAMES SHIRLEY. Never Printed before. LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Robinson at the three Pi∣geons, and Humphrey Moseley at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's Church-yard. 1652.
To the most worthily honored Sir Edmund Bowier. SIR, MAny years are vanished, and a period, not onely of the Scene, but more considerable revoluti∣ons have pass'd, since I had the happiness to be first known to you. I read excellent Characters of you, when you writ but a small Letter, and though my observati∣ons, like seeds, were not cherished (by the fault of time) to a maturity, yet they begat in me such great respect to your person, then budding with honour, and expectation, that now after so long ab∣sence, I find them not extinguished; and howsoever at the first complexion, I may appear bold, in this hasty interruption, yet your candour will be so far in my
defence, that I have presumed thus, ra∣ther to let you know I can still honour you, than unsatisfie my self, by neglecting the first opportunity of presenting my service. Sir, it is a piece, which perhaps you have seen in the active represent∣ment; the estimation it gained from thence, will be short of that grace it shall derive from your acceptance, by which you will shew, how still you dare re∣tain your nobleness, and by renewing your smile upon me, encourage me to write my self Your humble Servant, JA. SHIRLEY.
Prologue. ALl that the Prologue comes for, is to say, Our Author did not calculate this Play For this Meridian; the Banckside, he knows, Are far more skilfull at the Ebbes and flows Of water, than of wit, he did not mean For the elevation of your poles, this scene. No shews, no dance, and what you most delight in, Grave understanders, here's no target fighting Upon the Stage, all work or Cutlers barr'd, No bawdery, nor no Ballets; this goes hard; But language clean, and what affects you not, Without impossibilities the Plot; No clown, no squibs, no Devill in't; oh now You Squirrels that want Nuts, what will you do? Pray do not rack the benches; and we may Hereafter fit your Palats with a Play: But you that can contract your selves, and sit As you were now in the Black-Fryers pit; And will not deaf us, with leud noise and tongues, Because we have no Heart to break our Lungs, Will pardon our vast Stage, and not disgrace This Play, meant for your persons, not the place.
The Persons of the Play. Leonario. Prince of Arragon. Ferdinand, King of Murcia. Noblemen. Rodriguez, Ernesto, Leandro, Alfonso, Father to Rosania. Olivia, supposed Queen of Murcia. Rosania, Alfonso's, Daughter. Violinda. Captain. Citizens. Courtier. Officers. Souldiers. Scene Murcia.
THE DOVBTFVLL HEIR. ACT. I. Enter Rodriguez and Ernesto. Rod. THis turn was not expected, Prince Leo∣nario Is much perplext. Ern. I cannot blame his Highness, So neer an expectation of a blessing, To be thus crost. Rod. The Day of Marriage sef, With the applausive Vote of both the Kingdoms, By an unlookt for War to be put of, Would vex a royall spleen. Er. 'Tis but deferr'd. Rod. I doe not like the hope on't. Er. I pittie The Princely lover, worthy (without blemish To the excelling virtues of the Queen) Of as much goodness as her sex contains, So Noble in his Nature, Active, bountifull Discreet, and valiant, if we may believe What his young fame profers to every knowledge. Rod. This character is not flattery, and yet The Queen our Mistriss is not lost in this
Just praise of him. Er. I have no thought so Impious, My dutie never taught me to commend But to obey, her Virgin sweetness makes me Her just admirer but when I observe Her prudent manage of the State, a strength Would become many years, her pious Laws, But that without example, made to advance Her sexes Chastitie, I forget all Beside worth praise, though every least of her Desert would ask a volume. 'Tis his Excellence. Enter Leonario, Captain. Rod. Ther's one not sorry for these Wars. Er. 'Tis his Profession; Souldiers batten in a Tempest. Rod. And he deserves employment; yet I think Hee'l never purchase with his pay. Leo. Be confident; Your worth will plead alone; the Queen expects me. Ex. Leon. Capt. Your Highness humble creature;—so, ther's hope yet After a time of ease, and surfet, we May cure our selves by letting others Bloud. My Noble Lords. Ernest. 'Morrow Captain, you look blith, and bright. Capt. I'l put my Sword to scowring that shall shine. I thank Heaven my prayers are heard. Rod. What prayers? Cap. That honest men may cut knaves throats, and bid Defiance to the Hangman; Musk, and Civet Have too long stifled us, ther's no recovery Without the smell of Gunpowder. Enter two Citizens. Er. But Captain— 1 C. 'Tis he, we must not lose him, 2 C. He has credit with the Lords it seems. 1 C. He has spied us.
Capt. My honest friends, welcome to Court. My Lords these honest Gentlemen, they will Derv to kiss your Hands. 1 C. Or business Is to you Captain. Capt. Doe you think what these brace of Baboons come for? Rod. Not I. Capt. By this day for mony, moneys that I owe 'em. Er. Is't possible Capt. I ha' mov'd your sute Gentlemen. 1 C. What sute? Capt. Touching the Masque. Which you two in the name Of the whole City, offer'd to present At the Town charges to congratulate The Queens intended Marriage; I know This Egge was long a hatching, and expected, But that your Heads could not agree, they being Of severall sizes, some upon the shoulders Of your long-winded Officers, whose purse Was made of the Leather with their conscience. 1 Ci. Does he talk to us of a Masque? 2 Ci. Good Captain put your Masque off, and give us. The money that you owe us. Capt. Was't not meant nobly? But you my good Lords know how much The Queen and Prince are sorry, that so rare A President of their duty should not be Upon record; this villanous War distracts All civill mirth, but you will be remembred. 1 Ci. We know not what you mean, we have no anticks In agitation; if your Captain-ship Will pay your debts so; there is Law and courses To be taken, and you will find that Justice Can deal Sir with the Sword as well as Ballance. Capt. The Puppys talk Philosophy; nay then I must be plain, would I could tice 'em to A little treason, they I ner hang for felony.
Why, whither doe you think I am going now? 1 Cit. We care not whither so you pay us first. Capt. Let their own Fathers swing, so they have mony. 2 Cit. May be you are going to the Wars. Capt. Yes Mongrels, To fight for your chamlet Faces, while you stay at home And catch the cramp with telling mony, Putting your Guts to Pension every Day, And roots, untill the wind cry out agen you, And with your belching backwards stifle Men That walk the Street, untill the Air be purg'd; Must we Eat Bullets without Butter, Whelps? Have our Throats cut, or drop like Sheep by'th' hundred, O' the rot, to buy your Peace you boding Screechowls? And ha' your confciences so course a Nap To aske money of us? 1 Cit. You had the conscience To take up our commodities. Capt. Reason good; Should I goe naked leeches? 2 Cit. No but there is reason That you should pay good Captain for your warmth. Capt. Pay you? for what? for Cloaths, such things as these? Your tribe is bound to keep us. 1 Cit. How? Capt. Yes, and desire us to accept your wares, To recompence our sufferings; 'tis we, 'Tis we that keep your Worships warm and living, By Marching, Fasting, Fighting and a thousand Dangers. (you o'r grown moths) you that love gold, And wo'not take an Angell sent from Heaven Unless you weigh him, you that spend the Day In looking o'r your debt—Book, and at Night Can lap and lecher in your Feather Beds, Then snort, and dream of fourscore in the hundred,
Afraid of nothing but the Gou, or what Is a more just reward for your hard hearts The stone, which puts you to the charge of Physick To make you piss out your last Usurers Gallon, Or of a Surgeon, to cut you for The Pibles which (if you survive Incission) You keep in penny Boxes, like deer reiques, And shew your friends, when you intend to visit 'em. And beg a Dinner. Er. Let not passion Make you too much abuse their qulaity; The City does contain brave fellows Captain, As generous, as bountifull, discreet, And valiant too, as any boast themselves In Court or Camp. Cap. I grant you my good Lord, And honour all the Noble souls within it, But these are walking sicknesses, not Citizens; Two such prodigious things with crooked consciences, Though Young, yet Old in Usury— 2 Cit. All this Captain Wo 'not pay us our money, which we must Have▪ or Petition for to your disgrace. Cap. Well since there is no remedy, will you take These two Noblemens words for what I owe you? 1 Cit. Withall our Hearts. Rod. That bargain is to make. Er. Good Captain, at this time you may excuse us, Capt. Why, doe your Lordships think I'd let you suffer, Come, y'ar my honourable friends; pass, pass Your word, Ile pay the mony; hang 'em dottrels Ile not be beholding to 'em. Rod. We had rather you should good Captain. Capt. No,—come hither Capons Will money content you; shall I walk the Street Without a Head ake, with your bawling for
The debt when I ha' paid you? 2 Cit. 'Tis but reason. Capt. I'l fetch you money presently,—you may follow If you please, but these Noblemen shall see And witness what I pay you, I'l not trust Your Memorandums. 1 Cit. Withall our Hearts Sir. 2 Cit. We desire no more. Capt. I'l wait on you again. Ex. Manent [Rod. Ernesto. Enter Leandro, reading a Paper. Rod. Fortune de la guerre. My Lord Leandro? what papers that He so intentively peruses? Lean. I like it, and could willingly allow The change; the Queen grows mighty in her spirit, And this match with the Prince, would swell her State Too much; my Lords. Rod. We are yours. Leand. See what dangerous Papers have been scatter'd To wound the Title of our Royall Mistriss; My servant brought me this; our Enemie Who calls himself Prince Ferdinand would fain Have us believe him Cosen to the Queen, She an usurper of his Crown. Er. We all know him dead. Rod. I'm sure I did attend his Funerall. Lean. I think I waited too. Er. This paper sayes he was conveyd away, And so escap'd his Uncles cruelty. To whose protection he was left an Infant; He dying we translated our obedience To his Daughter, now our Queen. Rod. Here's an Impostor. Leand. Heaven aid the Innocent say I; he has Valentias aid and comes not to Invite But force a resignation; I wish things Were calm agen.
Er. Prince Leonario, if she prosper not, Is like to be a loser too. Leand. For him It matters not, we have more to think on now, Than love and complement. Rod. I thought he would be Generall 'Gainst this pretended Ferdinand. Leand. What else? Her sweet Heart▪ that gives Cupid in his crest. Alas! there needs no art, nor strength of War To advance her cause Justice will fight for her I'th' Clouds, and victory sent from Heaven, without Her souldiers sweat, will gloriously descend To Crown his Head with Laurell. Er. May it prove so. Leand. I could say things would stagger your belief, But I forgot the Queen sent for me; to You both a servant— Exit. Er. I do not like my Lord Leandros winding, He has been faithfull. Rod. Alwaies honourable. The Queen. Enter Queen, Leonario, Captain, Leandro, Violinda, Attendants, Ladies, Gentlemen. Leon. I take this as the greatest honour Madam You could confer; my name is young in War, But my affection to your royall person, Arm'd with the virtue of your cause, shall make me Doe something worth your name. Que. 'Twas your request, Nor could we place our chief command, but where 'Tis equald with your Interest in us And your own merit. Leon. Sure my Stars did mean This way to make you know, how much my heart Dares in your service; and if Ferdinand, For so he calls himself, possess a soul
Above the vulgar making, we shall spare The Blood of many, and conclude the War In single opposition. Leand. With your Highness pardon, It not becomes you should Engage your Person, And so great a cause so dangerously; It will be too much honor to th' Impostor, And in the supposition of the World, A strength to his pretence, to bring your Birth So low, to humble both your self and fortunes To his unworthy Levell a thing grown Up in the Night. a Meteor hanging in The Air▪ prodigiously, fed with vapor, and Black Influence, ambitious to deceive The World, and challenge kindred with the Stars; It is too great a venture Sir. Er. Since there must be a War Let the armies meet in Battail, theres more hope After the worst to reinforce, and prosper, Than when the kingdoms put upon one stake, And one Mans chance to assure it. Que. I allow Your Counsell Lords; but have more argument Convincing me, not to run such a hazard Of what must make Olivia rich hereafter; A kingdoms loss may be repair'd, but your Life made a Sacrifice to tyrant War, May find a welcome to the other shades, But no tears can Invite you back, to share, Or grief, or Joy with me; Ile have no Duell. Leon. 'Tis a command, and my obedience Shall meet it, though I fear 'twill be a sin To be too carefull of my self but I Shall still remember I am your Souldier, And this consider'd shall not make me rash, But wisely teach me to deserve this title
Which lives but in your honour. Que. I'l pray for you. And not so much for what concerns the State, As what your merit hath already gain'd Upon my Heart. Rod. Blessings upon 'em both, A curse upon these Wars, that spoil their mirth. Que. My Lord Leandro. Leon. Ther's your Commission Captain, I suppose You have found wayes to empty your Exchequer. Capt. My Baggs are not brimfull my Lord. I have Defalk'd, and made an ebbe for Wine, and Women, And other things that keep poor men alive To doe their country service. Leon. Please you walk With this Gentleman Captain he shall pay you Five hundred pieces that I owe you. Capt. Me, your Grace owes me nothing, Leon. I could not pay the debt in better time Sir. Capt. Umh! I will take the mony, and allow the miracle. Ex. Capt. & Gent. Er. Did you observe the Princes nobleness? Although the act become him. Yet the manner Takes me especially, Heaven preserve the Captain From being Mad. Leon. I prosper in your Vote, But shall I Madam, if that power, which Crowns With victory, guides me with fair success In this your War, and triumph smile upon us, Shall I at my return have that reward My soul next Heaven affects? shall no delay (Colder than Frost to lovers blood,) afflict My expectation of our Marriage? Although to doubt this be a sin, yet where The ambition is so Just. I shall but right My Heart, to have it oft assur'd nor can It make your eye less rich in smiles, when 'tis
Only my love Encourages me to make The busie harmless question. Que. It does please me, Nor can you ask so often, as I have A cheerfulness to answer, that I love you, And have propounded nothing dearer to me, Than that which perfects chast affection, And chains two Hearts; the Priest with sadness will Expect you safe agen, but from this War When you return, he shall not in his Register Of Lovers, find one with more wing hath met The bosom of her friend, than glad Olivia To make one soul with you. Leon. I have enough, And thirst for action in the Field, from whence I will bring Harvest home, or leave my self, Happy in life or death to doe you service. Ex. Queen, Leon. Lan. Ladies, attendants. Rod. Well, I'm afraid if Hymen should set up His Tapers now, they would not last to light His Priest, at their return to say his Office. Er. Hope fairly. Rod. I allow his spirit, but The Prince hath not been practis'd in The School of War, where stratagems prevail Above all personall resolution. Er. He cannot want fit counsell to direct His early valour, besides Ferdinand by computation as young as he Enter Captain, two Citizens, and a Souldier. May poize the scale. See, the Captain. 1 Cit. We alwaies thought you Noble, and we hope You'l take no offence, that our occasions Prevail'd above our modestie. Capt. I know You two are very modest; well I'm glad
I am furnish'd for you: my good Lords I must Inteat you to be witnesses of what money I pay these Gentlemen, that have trusted me. 2 it. And will agen; command our Shops. Capt. No sit there, and starve, Or if you like it better take a swing At your own sign Post. Er. Good words Captain. Capt. They expect good money, and both good are too much. 1 Cit. We alwaes lov'd you. 2 Cit. And doe so still most virtuously. Capt. It does appear. 1 Cit. And you shall find us ready— Capt. I'l make but one fair motion, it will be Sufficient tryall of your honestie; I have five hundred pounds▪ you see me tell it, Faith make it up a thousand 'twixt you both Till I come back, you will be Aldermen. 1 Cit. Ne'r a whit the sooner. 2 Cit. Alas Sir, if it were at another time— 1 Cit. Hereafter, upon good occasion you shall find— Capt. You both i'th' Pillorie, for selling Copper Lace by a wrong name; well ther's no remedy, I'l keep my word; the money's ready for you. 1 Cit. You are noble Captain. 2 Cit. May you kill all the Queens Enemies. Capt. You would not scape, That Cosen her liege people every day, then. 2 Cit. This payment Captain will come most seaso∣nably. 1 Cit. And doe us as much good, as you had given us The sum twice told, another time. Capt. Before These Noblemen, have you such want As you profess? you have no Wives nor Children. 1 Cit. I protest upon my credit, I am to pay This day two hundred pound, or be indanger'd To an arrest.
2 Cit. And I must goe to Prison If before Sun-set— Capt. Then 'twill doe you a pleasure. Both. Cit. Above expression. Capt. Heres twelve pence a peece for you y'ar fit Men To serve the Queen: Both Cit. How Captain? Capt. Why in the Wars, choose either Pike or Musket, You shall have that favour. Both Cit. We are both undone. Lords. Ha, ha, but will you use 'em so? Capt. Ha' they not ready mony? why d'ee stare? No thanks for my protection? Both it. Protection? Capt. Did you not protest you should to prison else? Why you unthankfull sons of false light, Sergeant Take 'em to thei'r Rendevous 1 Cit. Captain, a word-we are content— Capt. I'm glad on't, Why d'ee stay then. 1 Cit. To abate half our money. 2 Cit. All, all good Captain, he shall have all, rather Than be sent a souldiering; d'ee know what 'tis? 'Tis no Artillery Garden, where you come off With as you were. Rod. This was his Project. Capt. Umh'. You will forgive me both your debts? 2 Cit. And pray Heaven to forgive you too. Capt. My Lords, bear witness, These two would bribe me to abuse the Queen And the present service, is this less then Treason? Both Cit. Oh. Er. Nay▪ nay Captain. Capt. There are not two more able Men i'th' Army, I mean for bulk; ram me into a Cannon If you shall buy your selves with your estates From this Imployment; Il not cosen you, Your mony is good debt still, you may live,
And aske me for't agen, and I may pay you. Rod. But shall they serve indeed? Capt. That's at their perill When they come to 'th, field, but goe they shall, And they were my Cosen-germans. Both Cit. Good my Lord speak for us. Capt. You doe not know my Lords, but a little suf∣fering May save their souls, and teach 'em, if they come Off, with a quarter of their limbs, compassion To other Men, that venter their lives for 'em, Their consciences are tough, and must be suppled, When they shall fast, and march ten months in armor, Sometimes through Rivers, sometimes over Mountains, And not have straw at Night, to keep their Breech From growing to the Earth, in storms, in heats; When they have felt the softness of a trench Thigh deep in water, and their dung to fatten it; When they shall see no meat within a month, But chaw their Match like Liquorish, and digest The Bark of trees like Sallads in the Summer; When they shall live to think theres no such thing In Nature as a thirst, and wonder why A Taylor was created; when they have As much in ready shot, within their flesh, As would set up a Plummer, or repair A Church with Lead, beside ten thousand more Afflictions, which they are sure to find, They my have Christianitie, and not put A Souldier to the payment of his debts. Rod. 'Tis a Mad Captain, come my Lord lets leave him. Ex. Lords. Capt. You shall have time and place to send for mony, Or make your Wils; set on, who knows but you Hereafter may be honest, and prove Captains; You may have preferment in the Wars for money, And so my Gentle Creditors, march on. Exeunt.
ACT. II. Enter Leandro with Letters. Lean. THe hope, and care of many years, are in One day destroy'd; hath Heaven no stroke in War? Or is old providence asleep? Leonario Is comming home with victorie, and brings Young Ferdinand, whom I expected to Salute a King, his Prisoner, and the Queen With her new Conqueror, glorious in the spoils, By putting out this light, will mix their beams And burn our eyes out with their shine; there is No talk but of this triumph, and the people Whom I by art and secret murmurs had Made doubtful at the first noise of this Conquest, As they had borrowed souls from fear, and folly, Adore the rising Star, and in the praise Of him and his great fate, wonder that Heaven Should hold a Sun, and he so bright; nor with This flattery content, but they condemn, (As low as all their sins shall one day them) Him whom the chance of War hath made a Prisoner. There is no trust to policie or time, The things of State are whirld by destinie, To meet their period, Art cannot repair 'em. Enter Servant. Ser. My Lord, the Queen hath sent for you, She is going forth to meet the Prince, and hath Commanded none be wanting to attend With all the State that may become her to Congratulate the triumph now brought home. Leand. I shall obey▪ I must attend this glorie;
It is not safe to wear a brow, but what The Queens example first forms into smile. I here contract my knowledge, and seclude My wishes, since they prosper not. I am Her Chancelor as great Offices, and high Employments, do expose us to most danger, They oft teach those possess 'em a State-wisdom, And by Inherent virtues of the place, Our fear to lose, makes us secure our selves, By art more often, than by conscience; But I may be indangered to suspition; I like not things; but I delay my attendance. Exit. Enter Captain, Lieutenant, Antient and Souldiers. Capt. Lieutenant. Lieu. Captain. Capt. Antient, what think you of the Wars now? Ant. We are come off with Honour. Lieu. And our Limbs, Captain. Capt. Is that all? who made you a Lieutenant? And you Antient? these titles were not born w'e, You did not wear these Buffs and Feathers in The memorie of Man, when you receiv'd The binding twelve-pence, it was otherwise. Ant. But you receiv'd, if you remember Captain, Beside what we releast in honest debt Sums for this great Instalment, we ha' paid I take it for our names. Capt. And it became you, Now you are Gentlemen my Comrades of honor, And I dare walk and drink at Taverns w'e, Your oaths become you now, and your splay feet; You look'd before like Magots, City Worms, I ha' made you both brave fellows, fellows to Knights. You may be Squires to Ladies too. Ant. I think so. Capt. We are all now of a trade, For Mars is Master of our Companie,
Our Shop is the Field, Resolution our Stock, Honour our Purchase, and Fire and Sword The Tools we work withall. Lieu. But now the Wars are done, I think We may shut up our Shop, there is no more Pay, is there? Capt. Pox upon you; I see your souls bleat after Profit still, a bullet in the right place would Ha' knock'd out this humour of getting mony; But fear not, though you come off with more Limbs than you deserve, you shall have pay. Ant. Shall we, and not be troubled to fight for't? Capt. Yes it will be necessary you fight, you will Ha' your throats cut else, and be sent off like Sheep, Doe not fear payment here be Mandrakes, That will rore, and cudgell you to your hearts content, You sha'not walk the Screets now you are Officers without a quarrell: pay enough. Lieu. A Man had as good be no Lieutenant, as be Beaten when he comes home what think you Antient? Ant. For my part I can indure beating as well As another, if that be all. Capt. Will you to your Shops agen? Ant. I have no mind to Woosted Stockings agen, And Shoos that Shine, I would were colours still. Capt. Well said Antient, come I'l take your fears off; Doe not confess you are a Lieutenant, or you an Antient, and no man will quarrell w'ee, you Shall be as secure as Chrysome Children. Lieu. Shall we? they shall rack me e'r Ile confess I am A Lieutenant or ever see the Wars. Ant. Or I an Antient. Ile tak't upon my death I was never a Souldier in my life. Capt. 'Tis well done; now because I love you, And see you have an Itch after honour, so It may come without blows, Let me advise you,
You have moneys at command. Lieut. And good debts too. Cap. You shall both turn Courtiers. Ant. Shall we? Cap. I say't; for if my phisnomy deceive me not, You two are born to be— Both. What? Cap. Coxbombs. I'l help to make you too; You shall presently kiss the Queens hand; You have moneys you say, You shall never turn To your vomit of small Wares. I have friends At Court, you may in time be great; And when I come With a Petition to your honors, for moneys in arrear, Or knocking out some rascals brains, such as you were When you wore a girt under your chops, you two May stand between me and the Gallows. Ant. Hang us if we do not. Capt. You shall buy places presently. But stay, Have you a minde to be Officers to the Queen In ordinary, or extraordinary? Ant. Extraordinary by all means. Lieut. We scorn to be ordinary Courtiers. Capt. I commend your judgement, that will be more Chargeable: But— Ant. Hang't, we'l finde money enough, but I Resolve to be extraordinary. Capt. I'l bring you to a Court-Merchant pre∣sently; You will get infinite estates. Both. A ha Captain. Capt. And so command the Ladies, if you be bountiful. Both. A ha Boy. Capt. For I know you do love Wenches; You will have all the business and the Country Come tumbling in upon you like the tide, After a moneth: You must keep twenty men Between you, night and day to tell your money.
Oh 'tis unknown what will become on you, If you be rud, and take this course: Had I Moneys like you, I would be— Lieut. Come, we will lend thee moneys too here∣after. Cap. Will you, come on, no more Lieutenant now. Nor Antient. Ant. Do ye think we long to be beaten. Exeunt. Enter Ferdinand (in prison) Rosania (like a Page.) Rosa. Pray do not grieve for me, I have a heart Tha can for your sake suffer more; and when The tyranny of your fate calls me to die, I can as willingly resign my breath, As go to sleep. Ferd. Can I hear this Rosania Without a fresh wound? That thy love to me Should be so ill rewarded, th'ast engag'd Thy self too much already; 'tis within Thy will, yet to be safe, reveal thy self, Throw of the cloud that doth eclipse that brightness, And they will court thy person, and be proud With all becoming-honor to receive thee, No fear shall rob thy cheek of her chate blood. Oh leave me to my own Stars, and expect What ere become of wretched Ferdinand, A happy fate. Rosa. Your Councel is unkinde, This language would become your charity To a stranger, but my Interest is more In thee, then thus with words to be sent off; Our vows have made us one, nor can the names Of Father, Countrey, or what can be dear In Nature, bribe one thought to wish my self In Heaven without thy company; it were poor then To leave thee here. Then by thy faith I charge thee, By this—the first and last seal of our love. Kisses him. By all our promises, when we did flatter
Our selves, and in our fancy took the world A peeces, and collected what did like Us best, to make us a new paradice, By that, the nob est ornament of thy soul, Thy honor, I conjure thee, let me still Be undiscovered; What will it avail To leave me, whom thou lovest, and walk alone Sad pilgrime to another world? We will Converse in soul and shoot like Stars, whose Beams Are twisted, and make bright the sullen Groves Of Lovers as we pass. Ferd. These are but dreams Of happiness, be wise Rosania, Thy love is not a friend to make thee miserable, Society in death, where we affect, But multiplies our grief; Live thou, Oh live. And if thou hast a tear, when I am dead, But drop it to my memory, it shall More precious then embalming dwell upon me, And keep my ashes pure, my spirit shall At the same instant in some innocent shpe Descend upon that earth thou hast bedew'd; And kissing the bright tribute of thy eye, Shall after wait like thy good Angel on thee. There will be none to speak of Ferdinand Without disdain, if thou diest too: Oh live A little to defend me, or at least To say I was no Traitor to thy love, And lay the shame on death and my false Stars That would not let me live to be a King. Rosa. Oh Ferdinand, Thou dost not love me now. Ferd. Not love Rosania? If woing thee to live, will not assure thee, Command me then to die, and spare the cruelty Of the fair Queen: Not love Rosania?
If thou wilt but deligt to see me bleed, I will at such a narrow passage let Out life, it shall be many hours in ebbing, And my soul bathing in the Crimson stream, Take pleasure to be drown'd. I have small time To love, and be alive, but I will carry So true a Faith to woman hence, as shall Make poor the world, when I am gone to tell The story yonder.—We are interrupted. Enter Keeper. Keep. You must prepare your self for present trial; I have command to attend you to the Judges. That Gentleman, and all that did adhere To your Conspiracy, are by the Queens Most gracious Mercy pardon'd. Ferd. In that word Th'hast brought me more then life; I shall betray, And with my too much joy undo thee again. Heaven does command thee live, I must obey This Summons, I shall see thee again Tiberio, Before I die. Rosa. I'l wait upon you Sir, The Queen will not deny me that poor office; I know not how to leave you. Ferd. Death and I Shall meet, and be made friends; but when we part, The world shall finde thy story in my heart. Exit. Enter Officers with Bar, Table, Stools,—then Er∣nesto Rodriguez, Leonario, Queen, supported by Leonario, Ferdinand, Rosania, Ladies Gentle∣men, and Guard, who set Ferdinand to the Bar. Queen. Is that the prisoner at the Bar? Leon. He that pretended himself Ferdinand, Your Uncles son. Q. Proceed to his Arraignment; my Lord Leandro, You know our pleasure.
Lean. Although the Queen in her own Royal power, And witout violating Sacred Justice, where Treason comes to invade her, and her Crown With open war, need not insist upon The Forms, and Circumstance of Law, but use Her Sword in present execution; Yet such is the sweet temper of her blood, And calmness of her Nature, though provok'd Ino a storm, unto the great'st offender She shuts up no defence, willing to give A satisfaction to the world how much Se doth delight in mercy. Ferdinand, For so thou dost pretend thy self, thou art Indicted of High Treason to Her Majestie, In that thou hast usurp'd relation to Her blood; and under name of being her Kinsman, Not onely hast cotriw'd to blast her Honor With Neighbor Princes, but hast gather'd arms To wound the precious bosom of her Countrey, And tear the Crown, which Heaven and just Succession Hath plac'd upon her Royal Head: what canst Thou answer to this Treason? Ferd. Boldly thus. As I was never with the height of all My expectation, and the aid of Friends, Transported one degree above my self, So must not Ferdinand, though his Stars have frown'd And the great eye of Providence feem to slumber While your force thus compel'd, & brought me hither With mockery of my Fate, to be arraign'd For being a Prince, have any thought beneath The Title I was born to; yet I'l not call Tis cruelty in you, nor in the Queen, (If I may name her so without injustice To my own right) a Kingdom is a Garland, Worth all Contention; and where right seals not The true Possession, Nature is forgotten,
And blood thought cheap o assure it; there is some∣thing Within that excellent Figure, that restrains A Passion here, that else would forthlike lightning. Tis not your shape, whih yet hath so much sweetness, Some pae reigious Herit migt suspect You are the blessed Saint he pray'd too; no, The magick's in our nature, and our blood; For both our veins full of one precious purple Strike harmony in their motion, I am Ferdinand, And you the fair Olivia, brothers children. Leon. What insolence is this? Qu. Oh my Lord set him Be free to plead; for if it be no dream, His cause wil want an Orator: By my blood, He does talk bravely. Rodri. These are flourishes. Ernest. Speak to the treason you are charged with▪ And confess a guilt. Leond. He justifies himself. Ferd. If it be treason to be born a Prince, To have my Fathers Royal Blood move here; If it be treason, in my infancy To have escap'd by Divine Providence, When my poor life should have been sacrific'd To please a cruel Uncle, whose Ambition Surpris'd my Crown, and after made Olivia His Daughter Queen; if it be treason, to Have ben a stranger thus long from my Country, Bred up with silence, of my name, and birth, And not till now mature to own my self Before a Sun-beam; if it be treason After so long a banishment to weep A tear of joy upon my Countries bosom, And call her mine▪ my just inheritance, Unless you stain my blood with bastardy; If it be treason, still to love this Earth,
That knew so many of my race, her Kings, Though late unkindly arm'd to kill her Sovereign, As if the effusion of my blood were left To make her fertile, if to love Olivia, My nearest pledge of blood, although her power Hath chain'd her Prince, and made her Lord her pri∣soner, Who sits with expectation to hear That sentence that must make the golden Wreath, Secure upon her Brow, by blasting mine. If this be treason, I am guilty Ferdnand. Your King's become a traitor, and must die A black, and most inglorious death. Ernest. You offer At some defence, but come not home; by what Engine were you translated hence, or whether Convei'd? There was some trust, deceiv'd, when you Were carried forth to be preserv'd, and much Care taken since, in bringing of you up, And giving secret Fire to this Ambition. Ferd. There wants no testimony here, of what Concerns the story of my Birth and Infancy, I one dare speak, and be an honest Lord. Leand. Hows that? Ferd. Whose love and art secur'd me from all tyranny, Though here my funeral was beiev'd, while I to an honorable Friend his Kinsman, rew safely to the knowledge of my self At last, till fortune of the War betray'd me To this captivity. Leand. I blush at thee Yong-man, whose fate hath made thee desperate, And car'st not what mans blood thou draw'st along In thy back stream, or what mans faih thou mak'st As hateful as thy crimes. Ernest. That confederate Sure has some name, declare him, that he may
Thank you for his reward, and lose his head for't. Quee. We always see that men in such high nature Deorm'd▪ and guilty, want not specious shes To gain their practice friendship, and compassion, But he shall feel the punishment; d'you smile? Ferd. A womans anger is but  it Madam; And if I may have freedom, I must say▪ Not in contempt of what you seem, nor help'd By overcharge of passion, which but makes A fruitless noise; I have a sense of what I am to lose, a life, but I am so fortified With valiant thoughts, and innocence, I shall, When my last breath is giving up to lose Its self i'th' air, be so remote from fear, That I wil cast my face into one smile, Which shall when I am dead, acquit all trembling, And be a story to the world, how free From paleness Ferdinand took leave of earth. Rosa. Alas my Lord, you forget me, that can Part with such courage. Ferd. I forget indeed, I thought of death with honor, but my love Hath found a way to chide me; O my Boy▪ I can weep now. Leon. A sudden change, he weeps. Quee. What Boy is that? Ferd. I prethee take thy self away. Quee. Your Spirit Does melt it seems, and you begin to think A life is worth preserving, though with inamy. Ferd. Goodness thy aid again, and tell this great Proud woman, I have a Spirit scorns her pity. Come hither Boy, and let me kiss thee; thus At parting with a good, and pretty servant, I can without my honor stain'd shed tears: I took thee from thy Friends, to make thee mine;
Is it not truth Boy. Rosa. Yes my Lord. Ferd. And mean't when I was King to make thee great, And shall I not, wen I can live no longer, To cherish thee at farewel, drop a tear? That I could weep my soul upon thee,—But You are to slow me thinks, I am so far From dread, I think your forms too tedious. I expect my sentence. Quee. Let it stay a while. What secret flame is this? Honor protect me! Your Graces fair excuse, for you—I shall Return again— Exit. Ferd. And I, with better guard After my silence in the Grave, to meet And plead this cause. Ernest. He is distracted sure; His person I could pity, but his insolence Wants an example; what if we proceed To sentence? Leon. I suppose the Queen will clear Your duties in't. Leand. But I'l acquaint her. Exit. Rod. My Lord Leandro's gone. Ernest. His censure will Be one with ours. Ferd. Yet shall I publish who Thou art? I shall not die with a calm soul And leave thee in this cloud. Enter the Queen and Leandro. Rosa. By no means Sir.—The Queen. Quee. Whose service is so forward to our State, That when Our pleasure's known, not to proceed, They dare be officious in his Sentence? Are We Queen, or do we move by your Protection? Ernest. Madam, the Prince— Quee. My Lord▪ you have a Queen.
I not suspect his wisdom Sir, but he Hath no Commission here to be a Judge, You were best circumscribe our Regal power, And by your selves condemn, or pardon all, And we sign to your will▪ The offence, which you Call treason strikes at us, and we release it, Let me but see one curl in any Brow: Attend the prisoner hither;—Kiss our hand. Are you so mrciless to think this man Fit for a Scaffold. You shall Sir be near us, And if in this confusion of your Fortunes You can finde gratitude, and love, despair not. These men that now oppose, may finde your title Clear to the Kingdom too: Be Sir collected, And let us use your arm. Exit. Supported by Ferdinand. Rosa. What change is here? Leand. What think you of this Lords? Rodri. I dare not think. Leon. Affronted thus? O my vext heart. Exit. Rosa. Ile follow still, and if this be no dream, We have scap'd a Brook, to meet a greater stream. Exeunt. ACT. III. Enter Rodriguez, Ernesto. Ernest. THough I believ'd her passionate, and like A Sea, tempestuous in her anger, I Never thought she would marry him. Rodri. She's the Queen▪ But with what honor she could quit the Prince, Who (without treason) did deserve her too, Comes not within my reach.
Ernest. If you consider He has been valiant for her to great purpose, And brought a prisoner home, to mount his Gennet: It was a pretty service. Rod. How does he bear it. Ernest. He's here you may enquire it. Enter Leonario (with Letters) and a Servant. Leon. B swift and faithful, Arragon bleeds here, Nothing but Wr can right my cause and honor. Serv. Expect an army great as your own thoughts To cut the way to your revenge. Exit. Leon. My Lords Rodriguez and Ernesto. Ambo. Your Graces servants. Leon. A man my take the benefit of this Garden, Without a Court offece, you have had the day Of triumph, and the Queen already teeming, To bless the Kingdom with an Heir; and yet You see I walk like a poor Neighbor Prince, And have my heart still. Rod. I am glad you bear it so. Leon. Not have I a meaning To run my self into despair, or strangle My better hopes, out of pure melancholy. I praise the influence of my Stars; there is A fire in Cupids Quiver, that will siorch Through armor; and what's womans flesh and blood To make resistance, though I dd not dance Upon the marriage night, I wish'd her joyes I' th' morning. Ernest. Her heart shew'd she was pleas'd With what she had done; she was as active as The air before she went to Bed. Rod. But I Oserv'd a declination in the King, And as the night approach'd which should have more Inlarg'd his mirth, he grew more melancholy.
Leon. Strange! And such a Bride that took him from So great a loss, to place him in her bosom; But he was mark'd for the Queens thoughts, and I By destiny to bring this pair of Pidgeons Together. I expect no more reward, The Willow Garland Crowns me, but the Prince Is here still. Ernest. Your highness hath a noble temper. Rod. How ere he seem to cover it, his soul Hath a deep apprehension of the affront. Let's leave him, our discourse may be displeasing. We are servants to your Grace. Exeunt Lords. Leon. Y'have honor'd me. Think I am tame still? let the inconstant Queen Secure her thoughts, and glory in my silence; This heart is laboring a revenge. Enter Captain. Captain, what news? the Court is merry stil? Cap. Not altogether o merry as it was hop'd for. Leon. Can there be an eclipse already? Cap. I have not read the Almanack for this year, But by my Court Astronomie, I finde Our Sun and Moon are in no Conjunction; They take their fit by turns, the King was cold And full of flegm last night, and they that wait Neer both, report the Queen this morning look'd As she had wept. Leon. O, tears of joy. Cap. Of anger rather, if you saw her fullenness. She frowns on every man, she turn'd away One of her servants but this morning for Presenting her with Verses, that did praise The King, and wish her fruitful. Her own Page Was whipt for saying the King lay with the Queen And might for ought he knew▪ get her with childe ere morning▪ Leon. Thou art humorous.
Cap. And so are they. Leon. This begins well; and what Do people talk abroad of me, and my Affront? Cap. Why, they say they are sorry for you, Especially the women. Leon. Thou art pleasant. Cap. Some that are cheif in counsel, privately Suspect it but a trick of State; and that You had discover'd underhand the Queen Was not— Leon. Leave this mirth; let me indear thy care For my intelligence at Court; I must Not off so tamely; and expect me here, After a small dispatch, I have more to impart. Exit. Cap. Your humble creature still Sir. 'Las poor Gent' Were  has capable to be entertain'd now, in revenge I would mount all the Madams in the Court, There should be nothing like a woman in't, But I would touz and tumble: Who are these? Enter two Citizens. 1. Cit. Save you Sir. Cap. It may be so. 2. Cit. Pray Sir take no offence, we have been en∣quiring About the Court for two Gentlemen. Cap. And cannot your four eies see two Gentlemen I' th' Court? 1. Cit. Excuse us Sir, we have seen many, you May guess we have relation to the Citie Sir, And would be glad to meet two of our old acquain∣tances, A brace of our Tribe, We hear, translated first out of the Citie, To be Sons o'th' Sword, are since turn'd Courtiers. Pray d'ye know 'em? Enter Lieutenant and Violinda. Cap. Yes children of the Gown, but their imployment Wo ot give 'em leave to attend such vulgar confe∣rence,
And here comes one of the Moon-calves, does he look Like a Haberdasher, that's one of the Maids of Honor, The Weisel loves a Hens-Nest, and I have setled This perswasion, That no woman can hold out, Now he is sworn a servant extraordinary. 1. Cit. Sir do you know us? Lieut . No. 2. Cit. We were your neighbors, and of the same trade. Cap. They'l make him sweat; how the Rogue glotes upon 'em. 1. Cit. We were of your acquaintance, when you sold Garters. Lieut. Go hang your selves. 2 Cit. And Statute-lace. Viol. What are these? Lieut. Poor me that had some losses late by fire, And woud become my Clients to procure Some Letters Patents to beg by; alas, they are half distracted. 1. Cit. He's proud—I have a parcel of Periwigs Please you▪ for old acquaintance, put 'em off for me, Among some friends of yours at Court, whose skulls Are but thinly furnish'd; the hair is of a Gentlewomans spinning. Cap. I could love this Citizen, and ow him any money For his confident abusing him. Exit Violinda. He has brib'd her absence with some Ring or Bracele, Least she should taste the discovery now. 1. Cit. Methinks you need not be so proud. Lieut. I would have you to know that I am an ex∣traordinary— Cap. Proud Coxcomb. Lieut. Servant to the Queen. What I was, I am willing to forget; What you are, is apparant, I defie the Dunghil I came from, and it is scandalum Magnatum to be so saucy. Exit.
1. Cit. I will not leave your worship so. Exit. Cap. What will this Rascal do with himself? Here comes the other Fool to make up the Gemini. Enter Antient with two Petitions. Ant. Hum, I will not know him—Let me see— The humble Petition of— 2. Cit. Save you Master— Ant. Prethee fellow do not trouble me— Humbly praying—The Queen shall sign it. Let me see this other— Cap. Who the devil will bring him a Petition, This Whelp has discovered him, and now would Pretend himself most busily employ'd About Petitions to the Queen. Ant. Hum, shall daily pray for—Hum. Cap. More wit and money a your side; for your Extraordinary place will not hold out. 2. Cit. Sir I have a sute to you. Ant. Is it Embroidered Sattin Sir, or Scarlet? Yet if your business do hold weight and consequence, I may deserve to wear your thankfulness In Tissue or cloth of Bodkin; Ermines are for Princes. 2. Cit. Alas my Suite is not worth your wearing. Ant. Good faith Sir you must excuse me, at this time My attendance is expected at the Counsel, come To my Chamber by five a clock in the morning Four days hence, and you shall be sure to finde Me— Cap. A sleep. 2. Cit. But do you not know me? Ant. Hum. Yes I have seen your phisnomy, were you Never in a conspicuous place, called the Pillorie. 2. Cit. How the Pillory? Cap. A skirmish, and it be thy will. 2. Cit. If it were not in the Court Garde, I would beat out thy brains.
Ant. Take heed, for I am an extraordinary— 2. Cit. Ratcatcher. Cap. You may beat out his brains here as securely Sir, As if you met him i'th' market; Marry if you do Not kill him outright, it is but the loss Of your hand. 2. Cit. I would it were but the loss of my left hand To beat one of thy eyes out—Are you an Ancient? Ant. Thank you for that, so I might deserve To be beaten. I am an extraordinary Sir. Cap. And deserves to be beaten accordingly. You may kick him without danger. 2. Cit. May I? Enter 1. Citizen kicking the Lieutenant. Cap. Look, your friend will shew you a president' He is acquainted with the Court latitude. 1. Cit. This is no striking. Lieut. I know it is not. Cap. They are subtle knaves, and know the Law. Lieut. A pox upon 'em, I feel it. Ant. At their peril say I, these poor things Do not believe that we are extraordinary men, I shall know you another time, I shall. Cap. If you had known him now it had been better For your hanches. Well, I ha' not done with These whelps yet, till they are undone. I shall never be sufficiently revenged for their affront At Court. The Prince commanded me to Expect his return here, I'l not leave Enter Rosania. The Garden. Who's this? Rosa. Is perjury no sin? or can Heaven be So busie or a sleep? Such crimes of men Pass with impunity? Let this wake your anger: This; Ferdinand is married, all his vows
Scatter'd in th' air, dispers'd like witherd leaves, And hurried on the wings of some rude Wind, Whose pride was to deflour the Spring; Oh Ferdinand, Couldst thou, whilst yet thy breath was warm with love, With love of me, call back thy faith, and tear Thy Heart from mine to plant it in her Bosom? Capt. How's this? Rosa. What though she be a Queen? could any thirst Of present title flatter thy Soul from me? I that left all for thee, and would have calld Death for thy cause a triumph, now must live The scorn of my own thoughts, despis'd by thee. Capt. Here's a new business; this obscures me quaintly. Enter Leandro. Lean. The King commands you not to leave the Garden. He espied you from the Gallerie Window, and Would have you here atrend him. Rosa. Sir, may I Without offence▪ ask if the King be merry? Leand. We are scarce yet acquainted with his nature, But we observe no Jubilie in his eyes, Nor is the Queen so pleasant as our hopes Did promise after Marriage. Rosa. Pray excuse this boldness. Leand. You'l expect his pleasure here? Exit. Rosa. 'Tis my ambition once more to see, And speak with him, and if his language break not Enter Queen, Leandro. My Heart, I'l take my leave—the Queen. Leand. He is a Servant to whom the King Was pleas'd to shew affection▪ when he had No expectation of your Royall favour. Que. I do remember, I observ'd him once Use more than common passion to this servant, And if we may build any confidence Upon a fair aspect, he may deserve it.
Say we would speak with him; my Heart's opprest With melancholy, something tels my spirit I am too tame; have I advanc'd a thing Without a name to perch on the same Cloud With me and for his sake slighted a Prince, My Honour, and his Faith transported with My folly and his charms of tongue and person? And dares he pay me with neglect and coldness? Oh my vext soul! but he shall find I have A sense of my dishonour; and yet open Wayes become triviall and poor revengers, I will doe something that shall sting him to Repentance; my Lord you now may leave us. Ex. Lean∣dro. Sir of what Country are you? Rosa. Of Valentia. Que. Your name? Rosa. . My Parents not ignoble, yet too hasty I'th' apprehension of Pince Ferdinand; His Fortune (if I may yet call him so) Gave me to be his page I must confess My diligence thriv'd so well since I came to him, That he did value me above his servant. Que. Yet I've not seen you wait since we were married. Rosa. It was no want of dutie Madam, I Had late some wrasting with a Feaver that Compeld me to my Chamber, and disabled me For fit attendance. Que. Why dost weep? Rosa. I Madam? Que. I see the tears. Rosa. They are not sorrow then to see my Master Possest of so much happiness in your love, And I am confident his soul so full Of Honour and regard to your great virtues Will seal him worth your gracious favours Madam,
And the worlds Envie. Que. I'l not blame him now For loving thee; and so much hath thy faith And innocence prevail'd, thou sha't translate Thy service, and be mine, he shall consent. Ros. I am to both most humble. Que. Prethee tell me, Making so much of thee, he do's impart Sometimes the secrets of his bosom to thee. Tell me what fault he has, for thou know'st all. Rosa. 'Las Madam I know none, Or if I did, it ill became the trust And dutie of a servant to reveal'em Que. Thou wer't his bed-fellow? Ros. Gracious Madam— Que. Do's he not wanton in the night, and talk Of Mstresses. Ros. By truth not to me Madam. Que. Dissemble not I know he has a Mistress. Rosa. If love were ever so unkind to him— Que. Unkind? why I'st a sin to love? I shall Suspect thy Youth has not been free, thy looks Betray some seeds of Love. Rosa. By all that's good I never was in love but with my Master. Capt. Good. Qe. He is not worth it. Rosa. Madam. Que. Be wise, and govern well thy hopes. I'l help Thee to a Mistress; th'ast no Mistress yet? Rosa. But you self Madam. Que. It shall be no other. Thy Master is ingratefull Ros. Goodness aid him. Que. And wisdom thee, thou art a pretty youth,
I will reward thee better, if thou canst Be faithfull and obey. Rosa. In all things Madam That shall become your creature. Que. 'Tis not safe To play with a Queens favours, you shall wat Neer us, forget thy Master, and be happy. Exit. Ros. What clue can guide me in this Labyrinth? I would when I had lost Ferdinands Heart I had lost my understanding. She returns. Enter Queen. Que. The King is comming this way; now be free, Thou sha't have reason afterwards to bless Thy fate, this cannot chose but vex him. The Quen is plea∣sant with Ros. Enter Ferdinand. Fer. The Queen so pleasant? she has lost her ullenness, Playes with his Hair, and smiles. Ros. Madam, the King Observes us. Ferd. Stroaks his cheek too, she does want A Ganimed; my poor Rosania Art thou the path she walks on to revenge, All is not well within her Heart▪ but mine Sinks with the heavy pressure—she is gone. Exit Queen. The Queen does grace you much Tiberio, Those favours are not common. Rosa. She is pleas'd For your sake Sir to cast some smile upon me. I know 'twas your request she should be kind, To keep my Heart a live. Ferd. Th'art not discover'd. Ros. Did not you discourse My story to her? Ferd. I?
Ros. Take heed, yet this Will adde but a thin Feather to the scale Of my misfortune, she knows all▪ and in The pittie of my sufferings sayes you are Not worth my love, and calls you most ingratefull Ferd. We are both lost, till now there was some hope How to repair thy sorrow. Rosa. Do not mock me; 'Tis a worse tyranny than to kill, to laugh At what you have made wretched, 'tis as possible To call past ages back. Ferd. Take heed Rosania, And be not Judge of what thou know'st not, dearest. Rosa. I know too much. Ferd. That I am Married. Rosa. Ther's no truth in Man. Ferd. You are too rash; for there is truth in me, In Ferdinand, though in thy thoughts held black And staind prodigiously with breach of faith, I have not broke my vow, do not compell me By thy unbelief to do a Sin I hate As much as I love thee. Rosa. Have you a Soul? Ferd. Yes, and thy Eye shall read it, be but calm, That Soul, thou once didst love, white with his first Simplicity and faith; I wo'not urge In my excuse the beautie of the Queen Enough to melt a Scythian into love, But call to mind my dear Rosania, And do but put upon thee Ferdinand So late forgotten by his Stars, a prisoner, Slav'd like a villain at the bar, expecting At every breath his sentence, nay admit Rosania, the best part of his Soul Stood like a weeping fountain to take leave Of what she never must salute agen:
In this extreme, to preserve Ferdinand And save Rosania, wouldst thou scorn the breath Of mercy, that did Court thee from the Lips Of a great Queen? couldst thou love Rosania, If thou wert Ferdinand to lose thy self? Whom she would follow in a stream of tears, And when she had made an land of thy tomb, Striving to swim to thee, she could not choose, But drown her self in her own waves. I prethee Take reason to thee▪ and when th'ast consider'd— Rosa. Perswade me I am not Rosania, And I will say 'tis virtue and that yet Your heart may grow with mine; is not the Queen Possest of that which should have been my title, A Wife to Ferdinad? Ferd. 'Tis confest the world Doth think it so, I did consent to ceremony. Ros. Call you injoying of the Queen but ceremony? Ferd. Pause there, and if thou hast but so much charity To think I dare not blaspheme Heaven, I'l call That, and the Angels boldly to my witness, The Queen's to me a stranger yet. Ros. A miracle. Ferd. Retain but love, as thou preserv'st thy sweetness, And that will teach thee to believe that Ferdinand, How ere saluted King is still thy subject, And though her Husband▪ in my faith to thee The Marriage-Bed hath still our Virgin sheets; A Brother might embrace a Sister, with The heat I brought; that this is truth, the power And name I have, shall only serve to make Our flight secure into another Kingdom, And when I part with these new shining glories▪ Thy faith will be confirm'd, and thou acknowledge I ventur'd much to keep my Heart thy servant. Ros. I know not what to say; is not the Queen Displeas'd?
Ferd. She is, but cunningly disguiseth Her passion to the World; but I forgot What must inlarge my fears of her revenge If thou be known Rosania. Ros. Lose that fear, I am still safe, and now I see the cause Makes her repent her favours, and thy greatness; Forgive me Ferdinand▪ and yet I know not, All is not well ther's poyson in this Balsom Prepar'd for thee. Ferd. From whom? Ros. Rosania. Ferd. When she shall but consent to have me dye, She shall not trouble poyson to send off My despis'd life, my soul in just obedience To her command will take a cheerfull flight In hope to serve her in the other World. Ros. You shall know more hereafter, and let this Secure your thoughts, she yet beleeves me what This shape presents, but without wise prevention, I fear I shall not live too long conceal'd; I dare not say her honour is a bleeding▪ But a Queen thus distasted may not find That Ice within her bloud; we are interrupted. Enter Rodriguez. Rodri. Your pardon Sir; 'tis the Queens pleasure This Gentleman attend her in the Gallery. Ferd. He shall wait her commands— Ex. Rodri. I know not what to counsell, 'tis not safe Sweet to neglect her, yet my fears of some Ill fate, are round about me like a mist, And dark my understandings; let a kiss And silence teach our souls some new discourse. Capt. Why here's a volume of Intelligence.
I'l stay no longer to expect the Prince, But seek him out immediatly; disguises? King by your leave, I shall untruss your Mistress. Ex. Rosa. I know not what I feel▪ nor what to fear, If love e'r meant a Tragedie; 'tis here. Ferd. If we ne'r meet agen, one more salute Shall fortifie our lives by joyning breath, Nor shall our last hard fate deny us this, To change our faithfull Souls at our last kiss. Exeunt severally. ACT. IV. Enter Rodriguez, Leandro, Ernesto. Ernest. I know not what to think on't, but if I Have any sense, there is some new state madness Crept into Court. Rodri. Are we not all a sleep, And these fine dreams perplex us? Leand. No 'tis waking. Rd. Shew me the renth part of a reason why The Queen did Marry him. Lea. 'Twas destinie. Ernest. Why since should he be melancholy? Rod. Or she so humorus? Ernest. Not lie together? pray Heaven the Gentleman Be found with no defective title in him. Leand. Oberve her favours to that Boy, he was His servant, now her minion. I like not These violent wheels; the whole frame may be soon Indanger'd, if these passions be not cur'd. Rod. New lodgings for him, neer her own, and he
Given free access to the Bed chamber. Leand. 'Tis naught Or will be so, I pittie the good King; Though she have rais'd him to the highest glorie Her power extended too, yet to make this height His precipice, and throw him into scorn, Nay poyson the best hopes he had of honour, And love from her, and in his sight to Court A Boy, his servant? It would vex the best Of all our tempers, if we felt the sting on't. Enter Rosania and Violinda (passing over the Stage.) Er. He's here, that Lady is the Queens Cabinet. Lean. They are merry about the Mouth. Er. Another summons? 'Tis possible the Queen may Marry him too. Lean. There is some mysterie we cannot reach. If we doe well remember, ther's a Law Made by her self, as soon as she was Queen, To keep Wifes Pulses temperat, and correct The insolent Bloud of Women that had Husbands. Er. And Men were not exempted. Leand. I say no more. But Heaven maintain the Law, and the Law-makers, And conjure down that Devill, 'Tis the King and the smooth Boy, lets leave 'em. Exeunt Lords. Enter Ferdinand, and Rosania. Ferd. Was this the Ladies Message? does the Queen Take thee into such favour? Rsa. I tell truth, And though it found but ill on the Queens part, Because she thinks me wht I seem my Lord,
You need not to wear one Cloud upon your Face When you remember who I am, my fears Are thick upon my Heart, how to secure This shadow any longer. Ferd. That afflicts Me most Rosania, for it pleases me To hear she can affect thee; but what way To keep her expectation high, and thee (My dearest) safe? her passions may be violent. Rosa. They are already Sir, if I mistake not; I wish to Heaven that you were reconcil'd To do the office of a Husband to her▪ That peace would keep her Bosom clear, and I Should live to all the World except your self A stranger still. Ferd. What language speaks Rosania? Ther's death in every syllable▪ should I Obey what thou desir'st, and do the office Of a Husband, ha? Rosa. I'l wait upon you still, And hope you will vouchsafe me now and then A harmless smile; her beauty will deserve Your whole heart, and ther's something in the memory Of what she has advanc'd you to, will help To make you kind. Ferd. Should I injoy the Queen? Because the misery of my fate compeld A ceremonious si? shall I betray The essence of my faith, and leave a curse, When thou art known, upon my name for ever? If thou hast taken new resolves against me, Punish my hear some other way; had she More ornament than ever met in woman, Mistress of more perfection▪ than Poets Invented for the Queen of love to this Were the proud Empire of the World her own,
And she would make me Lord of her, and these, It would not buy me to the pleasure of One Nights embrace, my body shall not carry My soul so far astray; the Man condemnd To live in a perpetuall Snow, hath not A purer Frost within his blood. Rosa. This but Ingenders a new grief▪ although it bind Rosanias Heart there is yet one way left And that ere I pronounce you must forgive; There is a trembling in my tongue▪ and I Already feel such Winter in my breath, My timorous Lips do wither. Ferd. Do not fright My Soul too much, ther's something threatens me So like a loss of these, that I am left A peece of shaking Earth death cannot look To make me tremble so; canst thou forsake me? Ros. Not in my Heart, but give my body leave To seek some other place my Lord to dwell in. When I am gone into some wilderness, You will find ease at Heart, and love the Queen, And perfect all; I'l pray you may live happy, And hold Intelligence with some gentle Winds That shall convey my wishes and return What joys do follow you; the purling Rivers I'l teach your name and they which gide this way Shall bring thee something Ferdinand of mine; My tears I know will not be lost, which I Will send thee daily by the courteous stream, Clear pledges of my faith; consent my Lord I may depart and you shall choose your way, To every blessing here. Ferd. Not till we meet With one embrace, and take our flight together; And I have thought a way to perfect it,
Observe my sweet Rosania, the Queen Thou sayst affects thee, cherish it, with all The softness of her creature; if she allow, Kiss her, and promise what young lovers doe, Examine not, but by thy love to me Be free in amorous language, if she have Heat to a private meeting in her Chamber, Obey, this shall secure our loves ambition. Enquire not, but resolve, and let me know The time. Ros. You will attempt no violence Upon the Queen? Ferd. By this— Kisses her. Ros. What if she have commanded me This Night? Ferd. To meet? Ros. In her Bed-Chamber. Ferd. Ha▪ obey it. Ros. At a late hour. Ferd. It shall beget our comfort If thou consent. Rosa. But shall I not expose My self to danger, if her love persue Immodest ends, since you advise I should Apply my self to her desires? Ferd. If she Take too much flame, by some soft art delay her, Till I come to close all; keep still thy person Secret, the least discovery will destroy Us both; the Evening with much hast prepares Thy visit and our happiness. Rosa. I'l obey, But be you sure to come. Ferd. Lose thou no time Now to indear thee to her, let us part Love will find balm to cure the wounded Heart. Exeunt severally
A Table, and Lights, set out, then Enter Queen, and Violinda. Que. Was he not cheerfull when he promis'd thee? Viol. He was, and he was not. Que. I have a strange apprehension, and this doth feed it. Viol. I told him 'twas an honour worth his joyfull entertainment. Que. If it should prove succesfull, my revenge Were perfect, I'm resolute to persue— Viol. It makes well For your contrivement that the King and you do Lodge at distance—stay, I hear a tread. Que. I hope 'tis he. Enter Leonario. Viol. Prince Leonario Madam. Que. What comes he for? Leon. Although I have small expectation For my own sake, that you can pardon Madam This bold access, and at so dark an hour, Yet when you have heard my business, You will know Your self so much concern'd, I'l not despair To find your mercy. Que. You prepare me for Something of consequence. Leon. Please you to dismiss Your Ladie, I have something to deliver Wo'not become her knowledge. Que. Leave us—now, Ex. Violinda. Our conference is free, your Graces pleasure? It must be matter of much essence, that Could not expect till morning▪ but y'ar welcome. Leon. This time and darkness Madam best becomes him, Who for your sake blushes to see the Day, But I came not to chide my wrongs have learn'd A modest silence, my approach is not
To name a suffering of mine, but to Discover what already is prepar'd Against your peace and honour. Que. Is it treason? Leon. It is, but threatens not your life, you may Live many years upon the wound. Que. You fright me. Leon. Lose not the beauty of your cheek so soon, Hide not beneath that cold and killing Snow, One Rosie blush▪ and yet that pale would shew Like Innocence which you have lost; oh Madam Had you not made a forfet of your truth To me, no storm could shake you, but your soul That made no change▪ could know no fear; I come To tell you what just providence hath done In my revenge, your breach of vow is punish'd With loss of faith in him, to whom you gave The Heart you promis'd me, the King, whose pride You built on my dishonour, is as false, As you were. Que. This is passion but be Not yet too rash in censuring him. Whom I Have plac'd so neer, I must defend, nor will He need my strength, to make their blood account That dare traduce his honour; he has a Heart— Leon. A false one. I was born without a fear, And dare upon his bosom (wear he worth The manly contestation▪) write him perjur'd. Que. I would this were not envy; but admit He be thus guiltie, 'tis a fault in him. Leon. No Madam, it is yours; that sin that poysond The expectation of my joys in you. Hath made him false and will excuse his storie, When you are nam'd that broke your faith to me; I can have no hope now to be repair'd, But if it be worth memorie to know
The triumph waits on Innocence, the World Shall say the Queen deserv'd to meet a scorn Deep as her wrongs to me. Que. It cannot be. Leon. Think so, and help to make the revenge greater, Till the winds catch the black report, and multiply The shame, by scattering it about the Kingdom, Sit still, and careless of your fame, incourage His private lust, his Mistress now in Court. Que. A Mistriss in the Court? Leon. Yes Madam, in the Court, And may one day think any second place Too narrow to contain her greatness▪ she— Que. As y'ar a Prince no more; I have done ill, And find the penance here, It does agree With his neglects, and addes new flame to my Young jealousie; I feel a tempest rising; By all your goodness leave me Sir; I cannot Now right you more than mourn, and give belief to you. No more I pray you, by all your love to honour. Leon. I ha' done, And take my leave, my everlasting leave, 'Tis time; how like the day, that flatterd us With cheerfull light, are my desires fled hence, And left me here a prodigie of darkness, A walking Herse, hung round about with night, Whose wings must one day cover all? farewell. If any Star look forth, it is to call Me hence, and light me to another World. Our Lips are never like to meet agen. Kisses Farewell, if I but stay, I shall forgive her. Exit. Que. A Mistress in the Court? something is busie About my Heart. Enter Violinda. Viol. The Prince is gone. Que. No matter.
Affronted thus? but I forgot to ask Her name that rivals me; how this passion Befools our understanding, and prevents The knowledge, and the cure of what afflicts us! The Morning will assure all, but shall this Strike me to ashes? I may find a way To my revenge. Enter Violinda. Viol. Tiberio is come Madam. Que. Wait carefully. Viol. I know my dutie. Enter Rosania: (Kneels and Kisses her Hand.) Que. Rise, This meeting was not meant for ceremony, Ther's something in this presence will deserve We should put off all state, and speak like friends. You must be cover'd too. I'l have it so. We are private now. Rosa. These graces will Undoe a youth, whose birth, and careless Stars Ordain'd him to be humble, and with dutie Wait on your meanest servant. Que. Thou shalt soon have cause To think thy Stars are carefull of thee, if Thou canst be wise. Rosa. Alas! my years are few. Que. Thy knowledge is not wanting to distinguish Whose favours Court thee, and apply thy self To understand, and thank the kind bestower; 'Tis in my power to make thee great. Rosa. You may Advance this worthless walking shadow Madam, And when you like the free and bounteous Sun Have blest me with your rayes, it is but like
His glorious warmth bestow'd upon a peece Of rude and barren Earth, which takes not from The lustre of your Beams, but shews more clearly, By your own light, what poverty you shin'd on. Quee. This modesty becomes you not, look in My eie, and read what's there. Rosa. Some thing like anger, Enough to strike me dead. Quee. What now? Rosa. A smile, And such attending sweetness— Quee. Thus it shall Invite thee still to gaze, and love, Tiberio, No frown shall point on thee; I finde my eyes Were meant for thee, and all they grac'd before, But objects of mistake. Here here, O turn Thy lovely face away, lest I be seen To buh, my heart hath chose to place my love And the reward; this would become thy tongue A great deal better, Come sit down Tiberio. What still an Infants understanding? Think I am the man, and learn a little better, What beauty dwells upon this hand, What softness, How like the Snow, or Innocence it shews, Yet fires my heart with every gentle touch. Rosa. Dear Madam; would the King would come. Que. This is a happiness that Kings should sue for, And yet there are poor comforts in these Kisses; Let hands preserve Societie with hands, And with their change of whiteness, and of Balm, Make wealthy one another: But let what Was mean't for kisses meet, and finde out pleasure By warm exchange of souls from our soft lips. Kisses. Madam, how like you this? Rosa. Madam. Que. I suppose you a Lady all this while,
And I the man, our lips must meet again, Will this instruct thee nothing? Ros. Gracious Madam. Que. And yet this recreation comes short, Dear Lady, of what love might well allow us. Admit you are a Queen, you are not bound To thin your Royal Blood with frost, but as Your power, your pleasure should exceed; nay graut You have a man (a man said I) that can Keep love alive, and warm a yielding bosom, Yet where from the invitement of your eie, And amorous choice, I am become your servant, You may be a little kinder. Rosa. Madam, I know not How with the safetie of my self, my dutie, And your own name and power, to understand you, (Yet this to some would need but little Comment) Can you place such a value on a thing That not deserves to breath your name? Or should I hope these charms of Language you have spred To catch my heart, which hath no wings, but where It can believe; For you transcend so much In wonder of your love, a willing Faith Not easily can reach it. But dear Madam, I know all this is but to try my duty, And you have pleas'd to choose me forth, to make These silent hours more grateful, by the mirth My weak replies may raise you, Que. Miracle! I but imagin'd thee a woman, now I shall believe thee one indeed; this coldness Becomes no masculine habit. Come, we'll in, And change our Sexes; Thou shalt wear my clothes, And I will put on these, help on with thine, And I will dress thee handsomely, and then We'll act again.
Ros. Not for the world dear Madam. Not yet come? Que. The world? This confirms my jealousie. I'll search you to the soul, Adonis come, I'll call thee so, and court thee with more charm Than Venus did, when in the Idalian Groves To buy a kiss, she offer'd the proud Boy Her flaming Chariot, and her Doves of Snow. 'Tis in thy power to make thy fate and heart More happy by consent to meet with mine; Tempt not the anger of a Queen despis'd, Whose breath can like a whirl-wind snatch thee up, And drop thee in a Wilderness, where with sorrow For thy neglect, thou by degrees maist sigh Thy self into a Mist, which no Sun-beam Shall pitie or take up into a Cloud. But love me, and compose thy heart to mine, Wee'l live with more delight, than fancie can Inrich Elizium with. The soft hours shall stay Till we allow 'em Wings, and while we kiss And on each others Lips breath Incense thus, Wee'l have ten thousand Capids for our guard, Whose Bows shall awe the destinies, and we write The King and Queen of Fate. Enter Ferdinand, Leandro, Rodriguez, Ernesto, Captain, Guard. Ferd. Will this deserve your faith? Leand. We must believe. Enter Violinda. Viol. We are undone, the King. Que. False Keys? Rosa. 'Twas time to come. Ferd. Had I not cause, my Lords, to appear sad, When I suspected this so great affront? My melancholy all this while was but
A mourning for this shame: Look but my Lords Into your elves, and make this suffering yours. Viol. Madam be rais'd again, I have an art To fetch you off with honor▪ and the youth too. I will perswade him there can be no cure In this extream but to pretend himself A woman; I will dress him in your Gown Before they can be ware on't; they all know This way he cannot flie, mean time put on A confidence, and let them know you are The Queen, not to be shaken with their power; This will gain time. Que. Prosper in this. Viol. I will Redeem my fault, or never sleep again. Exit with Rosania. Ferd. She blushes not. Were she not Queen, what names could we bestow modesty? . 'Tis plain. We came in time. Ferd. Most happily to prevent Some further act of shame;  she look on us Without a blush? Que. I ee no such attraction In your state faces that I should desire Much to look on 'em. Who made you King I pray? Ferd. Your power I dare not call it love, presuming That I wa fit to be your property, Without a  to see, o have a sense Of these dishonors; This rank hea of blood, Madam, what penitence can make this clear? Admit your thoughts were wanton, and your flame, Too great to be supprest, could you finde none
For your adulterate embrace, but one That was my servant? my own hound devour me? As if your lust had not enough of shame And mischief to me, but your malice must Appear in't too; with what securitie Can I expect to live, when she begins So soon to poyson me? Leand. We heard her say They two would write themselves the King and Queen. Rod. So we did all. Ferd. You may consider these. Leand. 'Tis impious Madam with what grief do we Remember now that Law you made After your Corronation to preserve The name of your sex chast which gave our Hearts Hope of your blessed progress; you made it death To stain the Marriage-bed; where shall we expect The life of that good act, when ou begin A breach of chastitie by so black example? If the King urge an Execution Of what our voe  by yours impos'd Upon the kingdom  should prove your self More innocent o give us cause to mourn This fall from virue Er. Madam we geve for you. Que. So, so, have your great wisdoms said all yet? I laugh at you (poor things) and am so far From trembling at your thunder, that I pitty you, And first I'l let you know you selves, you are I take it all my subjects, I will not Exempt you Sir▪ since Marriage takes not off My Interest, and Essence here▪ all strength Flowing from me▪ and your Derivative shne Extinct, when I frown you to darkness; by What power dare you take an accompt of me?
That am above your Laws, which must obey Me, as their Soul, and Dye when I forsake 'em? But I will reason coolely, and admit They live in force; 'gainst whom? are you so shallow, To think we that created, and decreed 'em For vulgar reformation, must be squard And Levell'd by 'em, as we meant to lose Our Character and distinction, and stoop To th' common file of subjects? this were policy! I speak not this with sense of any guilt, So to decline it, for I here defie you, And bring an Innocence shall strike a blush Upon your Souls; that sinn'd in my suspition. Aside. Ferd. Where is the Boy? Ernesto take him to Your custodie, and bid him not despair, I have contriv'd the rest. Enter Rosania (like a Woman) and Violinda. Er. He's here. Viol. Take it upon you, if it come to searching Wee'l find a Jurie. Capt. You are deceiv'd my Lord, with your good pardon, He is not here. Er. Who is not here? Capt. The he you do expect; And your Officious Ladyship might well Have spar'd your pains, to put on all this trim. Ferd. What means the fellow? Capt. 'Tis no news to your Sir. I could have told the Queen before and you My honourable Lords, this was no Boy, Though now he would but seem o'th' tother sex, I knew her name. Ros. My name? Capt. Are not you call'd Rosania? erd. Ha! betraid?
Capt. Yes indeed is she, you were present Sir I'th' Garden when this fine Hermophrodite Declar'd what sex was hid behind the Breeches, And this I certified the Prince before. Que. Now 'tis clear. Capt. There are some tokens too I can remember, As kisses, and excuse for marrying with The Queen, a Virgin still, &c. Omnes. A Woman? Viol. But are you a Woman indeed? Capt. And now my Lords, if you have Hearts that are Honest and daring▪ come about agen, For this is but a cunning piece of treason, Against your Faith, and the Queens honour. Ferd. We are both lost Rosania. Capt. 'Tis truth, or take my Head off. Que. You do believe this transformation, And know this Ladie, my good Lord, I did Suspect before the cause of your neglects, And meeting with some dark Intelligence From the Prince, to perfect this discovery, Did in my Chamber wooe with aptest forms Of Love, to trie how long the sex would be Conceal'd; you heard a part, and see us kiss, And came in time with these wise Noblemen To prevent further acts of shame. Rodri. I'st possible? Rosa. It was an ill contrivement to make me Proof of the Queens dishonour. Er. An apparent Plot Against the life and honour of the Queen, Since he would urge that Law maliciously Against her, knowing this to be a Woman, And his close strumpet. Rodri. The same Law must be Their tryall.
Leand. What a change is here already? Que. You must not Lords deny me Justice. Rodri. 'Tis insufferable Against a common person. Er. Let his first Treason, if you think good Madam, be urg'd In accusation. Leand. So, so. Que. You did us service Captain. Capt. I am bound too't, heres more news for the Prince. Que. Use your pleasures. Exit. Rod. What need we circūstance, let him dye to morrow. Que. Death will be mercie to so much ingratitude, Command them both to severall custodies. The morning shall behold 'em dead— Ros. Now more lost then ever. Exeunt. Manent. Ferd: Ros. & Guard. Ferd. Pray lets take Short leave of one another, 'tis in vain To reason against providence, or say We might ha' liv'd; though I must dye, and after Be hid in my obscurest name, and shade, I must declare whose blood they will profane In bleeding thee; farewell, our last, last kiss. My heart would fain come to thee, I will make it My humble sute with my last breath it may Be quickly sent thee. Rosa. We shall both meet, when This dust falls off, and our souls kiss agen. Exeunt.
ACT. V. Enter Leandro, Rodriguez, Ernesto, Servants with Lights. Er. MY Lord you tell us wonders, 'tis high time To open such a mysterie. Rodri. This change Will exceed all, and to convincing are The circumstances of this great discovery They do command our faith. Er. And you sha  steer us. Leand. Then let us lose no time; oh my good Lords, Did you but feel the torment of my bosome, Till I discharge the duty, which so long Hath slept in his concealment you would call For wings to flye, and think all motion tedious; For Heavens sake lets make hast▪ that we prevent The morning, which will rise upon this knowledge With cheerfull beams, and put on all his glory. Er. Most gladly we attend. Exeunt. A Table and Taper set out. Enter Ferdinand (with a book in his Hand.) Ferd. I have no Heart to think of any thing But my Rosania, all devotion, When I remember her, flyes off, and leaves My soul no contemplation but her safety; They were too cruell to divide us, night It self looks now more black by this dim taper; Rosania's eyes would brighten all▪ but they Weigh'd down with sleep, and sorrow, are perhaps At rest, a thousand Angels watch about 'em; And let some one whoe office is to wait
On harmless love, present me to her dreams; O let her hear me often call upon her, As I am led to death, and when the stroke Divides me from my self, and from the World, My Heart shall pay her tribute, and my blood Do miracles, when every Crimson drop My Body bleeds, shall not in vain be wept, But fall into some Letter of her name, To keep alive our story. Enter two Servants (with Torches) Leandro, Ernesto, Rodriguez. What lights are these? This place sure is not wont to be thus visited. They are spirits, ha! yet if I have a memory Those Faces were but late familiar to me. They Kneel. What mockery is this? if you be substances Of things I know, go tell the Tyrant Queen She might allow me death without this scorn, This jeering Antimasque. Omnes. Long live the King. Ferd. What King? Omnes. Long live Ferdinand King of Murcia. Ferd. A dream, a golden dream. What fancies wait Upon our slee? and yet I wake, they are Apparitions, Il shut my eyes, and lose 'em. They wo not vanish. Leandro, Rodriguez, Ernesto? Omnes. All your subjects. Leand. Collect your scatterd thoughts my Lord, and be Assur'd, we now pay reall duties to you, You are our King▪ and must be. Ferd. Who says so? Leand. I, whose cold fear, and frailty, When fate of War had made you Prisoner, Conceal'd the truth, and Justice of your title,
'Twas I that sav'd you from your Uncles fury And sent you to Valentia, while I cozen'd The kingdom with your death, till time might ripen Your challenge to the scepter; if you can Find mercy to a treason, great as this, I'l live, and study how to merit pardon. Ferd. Rise, rise all, And if you be Leandro, pray come neerer. Rod. Pray Heav'n this unexpected happiness Meet with no extasie, all senses are Not arm'd for such extremes of Joy. Er. The Queen, When she finds this, will fall into a Feaver, By instinct her Head must ake this very minute. Rod. And shake too, for the Crown is tottering. Ferd. Pardon? thou shouldst divide the kingdom with me. But do all these believe it, will you not, When I make second claim, deny me agen? Call me Impostor? Leand. Sir forgive that first, And I'l not ask Heaven pardon for my next Deniall, let death threaten all his stings; And I have satisfied these Lords so well, They are confirm'd in your just claim, and person. Rod: Er. We lay our lives and fortunes at your feet. Ferd. I may command you then, fetch me Rosania; I'l be no King without her; do not stay To hear how much I love her 'bove the Crown, And all the glories wait upon it, she That was my Page, my fellow Prisoner, Rosania. Exit Rodrig. 'Tis that name next to Heaven I bow too. Good my Lord follow him, and if she be Awake, oh drop it gently by degrees, (The joy is mighty, she a sad weak Virgin)
That I shall live to make her Queen. Exit Ernesto. Stay you, and if I play too much the wanton with My fate, or swell with expectation, Speak something to allay my hopes, and say There may be crosses yet, the Queen may want Faith or consent, or put case the people (A dangerous torrent to oppose) like not This Innovation, where is the King then? Leand. Doubt not their Loves, you had their Hearts before; Let nothing shake you. Enter Rosania, Ernesto, Rodriguez. Ferd. Th'art my better Angell. Why then if my Rosania will be Queen, The kingdoms ours agen; she comes, she comes. Thou mak'st too little hast to be a Queen. I am my self agen, my name is found, I shall live to, thus to embrace Rosania Without a fear, these Lords are all thy subjects, I am a King. Leand. You are. Ferd. Then what must my Rosania be? Ros. Happy, if this be more Than dream, my tears and sufferings are all paid for If this be true. Leand. Most true. Ros. What a strong arm Hath Heaven? Ferd. See how the Day hath made Hast to salute Rosania, and to wait Upon thy triumph, blushes like a Maid When she is told she is in Love, the Stars Are gone to tell the other World, thy beauty, Till now Ecclips'd with sorrow, hath thrown off
The imprisoning veil, and shines above their bright∣ness. But how shall we Leandro now contrive For our Court entertainment, where the Queens Prepar'd to hear our Tragedy? Leand. Leave me To order your appearance; but first Sir, We must secure this Fort. Er. The Captain is My creature. Ferd. Thou shalt be all our direction. Come my Rosania, time hath turn'd a gen Our Glass, and his keen sith this comfort brings, It cuts no scepters down but to make Kings. Exeunt. Enter Leonario (reading a Letter,) and Soldier. Leon. So neer? Sold. We heard before of your affront My Lord, and were prepar'd. Leon. It hath outstrip'd my expectation, These Letters say Mendoza is their Generall new return'd With victory from the Moores; his fame I honour, My knowledge never reach'd his person. Sold. Sir, he brings old Soldiers with him, the Commanders Are such, whose faith and valor in those Wars Already tried, he durst name to the King To be employ'd here in your highness cause. Leand. We will to Horse immediatly. I long To salute the Army. Sold. Which but wants your person The Soul of their design; you may soon reach 'em. Enter Captain. Leon. I will. Capt. Your Grace.
Leon. That we had wings, away, to Horse to Horse. Exeunt Leon. Sold. Capt. Speed, and you be so hot o'th' spur, my business Is but breath, and your design it seems rides post. Enter Lieutenant and Antient. The Earth runs upon wheels; whom do I spy? My extraordinaries, I'l ha' sport with them, But first observe 'em. Lieut. I see no profit in these offices That we ha' brought. Ant. Not extraordinary, as the name did promise. Capt. The Rogues are poor, and now repent. Ant. We were told by the cheating Captain That we should want Men to tell our money. Lieut. This 'tis to deal with Soldades. Ant. We should command the Ladies too, and we Were bountifull, a small Pox take their beauties, 'Tis the greater curse, I have undone My self in giving away enameld Rings And Bracelets. Lieut. Well, if I trust a Captain agen. Ant. Or I. Capt. I'm glad they are payd; I wo'not leave 'em, I feel my antipathy strong yet. Ant. I would venture half my soul to be reveng'd If I knew how. Capt. True Rascals! Lieut. The Ladies love him. Ant. They all Love Men of War. Lieu. Would his poop were a fire. Ant. And Battels in Bed naturally. Lieu. Well, what Ladies give him hereafter to buy new Feathers, may his body compell him to bestow upon a Surgeon. Ant. May Diseases undermine his Flesh like Gun∣powder,
And blow all his skin up into blisters. Lieu. May they that look for his Nose, go about for want of a ridge, and let him wear no Legs but what he buyes from the Carpenter. Ant. May his face break out, and undo him in taf∣fata, and may the patches at the laft be so many, till his skin be invisible, and his goggle eyes look through a Mask. Lieu. May he live to be as much coward as we ha' been, and be beaten! Ant. Abominably beaten, and may the miracle be on our side, that we may be valiant, and be the Men to doe it, oh I would have no more mercy.— Capt. Save you Gallants, save you Courtiers. Both. My noble Captain. Ant. It may be he did not hear us. Capt. Hark you, what purchase have you two made lately? Both. Of what? Capt. Of Lands and loggerheads, Lordships I would say, I know you are both rich, you cannot choose, But I will borrow no more o' you, faith besatisfied and leave off in time with the wealth you have. Lieu. Where is it Captain? Ant. Can you tell where we may borrow as much money upon our extraordinary places, as will set up shop agen? For this Court trade wo'not do. Capt. How? Lieu. No indeed Captain, we ha' made little benefit since we came to be extraordinaries. Capt. Ye took not the right way then. Ant. That may be. Capt. Why, cannot you lie, and swear, and pawn your souls for six pence, the Devill could not furnish the City with two more hopefull Borachios. You have a Carrot-colourd Beard, and that never fails, and your worships face is a prognostication of preferment
Is a Prognostication of preerment, where Beside Dominicall Letters you have all the Conjuring Characters of the Planets. But all this is your cunning, to dissemble your estates. Lieu. By this empty pocket, I have but one Shirt left. Capt. You jeast y'faith. Ant. And by all my no money▪ I have but half a one Capt. Come, come, you took up linnen lately, I heard You did. Ant. I, smocks. Capt. Why they are in fashion with extraordina∣ry Courtiers. But if you be in earnest, I can tell, where you May furnish your selves richly. Both. Where? where? Capt. W'y in the Shops for ready money, but you would Save charges. Ant. I marry Captain. Capt. Venture to rob a hedge, it is but hanging, And whats that to men extraordinary? But if your wants be reall, be not dejected, I'l set you up agen my self, I have been Beholding to you two for your good words And wishes Gentlemen. Lieu. It pleases you to say so, I begin To smell.— Ant. Not to us Captain, we have been beholding to you. Capt. And it happens, as if fortune had made you miserable A purpose▪ to bless you both with such a preferment, as wo'not be offerd agen in a Coronation. Lieu. On good Captain, for we are extraordinary miserable. Capt. Then observe; you are not ignorant how things go at Court, the King is in prison.
Ant. So. Capt. And his wench with him that walk'd in Breeches; The Queen resolves they shall both dye. Ant. Good. Capt. This morning too; now in regard the King is a person of qualitie— Lieu. I think he be. Capt. And the tother a Lady, as some imagine, you two may do very well to undertake now— Both. Any thing. Capt. To be a couple of Hangmen  d'ee mark? to dis∣patch the Queens enemies in what horrid way, her coun∣sell shall think convenient▪ you will do service to the State, and have extraordinary rewards; besides the honour and reputation of your places; what say? 'tis my pure love to make this first offer to you. Ant. Do we look like a ouple of Hangmen? Capt. No you ha' not so good a complexion; and now I think on't you sha' not live to have that preferment come, draw you that wear your Sword like a Bum-baly, do as I bid you▪ and that quickly. Ant. It wo'not come out Sir— Cap. No—this shall in then— At. I will put more strength to't. Capt. So now, d'ee mark—kill one another. Both. Kill one another? Capt. Yes and doo't religiously, with as much alacrity as you would devour an Orphan: and do't hansomly, that you may not be hagd when you are dead. I'l see't done he that is dull shall have my goad to quicken him:— They fight. So, good good agen. well offer'd—they fight by these Hilts Furiously now cou'd I forgive 'em-so, enough. Lieu. This is very fine sport. Capt Necessity has taught 'em the noble science, come, if all fail, you shall fight challenges; ther's mony and
broken Pates to be got that way you can make legs, and gape like Gudgs for benevolence, ut scurvy capers, to shew your Legs are well, when your Head bleeds; farewell; stay, you want money, I had forgot, there is twelve pence apiece for you. Both. How Captain? I hope not. Capt. Tey are not heary yet, they think I serve 'em with Press money agen no, tis my pure bountie. Go, set up agen, and trust Souldiers, without impertinent asking for your debts; they'l pay you. Ant. As you ha' done. Capt. I'l hearken how you behave you selves farewell. When you are rich, I'l visit you agen, and borrow money. Lieu. Too much is too much: humh. Ant. Now have I a great mind to fight with your Captainship. Lieu. So have I, now my Hands in, methinks 'tis nothing. Capt. You are not desperate? Ant. We are a little better, as good be Hang'd for kil∣ling of you Captain, as live after the rate of our disgrace. I am resolv'd. Capt. Two Masives at once may worry me. I am put too't. They fight. Must we have tother 'bout. Ant. This is enough at once we may come too't in time. Capt. Why now I love you, love you, as well as you do Law. Ant. Upon good terms we love you too. Capt. Let's shke Hands, you sha' not to your vomit agen. ▪Now you dare sight, I'l tell you a hundred wayes to get moneys, come, wee'l drink and divide fortunes, Run not back into cows agen. Ant. I'l be Antient now agen. Lieu. And I Lieutenant. Capt. Both my own Boyes. Ant. 'Tis not so hard to fight I see, if a Man be but desperate, and give his mind too',
Lieu. Pox a Cowards; come Captain. Capt. Let me hug ye my bace of Mirmidons, And drink a Tun of Wine to this conversion. Exeunt. Enter Queen, Violida. Que. The Prince so eatly met upon the way This morning sayst? and with a Souldier? Vio. And in that hast too, Madam I was told The speed of Wings was slow, their fiery Horse Bathing in foam, yet fled as if they meant To leave the Wind, and Clouds behind 'em. Que. Strange! I could have wish'd him with less discontnt To have left us, but my stubborn fate design'd it; Having thus snatch'd away himself, it will Become us to compose, and make the best Of our State game; I sent a Messenger With our command, to th' Governor of the Fort, He should attend the King by the Water gate Leads to the Garden, we do purpose conference; If Ferdinand wisely consent to break The Magick that so chains his Heart to that Idoll Rosania, wee'l be reconcil'd, And Peace shall marry once agen our Hearts. Enter Courtier. Me thinks our Lords are cold in their attendance, Where be our train of Ladies?—nay permit 'em, A solitude becomes this sullen Day. And our own thoughts; methinks thou dost not look With thy own face upon me. Vio. Not I Madam? Que. My eyes have lost their virtue, all I look on Have not the shape and colour they presented, What whispers that? ha'? Viol. Here was none Madam.
Que. I could be jealous of the Wind methinks, And quarrell with the postures of those very Shapes i'th' Arras; fie Olivia, call home thy reason. Court. O Madam! Que. What horror's in that voice? I see a treason In's looks. Court. O Madam, I beseech your pardon. Que. Why? art a traitor? Court Not I, but there are practices I fear Against your royal person, the Court gates Are shut▪ all's in confusion within, And I could hear abroad loud acclamations And triumph for the King, as he were new proclam'd. Enter Captain. Que. Which way comest thou? Cap. Over the Wall Madam; the gates are shut, I'l tell you news; young ordinand your Husband Is in all stare attended, and proclam'd King in his own right, he is prov'd to be What he did first pretend himself, Leandro, And all the Lords confirm't the Governor Hath given him up the Fort, the wise City Her Ky, and every officer on's knees Is  and drinking the Kings health, QU. Away▪ and let thy face be seen no more, But when the fatall noise of fire, some blood, Or buriall calls thee forth. Capt. This my reward For bringing news the King's alive? take heed, Do not talk treason in your own defence,—hark Enter (in state) Rodriguez, Ernesto, Leandro, Ferdinand, (who takes the Throne) Attendants. Que. From what an expectation am I faln! Omnes. Long live Ferdinand King.
Ferd. We thank you; and will study to be worth Your prayers and dutie; Madam, the Chancelor Can cleer, and bring your faith to allow the wonder, We are no Impostor now nor need we borrow A beam from you to make us shine, yet still You are our Cosen, fair Olivia, Enter Rosnia and Ladies. The Husband was a title long since due To my Rosania, may it prosper here. Our love and years grew up together, and Our Souls by holy contract tied, when in A'fonzo's House, her Father, and my Guardian (To whose trust I was sent an Infant by Leandro) We plighted faith; it is no blemish To fair Olivia still to be a Virgin, Though she have lost the Queen, she is a Princess. And hath now found a Kinsman, that shall study What shall become his love, her blood and honour. Upon your Lip I print this fair assurance. Rosa. And mine shall be to do you service Madam. Que. If this be true, you must command my dutie. Ferd. We hear Prince Leonario is depared, When he shall know the progress of our fortunes Hee'l quit his Stars, that hid their golden Heads To mock him with a small Eclipse, o' purpose To light him with more glorie to his happiness. Soft Alat Ha? what clamors that? the frightfull noise increases. Enter first Guard. Guard. Flie, and save your selves, the Fort's surpris'd By the Prince of Arragon, whose troups have seiz'd the City, reeling with Wine, and careless of their strength, in their joyes for you Sir. Ferd. The Prince of Arragon? the fates cannot Be so injust, so envious of our blessing,
To snatch it from us in a minute; ha? Help, help, quarter. Divers within cry. Ferd. They are i'th' Court already. Leand. We are all undone, Lets yield and ask conditions honourable. Ferd. Dye he, that dares but think so yeeld? no, Ferdinand Was here too late a Pisoner; let us sell Our lives at glorious rates, the Evening puts A Mask upon the horror, follow me. Exit. Leand. To certain death; Ladies stay you, the danger Will meet us here to soon, and yet your persons In honour challenge safety. Ex. Lords. Que. Is there no end of my distractions? Or hath my folly yet deserv'd more vengeance? Rs. It cannot be Heaven will so soon destroy The blessig it bestow'd if thus you punish Whom you advance, who will believe your gifts Are more than flattery to betray our Peace? Enter Leoario Alfonso, Ferdinand, (Prisoner,) Rodriguez, Ernesto, Souldiers. Leon. This Ladie is my prize. Que. How Sir your prize? Leon. Mistake me not, ther's no dishonour meant Your person; yet I boldly may pronounce You are, and must be mine. I am not ignorant You are a Virgin all but name, be wise As you are fair, and I forget what's past, And take this satisfaction; if I meet Contempt, where I with honour once more Court you, You will create a flame shall never dye But in the Kingdoms ashes; you were mine First by your own election▪ seal'd above, If I must lose what Heaven bestow'd upon me The quarrell is not mine But virtues, whose right Hand is arm'd with Justice!
Enter Captain. Punish not where you owe your Heart, but let Both our revenges meet in that Impostor; I find your noble Soul return; Lord Generall While I retire with this fair Queen▪ whom not One violent accent shall affright, much less A rude attempt, take hence that counterfet, And cut his Head off. Ros. O my dearest Lord? Leon. The rest may if they please find mercy. Capt. I were best be o' this side. Leon. Away with him. Ferd. Insulting Prince, thou darest not. Leon. How Sir, dare not? Ferd. I said it, Thy better, being a King, in my own right, Without her charitie, proclam'd and justified, By Birth a Prince. Leand. All this is truth Sir. Leon. You must not Cozen thus my faith, away; Cut off his Head. Alfon. Dispatch you with the Queen, Let me alone to make his Head secure. Leand. Nay take mine too. I'l wait on him in death, It shall begin my service. Rs. Cruell Prince. Que. What fate must I obey? Ros. My death will adde some lines Unto thy bloody Chronicle; pray let us dy together. Leon. You shall speak, her sentence Madam. Que. She must live then. Leon. To all we offer mercie, but to Ferdinand, His doom is fixt; come Madam. Que. Whither Sir? Leon. I know the way to your Chappel, he that loves us Make hast, and bring the Priest.
Capt. That's I, I know Her Chaplains, they are my friends, and all good fellows. Exit. Ferd. Pray can you tell me, where, or what I am Or what I must do next? Alfon. Yes, you must dye. Ferd. Let not that grieve you Gentlemen, 'tis nothing To part with life, and if but my Rosania would not weep Methinks I could shake off this dust, and leap To Immortality without a guide, And in that cheerfull flight prepare the blest With so much praise and wonder of thy virtue, They shll be more in love with thee, than I, And double all their prayers to bring thee to 'em. Ros. No we will dye together. Al. You shall. Ferd. How? Alf. Both live, and love, and bless my age the witness. D'ee know me? Rosa. Father? Ferd. Guardian. Leand. Alfonso, my noble Kinsman. Alf. How joyes flow in my Heart, to see this constancy! Ferd. How came you to be his? Alf. I have deceiv'd the Prince, our forces are Valentia's, Not Arragons, which he by Letters sent for In his revenge, but we met the Intelligence And arriv'd sooner, to pretend our selves The Armie he expected; you shall know more hereafter. Ferd. I want a knowledge where to begin my gratitude, The joyes you bring are mighty, and overcome us. O my Rosia? Ros. This was beyond hope. Enter Captain. Capt. So, so, 'tis done, he has mumbled up the ceremony;
A compendious Priest may do much in few words; They are fast enough; the Queen was wise to take him; You are onely like to be a loser Sir; they come. Enter Leonario, Queen. Alfon. All joyes to the Prince of Arragon, and the fair Olivia. Leon. Why not the Queen Olivia? Alfon. Not while this Gentleman's Head is on, believe it. Leon. Where is Mendoza? Alfon. Hid within this bush— But here's Alfonso Generall of the Army Sent from Valentia to assist King Ferdinand To his native right. Lon. Valentia? Alfon. My Master having faild in his first aids To Ferdinand, intende not it down With so much loss but rais'd another Army, Which in our march consulted our security By Interception of all passage; Your mssenger by a party was surpriz'd, Him, stubborn to discover what he was, Imperfect in his answer, we Interpreted Some spie, and searcing fund your Letters fraught With michief and revenge, these sent to our King We had command to hasten our design, And steer our course by Sea to Carthagena, How after we arriv'd, we gaind your faith And purposes, Your highness knows. Leon. Betrayd? Alfon. Sir, be a Prince, and just to your own honour, And having perfected your fair desires With her, we hope you will account your self Most happy that you mist a power to serve Further revenge upon a lawfull Prince. My Soldiers will obey me now, although
To help your Marriage I appear'd no friend To Ferdinand. Leand. Who was the Prince preserv'd By me, and sent an Infant to this Lord, My noble Kinsman. Alfon. Him I bred, till time And strength might arm him to return, and claim His own. Leon. Leandro denied this before. Leand. To my dishonour, 'twas a coward fear To lose my self unprofitably Leon. I apprehend with wonder. Ferd. If you repent not love and our alliance, She shall be worth your best embrace, and we Forgetfull of your passion, entertain you With all affection to our blood. Leon. I meet it, And satisfied in this story, Joy I was Prevented; I congratulate your Stars Sir; Nor is this treasure of less price to me Than when her Temples were enchac'd with Empire. Que. This love will give my soul another form. Ferd. Our storie hath been full of change, but love Hath met a glorious victory, and tied Our souls together with most firm embraces. My Lord Leandro you shall to Valentia, With our best thanks and greeting to the King; His Armies charge is outs beside what else We owe his Royall bountie. Once more welcome Alfonso now my Father, witness I Preserve my faith to my Rosania, I hear the Priest call us to other rites, His Altar doth expect another pair, Make hast to light his Tapers with thine eyes And make our hearts each others Sacrifice. Exeunt Omnes▪ FINIS.
Epilogue, Captain. Gentlemen, I Am no Epilogue, I come to pray You'd tell me your opinion of the Play, Is the Plot current? may we trust the wit Without a Say-Master to autorise it? Are the lines Sterling? do they hold conceit? And every peece with your allowance, weight? That when you come abroad, you'l not report You are sorry to have given white money for't? So, so, I know your meaning, now pray tell How did the action please ye, was it well? How did King Stephen do, and tother Prince? Enough, enough, I apprehend, and since I am at questions w'ee, tell me faith How do you like the Captain? ha? he saith, I'l tell you, y' are my friends, none here, he knows, I mean you o' the Gentry, t'whom he ows No money, will enter a false action, And let the rest look too't, if there be one, Among his City creditors, that dares, He hath vow'd to press, and send him to the Wars. FINIS.
THE IMPOSTVRE A Tragi-Comedie, AS It was Acted at the private House IN BLACK FRYERS. WRITTEN By JAMES SHIRLEY. Never Printed before. LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Robinson at the Three Pigeons, and Humphrey Moseley at the Prince's Armes in St. Paul's Curch-yard. 1652.
TO SIR ROBERT BOLLES Baronet. SIR, IT hath been a Complement with some, when they have treated Friends, to profess a barrenness in that which they had prepared not without studied charge, and Curio sitie. As I was ne∣ver so insolent to magnifie my own, being best acquainted with my weak abilities: so I should deserve a just affront to my self, and undervalue your person, to present you with any thing were first cheap in my own opini∣on. Sir, this Poem, I may with modesty affirm, had a fair reception, when t was personated
on the stage, and may march in the first rank of my own compositions, which directed now by my humble devotion, comes from the press to kiss your hand, and bear your noble Name in the dedication. I cannot have so much pre∣judice upon your nature, to think you will de∣cline it, and should I abate those other cha∣racters of honour that shine upon you, your in∣dulgence to Musick and singular love to the worthy professors eminently, shew the harmo∣ny of your soul, and while Poetry is received a Musicall part of humane knowledge, I can∣not despair of your candid entertainment. Sr. I beseech you take it, as an earnest of my thoughts to serve you, I am assured it brings with it, beside the acknowlegment of your late obligation upon me, ambitious desires to pre∣serve my interest in your favour, while I sub∣seribe my self, Sir, The humblest of your Honourers, Ia: Shirley.
The Prologue. OUr poet not full confident he says, When Theaters free vote had crown'd his plays, Came never with more trembling to the stage, Since that poetick Shism possest the age. A Prologue must have more wit than the play, He knowes not what to write, fears what to say. He has been stranger long to'th' English scene, Knowes not the mode, nor how with artfull pen, To charm your airy soules; beside, he sees The Muses have forsook their groves, the trees That fear'd no thunder, and were safely worn By Phaebus own priests, are now rudely torn By every scurrile wit that can but say He made a Prologue to a new—no play. But let 'em pass; you Gentlemen that sit Our judges, great Commissioners of wit, Be pleas'd I may one humble motion make, 'Tis that you would resolve for th' authors sake, I'th' progress of his play not to be such Who'l understand too little, or too much But choose your way to Iudge; to th' Ladies one Address from the Author, and the Prologue's done, In all his Poems, you have been his care, Nor shall you need to wrinckle now that fair Smooth Alablaster of your brow, no fright Shall strike chast eares, or dye the harmlese white Of any cheek with blushes, by this pen No Innocence shall bleed in any scene, If then your thoughts secur'd you smile, the wse Will lear to like by looking on your eyes.
Persons. Duk of Mantua. Honorio, his Son. Flaviano, The Dukes Creature. Leonato, The Duke of Ferrara's Son. Petronio, a noble man of Ferrara. Bertoldi, an insolent Coward, son to Florelia. Claudio, a creatvre of Flaviano. Volternio Hortensio Colonells. Antonio, a Gent. Frier. Pandolfo, a servant of the Tavern. Soldiers. Servants. Abbess. Fioretta, Daughter to the Duke of Mantua. Donebella, Sister to Leonato. Juliana, A Mistris of Flaviavo. Florelia, A noble Lady, Mother to Bertoldi. Ladies.
THE IMPOSTURE Enter Duke Honorio, Flaviano. (at severall Doors.) Duke. NO Army yet discover'd? Flav. None. Duke We are lost. Honor. Despair not sir. Duke Away, thy confidence is folly, Is not danger round about us, From every part destruction staring us I'th' face? this City, like a fatall Center, Wherein the bloody lines of War, and Famine, Prepare to meet? Flav. And every minute we expect a Battery. Honor. The walls are not so easily made dust, As the besiegers would perswade our faith; Disarm not your own hearts, my confidence Tells me we sha'not suffer, the Duke of Ferrara may send yet to raise the siege. Duke Fond Boy, it was thy counsell to depend Upon his aids, and promise Fioretta, Thy Sister, with so great a dowry to The Dukes vainglorious Son; fame has beli'd His valour, and we now are cheated of Our lives and Dukedome.
Honor. Sir, with my duty safe, let me intreat you Not stain the character of a Prince so much; The interest we have in that great Title Should make us wise in our belief; for when Princes break faith, Religion must dissolve, And nature grone with burthen of the living Beside his Son Leonato, how ever Traduc'd or sullied by some Traitors envy, Deserves a noble fame, and loves the hope Of our alliance; I ne'r saw his person But, twere a sin, honor could not forgive In us to question him. Duke We fool our selves; Lets think of timely Articles and yield. Flav. Whilst there is hope of mercy. Hon Oh! this want Of man will make all our well meaning starres Forfiet their kind aspects, & turn their influence to death Flav. My Lord, I cannot be concern'd in name And honour with your person, whose least blood Is worth ten thousand arteries of mine, Therefore while such necessities invade us I cannot but prefer your lives, and in My duty counsell, you would think of what Is offer'd here, rather than hazard all By a vain expectation of an Army From Leonato, who with all his forces Is not yet sure to prosper in our cause. Duke. Consider that Honorio. Flav. Nay, should Heaven So smile upon us, that his sword o'r come, This to weak apprehension may promise Our glory, but examine well the close, There may be greater danger in his victory, Than all our want of him can threaten. Hono. You perplex my understanding.
Flav. He expects your Sister the reward of his great service. Hono. Is it not Justice? Flau. Yes, forbid it goodness, He should not thrive in his fair hope, and promises; But if her Highness find not in her heart Consent, to meet the Prince with love and marriage, Who shall defend us from his power? that must Keep us in awe, and this earth, panting yet With frights and sufferings of the Warre. Hono. It is my wonder Lord Flaviano, your wisdome Should weave these wild impossibilities; My Sister not consent? nature, her birth, Obedience, honor, common gratitude, Beside ambition of what can be hop'd for To make her happy, will give wings to her desires. Duke I cannot tell. Hono. I cannot think, Your reason sir can be so much corrupted, To look upon my Sister with that fear, She should not fly to meet our great preserver; Do you believe, she now 'mong holy Virgins, Lead thither by her own devotion, During this Warr to pray, and weep for us (Teares, whose clear Innocence might tempt an Angel To gather up the drops, and string for Saints A Christall Rosarie) can wish us safe By his victorious arm, without a will To be her self his own reward? her virtue Must needs instruct her that, and we apply No motive to her heart— A shout within. Du. What news? Enter Claudio. Claud. From the Watch-tower we descry an Army Marching this way; the Sun which hath thus long Muffled his face in clouds, as it delighted In their approach, doth gild their way, and shine Upon their burgonets to dazle the faint eyes Of our beseigers. Hono. 'Tis Leonato.
Claud. Our Enemies, whose Troops circle the Town, Are making hast to meet 'em, and the Foot Quitting their trenches, now are gathering Into a body, as it seemes resolv'd To give 'em battle. Duke. We have life again. Hnorio, collect what strength we have, And make a sally at your best advantage. 'Tis good to engage 'em both waies. Hon. How my thoughts triumph allready! Ex. Duke. Now my Son is gone, Who is not of our Counsell; wee must think How to behave us, if the Prince succeed, Our daughter which wee promis'd him in marriage, Being already sent away, the price Of his great Victory. Flav. Trouble not your self, Great Sir, your wisdom that inclin'd your faith To my true Character of the Prince, And took my counsell for her absence, shall Applaud my future policy; hee's not come To conquest yet, however Princes are not Oblig'd to keep, what their necessities Contract, but prudently secure their states And dear posterity; trust to my care, Fioretta is no match for Ferraras Son, A Prince deep read in lusts, faithless, and cruell, So will a Turtle with a Vulture shew, Or Lamb yoak'd with a Tiger: shee's a pledge Destin'd by better fate to Crown your age And heart with blessings Sir. Du. Hark, The dums talk lowder, from the battlements, I may behold their fight, and see which Army, Conquest, now hovering in the air, will mark Her glorious perch, upon whose Plumed heads
She may advance, and clap her brazen wings. Ex. Soft Alarum Flav. Sir I'l attend: Claudio. Claud. My Lord. Flav. Thou left'st the Princes Fioretta safe at Pla∣centia? Claud. Yes Sir. Flav. How did she like her progress? thou didst urge It was my care of her, to take her from The fright and noise of War. Claud. I did my Lord. Flav. And did she taste it well? Claud. To my apprehension exceeding well, And gave me strickt commands To say she will remember, and reward Your love and care of her. Flav. Did she name love? Claud. The very word she us'd, and I return'd, How much your study and ambition was To merit her fair thoughts. Flav. And didst thou scatter, as I instructed Here and there dark language, to Dissafect her with the Prince, to whom The Duke hath rashly made a promise? Claud. All; I had fail'd my duty else my Lord. Flav. Call me thy friend, thou hast deserv'd me, now Attend the Duke—so, now my next art must be, Exit. Claud. How to come off with with Leonato, if his Army prevail, the Duke must be instructed; Honorio thinks his Sister still i'th' Nunnery; That thought must be preserv'd; a thousand wheels Move in my spacious brain, whose motions are Directed by my ambition to possess And call Fioretta mine, while shallow Princes I make my State decoyes, then laugh at 'em.
Alarum, Enter Honorio lead by Claudio over the Stage wounded. The Prince Honorio wounded; fate I bless thee. How is it with your highness? Hon I am shot sir. Flav. Would it were dangerous—be carefull of him; A curse upon that hand that mist his heart. Ex. Hon. So, so, fortune thou shalt have eyes agen If thou wouldst smile on mischief, I will build thee An Altar, and upon it sacrifise Folly and all her children, from whose blood A curled smoak shall rise, thick as the mists That breath from Incense to perfume and hide The sacrifising Priest; sight on, Ye are brave Fellows, he that conquers may Get Honor, and deep wounds, but I the day. Exit. Alarum and Retreat. Then Enter Leonato, Volternio, Hortensio, and Souldiers in Triumph, at one door; at the other, Enter Men with boughes of Laurell singing before the Duke, Flaviano, Claudio. You Virgins, that did late despair To keep your Wealth from cruell men, Ty up in silk your careless hair, Soft peace is come agen. Now lovers eyes may gently shoot A flame that wo'not kill: The Drum was angry, but the Lute Shall wisper what you will. Sing Iö, Iö, for his sake, Who hath restor'd your drooping heads, With choice of sweetest flowers make A garden where he treads;
Whilst, we whole groves of Laurell bring, A petty triumph to his brow, Who is the Master of our Spring, And all the bloom we ow. Duk. Our hearts were open sir before the gates To Entertain you, I see Laurells grow About your temples, where, as in a grove Fair Victory Enamour'd on your brow Delights to sit, and cool her reeking head And crimson tresses in your shade. Flav. The City In glory of this day shall build a Statue To you their great preserver, whose tough brass Too hard for the devouring teeth of age Shall eat up Time, to keep your fame Eternall; Our active youth in honor of your name Shall bring agen the old Olympick games, And willing to forget what's past in time, And story, count their years from this dayes triumph, As if the World began but now; the wives As if there were no legends past of love, Shall only talk of you, and your great Valour; And careless how mans race should be continu'd Grow old in wonder of your deeds; our Virgins Leaving the naturall tremblings that attend On timorous maides, struck pale at sight of blood, Shall take delight to tell what wounds you gave, Making the horror sweet to hear them sing it; Their hands at the same time composing Garlands Of Roses, Mirtle, and the conquering Bay, To adorn our Temples, and the Priests, and while The Spring contributes to their art, make in Each garden a remonstrance of this battle, Where flowers shall seem to Fight, and every plant
Cut into Forms of green Artillery, And instruments of War, shall keep alive The memory of this day, and your great Victory Yet all that can be studied short of you, Our best, a rude Imperfect Monument Of your deserved honors. Leo. Y'are too bountifull In language sir, the service wee have done May merit your acknowedgment, which though The Justice of your cause directed first To this success, was not without a hope Of a reward you promis'd, and I value it More than you can esteem all your prservings; So much hath fame prefer'd your Daughters Virtue To every excellence. Duke. This adds to what Wee held before excess of honor to us. I had but a part i'th' Universall benefit Your Valour gave, but this affection Falls like a happy Influence on my self And blood, whose aged srams you fill with blessings. My Daughter shall be yours, in which I sum My lives chief satisfaction. My Lord Go to the house of Benedictine Nuns, Among whose sweet society our Daughter, During this War and tumult, went to offer Her prayers for our deliverane. I am in a storm, and now must stand (aside) My desperate fate. Horten. I hope shee's not turn'd Nun? Leo. I should not like it. Vol. May not we visit the holy house? 'tis pitty so much Sweet flesh, should be engros'd and barrell'd up With penitentiall pickle 'fore their time, That would keep fresh and fair, and make just work For their Confessions. I do not like the women Should be cabled up.
Hor. I think so. Vol. I would this Virgin would be peevish now. Hor. Why so? Volt. That we might ha' some sport among the Leve∣rets. For I would so inflame the Generall He were affronted, that wee should have all Commission to work into the Warren. Le. We do want a person here, whose name is great I'th' Register of honor, it would much Enlarge our present happiness to Embrace him, Your Son the prince Honorio. Duke. 'Twas his chance Upon a sally, when your colours gave Us Invitation to the Field, and spirited Our souldiers, to receive a shot, whose cure May excuse the want of his attendance sir, Nor will I doubt his wounds are doubled by The thought he cannot wait upon your person. Le. He should have honor'd us, and made me proud To know, whom so much fair desert hath made Dear in the voice and love of men: but I Shall not despair to see him. We want A limb of our own Army, where is Signior Bertoldi, that came with us to see Fashions? I hope we have not lost him. Horten. Sir, I know not, I fear hee's slain. Volt. He wo'not dy so nobly; He'l nere give up the ghost without a Fetherbed. He vvas sick last night at the report vve vvere But three leagues off the Enemy, and call'd For a hot caudle. I that knevv his cold Disease perswaded him to drink, which he Did fiercely as I could vvish, in hope to see him Valiant and vvalk the round, but quite against Nature his ague shook him more, and all the Drink Which vvas the full proportion of a gallon Came out at's forehead in faint svveat; he had Not mov'd ten paces, but he fell dovvn backward
And swore he was shot with a cold bullet; how They rould him like a Barrel back to his Tent, For levers could not raise him to make use Of's feet agen, I know not, nor since saw him. Hort. I hope hee's still asleep. Volt. But when he wakes, And finds the Army marcht away, He dares not, Go home agen alone, & how hee'l venture O'r the dead bodies hither—he has don't. Enter Bertoldi. Ber. Where is the General? Leo. Here comes our mirth. Hort. A walking Armorie; noble Signior Bertoldi. Bertol. If you want Pikes or Muskets there, I could Ha brought field peeces, but I durst not venture My chine. Leon. Where had you these? Bert. Ask, ask the men I kill'd, if they deny A syllable I'l forswear the Warrs. Volt. He has disarm'd and rob'd the dead. Hort. A coward has impudence to rob a Church. Volt. He durst not take 'em from a man that had But so much life in him to gasp or grone, That noise would fright him. Hort. I rejoyce Signior, y'are safe come home. Bert. I would I were at home, and you get me Among your Guns agen—how ist Volterino? Enter Flaviano. Volt. This news wil much exalt your Mothers heart. Leon. He is return'd but with a melancholy face. Where is the Princess? Du. Where is our Daughter? Flav. Where her devotion I fear will make This Dukedome most unhappy, if your virtue Exceed not what is read in other Princes, It was my fear that place, and conversation, Would mortisie too much that active heat
Shuld wait on the desires of high-born Ladies. Leon. The mystery? Volt. Do not you find it? they have nunnified her. Flav. Sir, your pardon; She whom first fear and fright of War perswaded To joyn her prayer and person with the Virgins In the religious Cloyster, by what art Or holy magick won, is now resolv'd— Leon. What, hath she vow'd? Flau. Untill a year be finished By revolution of the dayes great guide, Not to forsake the Nunnery, but spend Her hours in thankfull prayers to Heaveu for this Great victory. Volt. So, so, It will come to the battery I talk'd on. Duke It cannot be. Leo. It must not be Volt. I am of that opinion my Lord, It must not be, this is a stratagem. Flau. She humbly praies you would interpret this No breach of filiall piety, nor your Highness a will to wrong so great a merit As hath engag'd all fortunes here, and lives To bleed for you, but weigh in your best charity That duties are first paid to Heaven, the spring And preservation of what makes us happy, And she is confident when you consider— Leon. How much my honor suffers, to imploy The strength I have to punish this affront. Bert. A pox upon't, we shall ha' more fighting now Duke I hope you have no thought of any pctice Here to deserve that language? Volt. Y'are abus'd. Leon. If you be her Father sir, I must expect What did ingage me hither, and without Delayes, or leave this City in a flame.
Bert. More Fire-works? Leon. In whose Ashes I will bury this foul ingra∣titude. Duke We are ruin'd all. Bert. There is not so much danger, to be put In Rank and File with Pye-meat in an Oven, If a man were certaine to come out agen Dow-bak'd. Leon. Yet stay. I have considered, I may have leave to see this Frozen Lady. Duke We are more undone. Flav. Your person may prevail sir, And by some better charm, gain her consent, Or if you please not to ingage your self Upon the trouble of a hasty visit, The presence of her Father, and what else We can prepare to keep your smile upon us, Shall be inforc'd, to clear how much we aim At the perfection of your wishes. Bert. So, so. Leon. Prospen. Flav. I have now courage sir to serve your will, And am o'th' sudden confident. Leon. It pleases. Exit Leon. Duke It is impossible. Flav. Promise any thing In such a strait, and not despair to effect it. Be private men content with their poor Fathom, Since Heaveu we limit not, why should not Kings Next Gods, perform the second mighty things? Your ear— Exit. ACT II. Enter Flaviano and Abbesse (with a Letter.) Flav. YOu will obey the Dukes command? Abbes. Good Princes, Punish, not teach us sacrilege; I'l obey
A thousand sufferings ere such a rape— Flav. A rape? Abbesse. Of honor, Honesty, Religion; I am plac'd here to preserve, and not betray The Innocent; should I instead of prayer, Chast life, the holyness of vow, of discipline, With those austerities that keep wild blood In calm obedience, now begin to teach Soul-murdering liberty, the breach of all Was promis'd Heaven. Flav. Wy' Madam you mistake, We ask no Virgin to turn Whore, we onely Desire you would perswade some pretty Nun, In this extremity, to take upon her The Princess Fioretta, whom Leonato Ne'r saw, and be his Wife in honest marriage. Ab. Can you be thus Unjust to him, so late preserv'd your lives? Flav. Trouble you not your reverend head with that, He shall be satisfied, and you remain Still mother of the Maid, no more sour faces, But turn your wit to'th' bufiness. Ab. Never sir. Flav. Take heed and have a care of this inclosure, The Dukes breath makes all flat, tis yet no common; are old, and should be wise. Ab. I would be honest. Flav. Shew it in your obedience; will you do't? Ab. Never. Flav. D'ee hear? I sent unto this holy place, A Damzel call'd Iuliana, she's in your Catalogue, And yet but in probation, cause I see, You make so nice a conscience, so severe, I'th' rules of honesty, and would not have, Your Virgin province touch'd with least defilemen, Pray let me speak with her, it will concern you. Ab. Would you pervert her? Flav. I know not what you call perverting,
But she has not too much Nuns flesh, And tis my charity to your chast Order To give you timely notice. Ab. What do I hear? Flav. No more than you may justifie in time, If things prove right, she was a merry soul And you ha' not spoild her, if you mean to be No Midwife, let me talk with her a while. Ab. Protect us Virgin thoughts Exit. Flav. So, so, this was reserv'd to wind up all, It may be fortunate; I know her spirit high, and apt to catch at Ambitious hopes and freedom, some good counsell May form her to my purpose, I have plung'd Too farre, to hope for safety by return, I'l trust my destiny to the stream, and reach The point I see, or leave my self a rock In the relentless waves; shee's here, I'm arm'd. Enter Iuliana and Abbesse. Iul. By your own goodness, reverend Mother give No belief to him; though he be a great man, He hath not been held guilty of much virtue, Yet tis my wonder he should stain my Innocence; Pray in your presence, give me leave to acquit My Virgin honor; for the wealth of all The World, I would not have this shame be whisper'd To the stain of our profession. Enter Nunne. N. Madam, the Duke. Ab. The Duke? Flav. Peace to the fair Iuliana. Exit Abbesse. Iul. Y'are not noble, A most dishonord Lord, your titles cannot Bribe my just passion, who will trust a man? Oh sir, you are as black, nay have a soul As leprous with ingratitude, as the Angels
Are white with Innocence; was't not enough To rob me of my honor, the chief wealth Of Virgins, and confine me to my tears, Which ne'r can wash away my guilt (should I Live here to melt my soul into a stream With penitence) but when I had resign'd The World with hope to pray, and find out mercy, You must thus haunt me with new shame and brand My forehead here, as if you meant to kill My better essence by despair, as you Have stain'd my body. Flav. Deer Iuliana I Confess I injur'd thee thou knew'st no sin But from my charm, 'twas only I betraid thee To loss of thy dear honor, then of liberty, For 'twas my practice, not thy pure devotion Made thee a Recluse first; but let not passion Lose what I would not only save from shipwrack, But make as happy as thy thoughts can wish thee; By thy wrong'd self tis true, nor could I choose Another way than by discovery Of both our shames to right thee, I am come To make thee satisfaction in so high And unexampled vvay of honor, thou Shalt say I did deserve to be more vvicked, When thou hast vveighed the recompence. Iulia. You amaze me Flav. Collect thy senses, and discreetly mind me; Thou canst not be concern'd so much alive In any other story, hear me gently And prize the vvealth of every syllable. Enter Duke and Abbesse. Ab. Had you been pleas'd to have left your daughter still My charge and svveet companion, I should Have left no duty unessaid, to have shevvn In vvhat degree I honor'd her, but I Must not dispute your royall pleasure, though
With some sad thoughts to separate, I resign'd her To your commands. Duke. It was your virtue Madam, she found no Consent to be profest, nor love the Prince, To whom I promis'd her a Wife, although Our fears keep warm his hope, in his belief Shee's here inclos'd still, but without thy help, We are all lost. Iulia. The Prince Leonato? Flav. Ther's a preferment, this is considerable. Iulia. If you my Lord be serious; a Princess! The change would do well. Flav. Be but confident to manage it. Iulia. Hath he not seen the Princess by picture? Fla. Never. Iulia. Strange! Fla. 'T was a ceremony, in the necessities of our state, The Duke ne'r thought on, & I meant not to insert it, As knowing Fioretta had no zeal, To what her Father darkly had contracted; His Highness doth expect thee. Iulia. It would be More for my honor, if he took the pains, To visit our Religious house, and then— Flav. It shall be so. Iulia. But twill be necessary, You purge me to the Abbesse, no suspition, Must live within her thought. Flav. I apprehend; Oh! you have shot a trembling through my soul, I dare not kiss your hand, the Earth you tread on, Would too much grace the lips have so prophan'd you. Madam your pardon; sir be you the witness, I have wrong'd this noble Virgins honor, It was my anger, and revenge upon Your goodness that so late oppos'd me made
Me careless, where I flung disgrace and scandall, Thus I implore her mercy and forgiveness, Take her white thoughts to your agen, she is As innocent from sinfull act by me As the chast womb that gave me life. Duke Tis piety, Thus to restore the Innocent, I conceive not His aym in this. Abbesse Tis satisfaction. Iuli. VVhen I stray from your sweet precepts— Abbes. In, I am confirm'd. Flav. All to our expectation, shee's prepar'd, A Mistris for the Prince. Duke But now I think on't She must not marry him, it will breed ill blood. Flav. By all means marry him, there's no other way To send him hence, and quit us of the Army, I'l instantly acquaint him how I prosper. Exit. Duke It must not be, my honor will bleed for it. I have been too much guided by Flaviano. Madam— Abesse Your face is troubled. Duke No, my heart VVhich you may curc with honor, as I have Contriv'd it now— Abbesse I shall study with my loss of life To gain your bosom peace. Duke I like this Virgin, I know my Lord here hath been practising, But finds her not inclin'd to that extent VVe had propos'd, she is virtuous, you shall Counsell her onely but to take the name Of my Fioretta, but not change her life To marry with the Prince; I do believe, Her chast, Oh let your goodness keep her still so, And fortifie her vertuous thoughts, I doubt not
But she with holy eloquence, and pretence Of vow, and Virgin sanctity, May so prevaile upon him both to save her self, Our honors, and the Kingdom from a sacrifice. May not this be? Ab. Such extremes I know not. Du. If she persist a chast, and noble Virgin, You must dispence, we have but little time For pause, unless this present care be found, We all must bleed to death upon the wound. Exeunt. Enter Bertoldi. Bert. Hum! shall I never fight? drink wo'not do't, No nor a Whore the greater provocation; I speak it to my shame, I never durst Fight for my wench, yet Gentlemen commend My confidence at paying of a reckoning, There I can kill 'em all with curtesie, Discharge my Peeces like a Mr. Gunner at a great sup∣per, Yet I am not valiant, this must be mended someway. Enter Volterino. Volterino? a word; Tis not unknown to you, that I am a coward. Volt. No, not a coward, but you, are not sir, If I were put to answer upon Oath, So valiant altogether as Don Hercules, That strangled a great Bull with his forefinger And's Thumb, and kil'd the King of Troys great Coach horse With a box o'th' car. Ber. Pox on't, do not abuse me, I shall take it Scurvily and you deny it. Volt. But you wo'not beat me. Ber. Ther's the thing, I know't As well as you can tell me, I am base, And in plain terms a coward. Volt. Why dost not beat thy self for being one?
Bert. Then I durst fight; no, I was begotten In a great Frost, between two shaking Agues, I never shall be valiant, who can help it? But when you come home agen, if you vvill but Svvear I am valiant— Volt. You shall pardon me. Bert. Come, my Mother shall make you amends; a ha, You love her, she's a Lady and a Widdow, That has the Goldfinches, hark in your ear, You shall have her. Volt. Shall I have her? Bert. A vvord to the wise. Volt. Would I were sure on't. If I have thy Mother, I vvill not only svvear thou art, But make thee valiant. Bert. Would it vvere possible, upon that condition You should ha' my Sister too. Vot. She's dead. Bt. she were alive I mean— Volt. arewell, wee'l treat agen, and if I live Thou shalt be Iulius Caesar. Exit. Enter Hortensio. Bert. When I dye, thou shalt be Caesas heir. Noble Hortensio. Hort. I am in hast, what's the matter? Bert. There lies your way, a hundred thousand Ducats Will find entertainment somewhere else. Hort. Canst thou help me to 'em? Bert. Yes, and a better business. Hort. How? where noble Bertoldi? Bert. Wy—but you are in hast. Hort. No, no, where is all this money? Bert. Safe enough in a place. Hort. But how shall I come by it? Bert. You know my Mother. Hort. The rich Lady Florclia, the Court Widdow, Shee's my Mistris.
Bert. You shall have her. Hort. Shall I? Enter Leonato, Flaviano, Volterino. Bert. Yes, and be Master of as much money As will make you mad. The Prince, hark in your ear. Fla. I knew I should prevail, and I am happy, There's no frost now within her, if your excellence Would grace the Monastery with a visit And satisfie your self, your presence will Perfect the business, and be a just excuse To some nice ceremonies that detain Her Person to comply with virgin modesty, The Duke will meet you there. Leon. I will attend him. Flav. You will consider Sir it is a place Not us'd to publique treaties, though dispenc'd with For this your solemn view, and conference, Your person may be trusted there, without A numerous train. Leon. You shall direct me Sir. Volterino, you shall only wait upon me. Sir when you please. Flav. I'm proud to be your conduct. Exit. Leo. Flav. Volt. Bert. You shall have her And her Estate, that's fair, she has enough To undo the Devill if he go to law with her, My Father's dead and has told him that already. Hort. I'l do't. Bert. Here's my hand, my mother's thine. Hort. Not my mother. Bert. She shall be any thing I'l have her, Do you but perswade her I am valiant, And I'l venture to beat her, and she dare Deny to marry any man I please
To call my Father in law. Hort. Let's walk and think on't. Bert. You may swear any thing, And you pawn your soul for me, You know you cannot be a loser. Ex. Nunns Discovered singing O fly my soul, what hangs upon thy drooping wings, and weighes them down, With love of gaudy mortall things? The Sun is now i'th' East, each shade as he doth rise, is shorter made, That Earth may lesson to our eyes: Oh be not careless then, and play untill the Star of peace Hide all his beames in dark recess; Poor Pilgrims needs must lose their way, When all the shadowes do entrease. Enter Duke, Leonato, Flaviano, and Volterino. Soft Musick, after the Song Enter Iuliana Abbesse, and Nunns. Le. She is exceeding fair, what pitty 'twere Such beauty and perfection should be Confin'd to a melancholy Cell: I approach You Madam with the reverence of a votary, You look so like a Saint, yet nature meant You should not with such early hast translate Your self to heaven, till earth had been made happy With living modells from your excellent figure. You that become a cloud, and this dull dress So well, whose sight doth pale, and freeze the blood, How will you shine to admiration Of every eye, when you put on those Ornaments That fit your name and birth? if like a statue
Cold and unglorified by art, you call Our sense to wonder, where shall we find eyes To stand the brightness, when y'are turn'd a shrine, Embellisht with the burning light of Diamonds, And other gifts that dwell like starres about you? Iuli. If you do fancie me an object so Prodigious, for the safety of your eyes And others, tender-sighted, give consent, I may not change this poverty ad place, (More pleasing to my self, than all the pride Can wait those Goddesses, at Court you bow to) Leon. And yet 'twere heresie in me to say You could receive addition or glory By the contributary blaze of Wealth, Or other dress, which art and curiosity Can form; you are not by them grac'd, but they By you made beautifull. Iewells near your eye, Take soul and Lustre, which but once remov'd Look dull as in their quarry. Fla. He is taken. Leon. I now applaud my fate, and must account My undertaking in this War to save Your Dukedom, but the shadow of a service, When I consider my reward. Oh! hast To make me Envi'd of the World, and once Possest of you, to undervalue all But Heaven, of which you are the fairest coppy. Iuli. My Lord, our study here is life, not language, And in that little time I've had of practice, My tongue hath learn'd simplicity, and truth; You are a Prince, and in your Cration But one degree from Angels, strive to rise That one round higher, and y' are perfect; I am By my good Fathers leave, and the sweet rules Of this Religious order, now i'th' way To meet another Bridegroom, before whom
While you stand a competitor, you fall To Atomes; sir my love is planted here, And I have made a vow, which your own charity Will bid me not to violate, (your triumph Being the spring of my imperfect duty,) That for a year, I'l spend my time among This happy Quire, to offer up my Prayers And humble gratitude to Heaven, a weak Oblation for our safeties. Flav. Ha? how's this? Leon. My Lord, did you not say you had prevail'd? What mockery is this? Flav. I am undone. What does the Gipsey mean, shee'l betray all. Most excellent Madam. Iu. Oh my Lord imploy Your counsell, to advance not Kill our Virtue, Remember where, and what I am. Flav. So, so. Volt. Sir will you suffer this? a new affront. Iulia. I am resolv'd To live and pay you better tribute here For your affection, and unequal'd service. Here no distraction will afflict my prayers, Which trust me I will offer chastly for you, At every hour of my devotion. 'Tis you, next Heaven, that gave this blessing to us, To meet, and in the holy Quire breath up Our sacred Hymes, while Angells Eccho to us, And Heaven delighted with our harmony, Opening her azure curtaines will present us A vision of all the joyes we pray and hope for. Flav. This my instructions? Iulia. O think my Lord To what a loss of Heaven your love invites me, Yet let me not be thought while I pretend The choice, and sweetness of a Recluse, I
Should in a thought accuse your worth, who are The man of all the World I most could fancie; If I be seen  blush, make it no sin, I know it is but honourable love Wings your desire, and that which should prefer you, Is merit of your Sword that cut our way, To freedom and soft peace, Religions Pillow, The Nurse of Science, and the generall blessing, You have a title yet more strong pleads for you, The contrac, nd the promise of a Prince A chain with many Links of Adamant. Duke I like not that. Iuli. To bind and make me yours, When I have nam'd these severall interests, And look upon my self so short of merit, I chide your unkind destiny, at such Expence of honor to go off unsatisfied, And quickly should despise my self the cause Of your distast, but that my vow confirms me, And mustring up Religious thoughts prevailes, Above my other will, made to obey you, Tis but a year my Lord, that I have bound My self this exile. Leon. Tis an age. Iuli. But whil Time hath one minute in his Glass of that, Nothing shall take me hence, unless you bring An impious strength upon this holy dwelling, And force me from my cell, but you are far From such a sacrilege, oh think not on it, I'l place you in my heart while you are virtuous, But such an Act might lose those noble thoughts Of you I wish preserv'd, but I offend, And am too large in this unwelcome argument, May wisdom guide your Princely thoughts, Whilst I return to pray for you.
Flav. She has orethrown all. Volt. Sir, if you love her she Hath taught you a cunning way to make her yours, This habit is compel'd, a little force, For form will disingage her, she does love you, And pleaded hansomely against her self. Leon. Nmore—I'l not despair yet of your Daughter, This is but Virgin nicety, at the next Meeting she may incline to smile upon me, Shee's too much treasure to be won at first Assault, Volterino. Exit Leon. Volt. Ho Duke. Flaviano. Flav. I did expect a storm. Duke We are not safe yet. Flav. I wonder why Iuliana kept not promise, The Dog-dayes thaw her chastity, I'm mad, Oh for some stratagem to save all yet, But you Sir (give me leave to say) are timorous, Princes should fix in their resolves, your conscience Should be as subject to your will, as I am. Duke I must confess Flaviano I had No fancy to Iulianas mariage. Flav. That was all my hope, how could I love the man Durst kill him now. Duke I shudder, what noise is that? Flav. These horrors will eternally affright us. Enter Leon. Bert. Volterino, Hrtensio, with swords drawn. Leo. The man that dares be guilty of least Insolence, To any Virgin, dyes. Exeunt Leon. Volt. Horten. Ber. My hopes are nipt, I thought to have tasted, Nuns flesh, but the General has made it fasting day. Ex. Flav. I hope he means to force away Iuliana— Ha? they attempt it, prosper'em deer fate. Blest beyond expectation. Duke Dost think, We shall be safe.
Enter Leonato, Iuliana in her habit, Volterino, Hortensio. Leon. Injoy the other benefit of my Sword In peace, this shall be mine. Exit Leon. Iul. Vol. Hort. Flav. The stars dote on us. Enter Honorio and Claudio. Hon. VVhat unexpected tumults fright the City? Du. You are too bold upon your wound Honorio To come abroad. Flav. The Prince has stoln your Sister From the Nunnery. Hono. He dares not Blemish his honor so, though he deserv'd her, And all our lives, should she be obstinate. Flav. Tis done. Honor. This Act shall lose him, death upon The Surgeon, that hath dallied with my wounds, But I'l revenge this rape. Duke Look to the Prince. Exit. Flav. I could adore my destiny, the wench sure, Meant to be ravish'd thus, I kiss thy policy; This chance hath made a dancing in my blood, While sin thrives, tis too early to be good. Exeunt. ACT III. Enter Antonio and Fioretta. Fior. IS this Ferraras Court? Anto Yes Madam. Fior. I will not yet discover, I shall find, A time Antonio to reward thy faith And service to me.
Enter Donabella, Florelia, Ladies. Anto. Here are Ladies Madam. Dona. I have a great desire to see this wonder, The Princess Fioretta, so much fam'd For beauty. Flor. Comes she with his Excellence? Do. Most certainly, so speaks the Prince Leonato's My Brothers Letters, and that with some difficulty, He gaind her from the Nunnery. Flor. Who is this? Don. She has an excellent shape, some stranger; Prethee Florelia ask. Anto. This Lady Madam, Seems to make some address this way; I know not, Upon what Jealousie my Lady left aside. Placentia so privatly, where she Was entertain'd by Flavianos Mother, Though old, a Lady of no decrepit brain. Fior. Antonio. Flor. A Lady, Madam, calls her self Lauriana, Born in Placentia, but the Warrs affrighting, Both Mantua and the confines, she came hither With confidence of safety, till the storm At home be over. Dona. It is not fit a person of your quality And presence should be ingag'd to common persons, And if I may entreat, you shall consent To be my guest at Court, which will be proud To entertain such beauty. Fior. It must be Too great an honor Madam. Don. Leonato my Brother hath secur'd your peace at home, Which cannot be less pleasing, if you tast The freedom I can here provide and promise you, We expect him every minute with the Princess Fioretta, in whose love he holds more triumph
Fior. And yet his fame was Earlier than this conquest, For many noble Virtues, but has your grace A confidence that he brings Fioretta with him? Dona. Since he left Mantua we received such letters. Enter Petronio. Pe. Madam, the Prince is come to court, and with him The gallant Lady wee expected. Fior. I am not well o'th' suddain. Dona. Virue defend! Pe. The good old Duke your Father, will Shew comfort in his sick-bed to behold A Son and Daughter. Fior. Are they married? Petro. No Madam, but I am confident So great a joy will not be long deferr'd, 'Twere sin such hope should wither by delay, They both wish to be happy in your presence, And you at first sight of this Princely sister Will much applaud your brothers fate. Dona. I hope so, How is it Madam yet? Fior. I do beseech you Let not your graces too much care of me Detain you from the joy your brother brings. Another Fioretta? Enter Leonato. Leo. Donabella? Dona. I shall not fear a surfet in my joyes To see you safe. Fior. A gallant Gentleman. Leon. What Ladie's that? Dona. A stranger, sir, with whom I have prevail'd To grace our court a while, which will be Honor'd In such a guest. Leo. And I should call it happiness If you would please to dwell for ever with us,
I have brought home such a companion, For both your beauties you will not repent. Fior. The Duke of Mantuas Daughter, I congratulate Y double victory, and if I may, Without imputed flattery speak my thoughts, You did deserve her, had she to her birth, All the additions that grace a Woman. Leon You have conferr'd a bounty on me Madam, And leave me hopeless to reward the debt Iow this fair opinion. Fior. Sir, the venture You made through blood, and danger, doth deserve it, And she were impious, did not think her self Much honor'd to be call'd your valors triumph. I shall betray my self. Censure me not, Immodest or suspectfull of her virtue, Whom you have made the darling of your heart. Enter Bertoldi. Bert. Sir the Duke calls for you. Dona. Signior Bertoldi. Bert. Your Graces creature. Leon. Will it please you Madam? Fior. I humbly pray your Highness to excuse me, I may have time and happiness to attend you, When with more health I may present my services, I dare not see this Lady. Leon. Wait you upon that Lady Signior. Bert. With all my heart; incomparable Lady— ior I have servants to attend me. Bert. But not one, More humble, or more active for your service, You cannot choose but know my Lady Mother; I have not seen her yet, but she shall stay, I'l kneel to her when I have done with you. Exit
Enter Florelia, Volterino. Flor. But is my Son so valiant, Signior? This War hath wrought a miracle upon him. Volt. He was a coward beyond Ela, Madam, I must acknowledg, to whom men in pitty Of his Birth, and care of your much-loved honor Often forgave his life, but see the turn, He that went forth (for all our conjurings And promise of no danger) as he had Been marching towards Aetna, nay before The instant fight would have given all the World To have been assur'd when he came home, but one Of every thing about him— Flo. What d'ee mean? Volt. One eye, one ear, one arm, and but one leg To have hopt home withall, strange, how i'th' heat O'th' Battle he grew double, and there fought As he had two soules; oh! had you seen When like a Magazine he march'd, with pikes With guns & Corslets, which he took from th' Enemy, With swords more than a Surgeons sign, stuck round, And seeming like a porcupine to shoot The Iron Quills— Flo. But is this possible? Volt. I never saw a Dragon do such thing Flor. This was not by instinct, but some example He saw in you, that wak'd his sleeping spirit. And he must owe all that is Valiant in him To your brave soul, which like a burning Comet Flew with prodigious terror to the Enemy. Volt. You do not Jeer your servant? Flor. And so he, by your great blaze Saw his next way to honor; Nor can I but acknowledge all my joyes Now in my Son do flow from you; a souldier Was ever high in my esteem, but you
Have plac'd the title nearest to me, pray Favour me often' with your visit. Volt. The Town's my own. Flor. No complement good Signior, your love If plac'd on me, shall find an object, though, Not equall to your favors, not ingratefull; I wonder he absents himself so long. Volt. My care shall be to find him out and bring him A welcom present to your eye. She's caught. Exit Flor. These Soldiers think if they but once lay siege, We must come in by force or cmposition. Although a Maiden Town may not hold out, A Widdow but well vittled with the bare Munition of her tongue, will tire an Army; I must suspect my Son, for all this legend, No mighty man at armes; hee's here. Enter Bertoldi, Hortensio. Hort. Your blessing. Flor. Take it, and with it all my prayers, thou maist Grow up in honor, and deserve to be Thy Fathers Son. Bert. Kiss her Hortensio, do, she is thine own. Hort. 'Twas my ambition Madam To wait upon my Convert, and to kiss Your white hand. Fler. Signior Volterino was here but now, and has Told me such stories, Son— Bert. Of me? He had better eat my Spaniard, then mention me With any scruple of dishonour. Flor. He extolls you for  Soldier, and tells me won∣ders. Hort. If you dare believe me Madam, your Son has Behav'd him like a Gentleman. Bert. I confess, I was—but that's no matter, thank this Cavalier; can receive and give a gash, and look on't When I ha' don without your cordial waters
Shall I cut you o'r the face Mother? Flor. Sir I am poor to recompence the honor You have done my Son, I see he is your convert, You that infus'd a soul in him cannot Enough be glorified. Hort. Tis within your power Madam to overpoise all my deserts. True, I did stir those dormant seeds of nobleness Your blood left in him, and made glow those sparks, Into a flame, were hid in hills of Ashes; Now he is yours, and if you Madam think I have done any service by an Act Or precept that could light your Son to honor, You make me fortunate, and encourage A Souldier to imploy his whole life here. Flo. How d'ee mean? Ho Without more complement to love you, and— Flo. VVhat? Ho. VVish my self with you Madam when you dream Flr. You would be with me when I dream. Hort. But I should wake you. Flor. But I should be very angry to have my sleep broke. Hort. But I would please you agen, And rock you into a traunce with so much harmony, You shall wish to dye in't. I am very plain. Flor. Me thinks you are very rough. Hort. A Souldiers garb, The old but the best fashion; a Sword, And flattery were not meant for one mans wearing; Madam I love you, but not doat upon you, For you are something old. Flor. I am indeed sir. Hort. Yet you are very handsome, and I love you; Y'are witty, fair, and honest, but a VViddow, And yet I love you; I do know you are rich, Exceeding mighty rich. Flo. And yet you love me▪
Hort. But Madam, I am a man. Flor. I do not mean to try you Signior, Pray Son do you. Hort. Now put your vote in. Bert. What should I do Madam? Flor. Try whether he be a man or no. Bert. Should I? Flor. D'ee hear? they say you are grown valiant Upon my blessing I command you strike This Gentleman, and do it presently. Bert. Strike him? Flor. Yes. Bert. A way, away, what here? Flor. Even here, this very minute. Bert. Not for your house, and all the monies in't, Not for my Fathers Wardrob, and I were An Adamite a top o'th' Alps, though you Admire the reliques, and have turn'd your Gallery Into a Chapel, where his severall suites Hang up like Images for you to pray to: Strike one taught me to fight? Exit Flor. Hort. Is she gone? what said she? Bert. The foolish woman— Hort. Why what's the matter? Bert. Shee shews her breeding, but do not you despair. Enter Florelia. Flor. If I mistake not sir, you would pretend You love me honourably. Hort. May I perish else. Flor. When you can make't appear in visible wounds Upon your head' or body, that my Son Dares fight—you and I'l be maryed. Bert. I told you Signior you should have my Mother. Hort. The Devill shall have you both upon easier conditions; Visible wounds upon my head or body? Flor. And here's my hand upon the sight thereof,
I'l be your wife; and so farewel till dooms-day. Hort. But hark you Lady Bert. My Mother's a Witch. I shallne'r be valiant In this World, what quarrels I may have i'th' next, I know not, There are some dead threatned to cudgell me. Hort. Is there no hope, that I may catch you in The Noose of Matrimony, unless your Son First break my head? Flor. I wo' not swear. Hort. It is not your best course, take heed of vows. Flor. Why my dear Signior? Hort. For your souls sake, and yet Dispose that as you please, I'l see who dare Cary your body from me, spight o' Lucifer I will ha' that, and come by't awfully; And so my service; think on't. Flor. A fine fellow. Exeunt. Mane Bert. Bert. Would I had his audacity; my Mistris, Yet knows not what I mean, but I will to her, And kiss her Glove immediatly. Exit. Enter Honorie. Hon. This Court is like a twilight, where I cannot Distinguish day, or perfect night, some faces Are ceerfull as the morn, others agen Are dark, and wrapt like evenings in a mist s is instinct for my approach, that brings A resolution to revenge the rape Upon my Sister; grow more strong my thoughts, And let no fear distract you. Prince I have Conider'd thee in all thy pride of merit, Allow'd my Fathers Contract, and did give thee My Sisters heart in thy own vote, but when, She onely made a pause for ceremony, Not disaffection, since thou could'st forget Thy honour of a Prince, to invade her Chastity,
And forfeit thy Religion, thus I come, To whip thy blood, or leave my own a sacrifice. Enter Petrmo: Sir, may a stranger ask without offence, why The Court like Ianus doth present a double Face, as it labour'd twixt the fierce extremes Of triumph and despair▪ Petro. Sir you mistake not The mixture of our passions, the Court Smiles in our happiness to entertain The Prince, and his fair Mistris, but doth wear, A grief and paleness, for the Duke, whose want Of health delayes their marriage. Honor. I apprehend; Sir I am bold, May not a Gentleman Engag'd to visit other Courts of Italy, Make his ambition fortunate to receive A favour from this Prince, and kiss his hand, Before he leave the Dukedome? Enter Leonato. Petro. He is here Sir. Leon. Lord Petroni, intreat the Princess Fioretta, and my Sister meet me i'th' grove— This Gentleman— Hono. kisses his hand. Hono. You have made me happy; Though I want honor to be known, your fame Speaks you a valiant Prince, and fortunate, And I must with the World congratulate Your victory at Manta, upon which, So rich a triumph waites. Leon. What triumph fir? Hon. The Princess Fioretta. Leon. I acknowledge, That Garland is my glory, such a treasure, Was worth more service, than my sword could merit: But I must be a debtor to my starres,
And can release all other happiness, Within their influence to come, so they Confirm me Lord still of her beauties Empire. Hono. This doth becom your Excellence; what error (Receive it not prophane) should Heaven and nature, Have made, to have kept your hearts too long asunder? And yet I may mistake, for though your Grace, Affect her with all height your soul can fancie, I know not how her love may answer this Desert in you. Leon. How sir? Hon. Your Highness pardon; I am no Prophet, nor do wish to see, Upon your spring, another winde than what The wings of pregnant Western gales do inrich The air withall, which gliding as you walk, May kiss the teeming flowers, and with soft breath Open the Buds to welcom their preserver; I wish you might grow up two even Cedars, Till your top-boughs kiss Heaven that made you flou∣rish, When stooping to behold the numerous branches That prosper in your growth, and what refreshing The World below receives by your cool shade, You wave your heads in the applause and wonder. This is the Song I brig to your chast Hymen, And thus would every good man pray, but that They fear. Leon. Fear, what? Hono. The blessings they invoke, With all their importunity of prayers, Will not descend. Leon. Icannot reach you sir Without a perspective, but this wanders from The doubt you made of Fiorettas love, To answer mine, that talk was dangerous, I must not hear't agen.
Hon. You must, unless You can be deaf, or cut the tongue of fame out. Leon. The man hath somwhere lost his senses; go back And sind thy strangled wits, this language has No chain of reason, I lose breath upon A thing distracted. Honor. Tis not come to that, I've no such hot vexation, but a soul Possest with noble anger, and with pitty. Prince, I must tell you there are dangerous symptoms Of a State Apoplex; those aiery stilts Of fame you walk on, will deceive your pride, When every honest breath, angry at what You did so late in the contempt of goodness, Will tell the wind how it mistook your praise, And in a sigh conclude her sad repentance. I come not sir to flatter. Leon. It appears so. Honor. But tell you what hath eat into your soul Of honor, and there poisond all the worth The VVorld once lov'd you for. Leon. You talk as if You had consulted with my fate, and read The leaves of my inevitable doom; VVhat action hath so much incens'd my late Kind starres to this revolt, and threatneth like To busie tongues in my disgrace? Honor. The noise is lowd already, would there were No truth in men, who say, you ravish'd Fioretta Sweet Princess from her Prayers, and left a Monument Of such a sacrilege committed by you, The very stones since groan in her behalf You ravish'd from the Nunnery, on this Must needs depend her hate, VVhose person and Religious vow you have Unlike a Prince prophan'd.
Leon. Y'are very bold, What confidence can that outside raise in you To be thus sawcie? Hono. Sawcie? Leon. Impudent. Is life a burden, that you dare my anger? What art? Ho. A gentleman, that have more right to honor Than he that is a Prince, and dares degenerate. Le. There's somthing in thy face would have me think Thou maist be worth my punishment, that I ould uncreate thee, if thy veines do house But Common blood, to make thee a fit Enemy In Birth, and soul to me, that I might kill thee Without a blush to honor, do not tempt My Just rage, that provok'd will scorn a sword, And make thee nothing with a look; be gone, Get hence with the same speed, thou wouldst avoid A falling Tower, or hadst new seen a Lioness Walking upon some cliff, and gazing round To find a prey, which she persues with eyes That shoot contracted flame, but when her teeth And pawes arrive, they quickly leave no part Or sign of what there was. Ho. Iust heaven, how high he talks, and counterfeits Your noise! I have a charm against your thunder; If thou hast courage to stay, thou quickly shalt repent Heavens Iustice in my arm sent to revenge Thy sacrilege, the more to encourage thee To fight, I am thy equall, and a Prince. They Draw Or may thy sin o'take my blood, and set A weight upon my soul when thou hast kil'd me Enter Donabella, Iuliana. Iuli. Alas my Lord? Don. Dear Brother?
Help, what traitor's this? Leon. Away sweet Fioretta. Honor. Fioretta. Iu. Ha? I am undone, alas what do you mean? My Brother, Prince Honorio. Leon. Thy brother? Iuli. Oh let me hold thee safe in my Embraces. Don. Leo. Honorio. Hono. The same, but not her brother. Leon. Pardon me, Whose soul disdain'd in my belief thou wert An insolent stranger, to acknowledge any thing Of satisfaction, but let thy sister Now speak for both. Hono. Give space to my amazement. Iu. If changing thus soft kisses, armes and heart You interpret violence, Fioretta, then Thy sister has been ravished; who hath thus Abus'd your faith, and wrong'd this Princes Virtue? Clear as the light of stars. I must confess I seem'd to wave his courtship, when he first Beheld me veild, which modesty instructed, And though my heart were won, I kept it secret, To make more proof of his, who not consenting To be depriv'd too long of what he lov'd, He brought a force to' th' Cloister: but took me His own away without a rape, and since All his adresses have been honorable. Hono. Instead of satisfaction, you inlarge My wonder, what Impostures here? the Prince Is cosend, yet she ownes me; pardon sir, I was made believe, you did most impiously Compell my sister, and by force injoy'd her, But now I find we are all abus'd, to what Misfortune might this error have engag'd us? Leon. This is my sister.
Honor. You cannot want a charity That are so fair. Iuli. Would Leonato's Sword Had prosper'd in his death; I must be confident; You have not yet made glad my heart Honorio, With our good Fathers health, I have some trembling Within my blood, and fear all is not well. Hono. Gypsye? Iulia. You look not cherefully. Hono. My Father injoyes a perfect health. Iuli. That word hath blest me. Sister and Leonato, you'l excuse, If I transgress with joy to see my Brother; Were but the Duke my Father here, I summ'd All my delights on earth— Honor. She confounds me. Iuli. Honorio and I will follow you. Hono. You are not my Sister? Exit Leon. Doa. Iuli. Sir, tis very true. Hono. Where is she? Iuli. You shall know what will make you happy sir, If you preserve this wisedom. Hono. I have seen you before. Iuli. But I am destin'd here, to do such service To your Family you shall know more— Hono. Give me breath for two minutes, Be confident of my silence, they expect you. Ex. Iul. So let me have some air, am I Honorio. Enter Fioretta, Bertoldi. What prodigies are these? we are all bewitch'd, Ha Sister, Fior. Brother Honorio. Honor. Tis she, what's he? Fio. Not worth the interruption of one kiss. Ber. My friend— Hono. My fool—Fioretta shew me where
We may injoy a shade, I'l tell thee wonders. Exeunt, manet Brt. Ber. Sir I shall meet with you agen; a pretty fellow. Exit. ACT. IIII. Enter Fioretta and Donabella. Fior. MAdam I fear this walk into the Park, May engage your grace too far without som more To attend you, Do. Our own thoughts may be our guard, I use it frequently; but to our dlscourse Of Prince Honorio, for we cannot find A nobler subject, I observe that he And you have been aquainted. Fior. Twas my happiness, To have my breeding in the Court of Mantua, Where I among the rest of his admirers, Seeing his youth improv'd with so much honor, Grew into admiration of his virtues, VVhich now he writes man do so fully crown him, His Fathers Dukedome holds no ornament To stand in competition. Dona. You speak him high, And with a passion too, that tasts of love. Fior. Madam, I honor him, As may become his servant. Dona. As his Mistris rather. Fior. My heart is clear from such ambition, Dona. But yet not proof against all Cupids shafs; I do not think but you have been in love. Fior. VVho hath not felt the wounds? but I ne'r look'd Above my birth and fortunes; Prince Honorio, May become your election, and great blood.
Dona. I find it here already. Fior. Nor could you Endear it where so much desert invites It to be belov'd. Dona. My looks do sure betray me, I do believe him all compos'd of honor, And have receiv'd your Character from the World So noble, all your praise can be no flattery. I know not by what powerfull charm within His person, Madam, I confess my eyes Take some delight to see him, but I fear— Fior. I find your Jealousie, and dare secure you. If in your amorous bosom, you feel, Madam, A Golden shaft, the cure is made by cherishing The happy wound; my destiny hath plac'd My thoughts of love, where they cannot concern Your trouble or suspition, nor indeed My hope, for I despair ever to meet, His clear affection whom I honor. Dona. Would This Court containd whom you would make so pre∣cious; I should with as much cherefullness assist Thy wishes, as desire thy aid to mine; I do believe you have much credit with His thoughts, and virtue to deserve it Madam, Fior. If you trust me, The favor I have with his Highness, shall not Create your prejudice, be confident, Your birth, your beauty, and those numerous graces That wait upon you, must command his heart. Dona. Madam you force a blush for my much want Of what y'are pleas'd to impute my ornaments, You are acquainted with your self, and shew What I should be, if I were rich like you, But my disparity of worth allow'd, Would you would call me Sister, and impose
Somthing on me, my act of confidence, And free discovery of my soul, may Deserve faith from you, that I shall never Injure his name you love. Fior. There is no hope In my desires, and therefore I beseech, Dear Madam, your excuse, yet thus much I Dare borrow of my grief to say, he lives Now in the Court, for whose sake I thus wither. Dona. Alas I fear agen, is he compos'd Of gentle blood, and can to thee he cruell? Fior. No, he is very kind, for he did promise To be my Husband, we ha' been contracted. Don. Disperse these mist, & clear my wonder Madam. Fior. When time and sorrow shall by death prepare My sad release of love, you may know all; Were the condition of my fae like others, It were no grief to name him. Dona. This doth more inlarge my Jealousie. Fior. But let us leave this subject, till time fit, To ope the maze of my unhappy fortune. Enter Bertoldi. Bert. I heard that she was come into the Park, They cannot far be; they are in view, And no man with'em, I'l now be valiant. Enter Florelia and Honorio. Flor. It was her Highness charge I should direct you, I know her walk. Bert. The blustring Prince agen; Who sent him hither? I think he conjures. Now dare I with as much confidence undertake To cure a Lyon rampant, o' the' Tooth-ach, As but go forward; and my valiant Mother— Honor. Your Son; I must excuse my self then to him. Ber. Now shall I be fit for a Carbonado. Honor. I hope you'l pardon sir, if I appear'd, Less smooth when I lat saw you.
Bert. My good Lord; your Grace is too much humble, I'm your blow-ball, your breath dissolves my being, But to shew how free my wishes are to serve you, If you have any mind, or meaning to my Mother— Honor. How do you mean? Bert. In what way your Grace pleases, She shall be yours, your Highness may do worse, Although I say't she has those things may give A Prince content. Honor. Your Son is very curteous. Flor. I should prepare you sir to look with mercy Upon his folly. But the Princess. Bert. Mother. Flor. VVill you be still a fool, VVhat said you sir to th' Prince? Bert. VVill you be wise and use him tenderly. Flor. Stain to thy Fathers blood— I was comming Madam. Exeunt, manet Bert. Bert. Vmh: he is my rivall, would my hilts VVere in his belly; they are out of sight; It is no rutting time, no trick? Enter Flaviano and Claudio disgis'd. Flav. Signior Bertoldi. Bert. I do not know you friends, but how soever, There is a purse of mony Flav. Sir, I want not. Bert. That Gentleman perhaps can drink; I like not Their goggle eyes, twas well I gave 'em mony: VVhat d'ee want else? you are Souldiers; I love a Souldier. Flor. I am a Gentleman of Mantua sir, That owe my life to your command, as one, That had an interest in the preservation, Your army brought when the Enemy besieg'd us. Bert. Your mercy Signior, and how do all Our limber friends 'it 'h Nunnery? I was one O'th' Cavaliers went with the Generall,
Into the Orchard of Hesperides To fetch the golden Dragon. Flav. Golden Apple, You mean the Princess Fioretta Signior; Is she married sir? Bert. No, no, the Duke will neither dye, nor live, To any purpose, but they will be shortly; Have you a mind to kiss her hand? Flav. I shall be proud— Bert. You shall be as proud as you please sir. Flav. You can resolve me, is Honorio Our Duke of Mantuas Son here? Bert. Yes, he is here, Heaven were a fitter place for him. Flav. Ha! look to him, For he is come with bloody thoughts to murder Your Prince Leonato, caution him to walk VVith a strong guard, and arm himself with all That can be proof against his Sword or Pistoll, He cannot be too safe against the treason And horrid purpose of Honorio. Bert. His mouth is Musket bore; but are you sure He did resolve to kill our Prince? Fla. Most certain. Bert. I am very glad to hear't. Fla. Glad sir? Bert. Yes, I cannot wish him better then a Traitor, Now I shall be reveng'd. Flav. Has he been guilty of any affront to you? Bert. He is my Rivall. Flav. Why do not you kill him then? Bert. Pox on him, I cannot indure him. Flav. He is then reserv'd to fall by me. Bert. Tis too good to be true; are you maryed Signior? Flav. VVhat then? Bert. If you be not, do this & you shall have My mother, a Lady that has Gold enough to pave
The Streets with double Ducats, heres my hand, Kill but this huffing Prince, my Mothers yours, Enter Honorio. And all her moveables—tis he alone too, There's convenient bottom sir hard by Exit Hon. The finest place to cut his throat, I'l not Be seen. Flav. I am resolv'd, charge home thy litle Murderers, And follow. Cland. I warrant you my Lord. Exit after Hono. Enter Volterino and Hortensi. Volt. But tell me hast thou any hopes of Madam Flo∣elia? Hort. I had a lusty promise. Volt. From her? Hort. Ye Coxcomb her sweet Son. Volt. Why so had I, he did contract her to me, A flat bargain and sale of all she had, So I would say he was valiant. Hort. That was the price he made to me, but I, Had hope last visit from her self. Volt. Be plain, I'l tell thee, she gave me strong expecta∣tion, And came on like a Cheverell. Hort. I hear, She has given out she wil have one of us, Enter Flora. Volt. She cannot love us boh. Hort. Would she had on, & then the toy were over, I could make shift to love her. Volt. And to lye with her estate, one helps the tother well. Florel. I finde a change within my self, I hope, I sha'not prove in love now after all My jeasting, and so many coy repulses, To men of birth and honor. Volt. Tis she. Florel. Why do I think upon him, then? I fear, This man of War has don't.
Horte. I have it, wee'l finde whether she affect Or Juggle with us presently. Florel. Those postures, Would shew some difference, here I can observe— Volt. Your Mistris? Horten. Mine if she be pleas'd, what interest Can all your merit challenge above me? Volt. You will repent this insolence, I must, Forget to wear a sword, and hear thee name Florelia, with that confident relation To her fair thoughts, and not correct your pride, I'l search your heart, and let out those proud hopes, That thus exalt you. Hort. You are cofend Signior, I do not fear your probe—she lets us fight, Fight If we had no more wit, we might foin in earst. Florel. Ha, ha, ha, are you at that ward Gentlemen? Volt. She laughes to see us fence o' this fashion, Lets come a little closer. Fight. Flor. Hold, hold Gentlemen, For your own honors, is this valour well Employ'd? what cause can urge effusion, Thus of that noble blood was given you To serve your Country? are you mad? Hort. We are but little better to be both in love. Flor. What Woman, Considered in her best is worth this difference; She is cruell cannot inde a better way To reconcile you, than by letting blood. Do you both love one? Volt. It does appear so Madam. Flor. I would I knew the Lady makes you both Unhappy, I would counsell her some way, To set your hearts at peace. Volt. Tis in your power. Hort. Without more circumstance, do but look upon
Your self, and end our civill Wars; we ha' both Opinion of your virtue, and both hope An interest in your love, if you will please To point which of us two is most concern'd In your affection, ou conclude our danger, And oblige one your everlasting Servant. Volt. This Madam is a charitable way To know your own, and save two lives, for we Shall fix upon your sentence, and obey The fate you give us. Flor. Do you fight for me? And will it save ncision and preserve Your noble veins to know whom I prefer In my best thoughts of love? this is but reasonable, And twill be hard to set a period To this contention, for I love you both So equally, observe me Cavaliers, Tis most impossible to distinguish which Is first in my neglect, for I love neither: Fight or be friends, you have your choice, and I My liberty—I had forgot to thank you, For your infusion of that fierce courage Into my Son, there is great hope if he Live till next year, he may be a Constable, He has an excellent art to keep the peace. Farewell. Volt. Madam, for all this I believe you love— Hort. I believe now shee's old and has no teeth, Else she would bite at one of us—Reverend Madam, That word has fetch'd her,—we ha' no other cordiall, At this dead pang for your disdain, but drink now; If you will have your Son made a fine Gentleman, Be sure you send him to the Tavern to us, He knows the rendezvous, though you despair, We may wind him up yet with spirit of Wine, How ever wee'l be merry, and perhaps, For all this, drink your health.
Volt. Buoy Madam. Hort. If you love your Baby send him. Exeunt. Flor. I am to blame, but I must help it some way. Exit. Enter Honorio, Flaviano, Claudio with Pistols. Hono. Two Engins of so small extent to do Such mighty execution? may I see These instruments you say you have invented, And so commend for service? Flav. Yes my Lord, Shew 'em to th' Prince, do they not fright already? Your Grace may take full view, and quickly be The proof what force they have. Honor. I am betrai'd, Who hath conspir'd my death Flav. To vex you, see him— Honor. Flaviano, what mak'st thou here? Flav. To put of these commodities; you are A princely Marchant, and affect this kind Of traffick, that you may not dy i'th' dark, I'l tell you a brief story, which you may Report i'th' other world, I did affect Ambitiously thy Sister Fioretta, Abus'd thy Father with a false opinion Of Leonato, for my end remov'd His Mistris from the Cloister, and perswaded A witty Nunne to take her name, and cheat The Prince, whom he suspects not yet. Honor. Dam'd rascall? Flav. For pure love to your Sister I did this. Hono. Why having been so impious, does thy malice Persue me, ignorant of all thy treasons? Flav. Would you know that?—because I am undone In my chief hope, the Princess whom I thought Thus plac'd secure, and apt for my own visit
Is gone, is vanish'd, and as soon I may Find the impression of a Ship at Sea, And by the hollow tract in waves oretake The winged Bark, distinguish where the Birds, At Chace 'ith' air, do print their active flight, As find in what part of the envious World Fioretta is bestow'd; this sad intelligence Surpriz'd me like a storm, nor was it safe To look upon the Duke, who must too late Repent his trust, and punish it. In this conflict Of desperate thoughts, I thus resolv'd to see Ferrara, and the Lady I preferr'd, But find things cannot prosper, if you live? Whose angry breath will throw down waht my policy Wrought high, and strike my head beneath the ruines. Are you now satisfi'd why you must not live? Honor. Hear me, shee's still in silence, and believ'd My Sister by the Prince. Flav. When you are dead, then You VVill be sure to tell no tales; now shoot— Claud. In my opinion, if all this be truth, The mischief you ha' done may be sufficient, And he may live. Flav. Villain vvilt thou betray me? Claud. You have betraid your self, and after this Confession, as I take it, I may be Your Ghostly Father, and prescribe you a Penance. Flav. Hold. Claud. I will but Physick you, your soul has caught A vehement cold, and I have tvvo hot pills Will vvarm you at heart. Hono. Shall my revenge be idle? Claud. Good Prince, you are too forvvard, & you be So hasty, I'm o' this side; did you think, I vvould be false? yet lest my aim be unlucky, Trust your ovvn hand to guide 'em.
Flav. Thou art honest, Thus I salute thy heart Honori—ha, no charge. Claud. Tis time sir to be honest, I could serve you In some Court sins, that are but flesh-colour, A wickedness of the first dye, whose brightness Will fade, and tincture change; your murder i Crimson in grain, I have no fancy too't. Sir you are safe. Hono. I see thou hast preserv'd me. Flav. I'm lost for ever. Hono. Tis but a minute Since you were found, you must be plea'd to walk Into the Court, the Vestall you preferr'd No doubt will bid you welcome. Fate I thank thee. Flav. False starres, I dare you now. Clau. I shall wait on you. Exeunt. Enter Iuliana. Iuli. I have collected all my brain, and cannot In any counsell of my thoughts find safety; Honorio's death wo'not secure my strength, Or prop my languishing greatness; tis but like A cordiall when the pangs of death hang on us, Nay to my present state no other than Some liberall portion of a quivering stream, Drunk to abate the scorching of my Feaver, It cooles to'th' tast, and creeps like Ice dissolv'd Into my blood, but meeting with the flame, It scalds my bosom, and augments the fire That turnes my heart to ashes; poor Iuliana, To what a loss hath thy first in betray'd thee▪ Ambition hath reveng'd thy breach of Honor, And Death must cure Ambition, for I have No prospect left, but what invites to ruine. I am resolv'd not to expect my fate, But meet it this way.
Enter Leonato. Leon. Dearest Fioretta? Ha, what offends my Princess? there is something That dwells like an Ecclipse upon thy eyes, They shine not as they did, a discontent, Is like a mildew fallen upon thy cheek, Tis pale and cold, as Winter were come back To over-run the Spring. Iul. My dearest Lord, My face is but the title to a volume Of so much misery within, as will Tire your amazed soul to read. Leo. Thou dost Freez up my blood already. O call back Part of this killing language, if thou mean'st To make me understand thee; the amazement Doth fall so like a deluge, I am drownd, Ere I can think my feares; how have we liv'd At distance? thou shouldst walk upon this Earthquake And my ground tremble not, but with this fright I am awake, open the volume now, I will read every circumstance. Iul. Observe then, what first becomes my sorrow. Leo. Dost thou kneel? That posture is for them have lost their Innocence; We must do this to Heaven. Iul. I must to you. Leon. What guilt can weigh thee down so low? Dost weep too! Iul. I should not love my eyes if they were silent, They know this story will too soon o'rcharge My feble voice, that every tear could fall
Into some character which you might read, That so I might dispnse with my sad tongue, And leave my sorrows legible; oh my Lord, I have wrong'd you above hope to find your mercy. Leo. Take heed, & think once more what thou hast don Ere thou describe such an offence, lest I Believe a fault, will drown us both with horror; Tou hast not broke thy vow▪ nor given away Thy honor, since thy faith did seal thee mine? Iul. Not in a thought. Leo. I wo'not see thee kneel, Rise, and be welcome to my armes, thou hast Done nothing can offend me Fioretta. Iul. Alas—I am not Fioretta. Leo. Ha! this doth confirm me, thou hast all this while But mock'd my fear, and yet this weeping is Not counterfeit, thou art too blame my love, Is it thy jealousie, that I am cold In my returnes to answer thy affection? Or have I less in thy esteem of merit Than thy hopes flatterd thee? or doth the time That dully moves, and intermit the joyes We promis'd when the Altar had confirm'd us Sit heavy on thy thought? we will awake From this our sullen sleep, and quit off those Sick Feathers that did droop our wings; fly to The holy man whose charm shall perfect us, And chain our amorous soules. Iul. Divide us rather; Joy is a fugitive of late, and while You think of Hymen, you remove your wishes. Fioretta will forbid the Priest. Leon. Canst thou forget thy love so much? Iuli. Alas my Lord,
You have been all this while abus'd, and when I have said enough to assure your Faith, that I Am not your Fioretta, but a Virgin, Compell'd to take her name, you will I hope Kill me your self, and save me a despair, That will conclude my breath else in few Minutes. Leon. Are not you Fioretta, but a Virgin Compell'd to take her name? who durst compell thee? Iul. The Duke of Mantua. Leon. I dissolve in wonder. Durst Mantua use me thus? thy name? Iuli. Iuliana; My blood, (excepting what does fill the veins Of Princes) flowing from the noblest spring Of honor. Leon. Where was Fioretta then? Iuli. Conveid I know not whither, ere you came To save their lives that did betray you thus. I was too careless of my fate, that I Kept such a glowing secret still within me, I had no fear to be consum'd, that had Another Fire within me, whose wide flame Had soon devour'd all my considerings. Alas my Lord, You did appear so full Of honor, virtue, and such Princely love, Twas easie to forget on whom you smil'd, I had no thought to wish my self unhappy, Or own another name to my undoing, Yet now more tender of your birth and fame Than my own life, I cast my self beneath Your feet a bleeding sacrifice. Leon. Am I awake and hear all this? Iul I see my Lord, In your inraged eye, what lightning is
Prepar'd, tis welcom; since I danot hope To live upon your smile, I would fain dye Betime, before the shame of my dishonour Inforce a mutinie upon my self▪ But think my Lord while I confess all this Against my self, how free I might have been, How happy, how near Heaven, above those glories, Had not you forc'd me from the blessed Garden Where I was planted, and grew fair, though not Oblig'd by any solemn vow, 'twas you, Your own hand ravish'd me from that sweet life, Where without thought of more than should concern Your welfare in my prayers, I might have sung, And had converse with Angells. Enter Petronio. Petro. Sir, I bring sad news. Leon. I prethee speak, I am prepar'd for all. Pet. The Duke is dead. Leon. My Father dead? Petro. I do not like the Princess at that posture. Leon. I have forgot your name Lady—you may rise. Enter Henorio, Flaviano, Claudio, and Guard. Hon. My Lord I bring you news welcom as health Or liberty, your soul will not be spacious Enough to entertain what will with joyes And strong amazement fill it; how I swell, With my own happiness to think I shall Redeem your noble heart from a dishonor Wil weigh down death. You think you vvalk on Roses And feel not to vvhat Dragons teeth, and stings, You vvere betraid. I bring a disinchantment, And come vvith happy proofs. Leon. To tell me this is not
Your Sister Fioretta: but a Nunne Subornd to cheat me—I know all the business, And am resolv'd in my revenge. Iuliana, Svveet suffering Maid, dry thy fair eyes, tis I Must make thee satisfaction, I thus By thy own name receive thee to my bosom, But you that practis'd cunning, shall e'r time Contract the age of one pale Moon, behold The Countrey I preserv'd a heap of ruines. Iul. Flaviano? sir— Honor. Do you knovv vvhom you embrace? Flaviano has confest Himself the Traitor, and the black contriver Of all this mischief; Leonato hear me, Or by thy Father nevvly falln to ashes, I shall repent I had an honorable Thought of thee. Flaviano; Madam, vvitchcraft, My rage vvill strangle my discourse, my soul Is leaping forth to be reveng'd upon That Devill; Prince keep off, his very breath Will stifle thee, and dam thy honor to All ages▪ Fioretta's now in Court. Flav. Ha! in the Court? Leon. This is some nevv device. Honor. I charge thee by thy blood throvv of these Harpies, And do my Sister justice, vvhom their treason Hath made a scorn, that minute she usurps Her name of Bride, I shall forget the Altar, And turn my self the Priest, with all your blood To make a purging sacrifice. Leon. If when we Receive our rites, thou dost but frovvn, or vvhispe To interrupt one ceremony, I Will make thee hold the tapers while the Priest Performes the holy office; tell thy Sister Here I bestovv, vvhat you have made me forfeit.
Present her to the Nunnery, and counsell Thy ignoble Father, when I next see Mantua To be a sleep in's Coffin, and his vault Deep, and thick rib'd with Marble, my noise else Will shake his dust; thy youth finds mercy yet, Take the next whirl-wind, and remove—our guard; Petronio we confine him to your house. Hono. Thou coward Prince, there's not one honest man In all the World, our sins ascend like vapours, And will, if Justice sleep, stupifie Heaven, For thine own glory wake, if thou dispense With this, proud man will cry down providence. Exeunt. ACT. V. Enter Volterino, Hortensio, Pandolpho (with a Towell.) A Table set out and stooles. Volt. SUch Wine as Ganimede doth skink to Iove When he invites the Gods to feast with him On Iunos wedding-day. Pandol. Iove never drank so brisk a Nectar as I'l draw. But does Signior Bertoldi come? Hort. What else? my Alderman o'th' Cellar. Volt. He is our Hilas; shall we not ha Musick? Hort. By all means, and the Mermaids. Pand. You shall have any thing; But if Signior Bertoldi come, I have A boon to beg, I have a pretty plot To make you laugh. Volt. What is't? Pand. As you are Gentlemen, do not deny me; I have been your up-and-down-stairs-man to draw The best blood o'th' Grape these ten years, Troy held out not longer, I have a device
Shall make you merry when he comes, if you Will give me leave to shift, and help a jeast. He is a Coward still, under the Rose? Hort. As any lives under the Sun, be confident. Volt. The same senseless peece of timber, You may cut him into a Bed-staff. Pand. I'l send you Wine, say I am valiant, Let me alone with the Catastrophe. Exit Hort. What will he do? Volt. I know not, he were best make us laugh, I shall expound the matter else. Enter Bertoldi, and Drawer (with Wine.) Bert. My Mother remembers her service Gentlemen, I left my Mistris to come to you; and how? Shall we drink like Fishes? Tolle roll lolly, &c. Volt. Sit, sit, a health to the Lady you kist last. Bert. Let it come, I'l pledge it, And it were the Gulf of Venice. Hort. And who's your Mistris? Bert. Faith I do not know her name, nor ever kist any thing but her Glove in my life. Volt: But you have told her your mind? Bert. Not I by this Wine—but thats all one, She is a Lady, well bred, and companion To the Princess, that's enough. Here Signior—would we had some Wenches here. Hort. Some bouncing bona robas, hang this dul City there's no musick in't, no silken Musick. Vol. Oh for a Wench could spit fire now, that could whizze like a Rocket, and fall into a 100 blasing stars, such a Fire-drake would be warm company in a close room, Signior. Hort. And it were in a Cellar under the Alpes, it would make Hercules melt in the back.
Bert. But for all that, I do not like a sinner of such a fiery constitution. Hort. You would not venture upon the golden Fleece then, which is but the morall of a Maidenhead. Bert. I never heard that afore. Hort. So say the learned, first for the difficulty to ob∣tain it, being watch'd by a Dragon, and then for the Rarity, there being but one in all the World. Bert. But one Maidenhead? Volt. And that some hold as doubtfull as the Phoenix or Unicorn, such things are in History, but the man's not alive that will take his Oath in what climat they are visible. Here's to the Swan that broke her heart with singing last. Hort. And to the Dolphin that was in love with a Fidlers Boy of Thebes, who carryed him cross the Seas on her bak a fishing, while he sung the iedge of Troy to the Tune of Green-sleeves, and caught a Whale with an angling rod. Bert. I'l pledge 'em both; they are very fine healths. Are these your Mistresses names Gentlemen? Enter Pandolfo like a Soldier. Volt. Mysticall, Mysticall. Bert. I Understand they are mysticall—who's this? Pand. Save you Gentlemen. Volt. Tis the Drawer. Pand. I do not like the odor of your Wine He throws it in Bert. face. Bert. Was it a health? let it go round Gent. I am troubled with sore eyes, & this Signior has wash'd 'em for me, I hope I shall see to thank him. Hort. Cry mercy Signior, you are like a noble Gent. I saw at Rome, you are the very same, to whom his Ho∣liness gave a pension, for killing 6 great Turks in Tra∣silvania, whose heads were boyl'd, and brought home in a Portmantua.
Pand. It was but 5 sir and a Sarasens. Hort. You are the man? Volt. Pray give me leave to honor you. Bert. I desire to be your poor admirer too, My eyes are clear to see your worth, my name Is Bertoldi at your service. Pand. To you Signior, a health to Iulius Caesar, Prester Iohn, And the grand Cham of Tartaria. Volt. You sha'not pledge him. Bert. No. Volt. Make your exceptions, I'l justifie 'em. Hort. This Cavalier drank t'ee sir. Bert. I do remember, but I cannot pledge him. Pand. How sir? Bert. No sir, I'l pledge my friend Prester Iack, But for Iulius Caesar and the grand Cham they are Pagans, I ha' nothing to say to 'em. Enter Servant. Serv. Here is a Gentleman, he seems of quality, Enquiring for Signior Volterino and Hortensio. Hort. Admit him, and he be a Gentleman. Enter Florelia like a Gentleman. Flor. You'l pardon if a stranger that has had A long ambition to kiss your hands, Rather intreat for his access, than lose The happiness of your knowledge. Volt. Sir, y'are most welcome. Hort. If you will keep us company You must be equally ingag'd. Bert. My humble service, Signior Hortensios Mistris. Flor. You honor me; would I were off agen. Bert. Excuse me Signior. Flo. Y'are too full of ceremony. Pand. Sir, is there any difference between you & Iulius Caesar, You would not pledge his health? Bert. No difference in the world.
Pand. How, no difference between you, and a Roman Emperor? Flor. Divide'em, what's the matter? Hort. O for some Trumpets. Bert. Somebody hold my Sword, give me the Wine, I'l drink it— Pand. So, we are friends. Flor. O shamefull! Bert. But I shall find a time— Pand. Find twenty thousand years, there's time e∣nough. Volt. I'l be your stickler. Bert. I ha' not pledg'd the Cham yet, nor I wo' not, come, I know you well enough. Pand. Know me, for what? Bert. For a brave fellow, and a man may believe thee thou hast done things as well as the best on 'em, but I know not where, nor I care not, tel me of Iulius Caesar: I am a Gentleman, and have seen fighting afore now, here's a Cavalier knows it, I scorn to be baffel'd by any Transilvanian Turk-killer in Christendom, I; thar't a Volt. Well said, and a Sandiack. Bert. And a Sandiack, I defie the grand Cham, and Muftie. all his Tartars, y'are a stinking obstreperons fellow to tell me of a Turd and a Fart, and I honor you with all my heart. Hort. He call'd you Muftie. Pand. What's that? Ho. And a Sandiack, that is son of whor in 2 languages. Pand. How? in two languages? then my honor is Concern'd, have I in 30 battells gainst the Turk Stood the dire shock, when the Granadoes flew Like Atomes in the Sun, Have I kil'd 20 Bashawes, and a Musselman, And took the Sultans Turbant Prisoner, And shall I be affronted by a thing Less than a Lancepresado? Bert. Will no body hold me? Flor. Gentlemen, this heat must needs be dangerous. Pand. Let me but speak with him
Volt. No danger o' my life, let 'em go together: And let us mind our business. Pand. Signior, I am your friend, and pitty you Should lose so much your honor, be advis'd, I'l show a way how to repair your fame, Pand. & Bert. talk privately. And without danger. Hort. To Volterinos Mistris. Flor. I receive it, I shall have my share, I now Repent my curiosity to see Their humors, and to hear what they would say Of me— Hort. Let 'em alone—to Volterinos Mistris. Volt. Come, to my Whore. Flor. Your Whore Signior? Volt. Does that offend you? Flor. Not me—I ha done you right. I am well enough rewarded & they beat me. Ber. I knovv not hovv to deserve this curtesie being a stranger But if you vvant a Wife noble sir, and will accept of my Mother, you shall have her before any man in Italy. Pand. I thank you sir, But be sure you hit me full o'th' head. Bert. Tis too much, a cut o'th' leg and please you. Pand. No, let it be o'th' head. Bert. You wo'not strike agen? Pand. Mine's but a foil. Hort. They measure and give back— Pand. Oh I am slain, a Surgeon. Bertoldi strikes Pand. Flor. I'l take my leave. Hort. By this hand, I'l drink his Mothers health first, There's no danger & he were dead; a health to the Lady Florelia, I drink it for his sake. Volt. Away, and get a Surgeon. Bert. Come, to my Lady Mother. A man is not born to be a coward all his lie. Flor. I can no more sir.
Hort. You should ha' told me sir at first, There is no remedy, tis to an honorable Lady. Flor. You must excuse me sir. Bert. Throw't in his eyes. Hort. At your request. Hor. throwes the Wine. Flor. Y'are most uncivill. Hort. Y'are a mushrump. strikes Flor. Flor. So sir, y'are a multitude, and in a Tavern, I did believe you sir a Gentleman, If you be, give me satisfaction nobly. Hort. With all my heart. Flor. Then thus— Enter Servant. Serv. Signior Bertoldi flye, his wound is dangerous, We fear he wil bleed to death before the Surgeon come. Volt. Out by the Postern. Bert. Pox, a conspiracie, I shall kill but one, I see that; Would I were a Mite in a Holland Cheese now. Exit. Hort. I wo'not fail you sir. Serv. He desires to speak with you before he dye. Hort. Is Bertoldi gone? Volt. Hortensio, I guess you may be ingag'd: Leave me to these things, There may be danger. Hort. I know the private way. Exunt. Enter Honori. Hon. Virtue and honor, I allow you names, You may give matter for dispute, and noise, But you have lost your Essence, and that truth We fondly have believ'd in human soules, Is ceas'd to be, we are grown fantastick bodies, Figures, and empty titles, and make hast To our first nothing, he that will be honest, Must quite throw off his cold decrepit nature, And have a new creation—my poor Sister, Enter Fioretta. She has heard the Dukes resolve.
Fior. Oh let me dye, upon thy bosom Brother, I have liv'd Too long; they say the Duke resolves to marry With Iuliana, so they call her now, Whose sorcery hath won upon his soul; I have walk'd too long in dark Clouds, and accuse Too late my silence, I am quite undon, There was some hope while he did love my name, But that and all is banish'd; is't not in The power of fancy to imagin this A dream that hath perplext us all this while? If it be reall, I will be reveng'd, Tis but forgetting what I am, and then I am not concern'd. Honor. Rather forget the Duke, And live to triumph in a love more happy. He is not worth a tear. Enter Donbella. Dona. How's this? my heart! Honor. Come, I wil kiss these sorrows from thy cheek, This Garden wants no watering, preserve This rain, it is a wealth should ransom Queens, As thou dost love me, chide thy saucie grief, That will undo the spring here, and inforce My heart to weep within me equall drops Of blood for these. Dona. Oh my abus'd confidence, Lauriana now I find hath but betraid me, Instruct me rage and jealousie. Fior. I am resolv'd. Exit Donab. Honor. Well said, take courage Fioretta, Appear with thy own name and sufferings, Thy sight will strike the proud Impostors from Their Pyramids of glory. Fior. It were more revenge to dye. Honor. Not so deer Fioretta, somthing glides
Like cheerfulness o'th' suddrn through my blood; Despair not to be happy: Let's consult, And form the aptest way for all our honor. Exeunt. Enter Flaviano. Flav. There's but one cloud in all our sky, were that Remov'd, we were above the rage of storms: That Claudio knows too much. I look upon His life like a prodigions blazing Comet; He palls my blood; if I but meet him hansomly, I'l make him fixt as the North-star. I hear No whisper of him yet; were but he dead, Iuliana and her friend might revell here: The Duke should have the name, but we would steer The Helm of State, and govern all. I have Gain'd much upon Leonato's easie faith, Who thinks me innocent, and that only duty Mislead my nature and my tongue to obey The Duke of Mantua and the Prince, upon Whose heads I have translated all my guilt, Enter Leonato, Claudio. And fram'd their jealousie at home my cause Of flight for refuge hither—Ha, my eyes Take in confusion! The Duke and Claudio! 'Tis doomsday in my soul. Leon. Can this be justified? Claud. I dare confirm this truth with my last blood. Flav. I dare not hear it. That I now could fling My self upon the winds— Exit. Claud. And should be happy Were Flaviano's life put into ballance Against my own, to make it clear by his Confession. To my shame I must acknowledge was the agent 'twixt 'em; he was pleas'd
To choose me his smock Officer, a place Poor Gentlemen at Court are forc'd to serve in, To please luxurious greatness, younger brothers, Who cannot live by fair and honest wayes, Must not sterve sir. Leon: Flaviano's Whore? Where can we hope to trust our faith, when such White browes deceive us? Enter Iuliana. Iul I do not like This Claudio's business here, the Duke is troubled; My whole frame trembles. Leon. Madam Iuliana? My excellent white Devil, you are welcome, Where is your Catamountain Flaviano? You are no Serpents spawn? Iuli. Oh hear me sir, by your own goodness. Leon. When didst thou kneel to Heaven? Iul. I see my leprosie unveild, that sin Which with my loss of honor first ingag'd My miserie, is with a Sun-beam writ Upon my guilty forehead, but I have not (Excepting the concealment of my shame, Which charity might privelege) offended bove what I confest, and you have pardond. Leon. She hath a tongue would almost tempt a Sai To unbeleeve Divinity, she learnd me accents from the first Apostate Angell That mutin'd in Heaven; away, dare not trust my frailty; where's Flaviano? Exit. Leon. and Claud. Iul. My soul doth apprehend strange shapes of horror. Enter Fioretta. a—tis the Princess Fioretta. Fior. Can you direct me Madam, how I may with the noble Lady Iuliana?
Iuli. I can instruct you Madam where to find A miserable woman of that name. Fior. Where? Iul. Here. Keels. Fior. Do not deceive me, I came to visit her whom the Dukes love And confluence of glories must create A Duchess, to whose greatness I must pay My adoration. Iul. Do not mock her, Madam, To whose undoing nothing wants but death; Let not my sin, which cannot hope your pardon, Make you forget your virtue; Princely natures, As they are next to Forms Angelicall, Shew the next acts of pitty, not derision, When we are fall'n from Innocence. Fior. Do you know me? Iul. For the most injur'd Princess, Fioretta. Fior. You must know more, I come to take revenge And kill thee. Iul. Thus I kneel to meet your wounds, And shall account the drops my proud veines weep Spent for my cure; oh Madam you are not cruell, You have too soft, too mercifull a look; When you see me, your countenance should wear Upon it all the terrors that pale men Can apprehend from the wild face of War, A civill War, that wo' not spare the womb That gron'd and gave it life, this would become you, Or fancie meager Famine when she hunts With hollow eyes, and teeth able to grind A rock of Adamant to dust, or what Complexion the devouring pest should have, Were it to take a shape, and when you put Their horrors in your visage, look on me.
Fior. What hath prepar'd this bold resolve? Iul. A hope To be your sacrifice; I was not before Without a thought to wish my self thus layd, And at your feet to beg you would destroy me. Fior. Can you so easily consent to dy, And know not whither afterwards this guilt Would fling thy wandring soul? Iul. Yes. I would pray And ask your self, and the wrong'd world forgiveness. Fior. Why didst thou use me thus? weeps. Iul. I could, if you Durst hear me, say something perhaps would take Your charity. Do you weep? gentle Madam? And not one crimson drop from me, to wait Upon those precious shewers? not to invite Your patience upon the lost Iuliana, But to call back your tears into their spring, And stay the weeping stream, I can inform you, The Duke looks on me now with eyes of anger; I have no interest in a thought from him, That is not arm'd with hate and scorn against me. Fior. This will undoe my pitty, and assure me Thou hast all this while dissembled with my Justice. Iul. I would I might as soon invest my soul With my first purity, as clear this truth; Or would the loss of him were all that sits Heavy upon my heart; I cannot hope For comfort in delayes of death, and dare Attend you to him, though it more undo me. Fior. Rise, and obey me then. Iul. I follow, Madam; My use of life is only meant to serve you. Exeunt. Enter Hortensio. Hort. This is the place within the wood he promis'd
To meet in, there is Saint Felices Chapell, That Father Cyprians cell, I hope my Gamster Will think it fit, I should not walk and wait Too long for him, these businesses of fighting Should be dispatch'd as Doctors do prescribe Physicall Pills, not to be chewd but swallow'd; Time spent in the considering deads the appetite, If I were not to fight now, I could pray; These terms of honor have but little grace with 'em, Like Oisters we do open one another Without much preface; he that fights a duell Like a blind man that falls but cares to keep His staffe, provides with art to save his honor, But trusts his soul to chance, tis an ill fashion. Enter Frier. Fri. This is the Gentleman by her description That comes to fight, another Champion? Enter Flaviano. Fla. Do none persue me, what a timerous Hare This guilty conscience is, I am not safe, I had no time to think of a disguise, And this can be no wilderness, the Duke Would give his Pallace for my head. Hor. Say so? Flav. Oh for some Pegasus to mount! a Frier? His habit will serve rarely, seeming holiness Is a most excellent shrovvd to cheat the world. Good Father sanctity, I must be bold, Or cut your throat, nay I can follovv. Fri. Help, help. Hort. Thou sacrilegious Villain. Flav. I am caught already.
Hort. My good Lord Flaviano. Father You may come back, and help to bind the Gentleman If I did understand him well, he said The Duke has some affairs to use his head-peece; I would not have him out o'th' way, when I Return—to that tree—you were best be gentle. Flav. I can but dye. Flav. is tied to a Tree. Hort. Oh yes, you may be damn'd All in good time, and it is very likely. Fri. You have preserv'd my life Son. Hort. It was my happiness to be so near, VVhen virtue was distrest. Frier. You have not done sir, As you are noble follow me, there is Another nemy to meet, but I Dare be your second and direct you. Hort. VVhat means the Fryer? I'l walk and see the worst on't. Exeunt all but Flav. Enter Betodi. Bert. Oh for a Tenement under ground to hide me▪ This wood will hardly do't, if I can lurk Here but till night; I am furnish'd well with ducats; Your melancholy mole is happy now, He fears no Officers, but walks invisible; Would I were chamber-fellow to a worm, The Rooks have princely lives that dwell upon The top of Trees, the Owls and Bats are Gentlemen, They fly and fear no warrants, every Hare Out-runs the Constable, only poor man By nature slow and full of flegm, must stay, And stand the cursed Law, I do not think Tis so much Penance to be hang'd indeed, As to be thus in fear on't.
Flav. Sir, look this way. Bert. Oh! if I had but the heart of a womans Tailor, I might run away now. Flav. I am rob'd and bound. Bert. Umh, are you bound? there's the less danger in you. Flav. For charity release me. Bert. You are surely bound—whats that? I hear another whispering o' that side; Now I sweat all over, I but think If I were naked, how Maids might gather dew From every part about me—Tis the wind Among the leaves. I do not like the Trees Should lay their heads together o' this fashion. You are my fast friend still. Flav. Signior Bertoldi. Bert. Does he name me? You and the Tree shall grow together now, I came not hither to be known; some Thief, Or sturdy rogue; I have heard of these devices In woods before; should I unbind him now, Hee'd cut my throat, or rob me for my charity. Flav. I am the man for your sake undertook To kill the Prince your rivall. Bert. Did you so? I'l trust you ne'r the sooner; Well remembred, I'me glad y'are not at leisure; You that will kill your Prince, will make but little Conscience to quarter me. Flav. But he is still alive. Bert. Is he so? Why then I am the less beholding to you. So, you shall cancell your own bonds your self. Enter Hortensio, Florelia and Frier. How now, more persecution? Hort. Here was a Duell quickly taken up,
And quaintly too, I did not think to marry The Gentleman that challeng'd me to fight, I thank your device Madam. Flor. Thank the blow you gave me sir, I love a man dares strike. Hort. I'l please you better with my after striking. Bert. My Mother and Hortensio? Enter Volterino and Officers. Volt. Signior Bertoldi well met, lay hands on him And bind him fast, he has a dangerous spirit Bert. Who I? you may as well say I have skil in the Black art, Volterino, Gentlemen, there's my Mother. Volt. Your Son is valiant Madam now I hope, As you can wish, he has kil'd his man; but I Studious to gain your favor have procur'd? His pardon from the Duke. Hort. Is the Drawer dead? Volt. Dead as the Wine he sometimes drew. Hort. Farewell he; will you salute my Lady Signior And give us joy? yon Frier married us. Bert. Let me go, I have my pardon. Volt. Not yet; now you shall be hang'd agen, Did not you swear I should have your Mother Bert. You shall have her yet. Flor. If it be so, He shall be worth your suit, and compound fairly. Volt. No, I have thought of my revenge; because I cannot have your Mother, d'ee observe, If you expect the benefit of this pardon, You shall marry mine. Bert. I'l marry any living soul, Volt. Shee's somethig old, till the last night I see her not These forty years, since when shee's grown so ugly, I dare not own her, and some think the reason
Of her deformity to proceed from witchcraft. Bert. Alas good Gentlewoman. Volt. I mean she is a Witch her self, And has two Cats they say, Suck her by turnes, which some call her Familiars; She has not had a tooth this thirty years; And you must kiss her with a spung i' your mouth, She is so full of flegm, else sheel go near To strangle you, and yet they say she has A most devouring appetite to mans flesh, You may have a devill of your own to attend you, And when y'are melancholy, Sheel make you Ghosts and Goblins dance before you Bring Bears and Bandogs with an o'r grown Ape Playing upon the Gittern. Hort. Where is this creature? shall he not see her first? Volt. I left her in a Sive was bound for Scotland, This morn to see some kindred, whence she was Determin'd to take Eg-shell to Skeedam. Enter Pandolpho disguis'd. From thence when she has din'd she promis'd me To ride post hither on a Distaff. Bert. How? Volt. Oh here she is, what think you of a Husband Mother? can you love this Gentleman, hee's one Will be a great comfort to you. Pandol. I like the stripling well, He will serve to watch my pits, and see that non Of my spirits boile over. Bert. Is this your Mother Come I'l be hang'd, tis the more hansome destiny Unless you will take composition— Pandol. Let me talk with the Gentleman. Hort. I am at leisure now to wait on you sir. Unbind, and lead him to the Duke.
Volt. Flaviano? you are the Gentleman his Higness Gave strict command should be persu'd, I shall Be proud to wait upon you to the Court. Fla. I wo'not lose my passion on such bloodhounds. Bert. We are agreed, hey, here's my pardon. Pand. Yes, I am satisfied, and can thank you Signior In severall shapes— Hort. The Drawer. Pand. I did want a sum like this to set me up: I was Provided gainst your Sword, a pretty night-cap, And almost Pistoll proof, I shall be rich, I thank your bounty, and so rid the Witch. Exit. Flor. Here's none of the Dukes hand. Volt. It needs not Madam. I know not yet by what device you came together thus. Hort. I'l tell you as we walk. Bert. Pay for a pardon and not kill my man? The Duke shall hear o' this. Exeut. Enter Leonato. Leon. No news of Flaviano yet? some furies Have sure transported him. Enter Petronio. Petro. A Gentleman with Letters sir from Mantua. Enter Duke of Mantua. Leon. Ha! admit him—leave us, the Duke himself? Du. That comes to offer A pledge for young Honorio, not in thought Guilty of that unprincely entertainment You hd at Mantua. if my Son, as fame Is sie in Ferrara, be expos'd To your displeasure, change my fate with his,
That to my shame in part consented to The practice of a Traitor Flaviano, Who us'd my power to advance his own ambition To your dishonour, and instead of my Fioretta, whether now alive or dead I know not, cheat your faith with Iuliana, To quit the noble safety your Sword brought us, My life is troublesome in the loss of fame, And Fioretta. Leon. Where is Flaviano? Duke Fled like a guilty villain from my Justice, May hortor overtake him; let my Son Live by some noble deeds to expiate His Fathers forfeit, and disgrace; I come Without a guard, and were it not a crime To my eternity, cou'd sacrifice My self without expecting your revenge, Or nature to conclude my age. Enter Donabella, Fioretta, Iuliana. Dona. Let me have Justice. Fior. Give me Justice Prince. Iul. Let me have Justice too. Leo. Against whom Sister? Dona. Against this Lady. She hath conspir'd to take away my life. Fior. My enemy is Duke Leonato sir, Who hath conspir'd to take away himself, A Treasure equall with my life. Iul. My enemy is Iuliana sir, that hath conpir'd To rob her self, both of her life and honor. Du. Mant. Tis she, my aged eyes take leave of seeing, Expect no object after this so welome. My Daughter Fioretta. Fior. Deerest Father. Dona. How, Fioretta? she is then but Sister
To my Honorio, life of all my joyes, My feet have wings at this glad news. Exit. Leon. Were you the Suffering Lady Fioretta? How could you live so long within the Court, And no good Angell all this while acquaint me? Fior. This joy is too too mighty, and I sha' not Repent my exile to be thus rewarded. Leon. Confirm my happiness again, no treason Shall now divide us. Duke Your hearts grow together. Leon. I have receiv'd by Claudio the particular Of Flavianos treason, he has guilt Above your knowledge sir, Iuliana findes it, And is confest his strumpet. Duke You amaze me. Fior. I bless now my suspition, when I was Convaid from Mantua, which directed me To leave Placentia secretly, and invite My self a stranger to this Court, where now I meet as much joy as my soul can fancie. Iu. You have not all this while pronounc'd my doom, I fear you hold intelligence with my soul, And know what pains I feel while I am living, You will not be so mercifull to kill me. Enter Claudio, Volterino, Hortensio, Florelia, Bertoldi, Flaviano. Claud. Flaviano! Hor. I present you with a Gentleman, I took rifling a Hermit in the Wood, As it appears in hope to scape persute, Hid in a Friers habit, who dispatch'd After a matrimoniall betwixt This Lady and my self.
Bert. That old Gentleman should be Duke of Mantua What think you sir? Claud. And that his Daughter Fioretta. Bert. She is my Mistris. Claud. She is like to prove the Duchess of Ferrara. Bert. His Grace will not use me so, I will have Justice, Justice Gentle Duke. Flor. Are you mad. Bert. I'l be reveng'd o' somebody. Enter Honorio, Donabella Leon. Honorio your son, to meet your blessing. Don. This was the life I feard to lose by her, Whom I suppos'd my rivall, pardon Madam. Duke Thus circled, I must faint beneath my happiness Leon. Forgive my passion, and receive a Brother. Honor. That name doth honor us, where is Flaviano? Flav. Whose witty brain must sentence me? let it Be home and hansom, I shall else despise And scorn your coarse inventions. Fior. Let me obtain, since providence hath wrought This happy change, you would not stain our joyes With any blood, let not their sins exceed our charity. Leo. Let him for ever then be banish'd both Our Duke-doms. Ho. What shall become of Iuliana? Duke She (if your grace more fit to judge, consent) Shall to a house of converts and strict penance, Where Flaviano, as the price of her Lst honor, shall pay her dowry to Religion; What doth remain of his estate, shall be Emploid toward the redeeming Christian Captives. Iul. I chearfully obey, and call it mercy. Leon. Tis a most pious Justice.
Bert. Justice, thats my kue, Justice, Justice to Bertoldi Against Signior Volterino, I am cheated. Flor. Will you be a fool upon record? Leon. You shall have Justice. Volterino, we appoint you, till he learn More wit, to be his Guardian, and at your Discretion govern his estate, so leave us. Volt. I shall with my best study manage both. Bert. I am as good as begg'd for a fool. Leon. And thus we chain our hearts and provinces. Madam I wish you joyes, to Fioretta I give my self, my Sister to Honorio. Treason is sick in her short reign, but when Heaven sees his time, Truth takes her Throne agen. Exeunt omnes.
Epilogue, by Iuliana. NOW the play's done, I will confess to you, And wo' not doubt but you'll absolve me too. There is a mysterie, let it not go far; For this Confession is aricular: I am sent among the Nuns to fast and pray, And suffer piteous penance, ha, ha, ha, They could no better way please my desires, I am no Nun—but one of the Black-Friers. FINIS.
THE CARDINAL, A TRAGEDIE, AS It was acted at the private House IN BLACK FRYERS, WRITTEN By JAMES SHIRLEY. Not Printed before. LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Robinson at the Thr Pigeons, and Humphrey Moseley at the Prince Arms in St. Paul's Church-yard. 1652.
To my worthily honored Friend G. B. Esq SIR, I Did suffer at the first some contention with∣in me, and looking upn my self, was inclined to stifle my ambitious thoughts in this Dedi∣cation; but when some time, and a happy con∣versation, had preferred me to more acquaintance with you, (which was more argument to me, than the fame I had heard of your reputation, with the most temperate and ingenious men) I found you not only an excellent Judge, but a good Man: at this my modesty took full encouragement, to make this offering, which as I conceive to be the best of my flock, I knew not a better Altar whereon to make it a sacrifice, with this protestation, that it comes (and that is it only, which makes all devoti∣ons
acceptable) from the heart, and your candid acceptance will bind me with all my services, and remembrance, to merit a reception with you, in the quality and honour of, Sir, Your most humble devoted Servant, JA. SHIRLEY
Prologue. THe Cardinal, 'cause we express no scene, We doe believe most of you Gentlemen Are at this hour in France, and busie there, Though you vouchsafe to lend your bodies here; But keep your fancy active, till you know By th' progress of our Play, 'tis nothing so; A Poets art is to lead on your thought Through subtle paths and workings of a plot, And where your expectation does not thrive, If things fall better, yet you may forgive; I will say nothing positive, you may Think what you please, we call it but a Play, Whether the comick Muse, or Ladies love, Romance, or direfull Tragedy it prove, The Bill determines not; and would you be Perswaded, I would have't a Comedie, For all the purple in the name, and state Of him that owns it; but 'tis left to fate; Yet I will tell you e'r you see it plaid, What the Author, and he blusht too, when he said (Comparing with his own for't had been pride He thought, to build his wit a Pyramyde Vpon anothers wounded Fame,) this Play Might rivall with his best, and dar'd to say— Troth I am out; he said no more; you then, When 'ts done, may say your pleasures Gentlemen.
To the surviving Honour and Ornament of the English Scene, Iames Shirley. AS Fate, which doth all human matters sway, Makes proudest things grow up into decay; And when they are to envyed greatness grown, She wantonly falls off, and throws them down: So, when our English Dramma was at hight, And shin'd, and rul'd with Majesty and might, A sudden whirlwind threw it from it seat, Deflowr'd the Groves, and quench'd the Muses heat. Yet as in Saints, and Martyr'd bodies, when They cannot call their blessed Souls agen To earth; Reliques, and ashes men preserve, And think they do, but what, blest they deserve: So I, by my devotion led, aspire To keep alive your noble Vestal fire, Honour this piece, which shews, Sir, you have been The last supporter of the dying Scene; And though I do not tell you, how you dress Virtue in gloryes, and bold vice depress; Nor celebrate your lovely Dutchess fall, Or the just ruine of your Cardinal; Yet this I dare assert, when men have nam'd Iohnson (the Nations Laureat,) the fam'd Beaumont, and Fletcher, he, that wo'not see Shirley, the fourth, must forfeit his best ey. HALL.
Persons. KIng of Navarre. Cardinal. Columbo, the Cardinals Nephew. Alvarez. Hernando, a Colonel. Alphonso. Lords. Secretary to the Dutchess. Colonels Antonelli, the Cardinals Servant. Surgion. Guard. Attendants, &c. Dutchess Rosaura▪ Ladies. Valeria, Celinda, Placentia, a Lady that waits upon the Dutchess. Scene Navarre.
THE CARDINAL. ACT I. Enter two Lords (at one door) Secretary (at the other.) 1 Lord. WHo is that? 2 Lo. The Dutchess Seretary. 1 Lo. Signior. Secr. Your Lordships Servant. 1 Lo. How does her Grace since she left her mourning For the young Duke Mendoza, whose timeless death At Sea, left her a Virgin and a Widdow? 2 Lo. Shee's now inclining to a second Bride, When is the day of mighty mariage To our great Cardinals Nephew, Don Columbo? Secr. When they agree; they wo'not steal to Church, I guess the ceremonies will be loud, and publick. Your Lordships will excuse me. Exit. 1 Lo. When they agree? alas poor Lady, she Dotes not upon Columbo, when she thinks Of the young Count D' Alvarez, divorc'd from her By the Kings power. 2 Lo. And Counsell of the Cardinal to advance His Nephew to the Dutchess bed; 'tis not well. 1 Lo. Take heed, the Cardinal holds intelligence
With every bird i'th' air. 2 Lo. Death on his purple pride, He governs all, and yet, Columbo is A gallant Gentleman. 1 Lo. The darling of the War, whom Victory Hath often courted; a man o daring And mostexalted spirit, pride in him Dwels like an ornament, where so much honour Secures his praise. 2 Lo. This is no argument He should usurp, and wear Alvarez title To the fair Dutchess, men of coarser blood Would not so tamely give this treasure up. 1 Lo. Although Columbos name is great in war, Whose glorious art and practice is above The greatness of Alvarez, yet he cannot Want soul, in whom alone survives the virtue Of many noble Ancestors, being the last Of his great family 2 Lo. 'Tis not safe, you'l say, to wrastle with the King. 1 Lo. More danger if the Cardinal be displeas'd, Who sits at helm of State; Count D' Alvarez Is wiser to obey the stream, than by Insisting on his privilege to her love, Put both their fates upon a storm. 2 Lo. If Wisdom, not inborn Fear make him compose, I like it; how does the Dutchess bear herself? 1 Lo. She moves by the rapture of another wheel That must be obey'd, like some sad passenger, That looks upon the coast his wishes fly to, But is transported by an adverse wind, sometimes A churlish Pilot 2 Lo. She has a sweet and noble nature. 1 Lo. That commends Alvarez, Hymen cannot tie A knot of two more equall hearts and blood.
Enter Alphonso. 2 Lo. Alphonso? Alph. My good Lord. 1 Lo. What great affair Hath brought you from the confines? Alp. Such as will Be worth your counsells, when the King hath read My Letters from the Governour; the Arragonians, Violating their confederate oath and league, Are now in arms; they have not yet marcht towards us, But 'tis not safe to expect if we may timely Prevent Invasion 2 Lo. Dare they be so insolent? 1 Lo. This storm I did foresee. 2 Lo. What have they, but the sweetness of the King, To make a crime? 1 Lo. But how appears the Cardinal. At this news? Alp. Not pale, although He knows they have no cause to think him innocent, As by whose Counsell they were once surpriz'd. 1 Lo. There is more Than all our present art can fathome in This story, and I fear I may conclude, This flame has breath at home to cherish it; Ther's treason in some hearts, whose faces are Smooth to the State. Alp. My Lords, I take my leave. 2 Lo. Your friends good Captain. Exeunt. Enter Dutchess, Valeria, Celinda▪ Val. Sweet Madam be less thoughtfull, this obedience To passion, will destroy the noblest frame Of beauty that this Kingdom ever boasted. Cel. This sadness might become your other habit, And ceremonious black for him that died;
The times of sorrow are expir'd, and all The joys that wait upon the Court, your birth, And a new Hymen that is coming towards you, Invite a change. Dut. Ladies, I thank you both, I pray excuse a little melancholy That is behind, my year of mourning hath not So cleer'd my account with sorrow, but there may Some dark thoughts stay, with sad reflections, Upon my heart for him I lost; even this New dress, and smiling garment, meant to shew A peace concluded twixt my grief and me, Is but a sad remembrance: but I resolve To entertain more pleasing thoughts, and if You wish me heartily to smile, you must Not mention grief, not in advice to leave it; Such Counsells open but afresh the wounds Ye would close up; and keep alive the cause, Whose bleeding you would cure; lets talk of something That may delight; you two are read in all The Histories of our Court; tell me Valeria, Who has thy vote for the most handsome man? Thus I must counterfeit a peace, when all Within me is at mutiny. Val. I have examin'd All that are Candidates for the praise of Ladies. But find—may I speak boldly to your Grace? And will you not return it in your mirth, To make me blush? Dut. No, no; speak freely. Val. I wo'not rack your patience Madam▪ but Were I a Princess, I should think Count D' Alvarez Had sweetness to deserve me from the world. Dut. Alvarez! shee's a spy upon my heart. Val. Hee's young, and active, and compos'd most sweet∣ly. Dut. I have seen a face more tempting.
Val. It had then Too much of woman in't, his eys speak movingly Which may excuse his voice, and lead away All female pride his captive; His hair Black, Which naturally falling into curl's— Dut. Prethee no more, thou art in love with him. The man in your esteem Celinda now? Cel. Alvarez is (I must confess) a Gentleman Of handsome composition, but with His mind (the greater excellence) I think Another may delight a Lady more, If man be well considered, that's Columbo, Now, Madam, voted to be yours. Dut. My Torment! Val. She affects him not. Cel. He has person, and a bravery beyond All men that I observe. Val. He is a Souldier, A rough-hewn man, and may shew well at distance; His talk will fright a Lady; War, and grim- Fac'd-honor are his Mistrisses; he raves To hear a Lute; Love meant him not his Priest. Again your pardon Madam; we may talk, But you have art to choose and crown affection. Dut. What is it to be born above these Ladies And want their freedom? they are not constrain'd, Nor slav'd by their own greatness, or the Kings; But let their free hearts look abroad, and choose By their own eys to love; I must repair My poor afflicted bosome, and assume The privilege I was born with; which now prompts me To tell the King he hath no power nor art To steer a Lovers Soul. Enter Secretary. What says Count D' Alvares?
Sec. Madam hee'l attend you. Dut. Wait you as I directed, when he comes Acquaint me privately. Sec. Madam, I have news, 'Tis now arriv'd the Court, we shall have wars. Dut. I find an Army here of killing thoughts. Sec. The King has chosen Don Columbo General, Who is immediately to take his leave. Dut. What flood is let into my heart! how far Is he to go? Sec. To Arragon. Dut. That's well At first, he should not want a pilgrimage To the unknown World, if my thoughts might convey him. Sec. Tis not impossible he may go thither. Dut. How? Sec. To the unknown other World, he goes to fight, That's in his way, such stories are in nature. Dut. Conceal this news. Sec. He wo'not be long absent; The affair will make him wift to kiss your Graces hand. Dut. He cannot flie With too much wing to take his leave; I must Be admitted to your conference; ye have Enlarg'd my spirits, they shall droop no more. Cel. We are happy, if we may advance one thought To your Graces pleasure. Val. Your ey before was in eclipse, these smiles Become you Madam. Dut. I have not skill to contain my self. Enter Placentia. Pla. The Cardinals Nephew, Madam, Don Columbo. Dut. Already? attend him. Ex. Plac. Val. Shall we take our leave? Dut. He shall not know Valeria how you prais'd him▪
Val. If He did, Madam, I should have the confidence To tell him my free thoughts. Enter Columbo. Dut. My Lord, while I'm in study to requie The Favour you ha' done me, you increase My debt to such a sum, still by a new honouring Your servant, I despair of my own freedom. Col. Madam, he kisseth your white hand, that must Not surfet in this happiness—and Ladies, I take your smiles for my encouragement; I have not long to practise these Court tacticks. Cel. He has been taught to kiss. Dut. Ther's something, Sir, Upon your brow I did not read before. Col. Does the Character please you Madam? Dut. More, Because it speaks you cheerfull. Col. 'Tis for such Access of honour, as must make Columbo Worth all your love; the King is pleas'd to think Me fit to lead his Army. Dut. How, an Army? Col. We must not use the Priest, till I bring home Another triumph, that now staies for me To reap it in the purple field of glory. Dut. But do you mean to leave me, and expose Your self to the devouring war? no enemy Should Divide us; the King is not so cruell. Col. The King is honourable, and this grace More answers my ambition, than his gift Of thee, and all thy beauty, which I can Love, as becomes thy Souldier, and fight She weeps. To come agen, a conqueror of thee; Then I must chide this fondnesse. Enter Secretary. Sec. Madam, the King, and my Lord Cardinal.
Enter King, Cardinall, and Lords. King. Madam, I come to call a Servant from you, And strengthen his excuse; the publick cause Will plead for your cōnsent; at his return Your mariage shall receive triumphant ceremonies; Till then you must dispence. Card. She appears sad To part with him, I like it fairly Nephew. Val. Is not the General a gallant man? What Lady would deny him a small courtesie? Cel. Thou hast converted me, and I begin To wish it were no sin. Val. Leave that to narrow Consciences. Cel. You are pleasant. Val. But he would please one better. Do such men Lie with their Pages? Cel. Would'st thou make a shift? Val. He is going to a bloody business; 'Tis pity he should dye without some heir; That Lady were hard-hearted now that would Not help posterity, for the meer good O'th' King and Common-wealth. Cel. Thou art wild, we may be observ'd. Dut. Your will must guide me, happiness and conquest Be ever waiting on his sword. Col. Farewell. Ex. K. Col. Card▪ Lo. Dut. Pray give leave to examine a few thoughts; Expect me in the Garden. Ladies We attend. Ex. Ladies. Dut. This is above all expectation happy; Forgive me virtue that I have dissembled, And witness with me, I have not a thought To tempt or to betray him, but secure The promise I first made to love and honour.
Enter Secretary. Sec. The Count D' Alvarez Madam. Dut. Admit him, And let none enterrupt us; how shall I Behave my looks? the guilt of my neglect, Which had no seal from hence, will call up blood To write upon my cheeks the shame and story In some red Letter. Enter D' Alvarez. D' Alv. Madam, I present One that was glad to obey your Grace, and come To know what your commands are. Dut. Where I once Did promise love, a love that had the Power And office of a Priest to chain my heart To yours, it were injustice to command. D' Alv. But I can look upon you Madam, as Becomes a servant, with as much humility, (In tenderness of your honor and great fortune,) Give up, when you call back your bounty, all that Was mine, as I had pride to think them favours. Dut. Hath love taught thee no more assurance in Our mutuall vows, thou canst suspect it possible, I should revoke a promise made to heaven And thee so soon? this must arise from some Distrust of thy own Faith. D' Alv. Your Graces pardon To speak with freedom, I am not so old In cunning to betray, nor young in time Not to see when, and where I am at loss, And how to bear my fortune, and my wounds, Which if I look for health must still bleed inward, (A hard and desperate condition;) I am not ignorant your birth and greatness,
Have plac'd you to grow up with the Kings grace, And jealousie, which to remove, his power Hath chosen a fit object for your beauty To shine upon, Columbo his great fvavorite; I am a man, on whom but late the King Has pleas'd to cast a beam, which was not meant To make me proud, but wisely to direct, And light me to my safety. Oh, Dear Madam! I will not call more witness of my love (If you will let me still give it that name) Than this, that I dare make my self a loser, And to your will give all my blessings up; Preserve your greatness and forget a triflle, That shall at best when you have drawn me up, But hang about you like a cloud, and dim The glories you are born to. Dut. Misery Of birth and state! that I could shift into A meaner blood, or find some art to purge That part which makes my veins unequall; yet Those nice distinctions have no place in us, Ther's but a shadow difference, a title, Thy stock partakes as much of noble sap As that which feeds the root of Kings, and he That writes a Lord, hath all the essence of Nobility. D' Alv. 'Tis not a name that makes Our separation, the Kings displeasure Hangs a portent to fright us, and the matter That feeds this exhalation is the Cardinals Plot to advance his Nephew; then Columbo, A man made up for some prodigious Act, Is fit to be considered; in all three There is no character you fix upon But has a form of ruine to us both. Dut. Then you do look on these with fear.
D' Alv. With eys That should think tears a duty to lament Your least unkind fate; but my youth dares boldly Meet all the tyranny o'th' stars, whose black Malevolence but shoot my single tragedy; You are above the value of many worlds Peopled with such as I am. Dut. What if Columbo Engag'd to war, in his hot thirst of honor, Find out the Way to death? D' Alv. Tis possible. Dut. Or say, no matter by what art or motive He gives his title up, and leave me to My own Election? D' Alv. If I then be happy To have a name within your thought, there can Be nothing left to crown me with New blessing; But I dream thus of heaven, and wake to find My amorous soul a mockery; when the Priest Shall tie you to another, and the joys Of mariage leave no thought at leasure to Look bak upon Alvarez, that must wither For loss of you, yet then I cannot lose So much of what I was, once in your favour, But in a sigh pray still you may live happy. Exit. Dut. My Heart is in a mist, some good star smile Upon my resolution, amd direct Two lovers in their chast embrace to meet; Columbo's bed contains my winding sheet. Exit.
ACT II. Enter General Columbo, Hernando, two Colonels, Alphouso, two Captains, and other Officers, As at a Councell of War. Columbo. I See no face in all this Councell, that Hath one pale fear upon't though we arriv'd not So timely to secure the Town, which gives Our enemy such triumph. 1 Colo. 'Twas betraid Alp. The wealth of that one City Will make the enemy glorious. 1 Colo. They dare not plunder it. Alp. They give fair quarter yet, They only seal up mens Estates, and keep Possession for the Cities use, they take up No wares without security, and he Whose single credit will not pass, puts in Two leane comrades, upon whose bonds tis not Religion to deny 'em. Colu. To repair this With honour Gentlemen? Her. My opinion is To expect a while. Colu. Your reason? Her. Till their own Surfet betray 'em, for their Souldier Bred up with coarse and common bread, will shew Such appetites on the rich ates they find, They will spare our swords a victory, when their own Riot and Luxury destroys 'em. 1 Colo. That
Will shew our patience too like a fear. With favour of his excellence I think, The spoil of Cities takes not off the courage, But doubles it on Souldiers; besides, While we have tameness to expect, the noise Of their success and plenty will encrease Their Army. Her. 'Tis considerable, we do not Exceed in Foot or Horse, our Muster not 'Bove sixteen thousand both; and the Infantry Raw, and not disciplin'd to act. Alp. Their hearts, But with a brave thought of their Countries honour, Will teach 'em how to fight, had they not seen A Sword; but we decline our own too much, The men are forward in their arms, and take The use with Avarice of Fame. [They rise and talk privately. Colu. Colonell. I do suspect you are a coward. Her. Sir. Colu. Or else a traytor, take your choice, no more, I calld you to a Councell Sir, of war, Yet keep your place. Her. I have worn other names. Colu. Deserve 'em, such Another were enough to unsoul an Army; Ignobly talk of patience till they drink And reel to death? we came to fight and force 'em To mend their pace; thou hast no honour in thee, Not enough noble blood to make a blush For thy tame Eloquence. Her. My Lord, I know My duty to a Generall, yet there are Some that have known me here; Sir, I desire To quit my regiment. Colu. You shall have licence. Ink and paper—
Enter with Pper and Standish. 1 Col. The General's displeas'd. 2 Colo. How is't Hernando? Her. The Generall has found out employment for me▪ He is writing Letters back. Al Cap. To his Mistress. Her. Pray do not trouble me, yet prethee speak, And flatter not thy friend, dost think I dare Not draw my sword, and use it, when cause With honour calls to action? Al. Colo. With the most valiant man alive▪ Her. You'l do me some displeasure in your loves, Pray to your places. Colu. So, Bear those Letters to the King, It speaks my resolution before Another Sun decline to charge the enemy. Her. A pretty Court way Of di missing an Officer, I obey; success Attend your Counsells. Exit. Colu. If here be any dare not look on danger, And meet it like a man with scorn of death, I beg his absence, and a cowards fear Conume him to a ghost. 1 Colo. None such here. Colu. Or if in all your Regiments you find One man that does not ask to bleed with honour, Give him a double pay to leave the Army; Ther's service to be done, will call the spirits And aid of Men. 1 Colo. You give us all new flame. Colu. I am confirm'd, and you must lose no time; The Souldier that was took last night, to me Discover'd their whole strength, and that we have A party in the town; the River that
Opens the City to the West unguarded; We must this night use  and resolutions, We cannot fall ingloriously. 1 Capt. That voice is every mans. Enter Souldier, and Scretary with a Letter. Colu. What now? Soul. Letters. Colu. Whence? Soul. From the Dutchess. Colu. They are welcome; Meet at my Tent again this evening; yet stay, Some Wine—The Dutchess health— See it go round. Sec. It wo'not please his Excellence. 1 Colo. The Dutchess health. 2 Cap. To me! more wine. Sec. The Clouds are gathering, and his eys shoot fire; Observe what thunder follows. 2 Cap. The Generall has but ill news, I suspect The Dutchess sick, or else the King. 1 Cap. May be the Cardinal. 2 Cap. His soul has long been look'd for. Colu. She dares not be so insolent! it is The Dutchess hand; how am I shrunk in Fame To be thus plaid withall? she writes, and counsels, Under my hand to send her back a free Resigne of all my interest to her person, Promise, or love; that ther's no other way With safety of my honour to revisit her. The woman is possest with some bold Devil, And wants an exorcism; or I am grown A cheap, dull, phlegmatick fool, a Post that's carv'd I'th' common street, and holding out my forehead To every scurrill wit to pin disgrace And libells on't; did you bring this to me Sir?
My thanks shall warm your heart. [Dws a Pistoll. Sec. Hold, hold, my Lord. I know not what provokes this tempest, but Her Grace ne'r shew'd more freedom from a storm When I receiv'd this paper; if you have A will to do an execution, Your looks without that engin, Sir, may serve I did not like the employment. Colu. Ha, had she No symptome in her eye, or face, or anger When she gave this in charge? Sec. Serene, as I Have seen the morning rise upon the spring, No trouble in her breath, but such a wind As came to kiss and fan the smiling flowers. Colu. No Poetry. Sec. By all the truth in prose, By honesty, and your own honour Sir, I never saw her look more calm, and gentle. Colu. I am too passionate, you must forgive me; I have found it out the Dutchess loves me dearly, She exprest a trouble in her when I took My leve, and chid me with a sullen ey; 'Tis a device to hasten my return; Love has a thousand arts; I'l answer it, Beyond her expectation, and put Her soul to a noble test; your patience Gentlemen; The Kings health will deserve a sacrifice of Wine. Sec. I am glad to see this change, and thank my wit For my redemption. 1 Col. Sir▪ The Souldiers curse on him loves not our Master. 2 Col. And they curse loud enough to be heard. 2 Cap. Their curse has the nature of Gunpowder. Sec. They do not pray with half the noise. 1 Col Our Generall is not well mixt, He has too great a portion of fire.
2 Col. His Mistris cool him, her complexion Carries some phlegm, when they two meet in bed? 2 Cap. A third may follow. 1 Cap. 'Tis much pity. The young Duke liv'd not to take the virgin off. 1 Col. 'Twas the Kings act to match two Rabbet suck∣ers. 2 Col. A common trick of State, The little great man marries, travells then Till both grow up; and dies when he should do The feat; these things are still unlucky On the male side. Col. This to the Dutchess fair hand. S▪c. She will think Time hath no wing, till I return. Col. Gentlemen, Now each man to his quarter, and encourage The Souldier; I shall take a pride to know Your diligence, when I visit all your Severall commands. Omnes. We shall expect, 2 Col. And move by your directions. Colu. Y'are all noble. Exeunt. Enter Cardinal, Dutchess, Placentia. Card. I shall perform a visit dayly, Madam, In th' absence of my Nephew, and be happy If you accept my care. Dut. You have honour'd me, And if your entertainment have not been Worthy your Graces person, 'tis because Nothing can reach it in my power; but where There is no want of zeal, other defect Is only a fault to exercise your mercy. Card. You are bounteous in all; I take my leave; My fair Neece, shortly, when Columbo has Purchas'd more honours to prefer his name,
And value to your noble thoughts; mean time Be confident you have a friend, whose Office, And favour with the King, shall be effectuall To serve your Grace. Dut. Your own good deeds reward you, Till mine rise equall to deserve their benefit. Exit Cardinal. Leave me a while. Exit Placen. Do not I walk upon the teeth of serpents; And, as I had a charm against their poyson, Play with their stings, the Cardinal is subtle? Whom tis not wisdom to incense, till I Hear to what destinie Columbo leaves me; May be the greatness of his soul will scorn To own what comes with murmur, If he can Interpret me so happily; art come? Enter Secretary with a Letter. Sec. His Excellence salutes your Grace. Dut: Thou hast A malencholy brow; how did he take my Letter? Sec. As he would take a blow, with so much sense Of anger, his whole soul boild in his face, And such prodigious flame in both his eys As they'd been th' only seat of fire; and at Each look a Salamander leaping forth, Not able to endure the Furnace. Dut. Ha! thou dost Describe him with some horror. Sec. Soon as he Had read again, and understood your meaning, His rage had shot me with a pistoll, had not I us'd some soft, and penitentiall language, To charm the Bullet. Dut. Wait at some more distance; My soul doth bath it self in a cold dew;
Imagin, I am opening of a Tomb, Thus I throw off the Marble to discover, What antick posture death presents in this Pale monument to fright me— Reads. Ha? my heart that call'd my blood and spirits, to Defend it from the invasion of my fears, Must keep a guard about it still, let this Strange and too mighty joy crush it to nothing▪ Antonio. Sec. Madam. Dut. Bid my Steward give thee Two thousand Ducates; art sure I am awake? Sec. I shall be able to resolve you, Madam, When he has paid the money. Dut. Columbo now is noble. Exit. Dut. Sec. This is better than I expected, if my Lady be Not mad, and live to justifie her bounty. Exit. Enter King, Alvarez, Hernando, Lords. King. The War is left to him. but we must have You reconcil'd, if that be all your difference. His rage flows like a torrent, when he meets With opposition, leave to wrastle with him, And his hot blood retreats into a calm, And then he chides his passion; you shall back With letters from us. Her. Your Commands, are not To be disputed. Kin. Alvarez. 1 Lo. Lose not Your self by cool submission, he will find His error, and the want of such a Souldier. 2 Lo. Have you seen the Cardinal? Her. Not yet. 1 Lo. He wants no plot— Her. The King I must obey;
But let the purple Gownman place his engins I'th' dark that wounds me. 2 Lo. Be assur'd Of what we can to friend you, and the King Cannot forget your service. Her. I am sorry For that poor Gentleman. Avar. I must confess, Sir, The Dutchess has been pleas'd to think me worthy Her favours, and in that degree of honour, That has oblig'd my life to make the best Return of service, which is not, with bold Affiance in her love, to interpose Against her happiness, and your election; I love so much her honour, I have quitted All my desires, yet would not shrink to bleed Out my warm stock of life, so the last drop Might benefit her wishes. Ki. I shall find A compensation for this act, Alvarez, It hath much pleased us. Enter Dutchess with a Letter, Gentleman∣Vsher. Dut. Sir, you are the King, And in that sacred title it were sin To doubt a justice, all that does concern My essence in this world, and a great part Of the other bliss, lives in your breath. Ki. What intends the Dutchess? Dut. That will instruct you, Sir, Columbo has Upon some better choice, or discontent, Set my poor soul at freedom. Ki. Tis his character— Reads. Madam, I easily discharge all my pretensions To your love, and person, I leave you to your
Own choice, and in what you have obliged Your self to me, resume a power to cancell If you please. Columbo. This is strange. Dut. Now do an act to make Your Chronicle belov'd and read for ever. Ki. Express your self. Dut. Since by Divine infusion, For tis no art could force the Generall to This Change, second this justice and bestow The heart you would have given from me, by Your strict commands to love Columbo, where 'Twas meant by heaven, and let your breath return Whom you divorc'd, Alvarez, mine. Lords. This is but justice, Sir. Ki. It was decreed above, And since Columbo has releas'd his interest Which we had wrought him, not without some force Upon your will I give you your own wishes, Receive your own Alvarez, when you please To celebrate your Nuptial, I invite My self your guest. Dut. Eternall blessings Crown you. Omnes. And every joy your Mariage [Exit King, who meets the Cardinal, they confer. Alvar. I know not whether I shall wonder most Or joy to meet this happiness. Dut. Now the King hath planted us Methinks we grow already, and twist our loving souls Above the wrath of thunder to divide us. Alv. Ha? The Cardinal Has met the King, I do not like this conference; He looks with anger this way, I expect A tempest. Dut. Take no notice of his presence, Leave me to meet, and answer it, if the King
Be firm in's Royall word, I fear no lightning; Expect me in the Garden. Alv. I obey, But fear a shipwrack on the coast. Exit. Card. Madam. Dut. My Lord. Car. The King speaks of a Letter that has brought A riddle in't. Dut. Tis easy to interpret. Car. From my Nephew? may I deserve the favour? Dut. He looks as though his eys would fire the paper. They are a pair of Burning glasses, and His envious blood doth give 'em flame. Car. What lethargy could thus unspirit him? I am all wonder; do not believe Madam, But that Columbo's love is yet more Sacred, To honour, and your self, than thus to forfeit What I have heard him call the glorious wreath To all his merits, given him by the King, From whom he took you with more pride than ever He came from victory; his kisses hang Yet panting on your lips, and he but now Exchang'd religious farewell to return, But with more triumph to be yours. Dut. My Lord, You do believe your Nephews hand was not Surpriz'd or strain'd to this? Car. Strange arts and windings in the world, most dark, And subtill progresses; who brought this Letter? Dut. I enquir'd not his name, I thought it not Considerable to take such narrow knowledge. Car. Desert, and honour urg'd it here, nor can I blame you to be angry, yet his person Oblig'd, you should have given a nobler pause, Before you made your faith and change so violent From his known worth, into the arms of one,
How ever fashioned to your amorous wish, Not equall to his cheapest fame, with all The gloss of blood and merit. Dut. This comparison, My good Lord Cardinal, I cannot think, Flows from an even justice, it betrayes You partiall where your blood runs. Car. I fear Madam, Your own takes two much licence, and will soon, Fall to the censure of unruly tongues; Because Alvarez has a softer cheek, Can like a woman trim his want on hair, Spend half a day with looking in the glass To find a posture to present himself, And bring more effeminacy than man, Or honour to your bed; must he supplant him? Take heed, the common murmur when it catches The sent of a lost Fame— Dut. My Fame Lord Cardinal? It stands upon an innocence as clear As the devotions you pay to heaven, I shall not urge my Lord your soft indulgence At my next shrift. Car. You are a fine Court Lady. Dut. And you should be a reverend Churchman. Car. One, that if you have not thrown off modesty. Would counsell you to leave Alvarez. Dut. Cause you dare do worse Than Mariage, must not I be admitted what The Church and Law allowes me? Car. Insolent? then you dare marry him? Dut. Dare? Let your contracted flame and malice, with Columbo's rage higher than that, meet us When we approach the holy place, clasp'd hand In hand, wee'l break through all your force and fix Our sacred vows together there.
Car. I knew When with as chast a brow▪ you promis'd fair To another; you are no dissembling Lady. Dut. Would all your actions had no falser lights About 'em. Car Ha? Dut. The people would not talk and curse so loud. Car. I'l have you chid into a blush for this. Dut. Begin at home great man, ther's cause enough, You turn the wrong end of the perspective Upon your crimes, to drive them to a far, And lesser sight, but let your eys look right What gaints would your pride and surfeit seem? How gross your avarice, eating up whole families? How vast are your corruptions and abuse Of the Kings ear? at which you hang a pendent, Not to adorn, but ulcerate, while the honest Nobility, like pictures in the Arras, Serve only for Court-Ornament; if they speak, 'Tis when you set their tongues, which you wind up, Like clocks to strike at the just hour you please; Leave, leave, my Lord, these usurpations, And be what you were meant a man to cure, in Agues to Religion; Look on the Churches wounds. Car. You dare presume In your rude spleen to me, to abuse the Church? Dut. Alas you give false aym, my Lord, 'tis your Ambition and Scarlet Sins that tob Her Altar of the glory, and leave wounds Upon her brow; which fetches grief, and paleness, Into her cheeks; Making her troubled bosome Pant with her groanes, and shroud her holy blushes Within your reverend purples. Car. Will you now take breath? Dut. In hope, my Lord, you will behold your self
In a true glass, and see those injust acts That so deform you, and by timely cure, Prevent a shame before the short haird men Do croud and call for justice. I take leave. Exit. Car. This woman has a spirit, that may rise To tame the Devils, ther's no dealing with Her angry tongue, 'tis action and revenge Must calm her fury; were Columbo here, I could resolve, but Letters shall be sent To th' Army which may wake him into sense Of his rasn folly, or direct his spirit Some way to snatch his honour from this flame, All great men know, The soul of life is ame. Exit. ACT III. Enter Valeria, Celinda. Valeria. I Did not think Celinda when I prais'd Alvarez to the Dutchess, that things thus Would come about▪ what does your Ladiship Think of Columbo now? it staggers all The Court, he should forsake his Mistress, I Am lost with wonder yet. Celind. 'Tis very strange Without a spel; but ther's a fate in love, I like him ne'r the worse. Enter two Lords. 1 Lo. Nothing but mariages, and triumph now. Val. What new access of joy, makes you, my Lord, So pleasant? 1 Lo. Ther's a Packet come to Court
Makes the King merry, we are all concernd in't? Columbo hath given the enemy a great, And glorious defeat, and is already Preparing to march home. Cel. He thriv'd the better for my prayers. 2 Lo. You have been his great admirer, Madam. 1 Lo. The King longs to see him. Val. This news exalts the Cardinal. Enter Cardinal. 1 Lo. He's here, He appears with discontent, the Mariage With Count D' Alvarez hath a bitter tast, And not worn off his palat; but let us leave him. Ladies. We'l to the Dutchess. Exeunt. manet Car. Card. He has not woon so much upon the Arragon As he has lost at home, and his neglect Of what my studies had contriv'd to adde More luster to our Family by the access Of the great Dutchess fortune, cools his triumph, And makes me wild. Enter Hernando. Her. My good Lord Cardinal. (neral. Car. You made complaint to th' King about your Ge∣neral. Her. Not a complaint my Lord, I did but satisfie Some questions o'the Kings. Car. You see he thrives Without your personal valour, or advice, Most grave and learned in the wars. Her. My Lord, I Envy not his fortune. Car. 'Tis above Your Malice, and your noise not worth his anger, 'Tis barking gainst the moon. Her. More temper would
Become that habit. Car. The Military thing would shew some spleen; I'l blow an Army of such Wasps about The world; go look your sting you left i'th' Camp, Sir. Enter King, and Lords. Her. The King. Exit. This may be one day counted for. K. All things conspire my Lord to make you fortunate, Your Nephews glory— Car. 'Twas your cause and justice Made him victorious, had he been so valiant At home, he had had another conquest to Invite and bid her welcome to new wars. K. You must be reconcil'd to providence, my Lord; I heard you had a controvercy with The Dutchess, I will have you friends. Car. I am not Angry. K. For my sake then you shall be pleas'd, And with me grace the Mariage▪ A Churchman must shew Charity, and shine With first example, she's a woman. Car. You shall prescribe in all things; Sir, you cannot Accuse my love, if I still wish my Nephew Had been so happy to be constant to Your own, and my election; yet my brain Cannot reach how this comes about; I know My Nephew lov'd her with a near affection. Enter Hernando. K. He'l give you fair account at his return. Colonel, your Letters may be spar'd, the General Has finish'd, and is coming home. Her. I am glad on't, sir; my good Lord Cardinal 'Tis not impossible but some man provok'd, May have a precious mind to cut your throat.
Car. You shall command me Noble Colonel; I know you wo'not fail to be at th'wedding. Her. 'Tis not Columbo that is maried Sir. Car. Go teach the postures of the Pike and Musket▪ Then dril your Mimidons into a ditch, Where sterve, and stink in picke, you shall find Me reasonable, you see the King expects me. Her. So does the Devill; some desperate hand May help you on your journey. Exeunt. Enter Secretary and Servants. Sec. Here this, I this will fit your part: you shall wear the Slashes, because you are a Souldier; here's for the blue mute. 1 This doublet will never fit me, Pox ont', are these Breeches good enough for a Prince too? Pedro playes but a Lord, and he has two laces more in a seam. Sec. You must consider Pedro is a foolish Lord, he may wear what lace he please. 2 Does my beard fit my cloathes well Gentlemen? Sec Pox o'your beard. 3 That will fright away the hair. 1 This fellow plays but a mute, & he is so troublesome, and talks. 3 Mr. Secretary might have let Iaques play the soldier, He has a black patch already. 2 By your favour Mr. Secretary, I was ask'd who writ this play for us. Sec. For u? why art thou any more than a blew mute? 2 And by my troth, I said, I thought it was all your own. Sec. Away you Coxcomb. 4 Do'st think he has no more wit then to write a Co∣medy? my Ladies Chaplain made the Play, though he is content for the honour and tronble of the business, to be seen in't.
Enter 5th. Servant. 5 Did any body see my head Gentlemen 'twas here but now? I shall have never a head to play my part in. Sec. Is thy head gone? 'tis well thy part was not in't, Look, look about, has not Iaques it? 4 I his head? two'not come on upon my shoulders. Sec. Make hast Gentlemen I'l see whether the King has sup'd; Look every man to his wardrop and his part. Exit. 2 Is he gone? in my mind a masque had been fitter for a mariage. 4 Why mute? there was no time for't, and the scenes Are troublesome. 2 Half a score Deal tack'd together in the clouds, what's that? a Throne to come down and dance; all the properties have been paid forty times over, and are in the Court stock, but the Secretary must have a play to shew his wit. 4 Did not I tell thee twas the Chaplains? hold your tongue Mute. 1 Under the Rose and would this cloth of Silver dou∣blet might never come off agen, if there be any more plot then you see in the back of my hand. 2 You talk of a plot, I'l not give this for the best Poets plot in the world and if it be not well carryed. 4 Well said Mnte. 3 Ha, ha; Pedro since he put on his doublet, has repea∣ted but three lines, and he has broke five butt ons. 2 I know not but by this false beard, and here's hair e∣nough to hang a reasonable honest man, I do not re∣member to say a strong line indeed in the whole Co∣medy; but when the Chambermaid kisses the Cap∣tain. 3 Excellent mute.
Enter another Servant. 5 They have almost sup'd, and I cannot find my head yet. 4 play in thine own. 5 Thank you for that, so I may have it made a proper∣ty, if I have not a head found me, let Mr. Secretary play my part himself without it. Enter Secretary. Sec. Are you all ready my Masters? the King is coming through the Gallery, are the women drest? 1 Rogero wants a head. Sec. Here with a pox to you, take mine, you a player? You a puppy-dog is the Musick ready? Enter Gentleman-Vsher. Gent. Gentlemen, it is my Ladies pleasure that you expect till she call for you, there are a company of Ca∣valiers in gallant Equipage newly alighted, have offer'd to present their Revels in honour of this Hymn; and 'tis her Graces command, that you be silent till their Enter∣tainment be over. 1 Gentlemen? 2 Affronted? 5 Mr. Secretary, ther's your head again; a man's a man; have I broken my sleep to study fifteen lines for an Ambassador, and after that a Constable, and is it come to this? Sec. Patience Gentlemen, be not so hot, tis but de∣fer'd, and the play may do well enough cold. 4 If it be not presented, the Chaplain will have the greatest loss, he loses his wits. Hoboies. Sec. This Musick speaks the King upon entrance; retire, retire, and grumble not. Exeunt.
Enter King, Cardinal, Alvarez, Dutchess, Celinda, Va∣leria, Placentia, Lords, Hernando; (they being set) Enter Columbo, and five more in rich habits Visarded; between every two a torch bearer: They Dance, and after beckon to Alvarez as desirous to speak with him. Alv. With me! [They Embrace and whisper. K. Do you know the Masquers Madam? Dut. Not I Sir. Car. Ther's one, but that my Nephew is abroad, And has more soul than thus to Jyg upon Their Hymenrall night, I should suspect 'Twere he. [The Masquers lead in Alvarez. Dut. Wher's my Lord D' Alvarez? [Recorders. K. Call in the Bridegroom. Enter Columbo, four Masquers, bring in Alvarez dead, in one of their habits, and having laid him down, Exeunt. Dut. What Mistery is this? Car. We want the Bridegroom still. K. Where is Alvarez [Columbo points to the body, they un∣vizard, & find Alvar. bleeding. Dut. Oh 'tis my Lord hee's murder'd. K. Who durst commit this horrid act? Col. I Sir. K. Columbo? ha! Col. Yes; Columbo that dares stay To justifie that act. Her. Most barbarous. Dut. Oh my dearest Lord! K. Our guard seize on them all, this sight doth shake All that is man within me; poor Alvarez Is this thy wedding day? Enter Guard. Dut. If you do think there is a heaven or pains, To punish such black crimes i'th' other world,
Let me have swift, and suh exemplar justice As shall become this great assasinate, You will take off our faith else, and if here Such innocence must bleed, and you look on, Poor men that call you Gods on earth, will doubt To obey your Laws, nay practise to be Devils, As fearing if such monstrous sins go on The Saints will not be safe in Heaven. K. You shall, You shall have justice. Car. Now to come off were brave. Enter Servant. Ser. The Masquers, Sir, are fled, their horse prepar'd At gate expected to receive 'em, where They quickly mounted, coming so like friends None could suspect their hast, which is secur'd By advantage of the night. Col. I answer for 'm all, 'tis stake enough For many lives, but if that poniard Had voice, it would convince they were but all Spectators of my act; and now if you Will give your judgments leave, though at the first Face of this object your cool bloods were frighted, I can excuse this deed and call it Justice; An act, your honours, and your office Sir, Is bound to build a Law upon, for others To Imitate; I have but took his life, And punish'd her with mercy, who had both Conspir'd to kill the soul of all my fame Read there,—and read an injury as deep In my dishpnour, as the Devill knew A Woman had capacity or malice To execute read there, how you were cozen'd Sir, Your power affronted, and my faith, her smiles A jugling witchcraft to betray and make My love her horse to stalk withall, and catch Her curled Minion.
Car. Is it possible The Dutchess could dissemble so, and forfeit Her modesty with you, and to us all? Yet I must pity her; my Nephew has Been too severe, though this affront would call A dying man from prayers, and turn him Tiger, There being nothing dearer than our fame, Which, If a common man, whose blood has no Ingredient of honour, labour to Preserve, a Souldier (by his nearest tye To glory) is above all others, bound To vindicate; and yet it might have been less bloody: Her. Charitable Devill! K. Reads. I Pray, my Lord, release under your hand, what you dare challenge in my love or person, as a just fo∣feit to my self, this act will speak ou honorable to my thoughts, and when you have conquered thus your self, you may proceed to many victories, and after, with safety of your fame visit again The lost Rosaura. To this your Answer was a free resign? Col. Flatter'd with great opinion of her faith, And my desert of her (with thought that she Who seem'd to weep and chide my easie will To part with her, could not be guilty of A treason, or Apostacy so soon, But rather meant this a device to make Me expedite the affairs of War) I sent That paper, which her wickedness not justice, Applied (what I meant tryall) her divorce; I lov'd her so, I dare call heaven to witness I knew not whether I lov'd most; while he, With him, whose crimson penitence I provok'd, Conspir'd my everlasting infamy; Examine but the circumstance.
Car. 'Tis clear, This Match was made at home before she sent That cunning writ, in hope to take him off, As knowing his impatient Soul would scorn To own a blessing came on crutches to him; It was not well to raise his expectation, (Had you, Sir, no affront) to ruine him With so much scandall and contempt. K. We have Too plentifull a circumstance to accuse You Madam, as the cause of your own sorrows, But not without an accessary, more Than young Alvarez. Car. Any other instrument? K. Yes I am guilty, with her self, and Don Columbo, though our acts look'd severall waies, That thought a lover might so soon be ransom'd; And did exceed the office of a King To exercise dominion over hearts, That owe to the prerogative of heaven Their choice, or Separation; you must therefore, When you do kneel for Justice, and Revenge, Madam, consider me a laterall agent In poor Alvarez Tragedy. 1 Lo. It was your love to Don Columbo Sir. Her. So, so; the King is charm'd; do you observe, How to acquit Columbo, he would draw Himself into the plot; Heaven, is this Justice? Car. Your Judgment is divine in this. K. And yet, Columbo cannot be secure, and we Just in his pardon, that durst make so great, And insolent a breach of Law and Duty. 2 Lo. Ha, Will he turn agen? K. And should we leave This guilt of blood to Heaven, which cries, and strikes,
With loud appeals the palace of eternity, Yet here is more to charge Columbo, than Alvarez blood, and bids me punish it, Or be no King. Her. 'Tis come about my Lords. K. And If I should forgive His timeless death, I cannot the offence, That with such boldness struck at me. Has my Indulgence to your merits which are great Made me so cheap, your rage could meet no time Nor place for your revenge, but where my eys Must be affrighted, and affronted with The bloody execution? This contempt Of Majesty trar scends my power to pardon, And you shall feel my anger Sir. Her. hou shalt have one short prayer more for that. Col. Have I i'th' progress of my life No actions to plead me up deserving, Against this ceremony? Car. Contain your self. Col. I must be dumb then; where is honour? And gratitude of Kings, when they forget Whose hand secur'd their greatness? take my head off, Examine then which of your silken Lords, As I have done, will throw himself on dangers; Like to a floting Iland move in blood; And where your great defence calls him to stand A Bullwark, upon his bold brest to take In death, that you may live: but Souldiers are Your valiant fools, whom when your own securities Are bleeding you can cherish, but when once Your state and nerves are knit, not thinking when To use their surgery again, you cast Them off, and let them hang in dusty armories, Or make it death to ask for pay. K. No More,
We thought to have put your victory and merits In ballance with Alvarez death, which while Our mercy was to Iudge, had been your safety; But the affront to us, made greater by This boldness to upbraid our royall bounty, Shall tame or make you nothing. Lor. Excellent. Her. The Cardinal is not pleas'd. Car. Humble your self To th' King. Col. And beg my life? let cowards do't That dare not dy, I'l rather have no head Than owe it to his Charity. K. To th' Castle with him. Madam, I leave you to your grief, and what The King can recompence to your tears, or honor Of your dead Lord, expect. Dut. This shews like Iustice. Exeunt. ACT IV. Enter two Lords, Hernando. 1 Lord. THis is the age of wonders. 2 Lo. Wonderous mischiefs. Her. Among those guards which some call Tutelar Angels, Whose office is to govern Provinces, Is there not one will undertake Navarre? Hath heaven forsook us quite? 1 Columbo at large? 2 And grac'd now more than ever. 1 He was not pardon'd, That word was prejudiciall to his fame.
Her. But as the murder done had been a dream Vanish'd to memory, he's courted as Preserver of his Country; with what chains Of Magick does this Cardinal hold the King? 2 What will you say my Lord if they inchant The Dutchess now; and by some impudent art, Advance a Mariage to Columbo yet? Her. Say? I'l say no woman can be sav'd, nor is't Fit, indeed, any should pretend to Heaven After one such impiety in their sex, And yet my faith has been so stager'd, since The King restor'd Columbo, I'l be now Of no Religion. 1 'Tis not possible She can forgive the murder, I observ'd Her tears. Her. Why so did I, my Lord, And if they be not honest, 'tis to be Half damn'd to look upon a woman weeping. When do you think the Cardinal said his prayers? 2 I know not. Her. Heaven forgive my want of charity But if I were to kill him, he should have No time to pray, his life could be no sacrifice, Unless his soul went too. 1 That were too much. Her. When you mean to dispatch him, you may give Time for Confession, they have injur'd me After another rate. 2 You are too passionate Cozen. Enter Columbo, Colonels, Alfonso, Courtiers, (they pass over the Stage.) Her. How the gay men do flutter to congratulate His Goal delivery? ther's one honest man, What pity 'tis a gallant fellow should
Depend on knaves for his preferment. 1 Except this cruelty upon Alvarez, Columbo has no mighty stain upon him; But for his Uncle— Her. If I had a Son Of twelve years old, that would not fight with him, And stake his soul against his Cardinals Cap, I would dis-inherit him; Time has took a lease But for three lives I hope, a fourth may see Honesty walk without a crutch. 2 This is But Air and Wildness. Her. I'l see the Dutchess, You may do well to comfort her, 1 We must attend the King. Her. your pleasures. Exit Her. Enter King and Cardnal. 1 A Man of a brave soul. 2 The les his safety; The King and Cardinal in consult. K. Commend us to the Dutchess, and imploy What language you think fit, and powerfull To reconcile her to some peace. My Lords. Car. Sir, I possess all for your sacred uses. Exeunt Severally. Enter Secretary and Celinda. Sec. Madam, you are the welcom'st Lady living. Cel. To whom, Mr. Secretary? Sec. If you have mercy To pardon so much boldness, I durst say, To me—I am a Gentleman. Cel. And handsome. Sec. But my Lady has much wanted you. Cel. Why Mr. Secretary?
Sec. You are the prettiest, Cel. So. Sec. The witiest, Cel. So. Sec. The merriest Lady i'th' Court. Cel. And I was wish'd to make the Dutchess pleasant▪ Sec. She never had so deep a cause of sorrow, Her Chamber's but a Coffin of a larger Volume, wherein she walks so like a Ghost, T'would make you pale to see her. Cel. Tell her Grace I attend here. Sec. I shall most willingly. A spirited Lady, would I had her in my closet, She is excellent company among the Lords, Sure she has an admirable treble—Madam. Exit. Cel. I do suspect this fellow would be nibling Like some whose narrow fortunes will not rise To wear things when the inventions rare, and new, But treading on the heel of pride, they hunt The fashion when tis crippled, like fell tyrants; I hope I am not old yet, I had the honour To be saluted by our Cardinals Nephew This Morning, ther's a man! Enter Secretary. Sec. I have prevail'd, Sweet Madam use what Eloquence you can Upon her, and if ever I be usefull To Your Ladiships service, your least breath commands me. Enter Dutchess. Dut. Madam, I come to ask you but one question, If you were in my State, my state of grief, I mean an exile from all happiness, Of this world, and almost of heaven, for my Affiction is finding out despair,
What would you think of Don Columbo? Cel. Madam? Dut. Whose Bloody hand wrought all this misery? Would you not weep as I do? and wish rather An everlasting spring of tears to drown Your sight, than let your eys be curst to see The murderer agen? and glorious? So careless of his sin, that he is made Fit for new Parricide, even while his soul Is purpled o'r, and reeks with innocent blood. But do not, do not answer me, I know You have so great a spirit (which I want, The horrour of his fact surprising all My faculties) you would not let him live: But I, poor I, must suffer more, ther's not One little star in Heaven will look on me, Unless to choose me out the mark, on whom It may shoot down some angry influence. Enter Placenti. Pla. Madam, her's Don Columbo says he must Speak with your Grace. Dut. But he must not, I charge you. None else wait? Is this well done, To triumph in his Tyranny? speak Madam, Speak but your conscience. Enter Columbo, and Secretary. Sec. Sir, you must not see her▪ Col. Not see her? were she cabled up above The search of Bullet, or of Fire, were she Within her Grave, and that the toughest Mine That ever nature teem'd and groand withall, I would force some way to see her; do not fear I come to Court you Madam, y'are not worth Th humblest of my kinder thoughts, I come
To shew the man you have prokvo'd, and lost; And tell you what remains of my revenge. Live, but never presume again to marry, I'l kill the next at th' Altar, and quench all The smiling tapers with his blood; if after You dare provoke the Priest, and heaven so much, To take another, in thy bed I'l cut him from Thy warm embracc, and throw his heart to Ravens. Cel. This will appear an unexampled cruelty. Col. Your pardon Madam, rage, and my revenge Not perfect, took away my eys, you are A noble Lady, this, not worth your ey-beam, One of so slight a making, and so thin, An Autumn leaf is of too great a value To play, which shall be oonest lost i'th' Air; Be pleas'd to own me by some name, in your Assurance, I despise to be receiv'd There, let her witness that I call You Mistress; honour me to make these Pearls Your carkanet. Cel. My Lord, you are too humble in your thoughts. Col. Ther's no vexation too great to punish her. Exit. Enter Secretary. Sec. Now Nadam? Cel. Away you saucy fellow; Madam, I Must be excus'd, if I do think more honourably Than you have cause of this great Lord. Dut. Why is not All woman kind concern'd to hate what's impious? Cel. For my part— Dut. Antonio, is this a woman? Sec. I know not whether she be man or woman, I should be nimble to find out the Experiment, She look'd with less state, when Columbo came.
Dut. Let me entreat your absence, I am cozen'd in her, I took you for a modest, honest Lady. Cel. Madam, I scorn any accuser, and Deducting the great title of a Dutchess, I shall not need one grain of your dear honour To make me full weight, if your Grace be jealous I can remove. Exit. Sec. She is gone. Dut. Prethee remove My fears of her return,—she is not worth Ex. Sec. Considering, my anger's mounted higher; He need not put in caution or my next Mariage, Avarz, I must come to thee, Thy Virgin, Wife, and Widdow, but not till I ha' paid thoe Tragick duties to thy Herse, Become my piety and love, but how? Who shall instruct a way? Enter Placentia. Pla. Madam, Don Hernando much desires to speak with you. Dut. Will not thy own discretion think I am Unfit for visit. Pla. Please your Grace he brings Something he says imports your ear, and love Of the dead Lord Alvarez. Dut. Then admit him. Enter Hernando: Her. I would speak, Madam, to your self. Dut. Your absence. Her. I know not how you Grace will censure so Much boldness, when you know the affairs I come for. Dut. My Servant has prepar'd me to receive it, If it concern my dead Lord. Her. Can you name
So much of your Alvarez in a breath Without one word of your revenge? O Madam, I come to chide you, and repent my great Opinion of your virtue, that can walk, And spend so many hours in naked Solitude, As if you thought that no arrears were due To his death, when you had paid his Funerall charges, Made your eys red, and wept a handkercher; I come to tell you that I saw him bleed, I, that can challenge nothing in his name, And honour, saw his murder'd body warm, And panting with the labour of his spirits, Till my amaz'd Soul shrunk and hid it self, While barbarous Columbo grinning stood, And mock'd the weeping wounds; it is too much That you should keep your heart alive, so long After this spectacle, and not revenge it. Dut. You do not know the business of my heart, That censure me so rashly; yet I thank you, And if you be Alvarez friend, dare tell Your confidence, that I despise my life, But know not how to use it in a service, To speak me his revenger, this will need No other proof, than that to you, who may Be sent with cunning to betray me, I Have made this bold confession, I so much Desire to sacrifice to that hovering Ghost, Columbo's life, that I am not ambitious To keep my own two minutes after it. Her. If you will call me coward, which is equall To think I am a Traytor, I forgive it, For this brave resolution, which time And all the Destinies must aid, I beg That I may kiss your hand for this, and may The soul of angry honour guide it. Dut. Whither?
Her. To Don Columbo's heart. Dut. It is too weak I fear alone. Her. Alone? are you in earnest? why? will it not Be a dishonour to your Justice, Madam, Another arm should interpose? but that It were a sawcy act to mingle with you, I durst, nay I am bound in the revenge Of him that's dead, (since the whole world has interest, In every goodmans loss) to offer it; Dare you command me, Madam? Dut. Not command, But I should more than honour such a truth In man, that durst against so mighty odds, Appear Alvarez friend and mine; the Cardinal— Her. Is for the second course, Columbo must Be first cut up, his Ghost must lead the dance. Let him dy first. Dut. But how? Her. How? with a Sword, and if I undertake it, I wo'not lose so much of my own honour, To kill him basely. Dut. How shall I reward This infinite service? 'tis not Modesty, While now my husband groanes beneath his tomb, And calls me to his marble bed, to promise What this great act might well deserve, my self If you survive the Victor, but if thus Alvarez ashes be appeas'd it must Deserve an honourable memory; And though Columbo (as he had all power, And grasp'd the fates) has vow'd to kill the man That shall succeed Alvarez— Her. Tyranny. Dut. Yet if ever, I entertain a thought of love hereafter, Hernando from the world shall challenge it,
Till when, my Prayers, and fortune, shall wait on you. Her. This is too mighty recompence. Dut. 'Tis all just. Her. If I outlive Columbo I must not Expect security at home. Dut. Thou canst Not fly, where all my fortunes, and my love, Shall not attend to guard thee. Her. If I dye— Dut. Thy memory Shall have a shrine, the next within my heart To my Alvarez. Her. Once again your hand, Your cause is so religious you need Not strengthen it with your prayers, trust it to me. Enter Placentia, and Cardinal. Pla. Madam, the Cardinal. Dut. Will you appear? Her. And he had all the horror of the Devil In's face, I would not balk him. [He staes upon the Cardinal in his Exit. Car. What makes Hernando here? I do not like They should consult, I'l take no note; the King Fairly salutes your Grace, by whose command I am to tell you, though his will and actions Illimited, stoop not to satisfie The Vulgar inquisition, he is Yet willing to retain a just opinion, With those that are plac'd neer him, and although You look with Natures ey upon your self, Which needs no perspective to reach, nor art Of any optick to make greater, what Your narrow sense applies an injury, (Our selves still nearest to our selves) but ther's
Another ey that looks abroad and walks In search of reason, and the weight of things, With which if you look on him, you will find His pardon to olumbo cannot be So much against his justice, as your erring Faith would perswade your anger. Dut. Good my Lord, Your phrase has too much landschape and I cannot Distinguish at this distance you present The figure perfect, but indeed my eys May pray your Lordship find excuse, for tears Have almost made them blind. Car. Fair, peace restore 'em! To bring the object nearer, the King says, He could not be severe to Don Columbo Without injustice to his other merits, Which call more loud for their reward and honour, Than you for your revenge; the Kingdom made Happy by those; you only by the last Uunfortunate, nor was it rationall, I speak the Kings own Language, he should dy For taking one mans breath, without whose valour None now had been alive, without dishonour. Dut. In my poor understanding, 'tis the Crown Of virtue to proceed in its own tract, Not deviate from honour, if you acquit A man of murder, 'cause he has done brave Things in the War, you will bring down his valour To a crime, nay to a baud, if it secure A rape, and but teach those that deserve well To sin with greater licence; but dispute Is now too late, my Lord, 'tis done, and you, By the good King, in tender of my sorrows, Sent to perswade me, 'tis unreasonable That Justice should repair me. Car. You mistake,
For if Columbo's death could make Alvarez Live, the King had given him up to Law Your bleeding Sacrifice; but when his life Was but another treasure thrown away, To obey a clamorous Statute, it was wisdom To himself and common safety to take off This killing edge of Law, and keep Columbo To recompence the crime by noble acts, And sorrow, that in time might draw your pity. Dut. This is a greater tyranny, than that Columbo exercis'd, he kill'd my Lord, And you not have the charity to let Me think it worth a punishment, Car. To that In my own name, I answer; I condemn And urge the blody guilt against my Nephew, 'Twas violent, and cruell, a black deed, A deed whose memory doth make me shuddet, An act that did betray a tyranous nature, Which he took up in War, the school of vengeance; And though the Kings compassion spare him here, Unless his heart Weep it self out in penitent tears. Dut. This sounds As you were now a good man. Car. Does your Grace Think I have conscience to allow the murder? Although when it was done, I did obey The stream of nature, as he was my Kinsman, To plead he might not pay his forfeit life, Could I do less for one so near my bloud? Consider Madam, and be charitable, Let not this wild injustice, make me lose The character I bear, and reverend habit. To make you full acquainted with my innocence, I challenge here my soul, and heaven to witnes
If I had any thought, or knowledge with My nephews plot, or person, when he came Under the smooth pretence of friend to violate Your hospitable laws, and do that act Whose frequent mention drawes this tear, a whirlwind Snatch me to endless flames. Dut. I must believe, And ask your Graces pardon, I confess I ha' not lov'd you since Alvarez death, Though we were reconcil'd. Car. I do not blame Your Jealousie, nor any zeal you had To prosecute revenge against me, Madam, As I then stood suspected, nor can yet Implore your mercy to Columbo, all I have to say is to retain my first Opinion and credit with your Grace, Which you may think I urge not out of fear Or ends upon You, (since, I thank the King, I stand firm on the base of royall favour) But for your own sake, and to shew I have Compassion of your sufferings. Dut. You have cleer'd A doubt my Lord, and by this fair remonstrance, Given my sorrow so much truce, to think That we may meet agen, and yet be friends. But be not angry, if I still remember By whom Alvarez dyed, and weep, and wake Another Iustice with my prayers, Car. All thoughts That may advance a better peace, dwell with you. Exit. Dut. How would this cozening Statesman bribe my Faith With flatteries to think him innocent? No, if his Nephew dy, this Cardinal must not Be long-liv'd; all the prayers of a wrong'd Widow
Make firm Hernando's Sword, and my own hand Shall have some glory in the next revenge; I will pretend my brain with grief distracted, It may gain easy credit, and beside The taking off examination For great olumbo's death, it makes what act I do in that believ'd want of my reason, Appear no crime, but my defence; look down Soul of my Lord, from thy eternall shade, And unto all thy blest companions boast, Thy Dutchess busie to revenge thy Ghost. Exit. Enter Columbo, Hernando, Alfonso, Colonel. Col. Hernando, now I love thee, and do half Repent the affront my passion threw upon thee▪ Her. You wo'not be too prodigall o' your penitence. Colu. This makes good thy Nobility of birth, Thou mayst be worth my anger and my sword, If thou dost execute as daringly, As thou provok'st a quarrell, I did think Thy soul a starveling, or a sleep. Her. You'l find it Active enough to keep your spirit waking, Which to exasperate, for yet I think It is not high enough to meet my rage— D'ee smile? Col. This noise is worth it, Gentlemen; I'm sorry this great Soldier has engag'd Your travel, all his business is to talk. Her. A little of your Lordships patience, You shall have other sport, and swords that will Be as nimble 'bout your heart, as you can wish, 'Tis pity more than our two single lives▪ Should be at stake. Colon. Make that no scruple Sir. Her. To him then that survives if fate allow
That difference, I speak that he may tell The World, I came not hither on slight anger, But to revenge my honour stain'd, and trampled on By this proud man, when General, he commanded My absence from the field. Colu. I do remember, And I'l give your Soul now a discharge. Her. I come to meet it, if your courage be so fortunate. But there is more than my own injury You must account for Sir, if my sword prosper, Whose point and every edge is made more keen With young Alvarez blood, in which I had A Noble interest; does not that sin benum Thy Arteries, and turn the guilty flowings, To trembling gelly in thy veins? canst hear Me name that murder, and thy spirits not Struck into air, as thou wert shot by some Engin from heaven? Col. You are the Dutchess Champion; Thou hast given me a quarrell now; I grieve It is determin'd all must fight, and I Shall lose much honour in his fall. Her. That Dutchess (Whom but to mention with thy breath, is sacrilege) An Orphan of thy making, and condemn'd By thee to eternall solitude, I come To vindicate, and while I am killing thee, By virtue of her prayers sent up for justice, At the same time, in heaven I am pardon'd for't. Col. I cannot hear the Bravo. Her. Two words more And take your chance, before you all I must Pronounce that noble Lady, without knowledge, Or thought of what I undertake for her. Poor soul, Shees now at her Devotions, Busie with heaven, and wearing out the earth
With her stiff Knees, and bribing her good Angel With treasures of her eys, to tell her Lord How much she longs to see him; my attempt Needs no commission from her, were I A stranger in Navarre, the inborn right Of every Gentleman to Alvarez loss, Is reason to engage their swords, and lives, Against the common enemy of virtue. Colu. Now have you finish'd? I have an instrument Shall cure this noise, and fly up to thy tongue, To murder all thy words. Her. One little knot Of phlegm that clogs my stomach, and I a' done; You have an Uncle call'd a Cardinal Would he were lurking now about thy heart, That the same wounds might reach you both, and send Your reeling souls together. Now have at you. Alph. We must not Sir be idle. [They fight, Colum∣bo's Second ain. Her. What think you now of praying? Colu. Time enough; [He kills Hernando's Second. Commend me to my friend; the scales are even, I would be mercifull, and give you time, Now to consider of the other World, You'l find your soul benighted presently. Her. I'l find my way i'th' dark. [They fight, and close, Columbo gets both the swords, and Hernando takes up the seconds Weapon. Colu A stumble's dangerous. Now ask thy life—Ha? Her. I despise to wear it, A gift from any but the first bestower. Col. I scorn a base advantage—ha. Her. I am now [Columbo throwes away one of the swords. They fight, Hernand wounds Columbo. Out of your debt. Col. Th'ast don't, and I forgive thee. Give me thy hand, when shall we meet again?
Her. Never, I hope. Col. I feel life ebb apace, yet I'l look upwards, And shew my face to heaven. Her. The matters done, I must not stay to bury him. Exit. ACT V. Enter two Lords. 1 Lord. COlumbo's death doth much aflict the King. 2 Lo. I thought the Cardinal would have lost his wits At first, for's nephew, it drownes all the talk Of the other that were slain. 1 We are friends. I do suspect Hernando had some interest And knew how their wounds came. 2 His flight confirms it, For whom the Cardinal has spread his nets. 1 He is not so weak to trust himself at home To his Enemies gripe. 2 All strikes not me so much, As that the Dutchess, most oppressed Lady, Should be distracted, and before Columbo Was slain. 1 But that the Cardinal should be made Her Guardian, is to me above that wonder. 2 So it pleas'd the King, and she, with that small stock Of reason left her, is so kind, and smooth Upon him. 1 She's turn'd a child agen; a madness, That would ha' made her brain and blood boil high
In which distemper she might ha' wrought something. 2 Had been to purpose. 1 The Cardinal is cunning, and how e'r His brow does smile, he does suspect Hernando Took fire from her, and waits a time to punish it. 2 But what a subject of disgrace, and mirth, Hath poor Celinda made herself by pride, In her belief Columbo was her servant. Her head hath stoop'd much since he died, and she Almost ridiculous at Court. Enter Cardinal, Antonelli, Servant. 1. The Cardinal Is come into the Garden, now— Car. Walk off, It troubles me the Dutchess by her loss Of brain is now beneath my great revenge, She is not capable to feel my anger, Which like to unregarded thunder spent In woods, and lightning aim'd at senseless trees, Must idly fall, and hurt her not, not to That sense her guilt deserves a fatall stroke, Without the knowledg for what crime to fright her, When she takes leave, and make her tug with death, Untill her soul sweat, is a Pidgeons torment, And she is sent a babe to the other World, Columbo's death will not be satisfied, And I but wound her with a two edg'd feather; I must do more, I have all opportunity, (She by the King now made my charge) but she's So much a turtle I shall lose by killing her, Perhaps do her a pleasure, and preferment; That must not be. Enter Celinda with a Parchment. Anto. Is not this she, that would be thought to have been
Columbo's Mistress? Madam, his grace is private, And would not be disturb'd, you may displease him. Cel. What will your worship wager that he shall Be pleas'd again before we part. Ant. I'l lay this Diamond Madam, 'gainst a kiss, And trust your self to keep the stakes. Cel. 'Tis done. Ant. I have long had an appetite to this Lady, But the Lords keep her up so high—this toy May bring her on. Car. This interruption tasts not of good manners. Cel. But where necessity my Lord compells, The boldness may meet pardon, and when you Have found my purpose, I may less appear Unmannerly. Car. To th' business. Cel. It did please Your Nephew, Sir, before his death to credit me With so much honorable favour, I Am come to tender to his neer'st of blood, Your self, what does remain a debt to him. Not to delay your Grace with circumstance, That deed, if you accept, makes you my heir Of no contemptible estate—this way [He reads. Is only left to try up scurrile tongues, And saucy men, that since Columbo's death Venture to Libell on my pride, and folly; His greatness, and this gift which I enjoy, Still for my life, beyond which term; a Kingdom's, Nothing, will curb the giddy spleens of men That live on impudent rime, and railing at Each wandering fame they cath. Car. Madam, this bounty Will bind my gratitude and care to serve you. Cel. I am your Graces Servant. Car. Antonelli, [Whisper.
And when this noble Lady visits me Let her not wait. Cel. What think you my Officious, Sir; his grace Is pleas'd, you may conjecture? I may keep Your Gem, the kiss was never yours. Ant. Sweet Madam— Cel. Talk if you dare, you know I must not wait, And so farewell for this time. Car. 'Tis in my brain already, and it formes Apace, good, excellent revenge, and pleasant! She's now within my talons, 'tis too cheap A satisfaction for Columbo's death, Only to kill her by soft charm or force, I'l rifle first her darling chastity, 'Twil be after time enough to poyson her, And she to th' world be thought her own destroyer. As I will frame the circumstance, this night All may be finished; for the Colonel, Her agent in my Nephewes death (whom I Disturb'd at Counsell with her) I may reach him Hereafter, and be Master of his fate. We starve our Conscience when we thrive in State. Exeunt. Enter Secretary, and Placentia? Sec. Placentia, We two are only left Of my Ladies Servants, let us be true To her, and one another, and be sure When we are at prayers, to curse the Cardinal. Pla. I pity my sweet Lady. Sec. I pity her too, but am a little angry; She might have found another time to lose Her wits. Pla. That I were a man? Sec. What would'st thou do Placentia. la. I would revenge my Lady.
Sec. 'Tis better being a woman, thou mayst do Things that may prosper better, and the fruit Be thy own another day. Pla. Your wit still loves To play the wanton. Sec. 'Tis a sad time Placentia, Some pleasure would do well, the truth is, I Am weary of my life, and I would have One fit of mirth before I leave the world. Pla. Do not you blush to talk thus wildly? Sec. 'Tis good manners To be a little mad after my Lady; But I ha' done; who is with her now? Pla. Madam Valeria. Sec. Not Celinda? Ther's a Lady for my humour, A pretty book of flesh and blood, and well Bound up, in a fair letter too; would I Had her with all the Errata. Pla. She has not An honorable Fame. Sec. Her Fame? that's nothing, A little stain, her wealth will fech again The colour, and bring honour into her cheeks As fresh; if she were mine, and I had her Exchequer▪ I know the way to make her honest, Honest to th' touch, the test, and the last tryall. Pla. How Prethee? Sec. Why, first I would marry her, that's a verb Mate∣riall; Then I would Print her with an Indx Expurgatorius, a table drawn Of her Court Hersies, and when she's read Cum Privilegio, who dares call her Whore? Pla. I'l leave you, if you talk thus. Sec. I ha' done, Placentia, thou may'st be better company After another progress; and now tell me,
Did'st ever hear of such a patient madness As my Lady is possest with? she has rav'd But twice; and she would fright the Cardinall, Or at a supper if she did but poyson him, It were a phrensy I could bear withall; She calls him her dear Governour— Enter Hernando disguised having a Letter. Pla. Who is this? Her. Her Secretary? Sir, Here is a Letter if it may have so Much happiness to kiss her Graces hand. Sec. From whom? Her. That's not in your Commission Sir To ask, or mine to satisfie, she will want No understanding when she reads. Sec. Alas, Under your favour Sir, you are mistaken. Her Grace did never more want understanding. Her. How? Sec. have you not heard, her scull is broken Sir And many pieces taken out, she's mad. Her. The sad fame of her distraction Has two much truth it seems. Pla. If please you Sir To expct a while, I will present the Letter. Her. Pray do Exit Place. How long has she been thus Distemper'd Sir? Sec. Before the Cardinal came to govern here, Who for that reason by the King was made Her Guardian, we are now at his devotion. Her. A Lamb given up to a Tyger! may diseases Soon eat him through his heart! Sec. Your pardon Sir, I love that voice, I know it too, a little, Are not you? be not angry noble Sir,
I can with ease be ignorant agen, And think you are another man, but if You be that valiant Gentleman they call— Her. Whom? What? Sec. That kill'd, I would not name him if I thought You were not pleas'd to be that very Gentleman. Her. Am I betraid? Sec. The Devil sha'not Betray you here, kill me, and I will take My death you are the Noble Colonel; We are all bound to you for the Generals death, Valiant Hernando? when my Lady knows You are here, I hope 'twil fetch her wits agen, But do not talk too loud, we are not all Honest i' th' house, some are the Cardinals creatures. Her. Thou wert faithfull to thy Lady, I am glad 'Tis night, but tell me how the Churchman uses The Dutchess? Enter Antonelli. Sec. He carries Angels in his tongue, and face, but I Suspect his heart, this is one of his spawns. Signior Antonelli. Ant. Honest Antonio. Sec. And how, and how—a friend of mine, where is The Cardinals Grace? Her. That will be never answered. Aut. He means to sup here with the Dutchess. Sec. Will be? Ant. We'l have the charming bottles at my chamber, Bring that Gentleman, we'l be mighty merry. Her. I may disturb your jollity. Ant. Farewell sweet— Sec. Dear Antonelli—a round Pox confound you. This is Court Retorick at the back stairs.
Enter Placentia. Pla. Do you know this Gentleman? Sec. Not I. Pla. My Lady presently dismist Valria, And bad me bring him to her bed-chamber. Sec. The Gentleman has an honest face. Pla. Her words fell from her with some evenness & joy. Her. Grace desires your presence. Her. I'l attend her. Exit. Sec. I would this Soldier had the Cardinal Upon a promontory, with what a spring The Churchman would leap down, it were a spectacle Most rare to see him topple from the precipice, And souse in the salt water with a noise To stun the fishes; and if he fell into A net, what wonder would the simple Sea guls Have, to draw up the o'rgrown Lobster, So ready boild? he shall have my good wishes, This Colonels coming may be lucky. I Will be sure none shall interrupt 'em. Enter Celinda. Cel. Is her Grace at opportunity? Sec. No sweet Madam, She is a sleep, her Gentlewoman says. Cel. My business is but visit, I'l expect. Sec. That must not be, although I like your company. Cel. You are grown rich Mr. Secretary. Sec. I Madam, Alas! Cel. I hear you are upon another purchase. Sec. I upon a purchase? Cel. If you want any sum— Sec. If I could purchase your sweet favour Madam? Cel. You shall command me, and my fortune Sir. Sec. How's this?
Cel. I have observ'd you Sir a staid, And prudent Gentleman—and I shall want— Sec. Not me? Cel. A Father for some Infant; he has credit [Aside. I'th' world; I am not the first cast Lady Has married a Secretary. Sec. Shall I wait upon you? Cel. Whither? Sec. Any whither. Cel. I may chance lead you then— Sec. I shall be honour'd to obey, my blood Is up, and in this humour I'm for any thing. Cel. Well Sir, I'l ty your Manhood. Sec. 'Tis my happiness, You cannot please me better. Cel. This was struck I'th' opportunity. Sec. I am made for ever. Enter Hernando, and Dutchess. Her. Dear Madam, do not weep. Dut. Y'are very welcome, I ha done, I wo'not shed a tear more Till I meet Alvarez, then I'l weep for joy; He was a fine young Gentleman, and sung sweetly, And you had heard him but the night before We were married, you would ha' sworn he had been A Swan, and sung his own ad Epitaph; But we'l talk o'the Cardinal. Her. Would his death Might ransom your fair sense, he should not live To triumph in the loss, beshrow my manhood; But I begin to melt. Dut. I pray Sir tell me, For I can understand, although they say I have lost my wits; but they are safe enough,
And I shall have'em when the Cardinal dyes; Who had a Letter from his Nephew too Since he was slain. Her. From whence? Dut. I know not where he is? but in some Bower Within a Garden he is makng Chaplets, And means to send me one, but I'l not take it, I have flowers enough I thank him while I live. Her. But do you love your Governour? Dut. Yes, but I'l never marry him, I am promis'd Already. Her. To whom Madam? Dut. Do not you Blush when you ask me that, must not you be My Huband? I know why, but that's a secret; Indeed if you believe me, I do love No man alive so well as you, the Cardinal Shall never know't, hee'l kill us both, and yet He says he loves me dearly, and has promis'd To make me well again, but I'm afraid, One time or other he will give me poyson. Her. Prevent him Madam, and take nothing from him. Dut. Why, do you think 'twil hurt me? Her. It will kill you. Dut. I shall but dye, and meet my dear lov'd Lord, Whom when I have kist, 'l come again, and work A bracelet of my hair for you to carry him, When you are going to heaven, the poesy shall Be my own name, in little tears, that I Will weep next winter, which congeal'd i'th' frost Will shew like feed-Pearl, you'l deliver it? I know he'l love, and wear it for my sake. Her. She is quite lost. Dut. I pray give me Sir, your pardon, I know I talk not wisely, but if you had The burthen of my sorrow, you would miss
Sometimes your better reason; now I'm well, What will you do when the Cardinal comes? He must not see you for the world. Her. He sha'not, I'l take my leave before he come. Dut. Nay stay, I shall have no friend left me when you go, He will but sup, he sha'not stay to ly w' me, I have the picture of my Lord abed, Three are to much this weather. Enter Plcentia. Pla. Madam▪ the Cardinal. Her. He shall sup with the Devil. Dut. I dare not stay, The Red-cock will be angry, I'l come agen. Exeunt. Her. This sorrow is no fable, now I find My curiosity is sadly satisfied; Ha? if the Dutchess in her stragled wits, Let fall words to betray me to the Cardinal, The Panther will not leap more fierce to meet His prey, when a long want of food hath parch'd His starved maw, than he to print his rage And tear my heart-strings, every thing is fatall, And yet she talk'd sometimes with chain of sense, And said she lov'd me; ha, they come not yet; I have a sword about me, and I left My own security to visit death. Yet I may pause a little, and consider Which way does lead me to't most honorably; Does not the Chamber that I walk in tremble? What will become of her, and me, and all The world in one small hour? I do not think Ever to see the day agen, the wings Of night spread o'r me like a sable Herse-cloath, The Stars are all close mourners too; but I Must not aone to the cold silent grave, I must not; If thou canst Alvarez open
That Ebon curtain, and behold the man, When the worlds justice fails shall right thy ashes, And feed their thirst with blood, thy Dutchess is Almost a Ghost already; and doth wear Her body like a useless upper garment, The trim and fashion of it lost. Ha? Enter Placentia. Pla. You need not doubt me, Sir, My Lady prays You would not think it long, she in my ear, Commanded me to tell you, that when last She drank, she had happy wishes to your health. Her. And did the Cardinal pledge it? Pla. He was not Invited to't nor must he know you are here. Her. What do they talk of prethee? Pla. His Grace is very pleasant [A Lute is heard. And kind to her, but her returns are after The sad condition of her sense, sometimes unjoynted. Her. They have Musick. Pla. A Lute only, His Grace prepard, they say, the best of Italy That waits upon my Lord. Her. He thinks the Dutchess Is stung with a Tarantula. Pla. Your pardon. My duty is expected. Exit Her. Gentle Lady.—a voice too? Song within. S. Come my Daphne, come away, We do wast the Crystal day; 'Tis Strephon calls. Da What says my love? S. Come follow to the Mirtle Grove, Where Venus shall prepare New Chaplets for thy hair. D. Were I shut up within a Tree, I'drend my bark to follow thee. S. My Shepherdess, make hast, The minutes slide too fast:
D In those cooler shades will I Blind, as Cupid, kiss thine ey. S. In thy bosome then I'l stay, In such warm Snow who would not lose his way. Chor. VVE'llaugh and leave the world behind, And Gods themselves that see, Shall envy thee, and m▪ But never find Such joys, when they embrace a Deity. If at this distance I distinguish, 'tis not Church musick, and the air's wanton, and no Anthem Sung to't, but some strange Ode of love, and kisses, What should this mean?—ha, he is coming hither, I am betraid, he marches in her hand, I'l trust a little more, mute as the Arras My sword and I here. [He observes▪ Enter Cardinal, Dutchess, Antonelli▪ and Attendants. Car. Wait you in the first Chamber, and let none Presume to interrupt us. Ex. Serv. She is pleasant; now for some art to poyson all her inno∣cence. Dut. I do not like the Cardinals humour, he Little suspects what guest is in my Chamber. Car. Now Madam you are safe. Dut. How means your Lordship? Car. Safe in my Arms, sweet Dutchess. Dut. Do not hurt me Car. Not for the treasures of the world, you are My pretty charge, had I as many lives As I have carefull thoughts, to do you service, I should think all a happy forfeit to Delight your Grace one minute; 'tis a heaven To see you smile. Dut. What kindness call you this? Car. It cannot want a name while you preserve So plentifull a sweetness, it is love.
Dut. Of me? how shall I know't my Lord? Car. By this, and this, swift Messengers to whisper Our hearts to one another. [Kisses. Dut. Pray do you come a wooing? Car. Yes sweet Madam, You cannot be so cruell to deny me. Dut. What my Lord? Car. Another kiss. Dut. Can you Dispense with this my Lord? Alas I fear [Aside. Hernando is asleep, or vanish'd from me. Car. I have mock'd my blood into a flame, and what My angry soul had form'd for my revenge, Is now the object of my amorous sense, I have took a strong inchantment from her lips, And fear I shall forgive Columbo's death If She consent to my embrace; come Madam. Dut. Whither my Lord? Car. But to your bed or couch, Where if you will be kind, and but allow Your self a knowledg, love whose shape and raptures Wise Poets have but glorified in dreams, Shall make your chamber his eternall Palace; And with such active and essentiall streams Of new delights glide o'r your bosome, you Shall wonder to what unknown world you are By some blest change translated; why d'e pause? And look so wild? will you deny your Governour? Dut. How came you by that Cloven foot? Car. Your fancy Would turn a traitour to your happiness; I am your friend, you must be kind. Dut. Unhand me, Or I'l cry out a rape▪ Car. You wo'not sure? Dut. I have been cozend with Hernando's shadow, Here's none but heaven to hear me, help, a rape.
Car. Are you so good at understanding then, I must use other argument. [He forces her. Her. Go to, Cardinal. [Strikes him. Ex. Dut. Car. Hernndo▪ Murder, Treason, help. Her. An army sha'not rescue thee, your blood Is much inflam'd, I have brought a Lancet wi'me, Shall open your hot veins, and cool your fever; To vex thy parting Soul, it was the same Engin that pinc'd Columbo's heart. Car. Help, Murder. Enter Antonelli and Servants. Aston. Some ring the bell, 'twil raise the Court, My Lord is murder'd, 'tis Hernando. The bell rings. Her. I'l make you all some sport,—So, now we are even, Where is the Dutchess, I would take my leave Of her, and then bequeath my curse among you. [Her. falls. Enter King, Dutchess, Valeria, Lords, Guard. K. How come these bloody objects? Her. With a trick my sword found out, I hope he's paid. 1 Lo. I hope so to; a Surgeon for my Lord Cardinal. K. Hernando? Dut. Iustice, Oh Iustice Sir, against a ravisher. Her. Sir I ha' done you service. K. A bloody service. Her. 'Tis pure Searlet. Enter Surgeon. Car. After such care to perfect my revenge Thus banded out o'th' world by a womans plot? Her. I have preserv'd the Dutchess from a rape, Good-night to me and all the world for ever. [Dies. K. So impious. Dut. 'Tis most true, Alvarez blood Is now reveng'd, I find my brain return, And every stragling sense repairing home. Car. I have deserv'd you should turn from me Sir, My life hath been prodigiously wicked,
My blood is now the Kingdoms balm; oh Sir, I have abud your ear, your trust, your people, And my own sacred Office, my conscience Feels now the sting, oh shew your charity, And with your pardon like a cool soft gale Fan my poor sweating soul; that wanders through Unhabitable climes, and parched deserts; But I am lost, if the great World forgive me, Unless I find your mercy for a crime You know not Madam, yet against your life. I must confess, more than my black intents Upon your honour, y'are already poyson'd. K. By whom? Car. By me, In the revenge I ow'd Columb's loss, With your last meat was mixt a poyson that By subtle, and by sure degrees must let in death. K. Look to the Dutchess, our Physicians? Car. Stay, I will deserve her mery, though I cannot Call back the deed, in proof of my repentance, If the last breath of a now dying man May gain your charity, and belief, receive This Ivory box in it an antidote 'Bove that they boast the great magistrall medicine, That puder mixt with wine by a most rare And quick access to the heart wll fortifie it Against the rage of the most nimble poyson, I am not worthy to present her with it, Oh take it and preserve her inncent life. 1 Lo. Strange, he should have a good thing in such readynes. Car. This that which in my jealousie and state Trusting to false predictions of my birth, That I sh dy by poyson, I preserv'd For my own safety, wonder not, I made, That my companion was to be my refuge. Enter Servant with a bowle of Wine. 1 Lo. Her's some touch of grace.
Car. in greater proof of my pure thoughts I take This first, and with my dying breath confirm My penitence, it may benefit her life, But not my wounds; oh hasten to preserve her, And though I merit not her pardon, let not Her fair soul be divorc'd K. This is some charity, may it prosper Madam. Valeria. How does your grace? Dut. And must I owe my life to him whose death Was my ambition? take this free acknowledgment, I had intent this night with my own hand To be Alvarez lusticer. K. You were mad, And thought past apprehension of revenge. Dut. That shape I did usurp, great Sir, to give My Art more freedom and defence, but when Hernando came to visit me, I thought I might defer my execution, Which his owe rage suppli'd without my guilt, And when his lust grew hight, met with his blood. Lo. The Cardial smiles. Car. Now my revenge has met With you my nimble Dutchess, I have took A shape to give my act more freedom too, And now I am sure she's poyson'd, with that doze I gave her last. K. Th'art not so horrid? Dut. Ha! some Cordiall. Car. Alas no preservative Hath wings to overtake it, were her heart Lock'd in a quarry, it would search, and kill Before the aids can reach it; I am sure You sha not now laugh at me. K. How came you by that poyson? Car. I prepar'd it, Resolving when I had enjoy'd her, which
The Colonel prevented, by some art To make her take it, and by death conclude My last revenge; you have the fatal Story. K. This is so great a wickedness, it will Exceed belief. Car. I knew I could not live. Surgeon. Your wounds, Sir, were not desperate. Car. Not mortall? ha? were they not mortall? Surg. If I have skill in Surgery. Car. Then I have caught my self in my own Engin. 2 Lo. It was your fate you said to dy by poyson. Car. That was my own prediction to abuse Your faith, no humane art can now resist it, I feel it knocking at the seat of life, It must come in, I have wrackt all my own To try your charities, now it would be rare, If you but waft me with a little prayer, My wings that flag may catch the wind, but 'tis In vain, the mist is risen, and ther's none To stear my wandring bark. [Dyes. 1 Lo. He's dead? K. With him Dy all deceived trust. 2 Lo. This was a strange impiety. K. When men Of Gifts and sacred Function once decline From virtue, their ill deeds transcend example. Dut. The minute's come that I must take my leave too. Your hand great Sir, and though you be a King, We may exchange forgiveness, heaven forgive, And all the world. I come, I come Alvarez [Dyc. K. Dspose their bodies for becoming funeral; How much are Kings abus'd by those they take To royall grace? whom when they cherish most By nice indulgence, they doo often arm Against themselves: from whence this maxim springs, None have more need of Perspectives than Kings. Exeunt.
Epilogue. Within. Mr. Pollad, wher's Mr. Pollard for the Epi∣logue? He is thrust upon the Stage, and falls. Epilogue. I Am coming to you Gentlemen, the Poet Has help'd me thus far on my way, but I'l Be even with him; the Play is a Tragedy, The first that ever he compos'd for us, Wherein be thinks he has done pretily, Enter Servant. And I am sensible; I prethee look Is nothing out of joynt? has he broke nothing? Serv. No Sir, I hope. Epi. Yes, he has broke his Epilogue all to peeces, Canst thou put it together agen? Ser. Nt I Sir. Epi. Nor I, prethee be gone, hum? M. Poet, I have a teeming mind to be reveng'd. You may assist, and not be seen in't now. If you please Gentlemen, for I do know He listens to the issue of his cause, But blister not your hands in his applause, Your private smile, your nod, or hum, to ll My fellows, that you like the business well; And when without a clap you go away, I'l drink a smallbear health to his second day; And break his heart, or make him swear, and ra He'l write no more for the unhappy Stag; But that's too much, so we should lose; faith sh And if you lke his play, 'ts as well, he knew it. FINIS.
A Catalogue of the Au∣thors Poems already Printed Tragedies. THe Traytour Philip Chabot Admirallo France Loves Cruelty The Maids Revenge Dukes Mistris The Cardinal. Comedies and Tragi-comedies. The School of Complement The Lady of Pleasure Hide-parke The Constant Maid. Falsely as∣cribed to Io. Fletcher. The Coronation The Changes, or Love in a Maze The Gratefull Servant The Patron of Ireland The Humorous Court The Wedding The Ball, or French Dancing Master
The Gamester The Example The Bird in a cage The Royall Master The Opportunity The Witty Fair one The Imposture The Brothers The Sisters. A Masque of the four Honorable Innes of Court, pre∣sented before the King and Queens Majesty at Whitehall in the Banqueting house. Poems. FINIS:
THE Court Secret, A TRAGI-COMEDY: Never Acted, But prepared for the Scene at BLACK-FRIERS. WRITTEN By JAMES SHIRLEY. Never printed before. LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Robinson at the three Pigeons, and for Humphrey Moseley at the Prince's Armes in Saint Paul's Church-yard. 1653.
TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE WILLIAM EARL OF STRAFFORD, Viscount Wentworth, Baron Went∣worth of Wentworth, Woodhouse, Newmarsh, Oversley, and Raby. My Lord, THE Character of true No∣bilitie is sacred, and inde∣leble; that Yours is such, needeth no Testimony, the World
bearing witnesse to Your Honoura∣ble Mind, upon which all other ac∣cesse of Titles wait like a fair Train of Attendance, not Ornaments, Your own Virtue giving them lustre, and enterteining them as Rewards payd down to Your Person, and Merit. This Principle, gave me boldnesse to make this approach to Your Lord∣ship, and not without some design in my Ambition, to renew my self to Your smile, who have enjoyed the happinesse (many yeares since) to kisse Your hand, and to observe with Admiration the Beauties that shin'd upon Your Youth, which as they gained upon Time, so they have grown
above the prejudice of Opinion, and improv'd their Maturitie by the Ear∣linesse of their Spring. But my humble duty (my Lord) at this fortunate hour to attend You, cometh not alone, it bringeth a Pre∣sent, such as my weak condition could reach to; a Poem, one, that wear∣eth no Ribbands in the forehead; not so much as warranted by Applause; for it happened to receive birth, when the Stage was interdicted, and want∣ed that publique Seal which other Compositions enjoyed; Though it hath been read and honour'd with the Allowance of some men, whose Opi∣nion was as acceptable to mee, as the
Vote of a smiling Theater. But this is not to prescribe to your Honour, whom I have by this Ap∣plication made my Iudge (should You wave the Patron) and from whom there lyes no Appeal. If your Honour, descending from your higher Contemplations, vouchsae to look upon these Papers, though Your Iustice should condemn them, it would bee their Reputa∣tion to fall by so Honourable a Sen∣tence: But if they happen to ob∣tain Your Lordships favour, that they may live, your Name will not onely bee a powerfull defence to them, but a lasting Record of
Honour upon the Composer, whose heart is full of Devotions to your Lordship, and ambitious of no greater addition, than to be known, My Lord, Your most obliged, and humble Servant, IAMES SHIRLEY,
The Names of the Persons. The King of Spain. Roderigh his Brother. Manuel the suppos'd son of Piracqu, but the true Carlo son to the King. Maria his Sister. Antonio Prince of Portugall. Isabella his Sister. Mendoza a Duke. Carlo suppos'd Prince of Spain, but indeed Iulio the son of Mendoza. Clara Mendoza's Daughter. Piracquo a Nobleman. Two Lords. Pedro a Kinsman of Piracquo's, Servant to Men∣doza. Celio Page to Carlo. Ladies. Castellano. Messengers. Servants. Guard. Scene Madrid. Plays newly printed for Humphrey Moseley at the Prince's Armes in St. Paul's Church-yard. THe Wild-Goose Chace, a Comedy written by Francis Beaumont, and Iohn Fletcher, Gent. THe Widdow, a Comedy written by Ben. Iohnson, Iohn Fletcher, and Thomas Midleton, Gent. THe Changling, written by Thomas Midleton, and William Rowley, Gent.
THE COURT SECRET. ACT I. Enter at one dore Don Antonio leading Maria; at another two Gentlemen. 1. THe Prince of Portugal, Don Antonio— 2. He courts our Infanta close. 1. And may deserve her. Enter Don Manuel. Maria lets fall a Iewel from her dress, he takes it up, and offers it to her. Man. Your Grace— Mar. 'Tis none of min, Don Manuel. Will your Highness walk? Ex. Ant. & Mar. 1. Observe you that? 2. The Prince seem'd not well pleas'd. Man. What doth the Princess mean? I saw it fall from her. 1. My eyes are witness, Noble Don Manuel. Man. My Lords, your servant. 2. How do you like the Spanish Court? Although My Lord your father were a native, yet Your birth and education were abroad; Compell'd by your father's destiny. Man. My unhappiness!
I have heard him say, some policies prevail'd To make him leave this Kingdom, and his fortunes, To try his fate at sea, till he found means To plant himself in Portugal, from whence He was but Iate reduc'd by the good Prince, With promise of a pardon; and his honour Is full securitie for us. 1. The Prince Can do becoming things, and knows good acts Are in themselves rewards; but the report Was here, that fifteen thousand Ducats Were offer'd Roderigo our Kings brother, By your father Lord Piracquo, to assure His reconcilement here, for trespasses He did at sea. 2. But not accepted. I know not which will be his more vexation, To know the Prince's act, restore Piracquo, Or so much money lost. Enter Prince Carlo, and Celio his Page. 1. The Prince. Car. Don Manuel, You are become a man of mighty business, Or I have lost some interest, I had Since I left Portugal; but I'll not chide. Where is the King? 2. In his Bed chamber, Sir, With Duke Mendoza. Car. I'll not intterrupt 'em. You may redeem your error, and we both Converse again. Exit. Man. You infinitely honor, And with it bind the obedience of your creature. 1. Now he is going to his Mistris. 2. To Clara
The Duke Mendoza's Daughter. Man. Mistris? do you forget, my Lord, the treaty, And his own personall contract, the kiss warm On Isabella's lip, and strengthned by the hope And expectation of another Mariage, Betwixt Anthonio and Maria his Sister? 1. We are us'd To freedom here, with as much innocence I may, perhaps, hereafter say, the Princess Maria meant you honor, when she dropt A Jewel; Sir, it cannot be much blemish For you to own her service. Man. 'T were an insolence (Beyond her mercy to forgive) in me, To think she meant it grace, or I apply it At such a distance of my blood and fortune. This in a whisper, but convey'd through Court, Would forfeit me for ever: As y'are honourable, Preserve me in my humbler thoughts. 1. Be confident. 2. And pardon my expression; Sir, your servant. Exe. Man. I have observ'd the Princess scatter beams Upon me, and talk language with her eyes Sometime, such as I dare not apprehend With safety, or Religion; for I find My heart anothers conquest. But the Prince! Why should he move my jealousie? I know His amorous thoughts, already plac'd upon Fair Isabella, must inhabit there, And meet their just reward; he cannot be So carelesless of his honour. Enter Pedro. Ped. Can you direct me, Sir, to Don Piracquo, Your noble father? I bring affairs concern him. Man. You wait upon the Duke Mendoza, Sir?
Pe. I was i'th' first number of those attended His Dutchess, while she liv'd; his Grace doth now Acknowledge me a waiting movable Within his family; my name is Pedro, A poor kinsman of yours, if you be, Sir, My Lord Piracquo's son, and might have been His heir, had not you Mother been more fruitfull At sea, before she died, who left you an infant; 'Twas something to my prejudice, but your Father— Ma. Is in the privy Garden, Sir. Pe. Your servant. Exit. Ma. What means this fellow to survay me? ha! Clara! Enter Mendoza and Clara. And her Father Duke Mendoza! I Must wish a time without his presence, to Confirm, how much I honour her: Loud fame Speaks him a noble Gentleman, but of late (By what misfortune 'tis not known) he hath Some garbs, that shew not a clear spirit in him. But that his Lady's dead, men would interpret His starts proceed from jealousie: I'll leave 'em. And wait some private opportunity. Exit. Cla. I must confess, Prince Carlo, Sir, hath courted me, But with a noble flame. Me. Flame me no flame, unless you mean to turn our family And name to ashes in the Kings displeasure. Thou do'st not know the Prince, as I doe, Clara. Enter Piracquo and Pedro. Pe. Sure you have known me, Sir, I have expected Some time, when you would own me— Pi. Your name's Pedro— Pe. You thought me of your blood, Sir, when you promis'd I should be your heir; I did a service for't Deserves your memory, not contempt, my Lord.
Pi. Oh, thou didst well, and though as I then stood Proscrib'd, I wisht it otherwise, I now thank Thy witty cozenage, and allow thy faith Religious to thy Prince; be honest still. Pe. Honest? you are mistaken, I have been Honest to none but you, Sir. Pi. Be to thy self. Pe. I know not what you mean by witty cozenage; But to my danger, I may say, I did The feat as you desir'd; you know I did, And 'tis my wonder, what we both projected To make your own conditions for your pardon, And safe return, afcer proscription, Hath not been worth your use so many years; Where is the Prince? Pi. The Prince? you are witty, Kinsman. Pe. Nay if you slight me, Sir, and pay my service With this neglect, I can undoe my self To make you find repentance— [offers to go in Pi. Come nearer— Me. Therefore upon my blessing, if thou hast Such an ambitious thought I charge thee leave it. Cla. Sir, you may spare these preeepts, I have not Given away my freedom, or by promise Of more than may become my duty, offer'd The Prince an expectation; I am Not ignorant he is design'd a Bridegroom To the fair Isabella, and it were Sawcie injustice to distract a blessing Now hovering o'r two Kingdoms— Me. Thou art wise; Preserve this duty. Ha! is not that Pedro? I doe not like their whisper— Cla. You look pale, Sir. Pi. Can this be truth? was it Prince Carlo, then Without imposture was deliver'd me?
Didst thou not couzen me? Pe. If I be mortall, Sir, It was my Ladies art, for her own safety, To put this trick upon the Court, which she Kept me from my Lord, untill upon her death-bed She made him overseer of the Secret. Men. Did he not name a Secret? Cla. You are troubled. Men. I? thou art deceiv'd. Pir. Ha! 'tis thy Lord Mendoza. Ped. He may take Some jealousie, if he observe our whisper. Pir. Adde, Pedro, but to this, thy future secresie, Till I mature some act, my thoughts now fix upon, And choose thy place within my heart; meet me— Ped. Enough, you seal the mystery agen. Men. Pedro, come hither; What did you whisper? Enter a Gentleman. 1. Duke Roderigo, my Lord, desires Your conference in the garden. Pir. I'll attend him. Exeunt. Ped. He is my Kinsman, Sir, and did salute me— Men. I would thou wert his Cosen ten removes (Pedro) as far as the two Poles are distant. Cla. My father need not fear Prince Carlo now; I find another guest here, 'tis Don Manuel Holds chief intelligence with my thoughts. Men. Well Pedro, Take heed, my life is in thy lips— Ped. I know my duty, Sir, if you suspect, Command me to be dumb; Sir, you must trust me. Men. I know not how to help it, wait upon My daughter. Exeunt I would my Lady had liv'd, or died without Bequeathing me this Legacy on her death-bed,
A Secret to consume me; this servant, whom I dare not muh displease, is all the witness Survives, sworn with the rest to secresie, And though I have small argument to suspect him, After so long a silence, yet I am Not safe to be at his devotion: I could soon purge him with a Fig, but that's Not honest: Was it ever known, a man So innocent, should have so many Agus In's onscience? I am weary of the Court; I must have some device— Enter Roderigo and Piracquo. Duke Roderigo, And Don Piracquo? they are whispering too; This jealousie will take my brains apieces. Exit. Ro. I have said, & now expect, my Lord, your answer. Pi. I must acknowledge from your Grace, a favour, That you have been so clear, and free with me; I might have thought my self secure i'th' dark, And ignorant of this expectation, Incurr'd your Graces jealousie. Ro. I had allwaies A firm opinion of your Lordships gratitude. Pi. But for the sum, he fity thousand Ducats, I must acknowledge, if your Grace had mediated My pardon then with the good King, your brother, It had oblig'd my payment; but my cause Not worth your Graces agitation, Or breath, was like a vessell struck upon Some shelf, without all hope ' have sayl'd agen, Had not the Prince's mercie, when he came To Portugal, reliev'd it with a gal, And set my bark afloat. Ro. The Prince? Why? doth your Lordship think I had no part
I'th' work of your repair? the power, and office I hold at Court, is not asleep, my Lord, When any act of grace is done by th' King. Pi. I dare not do so much injustice to The Prince's bounty, to divide and ow But half the benefit to his Grace; I not Extenuate your prevalence at Court, but His Highnes did compassionate my exile, And I am return'd by his commands, my Lord, I am his creature for it, and shall sooner Lose what he hath preserv'd, my life and peace here, Than doubt his honour, or dispute his power In my behalf. Ro. Sir, you are not safe yet, There has past no seal, I take it, for your pardon. You hang i'th' air, not fixt to th' roof of heaven, As when you shin'd a star; take heed you prove No Comet, a prodigious thing snatch'd up To blaze, and be let fall agen, upon Their eyes, that so mistook the region Where you were plac'd. Pi. I know, my Lord, your greatness, And hold it not becoming, to contest In language wi'ee; but I am confident— Ro. Of what? Pi. And will wager, if your Grace please, The to 'ther fifty thousand Ducats, Sir, That I'll not pay you a Marvedie; if I may On other honourable terms possess Your favour, I shall meet your just commands, But if you set such price upon your smile, After the Prince's honor to secure me, I know my self, my fortune, and upon What strength I must depend. Ro. I shall, my Lord, Send you to sea agen.
Pi. I made a shift, and may agen, my Lord, Amongst the Merchants. Ro. Pirate— Pi. 'Tis confest, I was so, but your Grace may be inform'd I was not born to th' trade, I had a soul Above my fortune, and a toy I took To lose what was beneath my birth and titles, Or purchase an estate fit to sustain 'em; The sea was my Exchequer; for I thriv'd, I thank my watry Destinies, and commanded Many a tall ship, won with so much horror, As possibly would have made your Lordship (had you But in a cloud, or airie scaffold stood Spectator of our fight) sweat out your soul Like a thin vapour with the fright, and after Drop your forsaken body on our deck, To encrease the number of the dead. Ro. But we May deal with you at land agen. Pi. With reverence to your blood as 'tis the Kings, withall my age, My wounds upon me, and that innocence, The Prince's word hath new created in me, I do not fear— Ro. Whom? Pi. The Devil. Ro. I shall conjure down the spirit. Pi. Hell hath not art to keep it down. Ro. So brave? Pi. So just. Ro. Thou talking fool, do'st think I have no stings? Pi. I know you are a Statesman, Sir, but he That fears with his own innocence about him, Deserves not a protection— [offers to go in. Ro. Piracquo, Stay, I now see thou hast a gallant spirit,
Let me embrace thee, and with this confirm An honourable friendship; I have not A thought so base to injure thee. Pi. I have— An easy faith my Lord— Ro. Farewell— Noble Piracquo, I have tri'd and found thee. Pi. I wo 'not trust you for all this; I know The Devill's excellent at the hug; your Servant. Enter Manuell and Clara, at the other dore Maria. Man. The Princess. Mar. I doe not like his Courtship there. Don Manuel—(Manuel leaves Clara, and goes to Maria. Ro. So gratious with my Neece? I'll make him curse Those smiles— Exit. Cl. All is not well within me, and the Princess Was never so unwelcome; they conferr With much delight, or else my fears abuse me. What hath she in the greatness of her birth, That I should be so passive? Heaven look on Our hearts, and if my love want a degree Of noble heat, when they are both compar'd, Let what I carry be the Funerall pile, And my own flame consume it. Ha, the Prince Enter Carlo. I shall betray my self too soon I fear. Car. My sweetest Clara! Mar. Either there were no Ladies that could love In that Court, or you could not want a Mistris. Man. They are not born with incapacity Of loving, where they find a worth t'invite: The fault was in my undesert, that could Attract no Ladies grace to own me there, So inconsiderable a servant Madam.
Ma. There is some hope, you wil not be thought here Unworthy of a nobler Character; I doe not think but Clara hath a better Opinion of your merit. Car. You cannot be so cruell; what could in My absence interpose, to make your heart Unkind to those desires at my return? Cla. My justice, and the care of both our honours, I have not lost; nor can Time make me forfeit, (What Nature, and the Laws of Heaven and Earth Command me to preserve) my duty Sir. What is above, would tast ambitious. Car. This was not wont. Cla. If any of your smiles, Or favours Sir before, have led my tongue To unbecoming boldness, you have mercy: Some things of errour are exalted by Our bold belief, when Princes make themselves But merry with their servants, who are apt To antedate their honour, and expound, In their own flattery, the text of Princes. Car. But is all this in earnest? Enter Roderigo and Antonio. Ro. Is not that Don Manuell with the Princess? Observe Sir. An. They are pleasant. Ro. Dare he presume? An. Vexation! Cla. While I have The memory of what you are, a Prince, And dare believe what is as true, as talk'd of, Your Contract made in Portugall to the Princess Isabella— Car. No Contract Madam; I confesse, To please my Father, who engag'd me to
The travel, I did seem to court the Princess, And with some shadows of a promise, might Advance her expectation; but here I left my heart, and dare appeal to thine. An. Madam— Mar. Your Graces pardon but a minute. An. Sir— [To Manuell. Mar. Nay then I shall repent I ask'd your pardon. An I ha' done, and will attend your Graces pleasure. Mar. I am now at your commands. Exe. Ro. Clara his Mistris? Car. Possible! was not that Prince Antonio, Uncle? Ro. Yes Sir, and gone displeased, He hath been affronted by that Gentleman. Car. He dares not be so rude. Ro. He dares be insolent, and court your Sister. Car. How? my Sister? be less ambitious, Manuel. Ro. Your favours have exalted him too much. Car. But I can change my brow. Ro. It does become you. Exeunt. Man. The Prince did frown upon me, Madam, you Are wise, as well as fair, can you resolve The Prince's riddle? Cla. Sir, I have no art To decypher mysteries, but if I erre not, He nam'd his Sister. Ma. Ha! Cla. With caution you should be less ambitious. Ma. 'Tis so, he's jealous of my courtship there, It can be nothing else, can it, sweet Madam? I dare make you the judge of all my thoughts, Unbosom every counsell, and divest My soul of this thin garment that it wears, To let your eye examine it; if you find Within that great diaphanal an atome Look black, as guilty of the Prince's anger,
Let him doom me to death, or if that be Not punishment enough, be you more cruel, And frown upon me too. Cla. If I were judge, Without such narrow, and severe dissection, Don Manuel, of your heart, I should declare Boldly your innocence, and rather than A frown of mine should rob your thought of quiet, I would deprive mine eyes of what they honour, By a more cruel absence. Ma. But to be Assured of so much charity I could wish My self in some degrees a guilty person, And stand the Prince's anger; but if I Be cleer'd in your opinion, I dread not The malice of accusers; yet if you had Wav'd my integrity, I had an argument To have convinc'd you, Madam, that Maria, Though sacred in her person, was to me No more enflaming than a peece of Alabaster, Which some great Master's hand had shap'd a Virgin; For if you dare believe me, you have won By your virtue here so much dominion, There is no room to entertain a guest, Much less a competition. Oh Madam, I took so strange a charm in at my eyes When first your presence made 'em happy, that To say I onely lov'd you, were prophane, And would detract from that religious honour, My heart in that first minute promis'd you. Cla. I know not in what language, Sir, to dress My answer, but in that small skill I have, Sir, of my self, I am not guilty of Unkind rewards, where I can understand A fair respect invite 'em; yet if you But flatter, for it is hard to say, when men Dissemble not at Court—
Ma. The curse of Virgins, and What else can make a Lover miserable Feed on my heart, that minute I betray Your faith by any treason of my tongue: I must not live with your suspicion on me; Why doe you obscure your face? Cl. I doe but hide Sir an unruly blush that's stoln into My cheek; I fear a Spy, that hath discovered, And would tell what complexion my heart has. Pray leave me. Ma. That command Receiv'd but faint commission from your heart, From whence those am'rous spies your blushes came; It had a sound like Virgins, when they teach A way to be denied. Pardon sweet Madam, If I presume to interpret my own happiness; Your eyes are not so kind to obscure themselves Behind that cloud, they may behold me kiss He kisses her hand. Your hands with this devotion, and not Repent to be a witness. Did you not Feel a chast trembling on my lip? with such A fear doe Pilgrims salute holy Shrines, And touch the flesh of Martyrs: but this circumstance Is but the pomp, no essence of affection. Say, can you love me, Madam? if your tongue Not us'd to such a dialect, refuse Articulate consent, a smile will make No noise, speak that way; I will keep this hand Both a white pledge, and prisoner, till your eye Or welcome accent doe redeem it from me; Or if you still be silent, I'll secure My fate, and teach your hand without a voyce To chant a Song to Hymen.
What help of tongue need they require, Or use of other art, Whose hands thus speak their chast desire, And grasp each others heart? Weak is that chain that's made of air, Our tongues but chafe our breath, When Palms thus meet, there's no despair To make a double wreath. Give but a sigh, a speaking look, I care not for more noise, Or let me kiss your hand, the Book, And I have made my choyce. Weeping? I'le kiss those drops away. Cla. Away— Ma. That eccho was not sweet, yet being thine— Cla. I am too much thine. Ma. There's no place for fears; Love is the purest, when 'tis washt in tears. ACT. II. Enter King and Roderigo. Ki. DAres he be so insolent allready? we Shall humble him. Ro. He durst affront me Sir; And when I urg'd the folly of his pride, Tell me, he knew himself, and on what strength He must depend; words of a dangerous consequence. Ki. My Son hath been too forward. Ro. He affects him strangely. Ki. Whose undertaking must not bind beyond The rule of our own greatness.
Ro. Your Son is full Of honourable thoughts, but being young, May meet with subtle natures, whose oblique And partial ends want no dissembled forms Of duty to betray him. This Piracquo In his experience of the world, hath art, And can from every accident extract A cunning use of time, and dispositions; And 'tis not to be doubted but the man Practiz'd in storms, and rapine (by which he Hath drawn a wealth above your treasury) May find a minute apt for his revenge Upon your justice— He that is a Pirate In the first act of spoyl he makes, doth open His conscience at sea, and throws the key Into the waves. Ki. He hath acquir'd a mighty wealth. Ro. But who can number their undoings and wet eys That have been rob'd? how many lives and fortunes Of your own subjects have increas'd the pile Of his estate and cruelty? think o' that: And if you can bring nearer thoughts, and look Upon your self, your present sums are lean, Compar'd to what did swell your treasury; Your customs are less numerous for his thefts, And your great debts and charge upon your crown, Are call'd upon, but drouzy with their weight, They make no answer to the kingdoms clamour. Some King, to whom the waves had sent a wrack So great upon his shore, would both secure, And call the timely benefit, a providence. Ki. 'Tis not too late. Ro. Wise Princes that have law & strength about 'em, Must take all forfeits; he that is too tame In Soveraignty, makes treason his own judge,
And gives a patent to be disobey'd. Ki. Let him be sent for streight. Ro. To hear him plead? What Traytor did want reasons of defence? Command him safe first, see his wealth seal'd up Against the confiscation; Kings must act, And not dispute their maxims; I could much Amaze you, Sir, with other argument To prove Piracquo's insolence; his son (And 'tis to be believ'd, in things of consequence Their counsels often meet) Don Manuel, Hath been ambitious to court Maria, Your daughter, Sir. Ki. Unsufferable impudence! Ro. Antonio too suspects him, and what honor You can maintain with the Prince, & what danger It may produce; if this resented, and Proclam'd, beget a War upon your country— For Treaties are the immunities of Kings, Subjects adulterate the Prince's coyn, Not without high injustice, but he that Doth play the wanton with his royal promise, Defaceth his own stamp, and teacheth, by His violation, others not to trust him. Enter Antonio and Manuel fighting▪ Enter Lords. Ki. Treason! Man. Be fearless, Sir, I am provok'd Beyond the sufferings of a Gentleman. Ro. Where is the guard? no mischief the result Of such a skirmish? Ma. I was not made for servitude, nor must I Have patience, when the greatest man is in Spain, Whose title cannot challenge my subjection, Throws infamy upon me.
An. Do the Kings Of Spain allow this sawcy privilege Against a Prince. Ki. Not we: To prison with him. You shall be judge your self, and set the punishment Upon his insolent act; away with him. Man. Not hear me? this is tyranny. Ro. Away, d'ee make a cypher of the King? Manuel guarded off. Ki. May we Entreat to know the circumstance? An. I must Acknowledge, Sir, I had suspicion Of some attempts by him against my honor, Which made me first provoke him. Ki. Dare he hope To keep a thought unpunished? Enter Piracquo. Pi. Sir, I met My Son by your command lead prisoner hence, It will not unbecome your royall justice, To let me know his crime, I am no father To any sin he dares commit against Your Laws, or person. Ki. You came in good time. Another guard for him. Pi. A guard? for what? Ki. You shall know that hereafter. An. I shall beseech, my cause against Don Manuel May not involve his innocence; my Lord Piracquo is full of honor. 1. The Duke's gone. 2. Nay he is right, at the wrong end of a cause still▪ An. If they be crimes against your state, I am not To prescribe your Justice, Sir. Ki. Away with him.
Enter a Gentleman with a Letter to Antonio. An. To me? I have seen this character. Enter Carlo, Piracquo, Guard. Car. Return him at my peril, Sir. Lord 2. What do you think of my Lord Piracquo? Lord 1. I think he's gone to prison; yet I think He's here agen, if that be he; for we are Not sure of any thing at Court. Now, my Lord— Pi. Do any of you know, my Lords, wherefore I am under guard? 1. Not we. Pi. I could not satisfie the Prince's question. 2. Your sons offence was an affront to th' Prince Antonio. Pi. That was not well; 'twas Some high provocation made him lose his temper. 1. They were at it with their swords. Pi. No hurt, I hope? 2. The Prince's feather discompos'd, or so. Pi. This was not my fault, Gentlemen. Car. Proclame to th' world I'm not your son, take off Mine and your peoples expectation, And then 'tis no dishonor; for to be Believed the Prince at the same time, and one That dares betray a Gentleman from's Sanctuary, To be a sacrifice at home, are things Of inconsistent nature, and destructive. Charge him with new committed crimes, since I Gave him my word and honour to secure him, And there he stands, without an Altar to Protect him; but far be it from the King, To make it a new treason to be rich; It will be thought your avarice to his wealth, And read in story to your shame for ever,
Piracquo died to pay your debts. 1. The Prince Solicites hard; the King inclines. Ca. I know This doth not, Sir, proceed from your own soul, But some malignant nature, that hath drop'd, And would infect your ear with wicked counsell; 'Twas some malicious enemy to me, And to your fame (as well as Don Piracquo His life and fortune) hath conspir'd to make Me less than Prince, and you unfit to be A King, when once men catch at your inconstancie. For I must pray you to remember, Sir, I had your royall promise to confirm My undertaking for his facts at sea, And give me leave to say, Sir, this dishonorable Retreat will stagger all your peoples faith: A King to break his sacred word, will teach The great men to be safe without your service; Who will beleeve your smiles are snares to catch Their fortunes; and when once the crowd takes sent Of this, you leave your self no oath to swear by. 2. The Prince bestirs himself bravely in your cause. Pi. I may do something to reward it, one day. Sir, shall I speak? not in my own defence; For since I came to Spain, I have not been Guilty in thought of any breach of duty; Nor for my son, if youth or ignorance Have made him erre, my humble knees beseech My cause may take no royall beam from him, That now is pleas'd to be my Advocate, Your son; in whom there's such an active heat Of honor, better all my blood was scatter'd Than you should frown upon him. But I know If I had payd the Duke your brother, Sir, But fifteen thousand Ducats—
Ki. Ha? what then? Pi. I had bought my peace, and been commended by His Grace to your full pardon. 1. Boldly urg'd. Ca. Was it his act? Ki. We restore thee, Piracquo, to thy self, and us; and let Our largest pardon for all past offences Be ready for our signature; my brother, I'll promise reconcil'd too: Carlo, thou Hast but confirm'd our hope, nor did we purpose This other than a tryal of thy temper, Thy gratitude, and jealousie of thy honor: Preserve them still thus, Carlo, nothing wants To fix our Kingdoms joy, but the compleating Thy mariage with the Princess Isabella, Which shall be done by Proxy, when Antonio Hath made his courtship perfect with thy Sister. Who saw the Duke Mendoza? send for him; He doth too much absent himself. Exe. Manet Carlo. Car. By Proxy? The Duke Mendoza's counsell is too busie To advance that, and Clara is grown cold, Or seems so, in her cunning to provoke My flame; but I must teach her how to meet it. My father may be wrought to a consent When things are done; forgive me, Isabella, My first thoughts cannot on thy beauty wait, I am not master of my love, or fate. Exit. Enter Pedro. Pe. Things are not now so desperate, whilst my Lord Piracquo keeps possession; but if I were Worthy to advise his Lordship, he should not lose Much time to settle things, secrets do burn—
Enter Mendoza. His grace; now for a fit of jealousie— I'll be here— Men. He's troublesome in my eye, and yet I cannot Endure him from my sight. Pe. That's I. Me. Methinks he hath every day a more discover∣ing look, There's Scaffolds in his face; I shall prevent him, And send him far enough, with the next Fleet He goes, the Sea may roar, and crack the Cabbins, Or he may meet the Calenture; I have heard Of Hericanoes that have torn up Mountains, One boysterous enough would strike his Ship Clean through, a'tother side to the Antipodes, And that would cure me; all my Art must be To win him to the Voyage, and not stir His jealousie; the Knave is apprehensive. Pe. Are you good at that? Exit. Me. I doe not like his business with Piracquo, 'Tis for no good, I'll break their correspondence; Piracquo has been honourable, yet I doe not much confide in him—he's here; Enter Pedro. Come hither Pedro. Re. Your Graces Pleasure? Me. What consult Have you with Don Piracquo? Pe. Please your Grace, He hath been fishing, some or other have Infus'd a scruple, I'll engage my life: But though he be my Kinsman and a Lord I honour, and from whom I have receiv'd The promise of a Fortune, and a great one, Yet, I have said little—
Me. Hast said any thing? Pe. How could I choose Sir? he did squeez me subtly, But I was wise, and faithfull to your trust, He knows no more than I, or you— Me. Ha? Pe. Wou'd wish him Sir, let me alone to be cautious. Me. Th' art honest Pedro, and I have been studying How to encourage and reward thy service, And I have thought of a preferment for thee. Pe. Your Grace was ever bountifull. Me. A place Of honour and command. Pe. That will do well Sir; And shal I come in as your Churchmen do? No first-fruits to be paid twice in a year, No buying of a Jewell at the rate Of fifteen hundred times the value Sir? Me. Remove that care. Pe. That care is well remov'd. Me. I have consider'd, that to live at home My Servant, is to dark thy abilities, That will abroad shine, and doe services Worth Spain's acknowledgement. Pe. Abroad? why, must I travell? Me. By any means. Pe. Whither, an't please your Grace? Me. But to the Indies. Pe. No farther? Columbus did it in 7 years, And less. Me. In the next Fleet thou shalt have an imploy∣ment Shall speak my care of thee, and interest ith his Catholick Majestie; he shall deny Me hard, but I'll prevail to make thee of Councill there, and the State Secretary. Pe. This is a mighty honour. Me. We may hold
Correspondence still by Letters, thou art wise; The King shall knight thee too of Calatrava; How will it joy my heart to write to thee, Al Signor illustrissimo Don Pedro. Enter Gentleman. Gent. Sir, the King hath sent for you? Me. For me? Pe. Yes, Sir, I could have told your Grace His Majesty commanded your attendance. Me. For what? Pe. I know not that, but I suspect There hath been some intelligence, however Go, Sir, it may do worse, and argue guilt, To be commanded twice. Me. Intelligence? It will be worth my safety to confess. Pe. By no means, Sir, that simplicity Would rather become me. Me Why? wo't thou confess? Pe. Not, unless you begin; go Sir, an't be But to prepare his Majesty, for me To wear the order of the Caletrava; You have put me, Sir, into the gang of going This Indian voyage. Me. Well, I must to the King. Pe. Shall I attend you? Me. Yes—no—do what thou wilt; yet now I think on't 'Twill be as well to go—yet do not neither. Pe. Be chearfull, Sir, why doth your head shake so? Me. My head? Pe. It trembles like the Needle of a Sun-dial, d'ee not feel it? Me. Ha? yes 'tis here; but do not breath upon me; I feel the very wind of thy words blow it To and agen like a Weather-cock; but I must go. P. I will prepare my self for this voyage.
Forget not the Calatrava. Me. I would thou wert shipt— Pe. And sunk. It shall go hard but I'll requite your Lordship. Exe. Enter Clara and Servant. Cla. A prisoner saist? Ser. 'Tis a confirm'd report. Cla. I fear Prince Carlo's jealousie is cause Of this; poor Manuel, it will not be Safe, or seem honorable for me to visit him: But since I cannot suffer with him, he Ex. Ser. Shall hear I dare confine my self to sorrow. Enter Servant. Ser. Madam, the Princess Maria is coming up the stairs. Cla. I must dissemble now my grief, and meet her, yet I may intreat her Graces mediation To the King for his enlarge. Enter Maria. Ma. Let us be private. If e'r thou lov'dst me, Clara, now express it. Cla. I have an humble sute to your Highness, which In hope to prosper, will direct my faith, And services to what you can prescribe me. Speak your commands. Ma. Don Manuel stands committed by the King, And I would have thy counsell, how I should Best work his liberty. Cla. That, Madam, is All my petition to your Grace. Ma. I know my least desire let fall to th' Prince Antonio, were enough to engage, and make him The Orator to effect it, but in honor
I would not contrive him the means, and instrument To advance his Rival's liberty. Cla. Rivall, Madam? Ma. For I must tell thee, Clara, and with it Give up the secret of my soul, I love Don Manuel, I fear, better than my self. Cla. You do not mock me, I hope, Madam? Ma. No, By all that Ladies once in love do pray for, By him thou lov'st, who e'r he be, and this Kiss (that I rather wish on Manuel's lip, Would modesty and honor give it privilege And durst entrust thy faith to carry it to him, In my experience of thy virtue, Clara) I speak no fable. Cla. It becomes my truth To answer yours, though not so cheerfully; I should not much repent, to carry, Madam, Your kiss to Manuel, but I fear, I should Forget who sent it. If you have a plot To raise mirth from my weakness, when you know How much my heart is his, I yeeld my self Your triumph, Madam, but the glories of Your blood, and title are not price enough To buy him from my thoughts, could you invest My name with their possession. Ma. Doth she love him? I have destroy'd my own hope then; alass Poor Clara, I must pitty thee, and for that Love that hath been between us, I'll apply To cure thy wound; for mine is not so desperate, Though I bleed inwards, I confess, since he, Whom I esteem best, suffers for Maria. Cla. Suffer for you? pray Madam, clear this mystery. Ma. It is poor Manuel's fortune to affect Me with a passion great; as mine, and love,
That like a rebell forrageth our soul, And can obey no law, but what it likes, Impatient that Antonio lov'd me too, Made him forget the Prince, and gave the affront, For which he suffers in the Kings displeasure. Cla. No repetition of this story, Madam, Lest you destroy all my belief in virtue; It cannot be, you may as soon perswade That snow, the innocent fleece of heaven, that's born Upon the fleet wings of some sportive wind, Is Ethiop's wooll, as call this truth. Ma. This will be rudeness, Clara, if you do not Convince, and with more reason, and with temper. And 'tis no little wonder, that when I Have fairly thus disclos'd my thoughts of Manuel, You should retain a murmuring thought, and dare Pretend rivality with me. Cla. The law You gave to love, that stoopes to no prerogative Of birth, or name (mine only a degree Beneath your own) will answer your disdain, And justifie my passion; and if reason And temper (which in vain you think are lost In me) be assign'd judges, I dare more Than say I love, I can deserve him— Ma. Better? Fate bring it to a tryall. Cla. So just are my affections, I dare make A Saint my judge. Ma. That Judge you make, is not A friend to so much pride. Cla. You are but my accuser, Madam. Ma. This affront I must Remember, Clara, and find time to teach You know me better. Cla. Madam, as you are
The Princess, I can fall thus low, to kiss Your hand, and pay all duties that become me, Or your command; but if you think by being Great, I must own no passion, but in what Degree you are pleas'd to fix it, nor compare My soul born with its freedome to affection, With yours, because one shaft hath wounded both, I rise my own defender. Ma. Thy own ruine For this presumption. Cla. I'll not bribe your mercy, When you can love as I doe, we may both Deserve him equally: Oh Manuell! Ex. Maria. Though I defend thy honour to the Princess, Yet he hath scatter'd seeds of jealousie About my heart, if this ground fertile prove, I wo'not curse his faith, but my own love. Exit. Manuell in Prison. Man. Why should we murmur to be circumscrib'd, As if it were a new thing to wear fetters? When the whole World was meant but to confine us; Wherein who walks from one Clime to another, Hath but a greater freedome of the Prison; Our Soul was the first Captive, born to inherit But her own Chains, nor can it be discharg'd Till Nature tire with its own weight, and then We are but more undone to be at liberty. Enter Carlo. The Prince, he brings a storm, I see it rising As Seamen doe, the wind far off. Car. Don Manuell, Man. You have nam'd a suffering man, but one that holds His life and death at such an even rate, No matter which is first employ'd▪ with honour.
I dare submit me to your justice Sir. Car. Your Cause would droop to trust to that, my love Willing to justifie the choyce it made In thee, hath pleaded better, and prevail'd With me to bring thee counsell to redeem Thy self becomingly. Ma. Your goodness flows still, 'Twas not the Prince that frown'd. Ca. Submit your self to Prince Antonio. Man. Submit my self? Ca. Ask him forgiveness. Man. I must be guilty first of an offence, Ere my tongue be so base, and ask a pardon. Ca. Then I must chide you Manuell; deny This triviall satisfaction? your crime Will upon second thoughts be much enlarg'd, Nor will the Prince be ever thought to merit His birth and name, unless he kill thee for't, 'Tis an affront of so supreme a nature. Man. Hath it no name Sir? Car. Dost not shake to ask it? Are you Sir a fit Rivall for the Prince? Abstract that she's my Sister, which consider'd, Carries so vast a guilt against the Kings, Mine, and Maria's honour, all thy bloud Mixt with repentance cannot purge; you are Instructed Sir. Man. Not yet, to know my self Conscious of any action should contract The Prince's brow, or yours, much less deserve The horrid name of guilt against the Kings, Yours, and Maria's honour. Car. Did not you Sir court my Sister? Man. Never Sir. Car. Doe not you love her? Man. Heaven in that word includes all that we owe
His precept; 'Tis my justice, Sir, to love her; But with a greater distance, than she is From me remov'd by birth; and if her smile Meant the reward of my attendance, Sir, At any time have met with false observers, Their tongues, and no audacious thought of mine, Or application, are in fault; I have, Beside the lesson of my birth, been taught A piety from your favours, Sir, to know My self their creature, and with humble thoughts To shew my gratitude, not proudly assume (Could she descend) a Courtship to Maria, Who by the King, & every good mans vote, Is meant a sacred pledge to Portugal, To chain two kingdoms. Car. If this, Manuel, Be truth— Man. Without condition of my liberty, Or dread of what Antonio shall attempt In his revenge, my soul dare wth ith an oath Confirm it at the Altar. Car. This doth please me. Possess thy first place in my friendship, Manuel; Antonio shall embrace thee too, his ear And mine have been abus'd. Man. There was A providence upon our Swords, that meant Less fatall than his passion shew'd, when we Last met, against whose weapon threatning me first, The safety of my fame, more than my life, Call'd up my just defence. Car. I do beleeve thee; To what a loss of virtue, and of blood Credulity engageth? this shall be No more thy dwelling; Prince Antonio Shall for thy honor make it his own act,
Who yet believes thy interest in Maria Hath made his Courtship vain, and will I fear, Not presently admit thy innocence Into his quiet faith, but I'll convince him. Man. If he but knew my heart, he should not need Much argument; no man can love with honour, And let his thoughts divide upon two Mistrisses. I have contracted love— Car. With whom? may Time, When this World fails, and Nature grows decrepit; Present it to Eternity. Man. This prayer opens my heart, and all the wealth within it, Commands me draw the Curtain from her name, That you may read my Clara, And I shall beseech your Graces smile— Car. Your Clara? what The Duke Mendoza's Daughter? Man. You have nam'd her. Car. No, I am i'th' dark still, speak agen, Or rather say, thou hast mistook, it is Some other Clara, and not the Lady I understand. Man. Life cannot bribe me with another wealth, Or death with all his horrours make me desert That name. Car. What a strange Sea-breach has This little storm of breath made here allready? I was taking pains to unconcern the jealousie Of Antonio, and find him my own Rivall; Thou hadst been kinder to have lov'd Maria My Sister, though Antonio had sworn Thy death, and the Kings anger with my own Had met thee like a torrent, than presum'd This interest in Clara. Man. I see no Such mighty danger in't.
Car. I'll tell thee, Manuel, Thou hast invaded all my joys, I love her. Man. Honor forbid it, Sir. Car. Honor's a dream, And a cold everlasting sleep must chain My soul up; for if once it wake, and know What thou hast torn from't, it will vex it self Into a flame, and turn thee into ashes. Ma. Never til now unhappy, with my weight I see my self now bearing down before me, A rotten part of some prodigious mountain Into the sea, with which I shall soon mingle. Ca. Collect thy self betimes, and give her back Unsullied with thy clame, release thy own, And with her, every thought as much a virgin As her soul was, when first I courted her, Or thou art lost— Man. With greater justice, Sir, Command to uncreate my self, as call My faith or heart agen. Ca. How? Man. Sir, my life, The cement that doth hold this frame together, You have power to melt, or but command my exile, And I may live far off, and be forgotten By all, but Clara; bu to ask that back, Which with the full consent of heaven I gave her (And in exchange receiv'd her equall vow) I dare not, or if I had will, to be So false to honour, 'tis within my heart So rivetted, I may with as much innocence Commit a rape, or murder, as attempt it. Ca. You have no doubt a valour too, that dare Love with so fierce a resolution. Man. When I am master of my sword, I dare Not draw it against you; but he that lives
Beneath you, may have little time to wish Himself unmade that would divorce us. Car. Leave me, leave me— Ex. Man. How many lones are shaken with one tempest? And if one suffer, ruin'd all? I know The faith he bears me, and the reverence He gives my blood, will never be provok'd To fight against my person; but I must not By tameness give my self a publike wound; He shall be master of his sword and freedom, And then let fate determine; Clara must Be mine, or make a Bridegroom of his dust. Exit. ACT. III. Enter Gentlemen of Prince Antonio, pre∣paring a Banquet.S 1. PRince Carlo's not come yet. 2. My Lord Piracquo And his son Manuel are expected too. 1. I wonder at this hasty reconcilement; We did imagine it as possible The two Poles should have met, as they together Friends at a Banquet. 2. In my opinion, peace, and wine, and musick, Are more convenient for the naturall body, Than swords or guns. 1. And for the politick too, If men were but so wise to like, and cherish Their own estates: If I had all the Plate In the Indies, I'd not give a silver spoon To have my head cut off. 2. Why is not the great Duke Roderigo here?
1. Who, the Kings Evil Genius? he was Invited, but excus'd himself. 2. Why, there's A Statesman, that can side with every faction, And yet most subtly can untwist himself When he hath wrought the business up to danger. He lives within a labyrinth, some think He deals with the devil, and he looks like one, With a more Holiday face. 1. But he hath so behav'd himself, That no man now dare much confide in him. They are come. Enter Antonio, Carlo, Piracquo, Manuel. An. Don Manuel, the Prince hath made me know My error, and your worth. Ma. He has too much honor'd me, And you have reason to command for this The service of my life. An. You are not pleasant, Sir— My Lord Piracquo. Pi. Your Highness humble servant. Car. All is not Reconcil'd here, I but suppress a flame, To give it vent more dangerous. An. A free welcom to all; Sit, and some wine; this Musick is not Sprightly enough: To his Majesty of Spain— Pi. He that doth pledg the Kings health with a murmur May his next thirst inflame him to drink poyson. Car. The King hath a true servant in Piracquo. Man. He that is not, had never sense of honor; And may he perish all but soul, that dares Harbour a thought disloyall. To your Highness— An. Give me another: This wine looks cheerful as my heart, to drink
The Princess fair Maria's health. Car. My turn Will come, Sir, to be gratefull. An. Here my Lord. Pi. May swift time perfect by your sacred Loves, The happiness of both kingdoms. Man. May that day, That seals your glorious Hymen, Sir, be ever Holy within our Calendar, and beget A faith, that all things then begun, may prosper. An. I thank thee, Manuel. Car. Sir, you may Believe Don Manuel's language, and his heart Are twins, they bear one date of time, & sense. You must now give me leave, Sir, to requite You in part; A health to the King of Portugal; Let it move this way, Manuel. Ma. It shall With humble thoughts be entertain'd—you honor me. Pi. It is but Justice Manuel; for when Spain Would not acknowledge, nor allow us being, Our lives were welcome there, till better stars Sent him, to whose bounty we ow all that's left us. Car. No more o'that my Lord, I am very confident, In any honorable cause, you dare Express your faith to me; and for your son, We two have been companions, I dare say, Our hearts are toucht by one Magnetick virtue, And such a sympathy, I cannot wish What's dearest to me, but he flies t'embrace it. Ma. I like not this— Car. Manuel, begin a health: We have had my Sisters and the Kings already, Name your own Mistris for the next. Ma. I should conclude her worthy of remembrance, If one were first preferr'd. Will your Grace please Sir,
To let me have the honor— An. Come, to me. Ma. To the white hand of fairest Isabella. An. Would she were Present to thank you Manuel. Car. 'Tis an affront, as Clara were his own Allready; ha! civilitie and honor Prescribe me patience, dares he insult? When this hath had the ceremony, Manuel, 'T shall be my office to remember Clara; I must have time to quit the favour, Sir, Y'ave done my Mistris; in your ear; though I Was pleased to reconcile you to the Prince, And order your enlargement, Clara must Be mine, or one of us be nothing; you May think on't yet. Ma. I have Sir, and to shew How much I can obey, and that I have not Intruded like a thief upon your treasure, And filcht her heart away, 'tis now within Her choice agen, if you prevail upon Her kinder thoughts, I can sit down despis'd. Car. Thou art my best friend now. Antonio— Me-thinks we are not pleasant—if she should Be a little obstinate, it would become, And speak the bravery of thy soul, and service, To use some language for me, wo't thou Manuel? Thou dost not know the sufferings of my soul For Clara. Man. But I pitty 'em. Car. 'Tis new balsom Into my wounds; where is the health, Piracquo? I feel new spirits dancing in my blood, The health begun to Clara languisheth, Why should I want it, Gentlemen? An. It was nam'd
By Manuel to my Sister Isabella; Prince Carlo, you forget. Car. To Isabella? Your Graces pardon, I confess my error, I forgot her indeed, but could your wishes Translate that Princess hither, she should be A witness of my honourable thoughts. Enter Isabella with Ladies. (Musick.) What Magick's this? do any know that face? Pi. 'Tis very like the Princess Isabella. Ca. I would she were a Ghost; Antonio, Ha you got enchantments? Is. You may stay, Sir. Ca. I love not to converse with spirits. Ma. Sir, This is no shadow. Car. It is to me, Sir. Meet me at Clara's, or be lost to honour. Exit. Is. It was your Counsell brother, that reserv'd me For this first entertainment. My good Lord Piracquo, and Don Manuel, you seem not So much affrighted, as the Prince. Pi. A devill In such a shape could never fright me, Madam; But persons of your quality shift not so Much air without a noise; the motion Of Princes has much rumor to attend it. Is. I chose to come so private, I arriv'd The City but last evening. Ma. You have much Honour'd Madrid. Is. Why, how now brother, are You frighted too? An. Yes, and do sweat at soul, To see our selves neglected.
Is. Some are not fortified against a sudden accident; In my desert, and innocence, I can Interpret nothing yet in my dishonour, Since joyes have extasies sometimes, and with Their rapture may transport our senses from us, As soon as any other passion. Besides, I heard him wish me here a witness Of honourable thoughts, he has but now Remov'd his person, to acquaint the King, With greater preparation to receive A Guest so unexpected. Pi. But I like not the Prince's humor, you Had whisperings Manuel I observ'd. Man. I shall Keep nothing Sir in Clouds from you. An. Thou sha't direct me Isabella, wee'l to Court My Lord Piracquo, Manuel. Is. How ere I put a valiant brow on his neglect, And seem to make a gloss in his defence, My soul is sick with fear. An. Come Isabella. Pi. We both attend your grace. Exit. Enter Roderigo. Ro. My engins want success, Piracquo is Restor'd to his full being, and his Son At large, and reconcil'd by Carlo's act. My Nephew had been better to have wak'd A sleeping Dragon, than have crost my aims; He has rescu'd them, but drawn upon his bosome As many wounds as policy and my Revenge can make. I was too tame, to strike At useless Shrubs, that hinder not my prospect; My thoughts should have no study but a Kingdome; It is my Heaven, and this young Cedar spread▪
Betwixt my eyes, and it; I have allready Betray'd his love to Clara, and the King That hath made up an Idoll to himself Of honour, is inflam'd to my own wishes; I know the Prince will be impatient To hear his Mistris tost by the Kings anger, And he may leap into some disobedience, That may be worth my second charge to sink him; And then Piracquo, Manuel, and the Kingdome Shall stoop to my devotion; yet I carry A smiling brow to all, and please the King, To think I am reconcil'd. Enter Carlo. My Nephew— Car. Where is the King? Ro. Where I left him displeas'd, and was now coming To Prince Antonio's Lodgings to acquaint you. Car. With what? Ro. Have you contracted love with Duke Mendoza's Daughter, the Lady Clara? Car. What officious Tongue hath been bold to mention her? Ro. He has Had some intelligence, and is almost grown Wild with the strange resentment, I not knowing What to object against his passion, thus Surpriz'd, you may believe apply'd what lenitives My understanding could collect o'th' sudden, With confidence, when you came to give account, The accusation would fall off, and he Appear too credulous against your honour. Ca. It were no treason to Castile, my Lord, If I confest this mighty fact. Ro. 'Tis justice If you de love her honourably, to avow it.
Ca. Isabella is no Angell. Ro. Nor is Clara Of an extraction to digrace a Prince. Ca. Though he be my Father, he did not Beget my Soul; who's with him? Ro. I left the Duke Mendoza. Ca. Has he made Complaint o'me? 'tis well; let me preserve Good Uncle still your loving thoughts; it is n vain to move my Father now. Ro. There is I way, if you could but dissemble, Sir, To set your wishes right, and Letters may e so contriv'd to Portugall. Ca. The Princess Is here allready Uncle. Ro. Isabella? Ca. Now with Antonio, and I am lost. Ro. Would thou wert never to be found agen. Ca. I must doe something. Ro. The Princess thus Affronted may be worth my own ambition. Calm thoughts attend you Sir. Exit. Enter Mendoza. Me. I'm glad I came so well off from the King, His anger made me tremble, I was jealous Of more discovery, when he nam'd the Prince: This Treason is a kind of a quotidian, It leaves a man no intervall; I durst Not mention Pedro at all, for fear The King had skill in Cabala; I'm afraid There's something in the very name, that may With a small key be open'd to my danger. Ca. You are well met my Lord, doe you know me? Me. Know you Sir? yes I know you for—
Car. For what? Me. The Prince, I hope; now I'm betray'd for certain, Yet if he know it, he will not be so furious. Car. Are you so much an enemy to your self, To tell the King? Me. I tell the King? alass I dare not tell it to my Ghostly Father, I have more regard to you, and my own life, My Family's undone by it. Car. By what Sir? Me. Nay if you know not, I know not neither, Sir; What doe you mean? Car. Am not I worthy in your opinion Your Daughter Clara's love? Me. Oh, is that all? Car. But you must dote, and tell the King on't. Me. I? I disclaim it, by my life and honour. Car. I thought you had lov'd me Sir. Me. He is a Traitour That dares accuse me; now I may speak boldly; My Bloud and Fortune have a little name I'th' World, to which make an addition of My Life, my Daughter Clara too, were these In ballance against you, they would be light, And their whole loss repaird, to see you happy: If this be false, a Whirlwind snatch me Sir, And let me hang in some prodigious Cloud 'Twixt Earth and Heaven. Car. This is a bold expression. Me. But I must tell you Sir, for your own sake, I would not have you love my Daughter Clara, Were she in beauty, person, and all ornaments, Fortune and Nature could bestow, more excellent Than Isabella. Car. Why an't please your Wisedome? Me. Sir in my love to you, and Isabella,
My duty to your Father, and the Kingdome, Nay for my Daughter's sake, and all my hope Of after-joyes, and for one other reason Above all these, which I conceal; yet I Complain'd not to the King. Car. Excluding me, Your Grace can be content, Don Manuel Should have your Daughter. Me. Rather than your Highness, I know a reason for't. Car. I must so too. Me. Your Grace shall pardon me at this time. Car. I wo'not Sir. Me. If you'l needs have it, I have made a vow I wo'not ask my Daughter blessing Sir; If you two meet, and marry, she may live To be a Queen, and then I'll kneel to her, Which is not in the Oath of my Allegiance. Car. The old man raves. Exit. Enter King, Maria. Me. The King. Car. He shall not see me Till I know all my fate. Exit. Ki. How doe you like the Prince Antonio? Ma. Sir, if you allow me freedome— Ki. You enjoy it. Ma. His Person, Bloud, and expectations, are High as the wishes of a Queen, and I With pious gratitude acknowledge all My duty, and my prayers a just return To your great care; but give me Sir your pardon, If I prefer some thoughts that prompt me to A better choyce. Ki. A better choyce? look back Upon that character your breath but now
Deliver'd in his honour. Ma. I confirm it; But when you hear me humbly beg I may Perform religious duties Sir to Heaven, You wil think nature hath a place beneath 'em: If I could find any consent to marriage, Antonio would prefer himself the first To my election: but if you were pleas'd— Ki. You would be a Nunn? Ma. That hath exprest my wishes. Ki. So I should Affront the Prince: how long Maria has This fit of your Religion held you? ha! No more, least I suspect this a pretence To hide your love plac'd otherwise unfitly, If I find where your heart is wandring— Ma. It knows obedience better, and your name, Than to choose any path leads not to honour. Ki. I must direct it then to love Antonio. My Children are turn'd rebell. Ma. Sir I hope My offer with your leave, to dedcate My life to prayer, and Virgin-thoughts, will merit A better name. Ki. Your brother Carlo too Will find himself at loss, if he collect not Himself, and make our Royall Promise good To Isabella; while my studies are To make the Kingdome firm by our alliance With Portugall, be courts the Lady Clara. Ma. I would she were his Bride, so I had Manuel. Ki. And you at the same time, and height of both The Kingdoms expectations, would take a Cloyster, Is this to pay obedience to a Father, Whose cares have kept him wake to make you happy? Ma. Goodness forbid, that Carlo or Maria
Should move me to just anger. Ki. This is virtue. Ma. He is passionate, and Love that makes all Ladies Apt and ingenious to contrive, cannot Inspire or help me with an heart to advance A little hope. Ki. It cannot be! Maria, We are surpriz'd, the Princess Isabella Is privately arriv'd, and come to Court: Where is our Son? all should prepare to meet her. Exe. Enter Carlo and Clara. Car. You may believe I trifle not. Cla. The Princess Isabella come? Car. Now if but Clara think I honour her, And instantly accept what I am willing In presence of the Priest and Heaven to give her, The Ceremony waits to make all perfect. Enter Manuell. Cla. I dare not Sir. Car. Say but you love, and that will teach you valour; I bring not onely proof of my own loyalty, Which if examin'd must invite thy faith, But thy security, a Release from Manuell; His soul is on my side, and comes to render In pity of thy wound, a balm into Thy breath; be gentle Clara. Cla. A Release? of what? Ma. Of all, thy Promise hath made mine; Observe me wisely Clara, and distinguish, As far as honour will permit, how long, And with what bleeding thoughts the Prince affects thee; For I have look'd into his soul, and back Upon the feeble merits of my self, And therefore giving thy own Vows agen,
I dis-engage their strength to bind thee Clara, And to that sweetness thy first bosome had, Remit thy quiet thoughts. Car. Th'art just. Cla. Pray give Me leave to understand this mystery, To give me back all those assurances Of Love my Promise made, I'll not dispute For what unworthiness I am neglected. Ma. I dare not be so impious. Cla. Then here I take My liberty again. Ma. You have it. Cla. Now I with safety of my honor, may Choose where I please. Ma. You may. Cla. And you desire it; You have power I must confess to give me from you Into my own possession, but no title Now to direct my heart, then though I meet My own despair, here I give Clara back, And with new Vows as strong as my Religion, And Love can make, contract my self agen To Death, or Manuell. Car. A Conspiracy! Cla. I have resign'd no interest in him, And by new choyce—am not my own agen. Car. So, so, it is as possible in our destinies We should enjoy her both, as live together, When Clara is thy Bride. Cla. That sound was tragicall; Oh call those fatall words agen, and think That if with safety of my faith I cannot Meet your desires allready, you will force My soul to greater distance, by destroying What most I love; I know you doe but fright me.
Ma. If I be mark'd for your revenge, I dare not Think you will stain your honour, to contrive My death ignobly. [They whisper. Cl. What was that he mention'd? Sir, by your name and blood I charge you hear me, By these (your rage compels) a Virgins tears, I can kneel too, take your revenge on me, 'Tis I that have offended, for your sake He did return the interest I gave him, But 'twas not in his power to revoke Himself made mine, nor dare I quit possession. Car. I have but tryed thy virtue, Manuel And I are friends. Cl. That was a heavenly language. Car. Our swords shall serve to nobler uses, Clara, I'll not disturb the progress of your Mariage; And since I see you're fixt so gloriously, Proceed to your own Hymen, I'll attend you, And witness all your holy rites. Cl. Blest change! What prayers and duty can reward his goodness? Car. I hope you'll not deny for my past service, Madam, your smile upon me, which shall be A triumph after all my wounds receiv'd, And boast a glory next to be your husband; For I consider now I am unfit. Farewell, we may salute. Remember, Manuel, The time and place. Exit. Cla. What was it the Prince whisper'd? Ma. Nothing, Madam, To fright your cheek to paleness. Cl. I do tremble. Ma. Were all this reconcilement a disguise, And that he meant revenge, should time and place Fit his inteuts, and I should meet his anger, t this secure thy peace, his honor will
Not let him wound me basely, and when I Lift up a sword 'gainst him, fate let me dye. Exeunt. ACT. IV. Enter Pedro. P. My Lord is coming to my chamber, he Has been with the King, I see my self allready Knight of the order of the Calatrava, And my Commission sign'd for the State Secretary. I am not the first servant of the Court Has kept his Lord in aw; these Secrets are An excellent curb to ride a Statesman with, That is not come to the art of poysoning. I know he wishes heartily I were hang'd; I tryed him once for the wars; to find his pulse, And I was listed Captain, before some The Generall knew had been seven years in service (As Ushers to right honourable Ladies) There was his Graces commendations To a Field-officer, that should drill me out, The first to dye, with honor on some on-slaught; So quitted that preferment. Enter Mendoza. He is come; I'll take no notice. Men. If he liv'd at the t'other end of th' world, He might betray me in the next packet: Ha! Pe. Item I bequeath— Me. What art thou doing? Pe. Only making up my Will, Sir; and my self eady for the Indies; 'tis a lonage,
And therefore I would settle every thing Before I go; if your Grace please to honor me, I would make you my Executor. Me. But when, Will you dye Pedro? ha? Pe. Sir, there be storms, Abroad, and who does know how soon the waves May rore, and crack the cabins? Me. Ha! Pe. There may be Calentures, my Lord, and twenty Devices to be met at sea, beside The land diseases; there be Hericanoes Are boysterous enough to tear up mountains, And strike a ship clean through o't'other side To the Antipodes. Me. He deals with the devil, and knows my thoughts. There's no hast to make your will, I have Consider'd o'the business, and truth is, I cannot find my heart willing to part with thee, So far thou hast been faithfull; we will live And dye together. Pe. By no means, my Lord: I am resolv'd I will not live in Spain A moneth, for as much plate as the next Fleet Brings home; no, I beseech your Grace excuse me. Me. Why Pedro? Pe. If your Grace please I shall be Knighted, Or have the Office you have promis'd, do't, And do't betime, it will be worse for both else. Me. You do not threaten to reveal the business? Pe. 'Lass, there be other matters, Sir, as dangerou And if you love your self, or honor, finish— I cannot help it. Me. I am all a bath! Pedro, why dost thou fright me so? if thou Beest honest, ther's no mortal ean betray us.
Pe. Worse, worse than that; let me go travel, Sir, And far enough; it is not possible That I should stay, and you preserve your wits. Me. The reason? Pe. It will make you mad to hear it, Sir, But 'tis my desperate fate, the stars command it; Would I had never seen— Me. What? Pe. A face that I could name. Me. If it concerns not The other mystery, let me hear it, Pedro, I will be arm'd. Pe. Why then you'll cut my throat; You cannot hold your hand; pray let me go, And you may save all yet. Me. Thou dost torment me. P. And yet it is no fault of mine, directly, We are all flesh and blood—oh Sir. Me. Out with it. Pe. You'll curse me when you know it. I would your Grace would guess, but 'tis impossible; 'Tis working to get out, I am— Me. Well sayd. Pe. Oh Sir, I am—I am—in love—now 'tis out. Me. That all? Pe. All? a Pistol to a Maravide you Your Rapier presently upon me, and If I name but the party, will not have The patience to foin, but tilt it at me. Sir, do not know't; what will become of me? It will be safer, Sir, to hoyst sayls yet, No matter whither, So I never come Agen; for if I see one face too often, Both you, and I, and she's undone: I have Beaten my self allready, fasted, prayed, Been drunk, and pray'd agen, nothing will kill
Concupiscence—oh Sir. Me. Why, this is raving. Pe. I, you may call it what you please, but here She lies a cross that must, or doe the deed, Or make poor Pedro miserable. Me. How he sweats? Pedro do not despair, this feaver may Be cur'd, it may. Pe. Indeed you can do much; For to say truth, your Grace is both acquainted, And has no small command upon the party. Me. Nay then be confident—who is't? Pe. It is—shall I name her? Me. By my honor I will beat thee else. Pe. Why so then; The pretty soul, I will confess to you, Whom, if I stay, I must— Me. Enjoy; this such a business? Pe. Is—is—Clara, your Graces one, & only daughter. Me. Ha! [draws. Pe. I told you this afore, but do not do't, Sir, now, I rather look for't in the next sallad, Or in my mornings draught; there's spice i' your closet; Or we have Spanish figs. Me. Thou most unheard-of impudence! how can't hope I should not cut thy head off? sirrah, rascall. Pe. To these things humane nature has been prone; But if you kill e, Sir, there is a scedule, A Secret in a bag of writings, left In a friends hand—nay I did look for this, There is an Inventory of Goods were stoln; The Anno Domini, with Aetatis suae Set down, the day o'th' moneth, and place remembred, If these do not revenge my death— Me. Why so; a pox upon thee—yet come hither, And let me cut thy tongue out.
Pe. I confess I am not fit to marry, Sir, a Lady of Her Princely birth and fortune, all consider'd; Alas, I know I am a wreth—but— Me. Thou wouldst have her to be thy whore, & me Thy pander to speak for thee—rogue, devill, I must kill thee, there is no remedy. Pe. Hold, you mistake me, Sir, 'is no such business. Me. What wouldst thou have then? Pe. I would go beyond sea, I, to the Indies, ir, Or turn a Haddack by the way; send me To the new Islands, or Iapan. Me. From whence you may send Letters to the King; No sirrah, I'll not trust you. Pe. 'Tis a hard case, my Lord, I have dangerous sailing Betwixt your Graces Scylla and her Caribdis. Me. I dare not kil him; why do I not kil my self ten? No, I wo'not, I will talk reason to him; Come hither sirra, my tormentor. Pe. I Sir— Me. If your hot blood must have a cooler, will None serve your rogues turn, but my daughter Clara? Say thou art mad— Pe. I have too many senses. Me. Or if your wantonness must be confin'd Within my walls— Pe. The more my sorrow—but I'll try my Lord, If you will give me leave, for your sake, Sir, Among her Gentlewomen, what I can do To conjure down my devil, I will take Some physick too, Sir, every thing will help; Would I were whipt, my Lord— Me. Whipt with a vengeance? Pe. But I am griev'd For your vexation, and my scurvey fortune; But if there be a wench, a witch, a medicine
Above ground, that can give me any charm, Your Grace shall hear no more on't—So, your pardon. And now my Lord, let your unworthy servant Have leave to ask one question; does not your Grace Suspect me monstrously? nay d'ee not think I do presume too much upon your fears? And that the knowledge of this Secret makes Me bold and sawcy, my good Lord? Me. 'Tis all too true, but 'tis not in my brain To help't, unless I take some course to kill thee. Pe. How? Me. I fear I shall be driven to't; one fit Like this will work my impatience up: look to't. Pe. Why, then I'll tel your Grace an easie way To remove all your jealousie, and never Trouble your brain with study how to kil me, A most compendious way. Me. I would I knew it. Pe. 'Tis but my going to the Court, my Lord, And if you be not cur'd within an hour After I have told the King a story, how Your wife the Dutchess lost—I ha' done— Fear nothing. Enter Lord. Lo. Is not Prince Carlo here? Me. Not here, my Lord. Lo. 'Tis the Kings pleasure you attend him presently, Your daughters presence is expected too Among the Ladies, for the entertainment Of Princess Isabella, new arriv'd the Court. Me. We humbly wait to kiss his hand. Pe. Shall I attend? Me. I am resolv'd now not to sleep without thee, And in the day, I'll look upon thee, Pedro, As thou wert my great Seal, and I thy keepr.
Pe. Yet I may give you a slip. Me. We'll to Clara: The Princess Isabella come so private, ha! Pedro? Pe. I am here, my Lord. Exeunt Enter Manuel. Ma. This is the place by his commands to meet in; It has a sad and fatall invitation. A Hermit that forsakes the world for prayer, And solitude, would be timoous to live here. There's not a spray for birds to perch upon; For every tree that over-looks the vale, Carries the mark of lightning, and is blasted. The day which smil'd as I came forth, and spread Fair beams about, has taken a deep melancholy, That fits more ominos in her face than night; All darkness i less horrid than half light. Never was such a scene for death presented, And there's a ragged mountain peeping over VVith many heads, seeming to crowd themselves Spectators of some Tragedy; but I'll Prevent 'em all; though my obedience Instructed me to wait here, it shall not Be brib'd to draw my sword against the Prince; And in his honor I am safe, how e'r This sense of Clara's loss transport him, 'tis not VVithin his nature to be impious. And if  gain his friendship, I return VVith triumph to my Clara. Within—help, help. Enter Prince Carlo's Page. Pa. Oh help, Don Manuel, help for heavens sake. Ma. Celio the Princes page? where is the Prince? Pa. Oh Sir, I fear he's slain. Ma. By whom?
Pa. The Devill, or one not very much unlike him, A More, that basely set upon him, sure He has dispatcht the Prince, he persues me, And if he have, Death shall be welcome to me, For I am not fit to live, and lose my Master. He's here, and his sword bloudy. Enter Carlo like a More. Ma. Villain! were all thy bloud rivers of balm, Or such a floud as would restore a life To the departed World, it should be all A sacrifice to Carlo. (They fight.) Pa Hold, hold Don Manuell. Ma. Canst thou be mercifull to the Princes Mur∣derer Pa. Curse on my Duty to obey so far. My Lord, the Prince is slain, you are wounded too. Ma. The Prince! Car. Don Manuell, I forgive thee. Ma. Pray Heaven this be a Dream; for if my hand Have been so much a Traitour, it shall call No other aid in your revenge: Are you Prince Carlo? Car. I was. Ma. That voyce shall be my sentence. Car. Hold, I charge thee by thy honour, Manuell. Ma. Why did you wear this black upon you Sir? Or how could art of man contrive a Cloud Which this Soul had no eyes to penetrate? Car. I knew thou wouldst not fight against me know∣ingly, And if I fell, I meant it to secure Thy act from punishment, when in this darkness I took my leave o'th' World, onely that boy, Whom I compel'd to feign me wounded, so To make thee draw thy sword; but with my bloud I feel my spirits vanish, if I have ut breath enough, I send by thee a kiss
To thy own Clara now. Ma. Oh, help good boy! For 'tis no time to curse thee now, my horse Is not far off, this scarf may stay his bleeding Untill we meet with better Surgerie. Now Heaven reprieve my strength but to convey him To some good place, and I resign my self To all the justice you will call me to. Exit. Enter King, Mendoza, Roderigo, Antonio, Pedro, Lord. Ki. Y'are all but my tormentors; where's Piraecquo? Enter Piracquo. Ro. His son is absent too. Pir. Have comfort Sir. An. Our neglect is lost in the Generall Cause, What doe you think my Lord Mendoza? Men. This no news of the Prince is not so com∣fortable. Enter 1 Lord. Ki. The news you bring? Lo. Unless he had left the Kingdom— Ki. Be dumb—and he had left the World Your cares might have persued him; if he Return not, you have murdred him. Ro. My Stars are now At work in Heaven, their influence is powerful, I will adore the Sun if it dissolve not This mit in which the Prince is lost; I am Content thou be a Constellation Carlo, In any Sphere but this. Enter a Messenger with a Letter to Piracquo. Pir. To me? 'tis Manuel's character. Lo. Unless we hear some good news of the Prince,
I fear we lose the King too. An. 'Tis strange none should attend him but his Page. Ro. I fear some plot is practis'd 'gainst his life, But dare not speak. 2 Lo. That's it distracts the King, Whose fears are helpt by a sad dream he had Last night. Ro. My Lord Piracquo's son is missing too. Pi. Comfort your self till my return, I'll find 'em, or ne'r see your face agen. Ki. Well said Piracquo, all my prayers go with thee. Me. Pedro. Exit Pir. Pe. My Lord. Me. I know not what to say, but stand Before, they may not see me weep. Pe. Sir, I must confess— Me. Ha! Confess? Pe. You are still suspicious, have a true heart, And let your conscience look less abroad Sir, If he be dead, your trouble's over Sir; We must all dye, Death has his severall waies And times to take us off, some expire humbly I'th' Cradle, some dismist upon a Scaffold— Enter Isabella, Maria, Clara. Me. Come hither, doe not name a Scaffold, I Was innocent thou knowst, the plot was all My Ladies, and not one survives the Secret, But we two. Pe. Keep your own counsell Sir, This Fatherly affection may doe harm, He could not dye in better time, Ki. Madam, can you, Whose honour seems to suffer by this absence, Have so much charity to comfort me? Isa. He is not desperate, while we have hope.
My Lord Piracquo's son may wait upon him. Enter Manuell. An. Don Manuell. Ki. Hast brought news of my Son? Ma. I can inform you a sad story Sir. Isa. Where is the Prince? Ma. Not dead I hope. Ki. Hast thou a jealousie will concern that fear? My soul has been a Prophet: what misfortune? Ma. If you have strength to hear a truth So sad, he has been wounded. Ex. Ladies. Ki. By what Traitour? look to the Princess. Ma. I had not with such boldness undertook The Tragick Story, if I had not brought The great Offender. Ki. Oh, welcome Manuell—where's the Body? Ma. Where it doth want no Surgery, but my Father Is gone with all the wings his fear and duty Can aid him with, at his return to acquaint you With Carlo's life, or death. Ro. Would I were his Surgeon. Ki. Thou hast not nam'd the Villain yet, he may Escape. Ma. I have took order for his stay, Untill your anger and the Laws conclude him. Ki. Thou hast done us service. Ma. And it will sink by slow degrees into Your faith, that he, who gave him all his wounds, Was one that lov'd him faithfully. An. Lov'd him? Ma. Above his own life. Ro. Torments oretake the Traitour. Ma. 'Tis not well said, with pardon of the King; When I shall bring you to the weeping heart Of this poor man, some may allow his penitence,
So great, it may invite a mercy to him; Alass, he was betray'd to the black deed, Both sword and soul compell'd to't. Ki. Here's a prodigie! Ro. Are you acquainted with the guilty person, That you dare thus extenuate his fact? Ma. I am, and dare produce him—here he stands, So far from wishes to out-live the Prince, He begs to wait upon his Shade. An. Does he not bleed? Ki. Apprehend his person. Ma. They are but churlish drops, And know not their own happiness; this wound Was made by Carlo, yet how slow it weeps To answer his effusion? could I reach Their orifice, I'd kiss the crimson lips, For his dear name that made 'em. Men. Did he kill him? Justice Sir, Justice I beg for Justice Upon this Murderer. Pe. Now it works. Ki. You? by what nearer interest in Carlo Should you imagine we are slow to punish him? 'Twas a black hour when Carlo saw thee first, Rewarded now for all his love; to prison with him, And let him see no day. Ex. guarded. Ma. I kiss your Sentence. An. This circumstance is strange, I am not satisfied. Ex. Ant. after Manuell. Enter Clara. Ki. How is the Princess? Cl. Sir she is alive, And would be glad to hear the Prince were so. Ki. We cannot promise, Clara. Roderigo, We should be satisfied where his Body is,
or'tis without a Soul, I fear, by this time. Ro. I could instruct the Surgeon a way To make that sure. Me. And Manuell hath confess'd himself the Mur∣derer. [To Clara.] Pe. This change was unexpected. Cla. Is he gone to Prison then? Me. Go home, by that time thou Hast wept out all thy tears, I'll come, and tell thee A little sad tale Clara, that shall make An end, and we will break our hearts together. Ki. Mendoza? Me. Sir. Ki. Why does thy grief appear So rude to out-swell mine? he was my Son. Me. My tears are anger Sir, as well as grief, That he that did commit this Paricide, Should be so impudent to say he lov'd him. Ki. That amazes me. Me. But Traitours have their Gloss, And dare expound their disobedient acts, A branch of their allegiance: precious juggling Treason would be too ugly to appear With his own face, but Duty and Religion Are hansome visors to abuse weak sight, That cannot penetrate beyond the bark, And false complexion of things; I hope You wo'not think a single death sufficient, If Iulio dye. Ki. Carlo thou meanst— Me. I, I, the Prince, I know not what I say Sir, Things make me wild— Pe. Take heed Sir what you say. Enter Antonio, Roderigo at one dore, and at the other dore Piracquo, and a Lord discouring. Piracquo is return'd.
Pi. My son confess the deed, and sent to Prison? so. Ki. Now Sir. An. How is the Prince, my Lord? Pi. This was an act of his last strength, as when A short-liv'd Taper makes a blaze, it has Direction to your Sister Sir, and I His last commands I fear— [Pir. gives Ant. a Letter. An. For the conveyance, Trust that to me—give this Sir to my Sister. [To his Servant. Ki. Then he is dead, Piracquo? Pi. Not yet Sir, But he hath such a wound will not allow Him many minutes life, 'tis mortall Sir, They say, and wo'not pain him past next dressing. Ro. How things succeed to my Ambition—Sir— Me. I care not for my head, now let him take it, 'Tis but for keeping counsell. Ro. It is apparent this misfurtune grew From both their loves to Clara. Ki. Thy son, Piracquo, dyes. Pi. Great Sir, hear me. An. Manuell affirms he did not know the Prince I'th' habit of a More, and that his Page By the command of Carlo told him, that His Master had been wounded by that More, To engage their fight. Pi. All this the Prince acknowledg'd. Ro. These are devices to paint Manuel's Treason. Pi. I sooner dare believe one accent from The Prince's breath, when his just soul was parting, Than all your Commentaries; I am bold; Nor can the Law, and all your anger weigh So heavy as my curse, upon his head That durst lift up a Sword to wound the Prince: But let not passion take away your justice, 'Tis that I kneel for.
Ki. Against whom Piracquo? Pi. 'gainst him that's guilty of the Prince's loss, You may incline to think poor Manuell innocent. Ki. What riddle's this? Ro. Has not your son, Piracquo, Confess'd himself the Murderer? An. Manuel's fortune Distracts the old man. Pi. Pardon my love of truth, I here accuse Mendoza, that hath slept so long in Treason. Me. Ha—Pe—Pedro. Pi. If he deny, I ha' proof to make him blush, And sink him with dishonour; Pedro can Relate a Story will be worth your wonder. Me. Nay then 'tis come about, I see, I cannot Sir confess in better time. Don Manuel has accus'd himself unjustly For Carlo's death, that Prince, if I may trust A Wife upon her death-bed— Enter Isabella. Ki. Roderigo— Give us account from their examination, And guide us in this Labyrinth. Piracquo Return toth' Prince, what Death hath left of him Command may be attended hither. Isa. Sir, if you please, I have a great desire To take a sad leave of the Prince, and kiss His pale hand, ere his Body be embalm'd, And sear-cloths hide him from us. Ki. It will but Enlarge your grief. An. I will attend my Sister; my Lord Piracquo You can best direct us. (Exe. Ant. Pir. Isa. Ro. Convey 'em with a strong guard. [Men. and Ped. under guard. Pe. What think you of an Indian voyage now Sir?
Ro. My joyes are firm at root, Don Manuel, Sir, is not guilty of the Prince's death, Yet stain'd with blood to merit execution. He that is slain did but usurp your blessing, And was by the art of Duke Mendoza's Lady, Then Governess to the Prince, after the loss Of Carlo, that was stoln away an infant, Put in his place; the Court has been long cosen'd. Ki. This story will want faith. Me. The circumstance will make all clear. Ki. Expound the riddle as we walk, there's no Condition more expos'd to care than Princes. Private men meet the force of common stings, But none can feel the weight of Kings, but Kings. Exeunt. ACT. V. Enter Mendoza, and the Castellano. Me. A Very goodly pile; a hansom prison! Ca. It has been grac'd with persons of some honor, Me. They had but little grace, as well as I, That came to be your Tenants for all that. Signior, where is my quondam servant? My fellow prisoner, Pedro. Ca. He is singing, Sir. Me. What? Ca. Catches. Me. He has a fine time on't. He need not clear his throat for a confession, He has done that already, and I too; That trouble's over; and yet call him hither; But I'll not sing. Poor Iulio, thou art gone,
nd with thy eyes all my delights are clos'd, y senses vanish too apace—I was oo hasty when my Dutchess lay a dying o visit her; had I but stayd one hour, he had been speechless, and I had been happy ithout the reach of this unlucky Secret. Enter Castellano and Pedro. Pe. Does the house fill, Sir? these are active times, nd if all men had their deserts, the State Must be at charge to build new tenements or Traytors. Ca. The times are busie, Sir. Pe. They are indeed, Good for al squires of the delinquent body And sable Twig. Ca. You are very pleasant, Sir. Pe. You would not smile, I think, so much, if Justice Should take a toy and turn about, it is Within the hand of fate to fetch a compass, With your own rod, & whip, you know what follows. Me. Is this a time and place convenient, Pedro, To sing your catches? Ex. Cast. Pe. Yes, and please your Grace. And cause my songs are set for three parts, Sir, If it will please your Grace to take the Tenor, And get the Prince's Page, newly committed, To sing the Treble, for the Base, let me alone. Me. You can sing that part at first sight. Pe. I can reach double ef-fa-uth: Shall the boy come? Me. Yes, yes, why should I grieve? Pe. Why now you are right; Let men that have no hope to get their freedom Be fullen, whine like whelps, and break ther sleep, We must be jolly, and drink sack, and sing. Me. We? why we? is any thing in our condition
Can promise hope to be enlarg'd before The rest? our state, if you consider, Pedro, Exceeds, in being desperate, other mens, As we out-sin them in the fact. Pe. Why, there's your error, we are in for Treason, Sir, That's to our comfort. Me. Comfort? can there be A greater charge? Pe. Oh our discharge the nearer; Poor things, whose highest thoughts are pilfering, Lye by't, and languish Sessions after Sessions, Till they have worn away their clothes, and skins too, And often are repriev'd, when he that's sent Hitherfor Treason, quickly comes to th'bar, Pleads his not guilty, and is hang'd compendiously. Me. Yet some, with reverence to your observations, Are not dispatcht. Pe. Then, doubt their causes mainly; Your Grace, I hope, shall not complain for want Of timely execution; I am thinking What Speech is best to please the people at it. Me. I shall have cause to name your treachery. Pe. Why so, there's more argument by that To stuff out your confession. Me. Tell me, and tell me truly, How long since you discover'd this Court Secret To Don Piracquo? Pe. I was tender hearted, Sir, And knew that I had but a weak memory, Therefore the first time that I saw his Lordship, After he came from Portugal, I told him The punctual story, lest I should forget, Sir; What should a man dissemble, & lose time for? I did it for your good. Me. It does appear. Pe. It was no faul of mine, you came no sooner
To this preferment. Me. It might have sav'd my Iulio's life indeed, And then though I had dyed— Pe. Yet you were against it still; These jealousies and fears do seldom prosper; I knew by instinct t'were better, but as it is 'Tis well, your death will be more pittied, And remarkable. Me. But what have you got by betraying me? Pe. The credit to be hang'd for treason, as I told your Grace, besides the benefit Of being read in Chronicles with Lords, And men of worship, I have prepar'd a business, For the present, a provision, Sir, Will serve any turn. Me. What's that? Pe. A ballad, Sir, Before I dye, to let the people know How I behav'd my self upon the scaffold; With other passages, that will delight The people, when I take my leave of the world, Made to a Pavin tune, Will you hear it? Enter Castell. and Clara. Me. Away you knave. Cast. Sir, your Daughter. Pe. She comes to condole. I'll see you another time; your Graces servant. Ex. Cl. Sir, I beseech you tell me, for I dare not Believe the busie noise, they say you have Confest strange things, and he that was receiv'd These many years, Prince Carlo, and so lately Slain, is my brother Iulio. Me▪ Sad truth, Clara. Cl. I have heard my Mother say, he dyed an infant.
Me. And I believ'd it too, but at her death She told me another story, Clara, that Prince Carlo by some Pirats had been stoln An infant from our Castle, on which loss, She sent me word to Court, my son dyed suddenly; At which the King fearing some danger might Follow to the Prince her charge, commanded him To court, instead of whom, she sent thy brother, Who was believ'd the Kingdoms heir, untill Pedro, who waited then nearest thy Mother, And knew the imposture, brake his oath, and told Piracquo all the Secret, by whose charge My death and shame must make up the full Tragedy. Cla. Manuel kill'd my brother then? Me. He has don't; And if thou hast a Sister's soul, thou must Joyn with thy father, to pull curses on him. Cl. That wil not call poor Iulio back again; They say that Charity will open Heaven. Me. Charity? will you not curse your brother's mur∣derer? Upon my blessing I command thee curse him. Cl. That would but wound us more, & not reach him; Beside, 'twere an intrenchment upon heaven, So boldly to prescribe our own revenge, It were a sin might draw another punishment, Great as the loss of you. Me. You are a baggage; But if thou hast a thought to wish him live, Here I disclame thee; if thou wert a son, I would pronounce thee bastard, if thou didst not Kill himself thy self, but as it is, I sha'not Be satisfied, since my own hands are bound, If thou attempt not something in his danger. Cl. Good Sir, you speak, as you were to expect No killing sentence from the offended Law. Me. I'll study some revenge my self. Exit:
Cl. He's lost; And in this storm like a distracted passenger, Whose bark has struck upon some sand, I look rom the forsaken deck upon the seas, find my own despair, which every wave Swels high, and bids me die for fear of drowning. Enter Castellan. May I not see Don Manuel your prisoner? Ca. Yes Madam, if you expect untill Princess Maria, who is come to visit him— Cl. My affairs concern 'em both, Direct me with more hast. Ca. Then this way, Madam. Exe Enter Manuel and Maria, (a Taper on the Table.) Ma. Madam, I ow to your charity this light, And yet this little Taper may be useless, I fear the King will lose part of his sentence When you go hence, for such a full light waits About you, when you take away your person, t will be some day still, as I foresee As you appear'd some dawning of the morning. Ma. I would I could bring comfort to thee, Manuel▪ Man. What comfort can you wish me? Ma. Life and liberty; With these my self, if fate, and thy consent Were to allow the gift. Man. It is not well, Unless you doubted, Madam, my repentance, To afflict me with these mockeries. When will you rather perfect what your own Revenge must prompt you to, my death for Carlo, Your Princely Brother, Madam? I confess This hand rob'd him of life.
Ma. Yet in my heart I dare pronounce thy pardon, Manuel. Man. It is not possible. Enter Clara. Is not that Clara? That's come to take her leave, before I print My everlasting farewell on her lip? Which I shall hardly find, if this rain last, To drown these lovely meadows; thou shalt be A Judge between the Princess and poor Manuel, To enable thee for sentence, take upon thee Her person, Clara; Be the Princess, wo't? And hear me plead against my sel fand her, Till she repent her love, and leave me to A quiet death. I know not how to think (Maria) you can mean this love to me, Or that your voice, when it does chime the sweetest, Is more than preface to my dirge; say that You have a heart less penetrable than The scale of Dragons, and as many stings When they make war, and I'll give faith to you; For such an enemie as I, must not Be look'd on, but with all your wrath upon me; Me-thinks I hear your brother call you, Madam, And hovering, as he scorn'd to touch the earth Sustains his Murderer, is pointing to The wounds I made, whose fountains are still weeping. I feel a purple dew descend upon me, And I am all a bloody rock allready; Are not you stiff with wonder yet? if once You had when I appear'd a man, fair thoughts Of me; it is too much to love me now, You must convert them into curses, Madam, And I will call it justice. Cla. I came not
To hear this Comment on my brother's story, Whom you have kill'd. Man. Observe her act your person, And speak now, as if the sorrow were her own, And she had lost a brother. Cl. Indeed, I have wept before, and came not now to learn A grief for him that was so near my blood: But I've consider'd too, the ties of nature Should have no force against the rules of Justice; Allthough it be a sorrow, to remember He took his great misfortune from your sword, You did not murder him, nay you did not kill him, You fought in his revenge, and while he came Hid in the name and person of a Traytor, It was your virtue made him bleed, and yet He was my brother, Sir. Man. Your brother? more, He was your Prince too, Madam, think o'that, The full blown expectation of the Kingdom, One that redeem'd my life from banishment, And yet I kill'd him, can you forgive me? You cannot, must not, Madam. Cla. Yes, and dare Say, I still love you. Man. She will punish me, For giving up my interest to Carlo, If she encourage thus Maria, Madam, Do you consider how few sands are left In my poor glass of time, I cannot promise Three minutes here, Law and the Kings deree Have turn'd two parts of me to dust allready; I feel the third unsettle, and make fit To be dissolv'd, but could fate give my life The period to be wished (remember whom I speak to Clara) and I need no more
Accuse my self, my heart was long since given Away, and you as soon may reconcile Time and Eternity to one growth, and age, As hope my love and yours should ever meet. Cla. Then it is time to dye. Man. Madam, she faints, Oh help, she has forgot her part, this was Not meant to Clara. Mar. Madam, Madam. Man. Clara, so, so, she returns, I should have quickly followed else. Mar. I see Your loves are sacred, and 'tis sin to attempt Your separation; though I lov'd thee Manuel, I can resign to Clara, whom I hop'd Her Brothers death might have provok'd to leave thee. Man. Her Brothers? let me hear Clara speak; her Bro∣thers death? Having so little time to stay with thee Alive, why didst thou make such hast? Cla. Did not You Sir pronounce it was impossible That our two loves should meet? Man. Thou didst not Represent Clara then, thou wert the Princess. Cla. I know not, but your last profession That our two hearts should never grow together, Followed so close my Brother's death, I thought The meaning look'd on me. Mar. Thy Brothers death? Mar. You have not slain the Prince my Brother, Manuel, But Clara's, this may yet appear a mystery. Cla. 'Tis too true. Man. But stay; and can my Clara then forgive me? No man despair to find Mercy in Heaven, There is so great a Charity upon Earth. But doe not leave me lost i'th' wonder, Madam,
Allthough it would be happiness to know The Prince not dead, I cannot hear without A wound next his, that I ha' kil'd thy Brother; It cannot be, allthough thou wouldst forgive me, I cannot be so miserable. Mar. How Their Souls agree? 'twere tyranny to part 'em. Clara, I envyed, now allow thy happiness, And will have no more thoughts upon your loves, But what shall be employ'd in hearty wishes That Manuel may live still to reward it; Thou hast deserv'd him better than I have Antonio. Cla. If my death may speak Addition to the love I owe thee; 'tis In my resolution, at that minute Thy Soul takes leave, my own shall wait upon it, And take a journey through the Clouds together: Who knows but they may fill one Star? Farewell, Till we begin that progress. Man. Doe not make Death horrid to me Clara, for to think, When this unworthy Frame must fall to pieces, Thy Soul, a fairer Tenant to this building, Should wander in persuit of mine— Mar. No more; Let me advise your griefs, I have tears for both, Divide at distance, you may kiss in heart. Man. With such a groan souls from their bodi part▪ The Castellano lights away the Ladies, and Manuell retires to his Prison. Enter Roderigo and Isabella. Isa. How, an Impostor! though the Peoples tongues, That catch at every noise, and wave their duty,
As they are prescrib'd by Faction, or lewd Pamphlets, Doe talk this loud— Rod. Upon my honour, Madam. Isa. I hope your Lordship has another knowledge, And faith, than to disgrace your bloud, the Prince— Ro. I say he is no Prince, and we are sorry A Lady of your greatness should i'th' height Of such a glorious expectation, lose What did invite your person hither. Isa. Ha! Then I am lost, that Letter has undone me, Which full of love and satisfaction, made Me hasty to destroy my self. Ro. 'Tis yet Within your choice to lose no honour, Madam, And in my sense of what you else might suffer, I come to tender reparation, Both to your love and greatness. Isa. 'Tis not possible. Ro. If you can find within your heart a will To entertain my love, I'm no Impostor, The King will call me Brother, be kind Madam, And what is past shall vanish like a dream. Secure me with a smile. Isa. My Lord, I thank you; But there will still remain some characters By which the world may guess at my sad story. Ro. There cannot. Isa. Yes, I find some printed here, For I did love the person, I confess, Of him you call the Impostor: did he know Himself a Counterfeit? Ro. Let me be just, And quit him from that Treason. Isa. That is something To plead his innocence to me; I dare not
Yet ask his name, when I remember what My tongue consented to before the Priest So late; yet 'twill be known; if he be not The Prince we thought, tel me his other name; Say, is he basely born? Ro. He is the Duke Mendoza's son. Isa. That is a comfort yet, And in the confidence of this truth, my Lord, I am well again, I thank you. Ro. If this please you, Doe you remember Madam, he hath wounds Fatall upon him, that allready may Exclude him from the living? Isa. 'Twould be impious, While there is any life remaining Sir, To make another promise; when you say He's dead, I may with modest freedom hear What you too early now prepare me for. Exit Isa. Ro. You honour me enough. I find her judgement Allready meet what I propound, he cannot, He sha'not live to cross me. Enter Piracquo. 'Tis Piracquo, He can assure me; you look sad my Lord, As if with Iulio's giving up the ghost, Your sons life now were forfeit. Pir. 'Tis too true. Ro. I'll follow, and acquaint her; yet 'tis safer She take it from another. Pir. All my hopes Are in your Grace, the King is coming hither, If you will bind an old mans prayers, and service, Second my feeble breath, and mediate
His mercy to my boy, you may be satisfied In conscience, he had no thoughts to kill him; The Prince's death will not engage you now To be poor Manuel's enemy; good my Lord, Forgive what past in my rash language. Ro. Does not Your Lordship call to mind there was a sum Of fifty thousand Ducats? Pi. They shall be sent to your Grace's Secretary, nay I'll make 'em fifty thousand more, and think It cheap to save his life, now you are mercifull— Ro. The bargain would doe well, but you are co∣zen'd, I will not take a Maravide, not I, If upon other honourable tearms I may possess you favour, I shall meet Your just commands; ha' you forgot my Lord? Some men doe keep Records, but I am charitable, And will not rack your patience— Pi. Y'are gratious. Ro. Ten millions of Ducats shall not ransome Your Darling from the Scaffold: you observe? You know your self, your fortune, and upon What strength you must depend, now I have said— Pi. Will your Grace hear? My son shall live then, and not lose one hair, If you would pawn your soul to have it otherwise. I have said too. Ro. So peremptory? Pi. Your Grace must pardon me the truth, I have A scurvy sullen humour where I meet A worse, and cannot hold, though I should hang for't, And so God bu'y to your Grace, we are alone— Ro. Be merry with your head on—time may come— Pi. I would take boldness, once more, to intreat That the young man may live till the next Spring, And then your Grace may purge—
Ro. So Sir, I shall find waies to stay your vomiting— The King. Enter King and Lords. 1. Lo. Good Sir be comforted. Ki. Good Sir give me reasons; I had a son till now, yet long since lost him. Ro. Now you may take revenge. Ki. Tis well remembred. Mendoza is the Traytor, he shall bleed For Carlo's loss. Ro. And he deserves, that would Have cozen'd the whole Kingdom. Ki. Send for him; I'll ask him in what wilderness the boy Has hid himself, command him hither presently, And if he give me not a satisfaction, It will be justice then to send his soul About the world, to find him out. 1. Lo. The Prince Antonio, Sir. Enter Antonio and Maria. An. If at a time, when sorrow Hath exercised his sting, you can admit To hear me happy in Maria's love, Let me begin to call you father, and Till Carlo find your blessing, think you have One to supply his duty. Ki. It is some Allay to Carlo's loss, Maria has Not left her father. Ma. I shall ever live Within your precept to express a daughter As unto him a wife. Ki. Both to my heart!
Sit down, where is your sister Isabella? Ro. She not despairs To be a Bride to one, that may repair My Nephews loss; and if she smile on me, It wil not draw I hope your frown upon it. Enter Isabella, Julio, Piracquo. An. Is not that Isabella? Isa. And this he, Who, if you call me Sister, must be worth Your noblest Friendship, and embrace. Ro. Alive? Iu. Your pardon Sir, they knew me innocent, Made me usurp Prince Carlo's name for Iulio's. Ro. Confusion! Enter Manuel and Clara. Pi. I appeal Sir to your justice, and have brought My son, to hear your breath pronounce his pardon. Ki. Thus all meet happiness but I; receive Him free Piracquo, onely I must mourn The loss of mine. Enter Mendoza and Pedro. Iu. I am no Prince, Don Manuel, my fate Has been unriddled. Cla. My Brother living? we are all safe. Me. Ha my Iulio? Iu. Your blessing now. Me. Take it, and with it all my tears, I scorn To shed one other drop, my joyes are mighty, My heart is all one bonefire— Ki. Plead no more, Mendoza dies, the sentence is irrevocable. Pe. There is a cooler Sir after your bonefire. Iu. Sister, I'll kiss these sorrows off.
Cl. You cannot while my Father's doom'd to death. Ro. Why does Mendoza live? Pi. Because he must not dye yet. Pedro— Pe. My Lord. [Pi. and Pe. whisper with the King. Men. I'll give thee Clara first, here take her Manuel, I see she loves thee, lose no tears for me, My Taper has burnt dim this many years. Ki. Antonio! Maria! Isabella! Mendoza! witness all—proceed Piracquo— Pi. I was that Pirat Sir, that stole your son, And being desperate meant by this surprise To make my peace— Pe. I was in the Confederacy, And must affirm this truth. Pi. But just when I had fitted my design, And did expect t'have brought Don Carlo home, I heard he was at Court, no loss deplor'd, For by the Dutchess of Mendoza's art Iulio supply'd the Princes name, and person. Me. And sent me word to Court my Son was dead? ha! Pi. This made me think my Kinsman had deceiv'd me, And then resolv'd my stay in Portugal, Where, as my own, I bred, and call'd him Manuel; Till after many years your Grace redeem'd us, And I at my return confirm'd i'th' story By Pedro, hitherto protracted time, With hope to serve Don Iulio for our freedome. I have your pardon Sir for all. Ki. Thou hast. Pe. I am included, trust me with a Secret Sir Another time, I knew 'twould come to this At last, and with some justice did but punish Your fears and jealousies; is not this better Than sending me to the Wars, or shipping me For t'other World before my time? Me. Th'art my best Servant.
Pi. And my heir agen. Car. Depose me from this glorious title, Sir, Unless my Clara may divide the honor. Ki. Providence meant her thine, both call me father. Ro. There is no remedy, Nephew, welcom home, And Neece, we shall be kindred now Mendoza, Piracquo we are friends too, and I'll try, How I can love you heartily. Ki. I hear The Altar call, make hast, the triumph will Attend too long, the clouds are chac'd away, Night ne'r was mother to so bright a day. Exeunt omnes. FINIS.
