S3636 R41684 31355767 110661
Short Treatise OF THE DESCRIPTION OF THE SECTOR. WHEREIN Is also shown the great Use of that ex∣cellent Instrument, in the Solution of several Mathematical Problems. LONDON, Printed for and Sold by John Worgan, Mathe∣matical Instrument-maker, at his Shop un∣der St. Dunstan's Church, Fleetstreet, 1697. Where all sorts of Mathematick Instruments, both for Sea and Land, are made and Sold.
TO THE READER. READER, THOU art here presented with a small Trea∣tise of the Use of the Sector, in which I have Explain'd the true Nature and Property of the Construction of this admirable Instrument; and have Geometrically demonstrated the Grounds upon which all the Operations depend. I have also shown the A∣mendments that have been lately made in disposing the Lines hereon plac'd, and the advantages accrewing thereby. In the next place I have exhibited its general Use, and declared wherein the great benefit of this Noble Contrivance lies, and the Universal Usefulness of the same. Lastly, I have a little Illustrated its Excellency in the Solution of some few Mathematick Problems, parti∣cularly in Arithmetick, Geometry and Trigono∣metry; which indeed are the foundation of all the rest, and sufficient for the young Tyro's light to the Solution
of many more. For to show  the  of  ¦ment were little less than to write a Body of the Mathematicks, which is not my design at present. My principal intent here being only to show how this Instru∣ment supplies the place of almost all others. Particular∣ly of all kinds of Scales and Rules, which are made but to assigned or particular Radiuses, which is the main end, and sole design of this Instrument. If herein the Publick Good be any way advanc'd, I shall be very Glad of it. Vale.
sector (mathematical instrument) Iohn Worgan Londini fecit
CHAP. I. A Description of Chords, Sines, Tangents, &c. BEcause in the measuring of parts of a Circle (which is often required) there is no other way but by reducing them to strait Lines, there∣fore did the Ancients apply certain strait Lines to a Circle; which come in Competition to Arch-lines, and that several ways, viz. as they are drawn within a Circle, through it, or without a Circle. Lines within a Circle are Chords and Sines. A Chord of an Arch is a strait Line drawn from one end of an Arch to the other, as in Fig. 1. the Line A B is the Chord of the Arch A C B. It is also the Chord of the Arch A D B, for it is common to both parts of the Circle. So that from 15 Prop. of the 3d Book of Euclid 'tis evident, the greatest Chord that can be drawn is the Diameter of the Circle, or Chord of 180 Deg. or half the Circle, and consequently that all Chords of Arches greater than a Semi-circle, are less than the Diameter. Sines be either Right or Versed. A right Sine of an Arch is a Line drawn from one end of that Arch perpendicular to a Diameter drawn from the other end of that Arch, and belongs to both parts of a Semi-circle, as in Fig. 1. EB. is the right Sine of the Arch C B, and also of the Arch B D.
And here you may observe from the aforecited Propo∣sition of Euclid, that the greatest Sine is that of 90 Deg. or a Quarter of a Circle: And therefore all Sines of Arches greater than a Quadrant, are less than the Sine of 90 Deg. which is half the Diameter, or that which (in all Proportions) we call Radius. The Versed Sine of an Arch is that part of the Dia∣meter betwixt the right Sine, and the end of that Arch it is the Versed Sine off, as in Fig. 1. E C is the Versed Sine of the Arch C B, and E D the Versed Sine of the Arch B D. From hence 'tis also evident that the greatest Versed Sine is that of 180 Deg. Lines drawn through a Circle are Secants. A Secant is a strait Line drawn from the Center of a Circle through one end of that Arch (which it is the Se∣cant off) till it meet with the Tangent which bounds it, as in Fig. 2. EI in the Secant of the Arch BH. Lines drawn without a Circle are Tangents. A Tangent is a strait Line that touches a Circle, and is erected perpendicular to a Diameter drawn from the Touch-point, being limited by the Secant which passeth through the other end of the Arch, it is the Tangent off, as in Fig. 2. the strait Line HI is the Tangent of the Arch B H. Hence 'tis evident there can be no Secant nor Tan∣gent of 90 Degrees, for the Secant of 90 Degrees is pa∣rallel to the Tangent Line, and therefore if infinitely produced will never meet with it. The Half Tangent is only the Tangent of half the Arch as the Tangant of 90 Degrees is infinite, but the Half Tangent of 90 Deg. is the Tangent of 45 Deg. as in Fig. 2. FE is the Half Tangent of the Arch BH, which is but half the Angle B A H, for the Angle at the
Center is double to the Angle at the Circumference by 20 Prop. of the Third Book of Euclid. CHAP. II. How the Sines of Chords, Natural Sines, Tangents, Secants, &c. are projected, and put on the Common Scales. FIrst, with any distance describe the Circle, A B C F and draw the Diameter A C, which cross at right Angles with the Line D B produc'd in Fig. 3. and draw A B, then divide the Arch A B into 9 equal parts, set∣ing thereto the Figures 10, 20, 30, &c. to 90; and each of those 9 Divisions again into 10 equal parts, one of which is a degree, or the 360 of the whole Circle. This done with one foot of the Compasses in A, transfer these Divisions of the Arch to the strait Line A B, pla∣cing thereto the Numbers 10, 20, &c. as was set to the Arch. The Line A B thus divided is a Line of Chords, and may be transfer'd from the Paper to a Silver, Brass, or Box-Scale. Secondly, For the Sines divide the arch B C as be∣fore, viz. into 90 equal parts, noting the 9 Grand Di∣visions with Figures as in the last. From these points in the arch B C let fall perpendiculars to the Diameter A C, these shall divide the Semi-diameter D C into a Line of right Sines, which may from hence be transfer'd to any Scale or Rule. Thirdly, For the Versed Sines, (which is only a dou∣ble Scale of right Sines) let fall perpendiculars (as before to divide the Sines) from every degree in the whole Se∣mi-circle
A B C, these Perpendiculars will divide the Dia∣meter A C into a Line of Versed Sines, which are num∣bered according to the Figures under the Diameter, but are seldom put on any Scale, except requir'd. Fourthly, From C raise a Perpendicular to A C, and from the Center D through each Division of the Qua∣drant draw Lines, producing them till they meet the Line C E, which Lines shall divide the said Line into a Scale of Tangents, to which set the Fig. 10, 20, 30, &c. as they were in the Arch. Fifthly, If the Extents D 10, D 20, D 30, &c. in the Tangent-Line be transfer'd to the Line D B produc'd, they will divide it into a Line of Secants, which with the Numbers 10, 20, 30, &c. may from the Scheme be put upon any Scale, and is continued on the line of Sines, for after the Sine of 90, the Tangents begins. Hence you see that the Secant of Nothing, is the Ra∣dius or Semi-diameter of the Circle. Sixthly, If from A to each Division of the Arch B C you draw Lines, they shall divide the Radius B D into a Line of half Tangents, to which set the Numbers 10, 20, 30, &c. to 90. Sometimes this Line is made to run as far as 150 or 160 Deg. which is of the same length with the whole Tangent of 75 or 80 Deg. and when 'tis so divided the Line B D must be produc'd as it was for the Secant. For the half Tangent of 10 Deg. is the whole Tangent of 5 Deg. so also the half Tangent of 160 Degrees is the whole Tangent of 80 Degrees. Seventhly, Draw the Line A F and divide the Arch A F into 8 equal parts, these transfer'd from the Arch to the strait Line A F, as were the Chords, divides it into a Line of Rhumbs or Points: Its use is to lay of any Point of the Compass, which it doth much more readier than a Line of Chords, though that will serve when you have not this.
Lastly, You may divide the Semi-diameter F D into 100 equal parts, and it will serve for a Line of Equal parts, to take Leagues or Miles from; not but that it might be longer or shorter for there is no necessity of its being just of such a length. This Line is of great use, because from it all the other Lines might be divided, by supposing the Radius of the Circle to contain any number of equal parts, as 1000, 10000, &c. For then all the Chords, Sines, Tangents, &c. will consist of a certain number of those parts. CHAP. III. Of the Plain Scale. ASsume a Line whose length let be what you please, suppose ab. On this Line make a Parallelogram of any breadth at pleasure as abcd, divide the opposite sides ab and de each into 10 equal parts, as also ad, bc, seting thereto the Figures 1, 2, 3, &c. as you see in Fig. 4. This done draw from the Points 1, 2, 3, &c. in the Line ad, the several Lines parallel to ab, then from the Points b, 1, 2, 3, &c. in the Line ab, to the Points 1, 2, 3, &c. in the Line dc; draw the Diagonal Lines, b. 1, 1. 2, 2. 3, 3. 4, &c. By which the Line ab or those equal to it, are actually divided into 100 equal parts. The reason of which is very clear from the 4th. of the 6th. of Euclid, for by that proposition 'twil hold as bc: be:: 1c: he, and therefore if be is 1/10 of bc (which by construction it is) then shall he be 1/10 of 1c that is 1/10 of 1/10 (or 1/100) of dc or ab. If the Sides ab, dc, as also their Parallels 1, 2, 3, &c. be produced, and the distances ab, dc, repeated thereon,
1, 2, 3, or more Lines, as the lengths of the Rule on which you put them will permit, you have finished the said Diagonal Scale; the design of which is to supply the use of a Scale of equal parts, but with greater exact∣ness than any of those kind of Scales can pretend to, for from it may be taken any Number under 1000 exactly. CHAP. IV. Of the construction of the Lines of Artificial Numbers, Sines and Tangents. BEsides the Lines before described there are another sort, which is generally put on Scales and Rules, called Artificial Numbers, Sines and Tangents, the rise and construction of which are from the Logarithmes. For they are only the Logarithms of the Natural Numbers, Sines and Tangents Transfer'd to a Scale. The Line of Numbers commonly known by Name of Gunter's Line, is a Line of Geometrical Proportion un∣equally divided into 9 parts, beginning at 1 towards the left hand and running with 2, 3, 4, &c. to 10, which is about the middle of the Line, where another Radius be∣gins, and is continued to 100 towards the right hand, it hath the Figures 10, 20, 30, &c. set thereto, and is divided just as was the first part of it. The Line being thus divided is called a Line of Num∣bers of two Radiuses, and the way of Numbring on it thus, (for herein lyes the great difficulty in the use of it.) It is (as before was noted) divided into 18 unequal parts, the first 9 ending about the middle of the Scale, and the other 9 at the end next the right hand; then each of
these Primes or first Grand Divisions are subdivided in∣to 10 other parts according to the same reason called Tenths; and again each of those Tenths are subdivided into 10 other parts if the length of the Rule or Scale will permit. The Figures 1, 2, 3, &c. by which the Primes are di∣stinguished, are all arbitrary points, and may each of them represent so many entire Unites, Tenns, Hundreds or Thou∣sands; or they may also represent so many Tenth, Hundredth, Thousandth, or Ten Thousandth parts of an Unite. If the first 1 on the Line be taken for 1, then 10 in the middle of the Line is 10 as in course it falls, but if the first 1 be taken for 10, or 100, then the figure 10 in the middle of the Rule must be taken for 100 or 1000. Now when the first 1 or Prime represents 10 Unites, each Tenth in that Prime will be 1; and each Centesme in those Tenths (if there be any) will be one tenth part of an Unite. Again, let the first Prime represent 100, then the Fi∣gures 2, 3, 4, &c. will denote 200, 300, 400, &c. and so 10 at the end will be 10000, and according to this supposi∣tion 1 tenth in each Prime will be 10 Unites, and in those tenths each Centesme will be 1. For Decimal Fractions let 10 at the end of the Line, next the right hand, represent 1, then each Prime to∣wards the left hand will be 1, and in those Primes each tenth will be .01, and in these tenths each Centesm will be .001 part of an Unite. The Divisions and way of Numbring on this Line being thus explain'd, it will not (I presume be difficult) to find the point upon the Line, where any Number given is represented. For Example: Suppose the Number 276 were proposed, for the first figure 2 I account 2 next the beginning of the Line that is 2 next the left hand, for the second figure 7 I
tell 7 tenths next following, that is 7 of the 10 great Di∣visions betwixt 2 and 3, then from this point I count 6 Centesms. So that from 2 to this point represents 276. Again, suppose I would represent or find the Number 408 on the Line, then for the first figure 4 I take that 4 on the Line next the left hand, and for the 0 in the se∣cond place, I must not take any tenths, but for the 8 in the third place I count 8 Centesms, and it gives that point which represents 408. The greatest Inconvenience of these Lines is this, all Numbers above 3 or 4 places cannot precisely be repre∣sented unless the Lines are very long. As for Decimal Fractions and mixt Numbers, they are discovered after the same manner as whole Numbers were: For suppose 2. 76 was required to be represented, it will be found at the same point, and by the same Rule as the whole Number 276 was. And therefore by what hath been said it will be easie to find the point where any Number is represented on the Line especially if it be small. Next for the Line of Artificial Sines, which are only the Logarithms of the Natural, and are therefore transfer'd from a Table of Logarithms to the Scale, they begin to∣ward the left hand, and are numbered towards the right with the Figures 1, 2, 3, &c. to 10, which stands about the middle of the Line, and signifie single Degrees, after these it runs on with 10, 20, 30, &c. to 90, which stands at the end next the right hand, these Divisions are sub∣divided into 10 equal parts, and those again into 10, 5 or 2 parts, and sometimes not at all, according as the length of the Scale will permit. So that if betwixt 1 and 2 in the first part it be divided into ten parts, one of these parts will represent 6 Minutes, and if each of these Divi∣sions be again halv'd each part will represent 3 Min. If the grand Division in the later part be divided into 10 equal
parts, each division represents a degree, and if these are halv'd each division will be 30 Minutes. What is said of the Line of Sines, the same may be understood of the Line of Tangents, whose divisions begin at 1, and run to 10 in the middle of the Line, and signifie only single Degrees, after 10 it runs on with 20, &c. to 45, which stands at the end of the Line; from 45 it runs back again to 90 where you be∣gun, as the bare inspection of these Lines on any Scale, will more fully declare. These Lines are of most Excellent use, for by them all Questions of Proportion may be solv'd, whether Arith∣metical or Geometrical. But their principal business is the solution of Plain and Spherick Triangles, which they do with great speed, and exact enough in many Cases, and therefore very necessary for proving your Arithme∣tick and Geometrick Operations. The method of working with them is thus: In all Proportions you have three terms given to find a fourth. Seek out therefore the first term whatever it be, viz. Number, Sine, or Tangent on its like Line, that is, if it be a Number look for it on the Line of Numbers, if it be a Sine, seek it on the Line of Sines, &c. and in that point set your Compasses, then extend the other to the 2d or 3d term, that is, extend it to that which is of the same name with the first, (for either the 2d or 3d will be always like the first) the same extent laid from the other term the same way will reach to the fourth term required. An Example will make it plain: Suppose this Proportion was to be wrought, as the Sine of 67 d. 30 m. to the Numb. 64. So is Radius or Sine of 90, to the 4th Number required. Set one foot of your Compasses in the Line of Artifi∣cial
Sines on the Number 67 d. 30 m. and extend the other foot to 90 on that Line, the same extent will reach from 64 on the Line of Numbers, to 70 on the said Line, if apply'd the same way, which 70 is the 4th Number re∣quired. After the same manner may all other Questions be wrought. CHAP. V. Of the Sector, and the Description of the Lines thereon placed. HAving thus shown you how these Lines are original∣ly divided, I shall now pass to show how they are plac'd on a Sector, or joynt Rule, and then shall give a few Examples of their Excellent use as they are thus dis∣posed. A Sector, as 'tis Geometrically defined, is a Figure bounded by two strait Lines, and part of the Circum∣ference of a Circle, as Fig. 5. But by a Sector here spoken of, you are to understand an Instrument that opens upon a Center like a common Carpenter's Rule. The two pieces that moves upon the Center we call Legs, upon which are plac'd most of the Lines that are upon the Common Scales, but are here used after a different manner than they are upon those Scales. The principal Lines that are now generally put upon this Instrument to be used Sectorwise, are equal Parts, Chords, Sines, Tangents, Secants and Polygons. The Line of equal parts, called also the Line of Lines, is a Line divided into 100 equal parts, and if the length
of the Leg of the Sector will permit, is again subdivided into Halves and Quarters, they are placed on each Leg of the Sector on the same side, and are Numbered by 1, 2, 3, &c. to 10. which is very near the end of each Leg, these Lines are (as in the Printed Plate of the Sector here∣unto annexed) noted with the Letter L. And here note, that this 1 may be taken for 10, or for 100, 1000, 10000, &c. as occasion requires, and then 2 will signifie 20, 200, 2000, 20000, &c. and so of the rest. The Line of Chords, is a Line divided after the usual way of the Line of Chords, from a Circle whose Radius is nearly the length of one of the Legs; this Line is pla∣ced upon each Leg of the Sector, beginning at the Cen∣ter, and running towards the end thereof. It is number∣ed with 10, 20, &c. to 60, and to this Line on each Leg is set the Letter C. Note, this Line on some Sectors run to 90 degrees. The Line of Sines, is a Line of common natural Sines, such as we have before defined, only 'tis divided from a Circle of the same Radius that the Line of Chords was; these are also plac'd upon each Leg of the Sector, and numbred with the Figures 10, 20, 30, &c. to 90, at the end of which on each Leg in the Print annexed, is set the letter S. The Line of Tangents, is a Line of common Tangents, divided from a Circle of the forementioned Radius, and is plac'd upon each Leg, and runs to 45. It has the Numbers 10, 20, &c. to 45 placed upon it, with the Letter T for Tangent. Beside this, is another small Line of Tangents, divided from a Radius of about 2 Inches, and is placed upon each Leg of the Sector, it begins at 45, which stands at the length of the Radius from the Center, and runs to a∣bout
the sides ad, ae, also ac, ab, shall be proportional. That is ad to ac, as ae to ab. So that if ad be a half or a third of the side ac, then shall de be a half or a third of his Parallel cb. The like reason holdeth in all other Secti∣ons: Whence you see that if ad be the Chord, Sine or Tangent of any number of degrees to the Radius ac, then shall de be the Chord, Sine or Tangent of the same number of degrees to the Radius cb. Now the Lines found out by the Sector are of two sorts, viz. Lateral or Parallel. Lateral are such as are found upon the sides of the Sector as ad, ac in Fig. 6. Pa∣rallel are the Lines that run from one Leg of the Sector to the other in equal divisions from the Center, as de, cb in the said Figure. And here note, That the Innermost of the Parallels is the true divided Line, and therefore in using the Com∣passes you must always set them upon the innermost Line both in Lateral and Parallel Entrance. And further note, that the Lines are plac'd (upon Se∣ctors now made) after a different way to what they were formerly, for instead of puting the same Lines at equal distances, from the inward edg, they now put them at unequal distances, as by inspection of the Print hereunto annex'd you may see; whereupon one Leg, the Line of Chords is innermost, but upon the other the Line of Tangents is innermost. That is, the innermost line of Chords and Tangents are equally di∣stant from the inward edg, and so are the outermost line of Chords and Tangents. The benefit of the Contrivance is this, when you have set the Sector to a Radius for the Chords, it serves also for the Sines and Tangents without stirring it. For the Parallel betwixt 60 and 60 of the Chords, 90 and 90 of the Sines; also 45 and 45 of the Tangent are all equal, and this is the reason why
they now make the Chords run but to 60 deg. upon the leg of the Sector. Whereas they us'd to run to 90. But practice and Experience has found out the inconveni∣ence. This being premised, I shall now proceed to show you the uses of the several lines. And first, CHAP. VII. PROB. I. Of the Line of Lines, or equal Parts. To divide any Line into any Number of equal Parts. IF you would divide any Line into the same Number of equal parts as the leg of the Sector is: Take the length of the line betwixt your Compasses, and set it o∣ver as a parallel betwixt 10 and 10 (which you may call 100 and 100, as before was hinted) then shall the pa∣rallel distances betwixt every point on each leg divide the given Line into the same equal parts: As if you would mark out 6 (or 60) of those parts, the parallel distance betwixt 6 and 6 mark'd out upon the given Line, is 6 (or 60) of the said parts. If you would mark out 7.3 (or 73) parts, then count 3 of the next great Divisions from 7, and in that point take the parallel di∣stance betwixt each, and it gives you 7.3 (or 73) parts of the proposed Line; and so of the rest. If you would divide a Line into any odd number of equal parts, as suppose I would divide the Line ab, Fig. 7. into 37 equal parts, Take the Line ab betwixt your Compasses, and make it a parallel betwixt 37 and 37 on the legs of the Sector, then the distance betwixt 36 and
36 (the Sector remaining at this angle) is 36 of them. Also the parallel distance betwixt 35 and 35, 34 and 34, 33 and 33, are 35. 34 and 33 of such parts that the whole contains 37 off, and may be cut off as you see in Fi∣gure 7. In like manner may any other Line be divided into any Number of equal parts: But if the length of the line be such that it cannot be applied betwixt the parts desired, then take but half, or a quarter of the said Line. So shall 2 (or 4) of those Divisions, be but one such part or division of the whole Line. PROB. II. To Increase or Diminish a Line in a given Proportion. SUppose a Line was given to be increased in such pro∣portion as 5 to 7, that is thus, If the Line given contains 5 parts, I require another Line that shall have in it 7 of those parts: Take the given Line betwixt your Compasses, and open the Sector till that Extent lye betwixt 5 and 5 on the Line of Lines, then if you take the parallel distance betwixt 7 and 7, it will give you the Line required. If it were to be diminished: Suppose as 7 to 5, then make the given Line a parallel betwixt 7 and 7, and the parallel Extent betwixt 5 and 5 is the Line required.
PROB. III. Two Lines given to find a third in continual proportion, both increasing and diminishing. IF it be increasing, take the two Lines given, and set them upon each Leg on the Line of Lines from the Center, and mark the points where both of them fall; then take the longest line betwixt your Compasses, and apply that Extent parallel wise in the Terms of the shor∣test, the Sector remaining at this angle, the parallel di∣stance betwixt the Terms of the longest being taken and apply'd to the leg of the Sector from the Center, will give you the length of the third Proportional required. If it be Diminishing, then instead of making the lon∣gest of the two given Lines a parallel betwixt the Terms of the shortest, make the shortest of the two given Lines a parallel in the Terms of the longest, then the parallel distance betwixt the Terms of the shortest being apply'd to the leg from the Center, will give the 3d. Proportional required. Let the Lines given be ab 18, ac 24, then is cc 32 the 4th. Proportional increasing, as in Fig. 8. PROB. IV. Three Lines or Numbers given to find a fourth Propor∣tional, both Increasing and Diminishing. THis Problem is almost the same with the last, and is therefore to be solv'd after the like manner: As first, If you would find it Increasing, set the two shortest
Lines on the Line of equal parts on each leg of the Se∣ctor, then open the Sector till the third or longest Line will come betwixt the Terms of the shortest: The Sector thus standing, take the parallel Distance betwixt the Terms of the longest, and apply that Extent to the side of the Sector; it will give you the length of the 4th. proportional Increasing. If it be Diminishing, lay the two longest Lines on the legs of the Sector from the Center, and make the shor∣test of the 3 given Lines a parallel in the Terms of the longest; then the parallel betwixt the Terms of the shortest taken and apply'd as before, is the 4th. Pro∣portional required, and is Decreasing or Diminishing. An Example would be needless. PROB. V. To find the Propotion that is betwixt any two given Lines. TAke the greater of the two given Lines, and make it a parallel betwixt 10 and 10 at the end of the Sector, then take the lesser line and carry it parallel to the greater, till it rests in like points on each leg; so the number of Points where it rests, is the proportion to 100. Thus in Fig. 9. you will find the Line aa in proportion to bb as 7 to 10. PROB. VI. The length of one Line being givan, to find what length any other Line is in such parts. SUppose the Line aa in Fig. 9. was 44, and I would know what the Line bb is, make the Line aa a Pa∣rallel
in 44, then take the Line bb, and carry it along Pa∣rallel to aa till it rests in like Points, so the number it rests in which is about 30, is the length of the Line bb in such parts as aa did contain 44. This Problem may be very useful sometimes, as in Case the Draught or Ground-plot of any place be taken and no Scale to it, then if the length of any one Line or side in the Draught be known, the length of all the rest is easily found by this artifice. PROB. VII. A right Line any how divided being given, to find how to divide any other Line of different length into the like parts. LET ch in Fig. 10. be the Line given, which is un∣equally divided in the Points e. f. g. And let hh be the other Line required to be divided into such parts as was the former; Lay the Line ch from the Center on both Legs of the Sector, and in the Points where this Line reaches apply the shortest Line Parallel-wise, that is open the Sector till the shortest Line may be apply'd betwixt the terms of the longest, this done lay the Divisions of the line ch, viz. ce, ch, cg, on both legs of the Sector from the Center, then the Parallel extent of these Divisions, viz. ee, ff, gg, being taken and applied to the line hh will will divide it into the like parts as was the line ch.
CHAP. VIII. Of the General Use of the Line of Chords, Sines, Tangents and Secants. BY disposing and placing these lines as afore dire∣cted on this Instrument we have Scales to several Raduis's, as I have already hinted, that is having a length or Radius given (not exceeding the length of the Sector when opened) we can by the Sector find the Chord, Sine, &c. thereto. For which property this In∣strument is many times of great use. For Example, Suppose I would have the Chord, Sine; or Tangent of 10 deg. to a Radius of 3 Inches. I take this 3 Inches and make it a Parallel betwixt 60 and 60 on the line of Chords, then as I told you before the same extent will reach from 45 to 45 on the line of Tangents: Also on the other side of the Sector the same distance of 3 Inches will reach from 90 and 90 in the line of Sines, so that if the lines of Chords be set to any Radius the lines of Tangents and Sines are also set to the same; Now the Sector being thus set, if you take on the said line, the Parallel distance betwixt▪ 40 and 40 it will give you the Chord of 40 degrees: Also if you take the Pa∣rallel distance on the line of Sines between 40 and 40, it will give you the Sine of 40 degrees. Lastly, if you take the Parallel extent on the line of Tangents, betwixt 40 and 40, it will give you the Tangent of 40 degrees, and all to the same Radius. If the Chord or Tangent of 70 degrees had been re∣quir'd, then for the Chord you must take the Parallel
distance of half the Arch proposed, that is the Chord of 35 deg. and repeat that distance twice on the Arch you lay it down on, and you have the Chord of 70 deg. and for finding the Tangent of 70 deg. to this Ra∣dius, you must make use of the small line of Tangents, for the great one running but to 45 deg. we cannot take the Parallel of 70 deg. on that; I therefore take the a∣foresaid Radius of 3 Inches and make it a Parallel be∣twixt 45 and 45 on this small line of Tangents, then the Parallel Extent of 70 deg. on the said line, is the Tan∣gent of 70 deg. to 3 Inches Radius. If you would have the Secant of any Arch, then take the given Radius and make it a Parallel betwixt the be∣ginning of the line of Secants, that is 0 and 0, so the Parallel distance betwixt 40 and 40, or 70 and 70 on the said Secant line, will give you the Secant of 40 or 70 degrees to the Radius of three Inches. After this manner may the Chord, Sine or Tangent, of any Arch be found, provided the Radius, can be made a Parallel betwixt 60 and 60 on the Line of Chords, or betwixt the small Tangent of 45, or Secant of 0 deg. But if the Radius be so large that it cannot be made a Parallel betwixt 45 and 45 on the small Tan∣gents, then no Tangent of any Arch above 45 degrees cannot be found; Nor the Secant of no Arch at all to such a Radius, because all Secants exceed the Radius, or Se∣mi-diameter of the Circle. If the converse of any of these things be requir'd, that is, If I require the Radius, to which a given Line is the Chord, Sine, Tangent or Secant of any Arch, suppose of 40 deg. then 'tis but making that Line (if it be a Chord) a Parallel on the Line of Chords betwixt 40 and 40, so will the Sector stand at the Radius; That is the Parallel Extent betwixt 60 and 60 on the said Chord-line is the Radius.
And so if it be a Sine, Tangent or Secant, 'tis but making it a Parallel betwixt the Sine, Tangent, or Secant of 40 deg. according as 'tis given, then will the distance of 90 and 90 on the Sines, if it be a Tangent, the Ex∣tent of 45 and 45 on the Tangents: And if it be a Se∣cant, the Extent or distance between 0 and 0 on the said Line of Secants, will be the Radius. Hence you see 'tis very easy to find the Chord, Sine or Tangent to any Radius, which is the great Benefit and Advantage we receive from this ingenious Contrivance, and of great use it is, not only in delineating and pro∣jecting on Paper, but even on the Ground, in laying out any Parcel in any form or shape; for by a Sector of two or three Foot long when opened, we can furnish our selves with Scales big or little enough for any pur∣pose or Design whatsoever. CHAP. IX. Of some particular Uses of the Circular Lines, viz. Chords, Sines, &c. PROB. I. An Angle being given, to find the Number of Degrees it contains. SUppose I would find the Quantity of the Angle a in Fig. 11. Take any distance, but so short that it may cut both sides of the Angle, with this distance on the Angular point a describe the Arch bc, and make that distance a Parallel betwixt the Chord of 60 and 60, then take the distance bc and carry it Parallel on the Line of
Chords till it rests in like Points, so the place where it stayeth gives the Quantity of the Angle desired, which in our Example is about 35 deg. But if the distance bc is so long that it cannot be made a Parallel on the Line of Chords, as it will when the Angle is above 60 degrees. Then take but half the Arch, and make it a Parallel Chord as afore-directed, and the Points where it stays will give you half the An∣gle, which doubled gives the whole. PROB. II. To divide the Circumference of a Circle into any Num∣ber of Equal Parts. DIvide 360 the Number of Degrees in every Circle, by the Number of Parts required, the Quotient giveth the Number of Degrees, of which if you take the Chord off 'twill divide the Circumference. For Example, if I would divide a Circle into 5 equal parts, I divide 360 by 5, the Quote is 72 deg. If there∣fore I take the Radius of the Circle I would so divide, and make it a parallel betwixt 60 and 60 on the Line of Chords, and then (because I cannot take the Chord of 72 deg. the ⅕ part of the Circle) take the Chord of 36 deg. and repeat it twice on the Arch it will give the ⅕ part of the Circle which was the thing required. But this Problem is more readier perform'd by the Polygon Line which is for this very purpose. The man∣ner of doing it is thus, Take the Radius of the Circle you would so divide, and make it a parallel betwixt 6 and 6 on the Polygon Line (for the Radius or Semi-dia∣meter always divides the Circumference of the Circle
into 6 equal parts) then if you take the Parallel distance betwixt 4 and 4 on the Polygon-line, it will divide the Circle into 4 equal parts; if betwixt 5 and 5 it will cut it into 5 equl parts: So also if you take the Parallel di∣stances betwixt 6 and 6, 7 and 7, 8 and 8, 9 and 9, and so to 12, you may divide the Circle into 6. 7, 8. 9, 10. 11, or 12 equal parts. PROB. III. The Radius, or the right Sine of an Arch (by which Radius may be found) being given, to find the Versed Sine of any Arch. SUppose ab Fig. 12, were the Radius, and it were re∣quired to find the Versed Sine of 50 deg. make the Line ab a Parallel betwixt the Sines of 90 and 90, then because the Arch is under 90 degrees, take the Sine Complement, that is take the Parallel betwixt 40 and 40, on the Line of Sines, and with that distance set one foot in a, and cut from the Line ab the Segment cb, which is the Versed Sine of 50 deg. to that Radius. If ac be the given Sine of 40 deg. and it be required to find the Versed Sine of 50 deg. I take the Line ac and make it a Parallel betwixt the Sine of 40 and 40, then taking the Parallel distance of 90, it gives me the Line ab for the Radius. From which if I take the Sine of 40 deg. the Complement of the Arch whose Versed Sine is sought, it will leave me the Versed Sine of 50 degrees. But if the Arch whose Versed Sine is required be more than a Quadr. the Versed Sine will also be greater than a
Quadrant, and that by so much as is the right Sine of the Excess of that Arch above 90. And therefore when ever the Versed Sine of an Arch exceeding 90 degrees, is required, suppose it were of 120 degrees, 'tis but taking the right Sine of the Excess above 90 degrees, viz. 30. and adding to Radius, so is the summ of Radius and this Sine of 30 degrees the Versed Sine required. PROB. IV. How by the Line of ines to describe an Elipsis to any length and breadth given. SUppose it were required to describe an Elipsis, whose length should be ab and breadth cd. Fig. 13. Set these two Lines at right Angles, and so as they may bisect each other in 0; then take half of the long∣est Line, and make it a Parallel betwixt the Sine of 90, the Sector thus set, take the parallel Sine of 10, 20, 30, &c. to 90 deg. and lay from 0 both ways to∣ward b and a, so have you several Points in the Line ab, through which if you draw Lines Parallel to cd, and lay thereon from the said Points the Sine of 80. 70, 60. 50, &c. to 10 degrees, upon the respective Parallels, they will give you several Points, through which if a Line be drawn with an even hand, it will form an Elipsis. By this Artifice may the Orthographick or Analem∣matick Projection of the Sphere be delineated with great ease and exactness, the Circles which are beheld oblique∣ly being in that Projection all Elipses.
PROB. V. To open the Sector to any given Angle. IT is one thing to open the Sector to an Angle, and another thing to open the Lines on the Sector to the same Angle. Suppose I would open the Line of Chords on the Se∣ctor to an Angle of 38 Deg. I take 38 from the Center laterally, and make that a parallel betwixt 60 and 60 on the line of Chords, so is the line of Chords set to an Angle of 38 deg. and not only the line of Chords, but also the Line of Lines, Line of Sines, and Line of Tan∣gents, because they are all Equidistant from the inward edges of the Sector. If you would open the two in∣ward Lines, suppose Chords and Tangents, or Sines and Lines, 'tis done after same manner, that is, by taking the lateral Chord of the Angle you would open the Se∣ctor to, and making it parallel betwixt 45 and 60 on one side the Sector, or else betwixt 90 and 10 on the other side, so is the innermost Line of Sines and Lines on the other side set to the Angle required. After the same manner may the outermost Lines be set to any given Angle. But suppose you would open the very edges of the Sector to any given Angle, then having put the Sector close; Take the parallel Extent betwixt the innermost ine of Chords and Tangents, and apply that Extent la∣terally on the line of Chords from the Center, and it shows you what Angle those lines make when the Sector is shut, in the printed Plate of the Sector hereunto an∣nexed, those lines make an Angle of 5 deg. Suppose
therefore you would open the Edges of the Sector to an angle of 40 Deg. I take from the Scale of Chords the la∣teral Chord of 45 deg. and apply that Extent parallelwise betwixt 60 on the innermost line of Chords, and 45 on the innermost line of Tangents, and it sets the Edges of the Sector to an Angle of 40 deg. for those lines are set to an Angle of 45 deg. Now the Edges of the Sector making an Angle less by 5 Deg. than those lines do, must therefore by consequence be set to an Angle of 40 Degrees. If you would open the Line of Lines to a right Angle, take the whole line of 10 parts, and make it a pa∣rallel betwixt 8 and 6 of the same. The line of Sines may be opened to a right Angle, if the Sine of 45 deg. be applied over in the Sines of 30 deg. And here note, that having opened the Line of lines to a right Angle, the line of Chords, Sines and Tangents are opened to the same. PROB. VII. The Sector being opened to find the Quantity of the Angle it is opened to. THe Sector being opened, take the parallel distance betwixt 60 and 60 on the Chords, and apply that Extent laterally from the Center on the Chords, the num∣ber of Degrees it reaches to is the Angle those Lines are opened to. Or the parallel extent betwixt 60 on the Chords, and 45 on the Tangents so applied, shows you the An∣gle they are opened to, and if they are the two inner∣most Lines, then is the edges opened to an Angle less
by 5 deg. than those Lines are. If the Lines be at the same distance as in our Print. This Problem is exceeding useful, for by it the Bevel of all kind of Roofs may be readily found. Also the Ground-plot of any old Edifice or Structure may be much easier and better taken than with any other Instru∣ment whatsoever: Likewise the Quantity of Inclination and Reclination of all Plains, which is of great use in Dyaling, as also the Angles of any kind of Fortificati∣ons, whether Regular or Irregular, may most easily and speedily be taken by this Instrument. In order for drawing the Ground-plot or Proffile of any kind of Works, which thing is of great use at this time of day. PROB. VII. Upon a right Line and from a Point given in it, to lay off any Angle proposed. LET the Line given be ab, and let it be required to lay off an Angle containing 40 degrees from the given point a. Upon the point a describe with any di∣stance an Arch cuting the said Line in b. Fig. 14. this distance make a parallel betwixt the Chord of 60, then if you take the parallel betwixt 40 and 40 on the said Lines, and lay the extent from b on the Arch to c draw∣ing from the point a through c the line ac, and it will form the Angle requir'd.
PROB. VIII. To Cut a Line in Extream and Mean Proportion: That is, to divide a Line into such parts that the whole Line shall be to the greater of the two Segments, at the greater, to the lesser. LEt ab Fig. 15. be the Line to be divided, I take the said Line ab, and make it a parallel betwixt the Chords of 60, to which Radius I find the Chord of 36 degrees, that is, the Sector being at this Angle, I take the parallel Chord of 36 degrees, and that extent being laid from a to c gives the greater Segment, and conse∣quently cuts off the lesser Segment cb. For 'twill hold as ab: ac: : ac: cb. The practice of this Problem is demonstrated in the 9th. Prop. of the 13th. Book of Euclid. CHAP. X. Trigonometry, Or the use of the Natural and Arti∣ficial Lines on the Sector, in the Solution of the Cases of Plain right Angled Triangles. Defin. Trigonometry is a Science that teacheth how to Measure the Sides and Angles of all kinds of Triangles.
CASE 1. Hypotenuse bc 496, and Angle b 38 d. 40 m. given to find the Legs. Geometrically, First draw a Line, as in Fig. 16. assume therein the Point b, on which as a Center with 60 deg. from the Chords, describe the Arch cd, seting thereon, from e to d, 38 d. 40 m. From b through d draw a Line at pleasure on which set from b to c. 496 taken laterally from the Line of Lines, from c let fall the Perpendicular ca and the Triangle is compleated. Note, The given Lines and Arches are drawn Black, the required prick't. If you take the Line ca betwixt your Compasses, and setting one foot in the Center of the Line of Lines, and pitch the other on the said Line, it will give you 310 for the length of that side. So also if you take the Line ba and apply it after the same manner, it will give you 388 for the length of this Line. And here Note, If this lateral distance of 496 be too big, or too little, it may be remedied, by opening the Sector to such a distance till the Parallel Extent betwixt 496 and 496 on the said Lines be of such a length as you would have it, then keeping the Sector at this An∣gle, take the Lines ba, ca, and apply them Parallelwise, till they rest in like Points, so shall these Points where they rest give the length of the Lines ba, ca, as before. Instrumentally. That is, by the Artificial Lines of Numbers, Sines, and Tangents. If you make the Hypotenuse Radius, the other two sides will be Sines of their opposite Angles. By Chap. I.
And then it will hold as Radius, to the Hypotenuse, so is the Sine of the Angle b, to the side ca. And therefore extend your Compasses from the Sine of 90 deg. to the Sine of 38 deg. 40 m. The same extent will reach on the Line of Numbers from 496 to 310 (being laid the same way) THE length of the Line ca. For the side ba extend your Compasses from Radius to the Sine 51 d. 20 m. The same extent will reach on the Line of Numbers from 496 to 388 the length of the side inquired. USE. By this Case we find the difference of Latitude and Departure in Navigation, when the Course and Distance sayled are given. Also by it may be found the Horizon∣tal Line, or Perpendicular height of any Mountain: Ha∣ving first measured the assent, and taken the Angle that its rise makes with the Horizontal Line, which may be easily done by fastening one leg of the Sector to a Walking-staff set perpendicular in the Ground, and Ele∣vating the other leg, til by it you see the foot of the hill if you stand at top, or top of the hill if you stand at the foot, so is the Sector set to the Angle that the assent makes with the perpendicular, or Horizontal Line, according as you take it either from top or foot of the Hill. CASE 2. Base ba 388, and Angle b 38 d. 40 m. to find the Hypo∣tenuse, and Perpendicular. Geom. Draw a Line at pleasure, as in Fig. 17. on which set from a to b 388 taken from the Line of Lines, from a erect a perpendicular, and on the point b as a Center, describe with 60 deg. from the Chords the Arch de seting thereon 38 d. 40 m. from e to d. through which draw the Line bd till it meet the perpendicular in c so is the Triangle compleated.
If now the Lines bc, ca, be taken and seperately mea∣sur'd upon the same Scale ba was taken from, it will give you 496 for the Hypotenuse, and 310 for the Per∣pendicular required. Instrum. Making Hypotenuse Radius as in the last, the sides ba, ca, will be Sines of their opposite Angles. As by Chap. 1. So that it will hold as the Sine of the Angle c, to the Base ba; so is the Sine of the Angle b, to the perpendi∣cular ca. Or so is Radius or Sine of 90 d. To the Hypo∣tenuse bc. Extend the Compasses therefore from 51 d. 20 m. (the Complement of 38 d. 40 m. to 90 deg.) on the Line of Sines, to 38 d. 40 m. on the said Line. The same Extent will reach on the Line of Numbers from 388 to 310 the length of the perpendicular required. Again, if you extend the Compasses from 51 d. 20 m. on the Line of Sines to 90 deg. the same extent will reach on the Line of Numbers the same way, from 388 to 496 the length of the Hypotenuse required. USE. 'Tis by this Case that we find the difference of La∣titude and Distance sayled, when the Course and Depar∣ture is given. Also when the distance of the Base of any Object from the place where we stand to observe its height, with the Angle at the Base are given, we make use of this Case to Calculate its height.
part of plate of mathematical diagrams referenced in the text, figures 11, 8, 9, part of 10, 12, 16, 15, 4, 3
part of plate of mathematical diagrams referenced in the text, figures 9, 10, 8, 2, 1, 5, 6, 7, 11, 8, 9, 10, 12, 14, 15, and parts of 4 and 3
CASE 3. Hypotenuse bc 496 and Base 388 given, to find the Per∣pendicular, and oblique Angles. Geom. First draw a Line, on which lay off 388 from b to a taken from the Line of Lines: From a erect a Perpendicular producing it, then take from the said Line of Lines 496, and setting one foot in b, pitch the other in the Perpendicular at c; joyn the points bc, and you compleat the Triangle. This done take the Line ca and measure it on the Scale, it will give 310 for the length of the said Line. So also if on the point b you describe with 60 deg. from the Chords the Arch ed, and then take the distance ed, and measure it on the Scale of Chords it will give you 38 d. 40 m. for the Angle b. Which 38 d. 40 m. taken from 90 will leave 51 d. 20 m. for the Angle c. Instrum. If you make the Hypotenuse Radius as be∣fore, then the Base and Perpendicular will be Sines of their opposite Angles. And then it will hold as the Hypotenuse bc is to the Radius or Sine of 90 d. So is the Base ba, to the Sine of the Angle c. Extend the Com∣passes therefore from 496 to 388 on the Line of Num∣bers, the same Extent will reach from 90 on the Line of Sines, to 51 d. 20 m. which is the measure of the An∣gle c. which taken from 90 leaves 38 d. 40 m. for the Angle b. Having gotten both the oblique Angles the Perpendi∣cular is found by Case the 1st.
USE. 'Tis by this Case we find the Course and difference of Latitude, when the Distance sayled and Departure are given. CASE 4. Base ba 388, and Perpendicular ca 310 given. To find the Hypotenuse and oblique Angles. Geom. Draw a Line on which lay off from b to a 388, from a erect a Perpendicular, laying thereon from a to c. 310, then joyn bc and the Triangle is compleated. From whence if you take the Hypotenuse bc and ap∣ply it to the Line of Lines, you shall have 496 for the length of it. And for the Angles, describe the Arch of a Circle as in the last Case was directed, then the inter∣cepted part de taken and apply'd to the Scale of Chords, will give you 38 a. 40 m. for the measure of the Angle b. which 38 d. 40 m. taken from 90, will leave 51 d. 20 m. as before for the Angle c. Instrum. In this Case the Base must be made Radius, then by Chap. 1. the Perpendicular will be the Tangent of the Angle opposite to it, and the Hypotenuse the Secant of the said Angle. Which granting, it will then hold, as the Base ba, to Radius or Sine of 90 d. so in the Perpendicular ca, to the Tangent of the Angle b. Extend therefore the Compasses from 388 to 310 on the Line of Numbers, the same Extent will reach on the Line of Tangents, from 45 d. the Radius, to 38 d. 40 m. the Measure of the Angle b. which taken from 90, leaves the Angle c. Having
USE. 'Tis by this case (having the difference of Latitude and Departure) we find the Course and Distance sayled. Also having the breadth of a Moat, and height of a Tower, we can from hence find the length of a Scaling-Ladder that shall reach from one to the other. After the same manner may the oblique Cases in Plain Triangles be solv'd; and by the Artificial Lines may all the Proportions in both right and oblique Spherical Tri∣angles, have their Solution, which thing is of great use, in that it so instantly proves our Arithmetick Opera∣tions. FINIS.
identical figures 16, 17, 18, and 19
