S4154 11787228 49139
A LETTER FROM Mr. RICHARD SMITH TO Dr. HENRY HAMMOND, CONCERNING The Sence of that Article in the CREED, He descended into Hell. Together with Dr. Hammond's Answer. LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in S. Paul's Church-yard, 1684.
TO THE READER. THESE two Letters are no spurious things obtru∣ded upon the Names of the Worthy Persons
betwixt whom they passed (as some have shamefully done of late with the Reverend Au∣thor of the Whole Du∣ty of Man, and some Others) but are real and genuine: They were found in the Study of Mr. Richard Smith (a Gentleman well known to most of the Learned of his time) amongst many o∣ther choice Papers which he had carefully collected
and laid up with a more than ordinary regard; and are now made publick with Advice. R. Chiswell.
Reverend SIR, TAKING no∣tice not long ago of the various Ex∣positions of learned Men of the Sence of the Article of the Creed of Christs Descension into Hell, and therewithal considering,
that the right understanding of that Article (as well as of any of the rest) is of such concernment, that (if we believe Athanasius's Creed) Whosoever doth not believe it (with the other Articles therein contained) he cannot be saved: I made more dili∣gent Inquisition hereinto; which having done, by perusal of the Works of divers Writers and Exposi∣tors of the Creed, the Ar∣guments, Reasons and Testi∣monies produced by them to justifie their several O∣pinions of the true mean∣ing of this Article, seemed
to me to be much con∣tradictory, obscure and un∣certain, so that I could not resolve, how any man con∣fidently or assuredly could fix a firm Belief, or relye upon any one of those dif∣ferent Expositions, cashiering all the rest, which must be done, there being but one Truth to insist upon; for to believe this or that, is to believe we know not what. Thus being not able to give my self any satis∣faction herein, at last I called to my remembrance
that once it was told me, that Mr. John Selden, that learned Lawyer and fa∣mous Antiquary (now in Abraham's bosome) held a singular Opinion of his own touching this Article different from all others, much afterwards approved by many judicious Men: Hereupon (for my own satisfaction) being desirous to know what was his Opi∣nion herein, I went purpose∣ly unto him to be resolved thereof; who freely at my request, declared to me his Opinion thereof, which was this, That by these
words in the Creed, He descended into Hell, was meant, that the Soul of Christ resting in Heaven, whither it went immedi∣ately after his death (like as we believe all the Souls of the faithful do) ma∣king good his promise to the good Thief on the Cross, saying to him, To day shalt thou be with me in Paradise, Luk. 23. 43: That Soul of Christ, I say, the third day after his Body had lyen interred in the Grave (according to Christs prediction, and application of the Prophet Jonas lying
three days and three nights in the Whales belly, Matt. 12. 40.) did descend from Hea∣ven into Hell, (that is, into the Grave, usually in the Scripture call'd Hell) and then uniting it self to his Body, did quicken and raise it up again from the dead, or place of the dead, which was the Grave, unto life in an instant; all which is undeniable; here∣in fulfilling the Prophecy of King David, Psal. 16. 10. (though otherwise expound∣ed) Thou shalt not leave my Soul in Hell, nor suffer thine Holy One to see corruption:
Which place of Scripture (granting that by this word [Hell] in the Creed is meant the Grave, as the Original will carry it) may very aptly be appli∣ed to this Descension into the Grave: thus, It cannot be denied but that his Soul was in the Grave in his Body the third day after his burial, descending thi∣ther to raise it up again to life; for without the Soul, the dead Body of it self naturally could not move nor remove: and so the Soul being thus descended into Hell or the Grave,
was not left there at all (as it must be granted by them of the other Opini∣on, that it was left in Hell the place of the Damned, though for no long time.) For if it had continued any space of time in the Grave termed Hell, it so continuing there (though never so little time) might have been said to have for that time been left there; and so this Pro∣phecy in that point had not been fulfilled. But I think, no man will deny, that the Soul, so soon as ever it descended into Hell
or the Grave into the Bo∣dy there lying, both Soul and Body without any staying there, was not left there, but in the twink∣ling of an Eye being united together, immediately rose again from the Dead, (that is from the Grave, the place of the Dead) and so I say, was not left at all in Hell, that is in the Grave; Where∣by the Prophecy in this point (in leaving the Soul in Hell) was upon the Resurrection fulfilled. The last part of the Verse of this Psalm is also fulfilled by the raising of the Bo∣dy
incorrupt (by the pow∣er of the Deity) of which there is no Question or Scru∣ple made. In this Opinion of Mr. Selden's (granting the word Hell to signify the Grave) there is no Tautologie, or twice re-iteration of the self same thing, no acuro∣logie or impropriety, contra∣diction or absurdity, no hy∣steron-proteron, no disorder in the position of it in the Creed, but placed orderly in its proper place accord∣ing to the Series of the Creed; nor is it involved
in any Mystical Sense, Trope or Figure (unmeet for an Article of our Faith). But it is a true and Orthodox Opinion according to the Exposition thereof, plain and easie to be understood of the meanest Capacity. Moreover I observe, that there may be a considerable use made thereof, thus ex∣pounded according to Mr. Selden's Opinion, to wit, That hereby is manifested the Re-union of Christ's Soul unto his Body in the Grave at or immediately before his Resurrection, with the time and maner thereof,
which in no other Article of the Creed, not yet in any plain place of the Scripture (that I remember) not having a various Exposition, is directly averred. Now besides the several Texts of Scriptures produ∣ced for proof of this Opini∣on of Christs Descension in∣to Hell, the place of the Damned, variously expound∣ed, the constant belief and profession of the Catholick Church for many Ages hi∣therto, and the Opinions and Judgments of many of the ancient Orthodox Fa∣thers,
and learned and pi∣ous Doctors of the Primitive times agreeing unanimously in the same Opinion, are strongly urged in behalf of that Opinion, which are not easily to be expunged; there∣by inferring, That, say they, to introduce a new Opinion of yesterday's standing into an Article of our Faith, ne∣ver heard of before, against and disagreeing with the ge∣neral Opinion of the Church throughout all Ages hitherto observed, might prove a matter of very ill conse∣quence, and breed much di∣sturbance and confusion in
the Church, not to be ap∣proved of by discreet ratio∣nal men, but rather (with more reason) for the unity of the Church, worthy to be exploded. Answer; If it were cer∣tain, That such an Exposi∣tion of Christs Descension into Hell, the place of the damned, as is before sugge∣sted, were the true sense and meaning of the said Article of the Creed, there would be no reason to leave that an∣cient Exposition for a new; but rather a necessity to sub∣scribe to it, and acknowledge
it as the true and proper sense of that Article; But such Interpretation being questio∣nable, dubious, and contra∣dicted by many other diffe∣rent Opinions of learned and pious men (though of later times) the probability or pos∣sibility only of the truth of that former Opinion (though never so strongly backt by learned, pious, and Ortho∣dox Fathers and Doctors, who may and have had their failings) cannot bind the Consciences of other men unto an implicite Faith, but they may be at liberty to adhere unto such an Opinion
(though lately published) which may by the judgment of other learned Orthodox Christians, compared with the sacred Scriptures, savour in their apprehension of more probability of the true sense of that Article, than the for∣mer Opinion. It may peradventure be likewise objected, That if this Opinion of Mr. Selden's had been intended by the Composers of the Creed, it is likely, that the time of such descension into the Grave, would have been ex∣pressed in that Article as well
as the time in the Article of the Resurrection. Answer; The time of the descension into Hell the place of the damned is not set down in the Article; the knowledge whereof would have been as necessary, as of this, and which is far more intricate to discover than this is: and therefore, if the time of the descension had been thought material, it is likely, it would not have been omitted, being a point controverted; but in this other Exposition, it is not so requisite to be set down, for
that the punctual time of his descension into the Grave, is apparent to be at the very instant time of the Resurre∣ction, being both acted to∣gether as one individual Ar∣ticle in a moment of time: For by an old Tradition, as some say, The division of the twelve Articles of the Creed was first made by the twelve Apostles, every one, say they, setting down one single Article; wherein this Article (made, as goes the report, by S. Thomas the Apo∣stle) Descendit ad Inferos, ter∣tio die resurrexit, containing both the descension and the
Resurrection, is joyned toge∣ther in one Article; and therefore, not improperly, it may be thence inferred, that as they were made at first one Article joyntly, so the time of the descension of Christs Soul into Hell or the Grave, and of his Resurre∣ction were both at one time; and the time of the Resurrection is rather men∣tioned, than of the de∣scension into the Grave, to fulfil the Scriptures, which mention the time of the Re∣surrection, but not of the descension: yet the Lutherans guess at a time when he de∣scended
into Hell, the place of the damned, which was, as they say, between his Burial and Resurrection in body and soul; for they will have it to be after his Burial, and before his Resurrection, that it might concur with the Or∣der of the place thereof in the Creed, which is between his Burial and Resurrection: And others think, wresting Psalm 119. v. 62. to their purpose, That he descended thither in body and soul about Midnight, and rose again about five of the Clock the next Morning. Cramerus de Descensu Christi, Cap. 5.
Now, Sir, my request to you is, that you will vouch∣safe me your Opinion (on which I much relye) con∣cerning this Opinion of Mr. Selden, which I have open∣ed unto you; I hope you shall not find me averse from Reason, though I may incline happily to one side more than to another, till my Judgment be better inform∣ed. I have perused somePsal. 16. 10. principal places of ScripturePsal. 68. 18. cited for confirmation of theHos. 13. 4.
Opinion of the local De∣scent of Christ into Hell (noted here in the Margent):Matt. 12.40. I have likewise taken notice of several Opinions of the Calvinists and others touch∣ing that Article,Ephes 4. 8. with An∣swers thereunto;Colos. 2. 13. all which being well known unto you,1 Pet. 3. 18. would be tedious to recite at large; wherein I observe, that some Opinions are more probable, and come nearer to the truth in all likelihood, than others: But those and all others be∣ing but Opinions and not undeniable Truths, some more probable than others,
I know not (among so great Variety) which one Opi∣nion solely to fasten on; for as I said, there is but one Truth, which cannot consist in contradictions or variable Expositions, but to find out that one Truth, hic labor, hoc opus est. I confess, I have been too bold with you, being (as I conceive) a stranger to you, howsoever an illi∣terate Old man not worthy of your acquaintance, yet a well wisher to Learning, and (though no Philoso∣pher
yet) a lover of Wis∣dom and Wise men: I should not have adventured to have been thus bold with you, but by the perswa∣sion of Mr. Royston, Bookseller, my Friend and old Acquaintance, and one that I presume will acknowledge himself obli∣ged unto you for real Courtesies. If I have been too troublesome to you, as I confess I have, Mr. Royston must bear part of the punishment being ac∣cessary ante factum. Thus with my love and respects unto you, I commit you
to the Almighty, rest∣ing Your affectionate Friend and Servant, R. Smith. Little More-fields April 1659. Indorsed, To his much Honoured and Re∣verend Friend Dr. Henry Hammond.
Dr. HAMMOND's ANSWER TO Mr. SMITH's LETTER. SIR, TO your Proposal I offer my sense in the Method you have used; And first to your suggestion from Athanasius's Creed, that with∣out
a right understanding of this and all other Articles, a man cannot be saved: It is sufficient, that I mind you, That as there is nothing said in the Nicene Creed in lieu of this Article; so there is no word of Explication of it in the Athanasian. The former Ar∣ticles concerning the Trinity and Christ incarnate, God∣man, which had been inva∣ded by Hereticks, are there largely explained; and 'tis rea∣sonable thence to say, that the right understanding of them, such as is there set down, and which false Teachers had op∣posed, was strictly required
of all men, by authority of all those Universal Councils, which had thus defined sub Anathemate, or pain of He∣resie, and which that Athana∣sian Creed recited: But for other Articles, though it re∣quire the believing of them, yet not giving any limited sence of them, it binds not to what it hath not declared, i. e. to any other determinate sence of them; which seem∣eth to me to leave it free and dangerless, to use all sober means, that search of Scrip∣ture or Tradition, together with the use of the words, especially in the sacred Dia∣lect,
can help us to, for the finding out and resolving the true or (if there be a competition of more possi∣ble) the probablest mean∣ing of it. To come then to that En∣quiry; There have been three (and now as by you it appears, there is a fourth) senses of it. First, That Christ in his Spirit, went to the place of Souls departed.
Secondly, That his animal Soul descended into, and con∣tinued in the state of the Separation from the Bo∣dy. Thirdly, That Hades sig∣nifies the Grave, and so that descending thither, is but an Explication of his Buri∣al. Fourthly, That his Soul descended from Heaven in∣to the Grave, and raised the Body.
The first of these Opini∣ons is subdivided again, some making the place to be Hell, or the place of the damned; and Mr. Brough∣ton contending against Bi∣shop Bilson, That it is Pa∣radise; and Durand interpre∣ting the Descending, only of a virtual motion and the efficacy of his Death, to the Souls detained there; and Calvin, and our Parker from him, understanding by it the torments of the damned, affirm Christs de∣scent, to signifie the suffer∣ing of them, especially in
his Soul. You demanded not of me the Reasons of not approving any of these, but only my Opinion of that which you call Mr. Selden's, and I have set down for the fourth. And because I see no cause to approve of that, it will be reasonable, that I point out, what I do ad∣here to, and upon what grounds I prefer it before Mr. Selden's. That which I adhere to, is this: That as Christ's Body af∣ter his Crucifixion and Death was disposed of in the Grave, so his Soul de∣scended
to, and continued in the condition or state of the Dead till the third day, meaning hereby the very same thing which I suppose to be meant by the first Opinion [that Christ in his Spirit went to the place of the Souls departed] ab∣stracting only from the ends, which have been variously assigned, by several men Ancient and Modern, for his thus descending. That he descended for the freeing some out of Hell, hath been the Opinion of some of the Ancients; as of others, for the opening Heaven
to those that were formerly kept out of it, and of o∣thers for the triumphing o∣ver the Devil in his own Quarter, and shewing openly the Victory he had gotten o∣ver Death and Hell; The last of these I abstain from con∣demning, having less pre∣judice to it than to either of the two former, and there∣fore have set it down in the Practical Catechism, as that which may piously be believed: But I now desire, I say, to abstract from eve∣ry of these ends, and not to fix on any other end, but whatshall necessarily and un∣questionably
arise from the Article most simply set down: and herein I suppose I shall best comply with the Doctrine of our Church, Article 3. defining no more than thus, (and ab∣staining from what had been express'd in the Article of Ed∣ward the Sixth.) [That as Christ dyed for us and was buried, so also it is to be believed that he went down into Hell] without any Explication: For sup∣posing the word [Hell] in the Article to be answerable to , and that word by the Origination, to denote ,
invisible, and that by the aequivalent  disap∣pearing, it is to me per∣fectly indifferent, whether this be understood of a State or a Place, so it be the common place of the dead or Souls departed, and not any impalement of those, either to Torments or Bliss. Let it be taken for the common place of Souls, not limited either to that on one side, which we call Heaven; or what we call Hell on the other; or any third middle Place: but indefinitely for the place of Souls, i.e. of all Souls
departed (wheresoever they are) and then it will be hardly intelligible, how this differs from a State; for Place properly so called it cannot be, that Notion be∣longing to Circumscription or Definition; and as Cir∣cumscription is only of Bo∣dies, so Definition which is of Souls, will not be com∣modiously attributed to an indefinite, i. e. the common place of Souls; but some one place, be it Heaven or Hell, or a third; and then taking it for a place only improperly, that is all one with that which I call a
State; This I say, because against the interpreting for the State of the Dead, I see it pressed by a very learned Man of our Church, that among Heathen Authors  always signi∣fies a Place; and this evi∣dence brought for it, be∣cause they that killed them∣selves, & c. and so were dead, and the Souls in the state of the Dead, were yet by the Heathens believed not to be admitted into , as from their Writers is fully testified. But to this I answer, That making no question of the truth of the
observation, I think it per∣fectly reconcileable with my Notion of  for a State; for , quasi  being ae∣quivalent to , signi∣fies not only the estate of Death, but of disappearing, and then the Souls of the and , those that dye untimely being by the Heathens supposed to walk and appear; and so of those whose Bodies are unburied, they could not say of them that they were in , which of all others which disap∣peared was affirmed by them, which being equal∣ly true and applicable, whe∣ther
to the Notion of a Place or State (for I deny not that in their Opinion the Soul of one unburied was in the State of , though he were in State of Death, and both of them are denoted, say I, by , as I interpret that a State) the Argument is of no force against me, who mean that very same thing by the State of the Dead, which they meant by , when they denyed the  to de∣scend or to be admitted thi∣ther. In like manner when they say that Christ by his Spi∣rit or humane rational Soul
descended to , and I, that the Animal Soul thus descended, I suppose those two to contain no real dif∣ference (as to this matter of the Descent); for I use this Phrase, because it is by the Animal Soul in proper speaking, that any one lives, and that is common to Man with all other Animals, and yet in a man this is not im∣properly called Spirit also (as breath and life are all one) mans becoming a living Soul, being an immediate con∣sequent of Gods breathing into his nostrils the breath of life, Gen. 2. 7. But be∣cause
there is another No∣tion of Spirit, for the upper Immortal Soul which passeth not into the condition of Death, but was by Christ com∣mitted into his Father's hands (in respect of which I sup∣pose it was that the Thief re∣ceived promise to be with him that day in Paradise, the Thief's immortal Soul, with Christ's immortal humane Soul) and that distinguished from the living Soul, as both from the Body, in settingdown the , the whole of us,1 Thes. 5. 23. 1 Thes. 5. 23. Therefore I choose rather to say the Animal
Soul, for distinctness sake, but mean the same that they mean, who either say Soul simply, or , Spi∣rit, in the Notion wherein we render it Ghost,Mat. 27. 50. Matth. 27. 50. where it is said of Christ, He yielded up the Ghost, which proceeds not on such a cri∣tical distinction of Ghost from Soul as that place to the Thessal. doth. To ei∣ther of these equally be∣longs the force of an Ar∣gument lately made use of by learned Mr. Pearson (on the Creed page 480.) to prove, that the meaning of the Ar∣ticle
is, the Motion or Tran∣slation of Christs Soul to the place of Souls. The Argument is taken from an opposition which the Fa∣thers made to the Here∣sie of the Apollinarians, which consisted in this, That Christ took on him our humane Flesh, with∣out the humane Soul, (his Deity supplying the place of that:) Which Error of theirs the Fathers refute by this, That in his Death his Soul was separated from the Body, in respect whereof he went to . This Heresie
of theirs equally deprived Christ of the Rational Intel∣lectual and of the Animal Soul, teaching, that his Flesh was , without Soul and without mind; and so the Fathers Argu∣ment against them founded in Christs Descent to is of equal force, whether it were in his  or , mind or Soul that he descended, their Heresie belonging to both, that is indeed to that Soul by which he ex∣ercised all the Acts both of Life and Reason when it was in the Body, and by
Separation of which from the Body, he was truly dead, his Soul departing to the Condition or Habita∣tion of Souls, as his Body was laid up in the Grave. Having thus far expli∣cated this Opinion, to which I adhere; and in doing so, adhere to that other (ab∣stracted from all conside∣ration of the end) which hath always been account∣ed the Doctrine of the Church of England, ordina∣rily stiled the Local De∣scent;
I shall not need any farther to confirm it (ha∣ving largely done it in the Practical Catechism, L. 5. Sect. 2. page 288. &c.) than by reflecting on the exact propriety this bears both with the Order and Con∣texture of the Creed, and with that one eminent Text cited by the Apostle from the Psalmist,Acts 2. 31. wherein be∣yond all other Texts this Article is undoubtedly founded.Psal. 16. 10. For in the Creed, after his Crucifixion, and re∣maining so long on the Cross till he was dead,
commending his Spirit into the hands of his Father, it fol∣lows, his Body was inter∣red, and his Soul (in Se∣paration of which from his Body, the reality of his Death consists) descended, departed into the common place, habitation, state, con∣dition, of the Dead (hovered not above the Grave, as the Heathen phansied of the (underwent the very same fate that the Souls of all other Dead men do, and so continued till the third day, and then he rose again. And lest it should be sug∣gested
(as I see it is,)Mr. Pear∣son, page 476. that taking  for the State of the Dead, descending to that, shall signifie no more, than to be Dead: I answer, That if this were supposed to be the utmost that the words by their own force do signifie (as when Jacob said, , I shall descend to Hades, it is ac∣knowledged it doth) yet the position in the Creed, will assist it to signifie thus much more; for if  be a State or Condition or Habitation or Place, though but improperly so called,
yet descending to Hades be∣ing immediately attended with [the third day he rose again from the Dead] this must in all reason extend the act of Dying to a durati∣on, and that duration or space of continuance among the dead as far as to the third day, else there would be (which is not to be ima∣gined) a Chasme in the Creed, no full enumerati∣on of all the parts and steps of the Story; but being thus understood, nothing can be more punctual and compleat in all the cir∣cumstances,
than the Or∣der observed in the Creed, is. And for the Text of the Psalmist recited by the Apostle, Thou shalt not leave my Soul in Hades, &c. it is now most expresly fulfilled in, and recited by this Ar∣ticle; That though his Body were laid in the Grave (where if it continued a∣bove three days, (the term observed in Nature for the revolution of the humors) it would naturally tend to corruption and putrefacti∣on, and stink, as it is said of Lazarus where he is ,John 11. 36.
four days dead) and his Soul gone to Hades, the habitation or condition or common place of Souls; yet being there really, in as perfect Separation from the Body as any Soul of dead man is, yet it should not be left there, forsaken there, or in any degree de∣stitute by God; but before the Body should begin to putrefie, that is, in three days space, the Eternal Spirit his Godhead inseparably uni∣ted both to his Soul and Body, should re-unite them again, and then it follows the third day he rose.
Having given so full, and as I suppose clear unquestio∣nable account of the mean∣ing of this Article, that it belongs to Christs Humi∣liation, the reality and con∣tinuance of the Separation of his Soul from his Body, and its being in Hades, as that is the place or habita∣tion or condition of separa∣ted Souls, and being ap∣plyed to Souls cannot pos∣sibly signifie the Grave, the Repository only of the Bo∣dy, I need add no further
prejudices to Mr. Selden's Opinion; Which first if this be true, cannot be the truth; Secondly, belongs not to Christs Humiliation, but is all one with his Resurrection; Thirdly, is a Descent from no place, no Ascent being before men∣tioned; Fourthly, is not compatible with any stay of his Soul in Hades; both which yet the Psalmist, re∣joycing that his Soul is not forsaken and left there, must import, and the subsequent mention in the Creed of the third days rising intimates
the third day, the Stay, the Rising, the Humiliation: Fifthly, Is founded in Hades, signifying the Grave or Re∣pository of the Body, which generally and by the Ori∣gination of the Word be∣longs to the Habitation of Souls, and is used in Scri∣pture sometimes, where it cannot be meant of the Grave, as Gen. 37. 35. I will go down to the Grave, (we render,) to my Son mourning, spoken of Jacob in relation to Joseph, whom yet he believed torn in pieces with wild Beasts and not at all
interred. Sixthly, if this be not sufficient, then remember that it was God, Rom. 4. 24. Acts 3. 26. the Spirit, that is, Divine Spirit, 1 Pet. 3. 18. Rom. 8. 11. that raised up Jesus from the Dead, and there∣fore it may not be attribu∣ted to his Animal or Hu∣mane Soul going down into the Grave and fetching out the Body; at least thus it cannot be in the place of the Psalmist;Psal. 16. 10. for there it is equally attributed to God, that he shall not leave his Soul in Hell, and not suffer him (in respect of his Body) to see
corruption: Which must therefore unquestionably be understood, First, of Gods doing the whole Work in General; Secondly, in Gods rescuing the Soul from Hades, in which he was detained (and preserving the Body from corruption to which it was lyable.) Which is quite contrary to Mr. Selden's Interpretation, which sup∣poseth the Soul not to be at all detained there, and conse∣quently not the Patient but the Agent in the Rescue, when 'tis evident that God is the Agent, equally in
respect both of Soul and Bo∣dy, and the Soul as the Body, the Patient, and there∣fore the word is  in the Passive. Seventhly, one Ar∣gument more I shall pro∣pose to you against this Sense; The Aquileian Creed is observed to have been the first in which this Article is exprest, and in this there was no mention of Christs Burial; the same is visible in that which we call the A∣thanasian: Now though from hence I conclude not (as some have done) that it is all one with Burial
(for it may be Burial, and somewhat more, dis∣posing of the Soul as well as the Body, during the space of Separation) yet sure this may I conclude, That it cannot with any pro∣bability refer to the Rai∣sing him out of the Grave (as Mr. Selden's phancy imports) when there had no mention of His being there, preceded: For what tolerable Sense would there be in the words of the A∣quileian Creed thus under∣stood? The words of that are, Crucifixus sub Pontio Pi∣lato,
descendit in Inferna, which Mr. Selden may have thus interpreted, Being Cru∣cified under Pontius Pilate, his Soul went into the Grave to raise his Body thence: This I say were absurd; without mention or intimation first given of his Body being at all there. So in the Athana∣sian, He suffered for our Salvation, descended into Hell, rose again the third day from the Dead; where there is mention of no more, but of his Suffer∣ing, but neither of his
Death or Burial (if de∣scending to Hades signifie them not) with what propriety could it be ad∣ded immediately, that he went down into the Grave to raise the Body thence? If these Arguments, any or all, prevail with you, to reject this Interpretation, I need add no more; if they do not, I shall then recommend one thing more to your consideration, That some Opinions are so remote and improbable, that it is hard to produce any Argument to make
them more so, than of them∣selves they are, and this is fit to be in front of such; That of Ramus, that Burying doth not sig∣nifie Burying but Embalm∣ing (that so descending to Hades may be left to signifie Burial) being though not more true, me∣thinks more ingenious and probable than this; and yet against this, it will be hard to produce above one Argument, (and that with him a begging the Questi∣on, which among Logici∣ans goes for the most
fallacious way of Dispu∣ting) viz, that  a∣mong all Authors, Sacred and Prophane, signi∣fies Burial not Embalm∣ing. Having said thus much to the Main, I shall now review your Letter, and give it what reflexions seem yet to be needful: And First, When you think it is an inconveni∣ence that the Opinion con∣trary to Mr. Selden's is prest with, to acknowledge in
the Text, Psalm 16. 10. That Christ was left in Hell the place of the Dam∣ned, though for no long time; you now see, First, that Hell (signifying not definitely the place of the Damned, any more than de∣finitely Heaven the place of the Glorified; but inde∣finitely, the common Place, Habitation, Condition of the Dead, Christ being there some time, and the third day recalled thence) is not his being left in Hades, but the quite contrary to it, his being rescued thence
timely, which yet he could not properly be, if he were not there for some time▪ The Phrase which from the Psalm the Apostle useth, Acts 2. 27. , Thou shalt not so leave, as to forsake destitute. But then Secondly, It is most certain, that Christs Divinity was inseparably united both to the Soul and Body of Christ, and so according to your hearts desire, though Christs Soul were (as my Opinion holds) in Hades, State or place of the Dead, for some space, yet
God left it not, forsook it not there one minute. Next, when you say, There is a considerable use of this Opinion, the manifest∣ing the Re-union of Christ's Body and Soul in the Grave, with the time and manner thereof, at, or im∣mediately before his Re∣surrection, which you say is in no other Article, nor in any plain place of Scripture averred. To this I Answer, First, That as a supposed incommodity doth not solve, so a con∣ceived advantage doth not
competently found an Argument; Secondly, That your own confession, That there is no plain place of Scripture that averrs this, is a valid Argument of probation, that it ought not to be esteemed a∣ny part of our Faith, nor consequently, any Article of our Creed; Thirdly, That when in the Creed [whatsoever may be said of the Scripture] the Separation of his Body and Soul, together with the time and manner of it, is no otherwise set down,
than by his being affirm∣ed to be dead; so is there no kind of need, that the Re-union should be more particularly set down, than by teaching us, that the third day he rose again, it being certain that he is the whole Christ that dyed, and so both Soul and Body, and so the af∣firming that he rose again is perfectly aequivalent and tantamount to his Soul being re-united to his Bo∣dy: Then for the time, that is also mentioned in that Article, the third day;
as for the manner, this Interpretation sets not that down truly, as was said; For the Resurrection of the Body was the work of his Divinity, and not pe∣culiarly of his Animal or Human Soul, but as of the Instrument used by his Divi∣nity. Next when you propose an Objection in behalf of the Opinion of the Descent into the place of the Dam∣ned, and give answer to it, I shall thus far interpose; First, that the Authority of the Antient Church in a matter of this moment, de∣pending
on what was de∣livered by the Apostles to the Churches, is, and ought to be of great weight a∣gainst all novel Heterodox∣es, so far as those of the Antient Church agree a∣mong themselves: Now though as to the end of Christs descending, and to the Definition of the Place, the Antients consent not, but differ very much from one another (which is shewed at large by Mr. Pear∣son) Mr. Pear∣son, page 479. and therefore in these particulars our Church de∣fines not, yet there is no∣thing
they more uniform∣ly agree in, than that the Soul of Christ really de∣scended into the habitation of Souls; for which I like∣wise for brevity sake re∣ferr you to Mr. Pearson, page 479. And therefore thus far we ought in all reason to come up to them, which he cannot, that ac∣cording to Mr. Selden's Opinion, interprets Hades of the Grave, the Repo∣sitory of the Body only. Lastly, For the Old Tra∣dition, that mentions the Descent and Resurrection
together, as one Article composed by Saint Thomas, there is little heed to be given to that Tradition, or indeed to the foundation of it, that every Apostle cast in his particular shott: For first it will be hard to deduce the Creed in the very form we have it, from the Apostles immediately, it being so variously set down, in the first times, and the Article of the Descent omitted in many; and the Aquileian being the first which delivers it in our present form: Second∣ly,
'Tis most certain, that every Apostle preached the whole Faith, and at their parting from Jerusa∣lem agreed in common upon a , form of wholsom words, not com∣mitting to writing, or obli∣ging it to the very same words, and this was called their Symbolum, as that sig∣nifies a tessera militaris, by which Christians were known from others; and not from the notion of a Shott which belongs to rather than ; so that you are not to
think that old Tradition, which in respect of true Antiquity, is but a novel Fable of no authority, and founded in a manifest mi∣stake, will be fit to assist Mr. Selden's, or any other Conceit. This is all I see occa∣sion to reflect on in your Letter, and so I have ex∣prest my self perspicuously (of which you will not judge aright, till you have read over the whole): I shall hope I have performed what you seem to require, First,
Given you my Sense of Mr. Selden's Opinion: Se∣condly, Represented unto you the one matter of Faith in this Article; which being received, there is no more required de fide: and then all Error and danger will be in Dogma∣tizing, or Teaching for Faith, what is more than this, which our Church wisely prohibits us to do: and then what need we trouble our selves with the various Opinions of men a∣bout other Circumstances, which are at the best, but
Opinions and Conjectures, and perhaps never an one of them the truth, or any part of the meaning of that Article. I have now held you so long, that you will have no reason to imagine your Letter came unseasonably to me: the truth is, it came in a point of time, wherein I had a perfect vacancy from businesses that had formerly engaged my attendance; and if it prove of any use to your satisfaction and repose of mind, I shall think my time
hath been very well disposed of, that hath been thus laid out. And so I take my leave of you, and remain Your affectionate Friend to serve you, Hen. Hammond. April 28. 1659. I received this Letter from Dr. Hammond, by Mr. Rich. Royston on Tuesday May 3. 1659. thus only indorsed: For Mr. Smith in Little More-Fields, These.
Books Printed for, and Sold by Richard Chiswell. FOLIO. Speed's Maps and Geography of Great Britain and Ireland, and of Foreign Parts. Dr. Cave's Lives of the Primitive Fa∣thers, in 2. Vol. Dr. Cary's Chronological Account of Antient Time Sir Tho. Herbert's Travels into Persia, &c. Wilson's Compleat Christian Dictio∣nary. B. Wilkin's real Character, or Philoso∣phical Language. Parmacopoeia Regalis Collegii Medico∣rum Londinensis. Hooker's Ecclesiastical Policy. Winch's Book of Entries. Guillim's Display of Heraldry with large Additions. Dr. Burnet's History of the Reforma∣tion of the Church of England, in 2. Vol. Dr. Burnet's Account of the Confessions and
Prayers of the Murderers of Esq; Thyun. Burlace's History of the Irish Rebel∣lion. Herodoti Historia Gr. Lat. cum variis Lect. Rushworth's Historical Collections the 2d. Part in 2. vol. Rushworth's Large account of the Tryal of the Earl of Strafford, with all the circumstances relating thereunto. Bishop Sanderson's Sermons with his Life. Fowlis's History of Romish Conspir. Treas. and Usurpat. Sir Walter Raleigh's History of the World. The Laws of this Realm concerning Jesuites, Seminary Priests, Recu∣sants, the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance explained by divers Judgments, and Resolutions of the Judges; with other Observations thereupon, by Will. Cawly, Esq; William's impartial consideration of the Speeches of the five Jesuits executed for Treason, 1680. Josephus's Antiquities and Wars of the Jews with Fig.
QVARTO. DR. Littleton's Dictionary, La∣tine and English. Bishop Nicholson on the Church Ca∣techism. History of the late Wars of New En∣gland. Dr. Outram de Sacrificiis. Bishop Taylor's Disswasive from Po∣pery. History of the future State of Europe. Dr. Fowler's Defence of the Design of Christianity against John Bun∣nyan. Lord Hollis's Relation of the unjust Accusation of certain French Gen∣tlemen charged with a Robbery 1671. Cole's Latine and English Dictionary. Dr. Jane's Fast Sermon before the Commons, 1679. Mr. John Cave's Fast Sermon on the 30th. of Jan. 1679. Mr. John Cave's Assize Sermon at Leicester, July 31. 1679. Dr. Parker's Demonstration of the Divine Authority of the Law of Nature and the Christian Religion.
The History of the Powder Treason, with a Vindication of the Proceed∣ings relating thereunto, from the Exceptions made against it by the Catholick Apologist and others. Speculum Baxterianum, or Baxter a∣gainst Baxter. Mr. Hook's new Philosophical Colle∣ctions. Dr. Burnet's Relation of the Massacre of the Protestants in France. Dr. Burnet's Conversion and Persecutions of Eve Cohan a Jewess of Quality late∣ly Baptized Christian. Dr. Burnet's Sermon before the Lord Mayor upon the Fast for the Fire, 1680. Dr. Burnet's Fast Sermon before the House of Commons, Dec. 22. 80. Dr. Burnet's Sermon on the 30th. of January, 1681. Dr. Burnet's Sermon at the Election of the Lord Mayor, 1681. Dr. Burnet's Sermon at the Funeral of Mr. Houblon, 1682. Dr. Burnet's Answer to the Animadversions on his History of the Rights of Princes, 1682. Dr. Burnet's Decree made at Rome 1679. con∣demning some Opinions of the Je∣suites
and other Casuists. Publi∣shed by Dr. Burnet, with a Pre∣face. Dr. Burnet's A Letter giving a Relation of the present state of the difference between the French King and the Court of Rome. Bibliotheca Norfolciana, sive Catalogus Lib. Manuscript. & impress. in omni Arte & Lingua, quos Hen. Dux Nor∣folciae Regiae Societati Londinensi pro Scientia naturali promovenda donavit. OCTAVO. ELborow's Rationale upon the En∣glish Service. Bishop Wilkin's Natural Religion. Hardcastle's Christian Geography and Arithmetick. Dr. Ashton's Apology for the Honours and Revenues of the Clergy. Lord Hollis's Vindication of the Judi∣cature of the House of Peers in the case of Skinner. Lord Hollis's Jurisdiction of the House of Peers in case of Appeals. Lord Hollis's Jurisdiction of the House of Peers in case of Impositions.
—Letters about the Bishops Votes in Capital Cases. Dr. Grew's Idea of Philological Histo∣ry continued on Roots. Spaniard's Conspiracy against the State of Venice. Dr. Brown's Religio Medici: with Dig∣bies Observations. Several Tracts of Mr. Hales of Eaton. Dr. Simpson's Chymical Anatomy of the York-shire Spaws; with a Dis∣course of the Original of Hot Springs and other Fountains. —Hydrological Essays, with an Ac∣count of the Allum works at Whit∣by, and some Observations about the Jaundice. Organon Salutis: Or an Instrument to cleanse the Stomach. With divers new Experiments of the Vertue of Tabaco and Coffee: with a Preface of Sir Hen. Blunt. Dr. Cave's Primitive Christianity, in three Parts. A Discourse of the Nature, Ends, and Difference of the two Cove∣nants, 1672. Ignatius Fuller's Sermons of Peace and Holiness.
A free Conference touching the pre∣sent State of England, at home and abroad, in order to the designs of France. Mystery of Jesuitism, Third and Fourth Parts Doctor Sanway's Unreasonableness of the Romanists. Dr. Ashton's Cases of Scandal and Perse∣cution. The Tryals of the Regicides in 1660. Certain genuine Remains of the Lord Bacon in Arguments Civil, Moral, Natural, &c. with a large account of all his Works, by Dr. Tho. Ten∣nison. Dr. Puller's Discourse of the Moderati∣on of the Church of England. Sir John Munson's Discourse of Su∣preme Power and common Right. Dr. Henry Bagshaw's Discourses on se∣lect Texts. Mr. Seller's Remarks relating to the State of the Church in the three first Centuries. The Country mans Physician; for the use of such as live far from Cities or Market-Towns.
Dr. Burnet's account of the Life and Death of the Earl of Rochester. —Vindication of the Ordinations of the Church of England. —History of the Rights of Princes in the disposing of Ecclesiastical Benefices and Church-Lands. —Life of God in the Soul of man. Markham's Perfect Horseman. Dr. Sherlock's Practical discourse of Religious Assemblies. —Defence of Dr. Stilling fleet's Un∣reasonableness of Separation. —A Vindication of the defence of Dr. Stillingfleet in Answer to Mr. Baxter and Mr. Lob, about Catholick Communion. The History of the House of Estee, the Family of the Dutchess of York, Octavo. Sir Rob. Filmer's Patriarcha, or Natu∣ral Power of Kings. Mr. John Cave's Gospel to the Romans. Dr. Outram's 20. Sermons preached on several occasions. Lawrence's interest of Ireland in its trade and wealth, stated.
DVODECIMO. HOdder's Arithmetick. Grotius de Veritate Religionis Chri∣stianae. Bishop Hacket's Christian Consolations. An Apology for a Treatise of Humane Reason, written by M. Clifford Esq;. The Queen-like Closet, both parts. Valentine's Devotions. 24. Pharmacopoeia Collegii Londinensis refor∣mata. 24. Books lately Printed for R. Chiswell. AN Historical Relation of the I∣sland of CEYLON in the East In∣dies: Together with an Account of the detaining in Captivity the Au∣thor, and divers other English-men now living there, and of the Author's miraculous Escape: illustrated with fifteen Copper Figures, and an exact Map of the Island. By Capt. Robert Knox, a Captive there near 20 years, Fol. Mr. Camfield's two Discourses of E∣piscopal Confirmation, Octavo.
Bishop Wilkin's Fifteen Sermons, ne∣ver before extant. Mr. John Cave's two Sermons of the duty and benefit of submission to the Will of God in Afflictions, Quarto. Dr. Crawford's serious expostulation with the Whiggs in Scotland, Quar. A Letter giving a Relation of the present state of the Difference be∣tween the French King and the Court of Rome; to which is added, The Popes Brief to the Assembly of the Clergy, and their Protesta∣tion. Published by Dr. Burnet. Dr. Salmon's Doron Medicum, or Sup∣plement to his new London Dispen∣satory, Octavo. Sir James Turner's Pallas Armata, or, Military Essays of the Antient, Gre∣cian, Roman and Modern Art of War, Fol. Mr. Tanner's Primordia: or, the Rise and Growth of the first Church of God described, Octavo. A Letter writ by the last Assembly General of the Clergy of France to the Protestants, inviting them to return to their communion; toge∣ther
with the Methods proposed by them for their Conviction. Translated into English, and exami∣ned by Dr. Gilb. Burnet, Octavo. Dr. Cave's Dissertation concerning the Government of the Ancient Church by Bishops, Metropolitans, and Patriarchs: more particularly concerning the antient Power and Jurisdiction of the Bishops of Rome, and the encroachments of that upon other Sees, especially Constantinople, Octavo. —His History of the Lives, Acts, Death, and Writings of the most eminent Fathers of the Church that flourished in the fourth Centu∣ry: (being a Second Volume) wherein amongst other things is an Account of Arianism, and all o∣ther Sects of that Age. With an Introduction containing an Histori∣cal account of the state of Paganism under the First Christian Empe∣rours, Folio. Dr. J. Lightfoot's Works in a 2. Vol. Fol. Mr. Selden's Janus Anglorum Englished, with Notes: To which is added his Epinomis, concerning the An∣tient
Government and Laws of this Kingdom, never before extant. Also two other Treatises written by the same Author: One of the Original of Ecclesiastical Jurisdi∣ction of Testaments; the other of the Disposition or Administration of Intestates Goods: now the first time Published, Fol. D. Spenceri Dissertationes de Ratione Ri∣tuum Judaicorum, &c. Fol. Sub prelo. Disquisitiones Criticae de variis per diversa loca & tempora Bibliorum editionibus, quibus accedunt Castigationes Theologi cujusdam Parisiensis ad opusc. Is. Vossii de Sibyllinis Oraculis & ejusdem re∣sponsionem ad objectiones nuperae Criticae. Quarto. Jus Regium, or the just and solid Foundations of Monarchy in ge∣neral, and more especially of the Monarchy of Scotland, maintained against Buchanan, Napthali, Doleman, Milton, &c. by Sir George Mac∣kenzie his Majesties Advocate in Scotland. 80. FINIS.
