T2100 9053977 42344
A TREATIE OF PEACE, Concluded The 29. of September, 1642. being Michaelmas day, That all Forces assembled together in any part of Yorkshire, Countie, or Citie of Yorke, shall be disbanded, and all those under Captaine Hotham now in Doncaster, and all other forces in any other parts of the Countrey, under a∣ny other Commanders belonging to the Garrison of Hull, shall retire to Hull with all speed possibly, and that Captaine Hotham shall begin to march from Doncaster towards Hull, upon Saturday next, the first of October, 1642. Here is also the True Copy of a Letter sent from Prince Rupert to to his Majestie from Bobford; September the 24. 1642. Printed at Yorke by speciall command, and reprinted at London. Likewise the Copy of another Letter sent from a Gentleman of Yorkshire, con∣taining many speciall and remarkable passages of what strength of men, Horse and Ordinance, there is in that Countie. London, Printed for I. Benson. 1642.
The copy of the Treaty of peace for YORK-SHIRE. FIrst it is agreed at a treaty concluded this pre∣sent 29. of September being Michaelmas day that all forces assembled together in any part of Yorkshire or Countie or Citie of Yorke shall be disbanded, and all those under the command of Captaine Hotham, now in Doncaster, and all other forces in ny other part of the Countrey under any other com∣manders belonging to the garrison of Hull, shall retire to Hull with all speed possible, and the said captaine Hotham shall begin to march from Doncaster to∣wards Hull, upon Satterday next. 2 It is agreed that no hostile or violent act shall hereafter be done to the garrison of Hull, either directly or indirectly, by pretence of any aide or as∣sistance whatsoever, upon the person of any man within the countie of York, or within the countie or citie of Yorke nor upon the goods, dither in the countie aforesaid, or in the countie of Kingstone upon Hull. 3 It is agreed that the commissioners or Array and orders and ordinances, of Parliament for the Militia be wholly suspended in this countie, untill such time as some course be agreed pon, for the ordering of the Militia by the King and Parliament, and this without disputing either the legalitie or illegalitie of either, as finding neither so necessary at this time, as for the set∣ting them a foot to involve this great countie in blood. 4 It is agreed, that no commissioners be imposed upon this countie, but such as are legall and presidented in good times. 5 It is agreed that no army or forces whatsoever shall be suffered to enter this countie in hostile manner by vertue of any pretence or command
whatsoever, and they who shall attempt to doe it, the whole countie shall rise against them with force as enemies against the peace, and to be supprest 6 It is agreed, that if any carriages for the houshold either of the King or Queene be to passe this countie, that to prevent all other armed forces under pretence of such a conduct to come amongst us, wee shall take order to see them quietly conducted by the sheriffe of the countie, with such a convoy as he shall appoint and we like, and with no other, and if it shall happen the Queenes Majestie shall returne out of Holland thorow this countie; that we shall humbly beseech her Majestie to forbeare the bringing with her any multitude of armed forces, but to believe that we shall wait upon her Majestie with such an honourable safe convoy, as shall befit our dutie and her honour. 7 It is agree that if any warlike provision bee desired to bee passed this countie for his Majesties service, that we shall humbly petition his Maje∣stie that he would be pleased to convey them some other way, being it may be occasioned to interrupt our peace. 8 It is agreed that none shall be arrested in this countie as delinquents to either partie, but by a legall peacable and quiet way; that is by the legall officers and their assistants only, and not by armed men and souldiers, who may be an occasion to bring fire amongst us. 9 It is agreed that whomsoever in this Countie can be made appeare ei∣ther to be the uthor contriver or assisting to the burning or pillaging of sir Edward Roods his house or any other mans in this countie, we shall all see them if they be able make restitution, and howsoever to be brought to Iustice. 10 It is agreed that a generall amnestia be made betweene all the Gen∣tlemen and others of this countie, of all former unkindnesses and differen∣ces which have beene bred by these distractions, and that we hereafter will be as one man, to defend one another according to the law against all o∣thers, laving all others to be punished by the law of the land, and not by force and violence. 11 It is agreed that it is intended by disbanding the Armies that his Majestie shall have libertie for removing of all such his canons and muniti∣on as he hath now in this countie. 10 It is agreed that all the armes which doe belong to any of the trai∣ned bands of this countie which have beene taken from them since the 21, September instant by either part, shall be presently restored, and that ca∣ptine Hotham shall leave behinde him when he returnes into Hull all those brasse pieces belonging to his Majestie which hee hath of his, which are now in Doncaster excepting such as he himselfe from Hull.
13. It is agreed that no further forces during this difference betweene King and Parliament be either Razed in, or payd by this County for this Warre order then such as are already levied, and really rased, and all such o goe out of the Country without raseing any more. 14. t is agreed that a humble Remonstrance and declaration of these re∣solutions bee presently sent both to the King and Parliament, accompanied an humble Petition from us all, that according as we have so unanimously a∣greed for our particular peace, so they would bee pleased to commiserate this distracted Kingdome to doe the same, for the generall peace of the whole, Henry Bellasse William Savile Edward Osburne Iohn Ramsdon Iugram Hopton Francis Nevill Tho Fairefax Thomas Mayleverey William Lister VVilliam VVhite Iohn Ferrey Thomus Stockdayle. A true Coppie of a Letter sent by Prince Rupert to His MAIESTIE. SIR, THe bearer will with all the Circumstances tell Your Majesty our Proceedings at Worcester. I shall onely say this, That upon Your Majesties commands to succour the Towne, we went thither with our Forces and found the Rebels on both sides of the Towne, no Ammunition, nor nothing fitting to entertaine so great a Force as the Lord of Essex would have brought that night. But all things in so great a disor∣der, that certainely we had all beene lost, had wee not by a great chance met with tenne Troopes of their Horse, and five of their Dragoners, which we did entirely rout, and kill'd most of their chiefest Officers. The Manner and the Names, I leave for the said bearer to tell you. Your Majesty will bee pleased to accept this, as a beginning of Your Officers and my Duty; and I doubt not, as (certainely) they behaved themselves all very bravely and l∣lantly, that hereafter Your Majesty shall finde the same behaviour against a
more considerable number. Of this Your Majesty may be very confident, as also of the endeavours of SIR, Your Majesties most Obedient Nephew, and humble Servant. RƲPERT. From Bobsort this 24. of Sep. 1642. Sir, This Gentleman hath behaved himselfe so gallantly, That I must needs humbly desire Your Majesty to Knight him; which will encourage him and all others to continue the Affection for Your ser∣vice. The Circumstances Related by Master Crane, who is Knighted. He is (I heare) Prince Ruports Cornet. THat at the first Charge, Prince Rupert, Prince Maurice, Master Foxe, and two more, charged and defeated a Troop, whom they knew not to be enemies, till they were upon them, by their Orange colour Skarfes. That seven Cornets are taken, some I saw. That severall Officers are kild on their side, particularly, Douglas and San∣dis; that the last repented before his death, for having borne Armes against the King. That severall men are taken, as Captaine Wingat of the House of Com∣mons, and others. That we have but three kild in all. That but three of ours of quality have been hurt; Master Wilmott in the backe, and the worst of any: but yet hee Marches in a Coach and is merry. Sir Lewis Dives through the Shoulder. Master Biron (a brother of Sir Iohns) over the face. I heare he hath said, That Prince Maurice is a little hurt, but I understood him but those three. That Browne, who commanded in chiefe as Colonell of Dragoners, was one of the first that ranne away.
That our Men are very hearty with their Victory, and the spoiles of the kill'd (as Horses, Armes, Buffe-coates, Mony in their Pockets) and the ene∣my (as they heare) much dishartened, and not likely to make so great haste from about Worcester as they meant. The CORNETS Mottoes. Pro Rege & Regno. Exurgat & Discipabuntur. Pro Raege & Religione. Si pro Patria Morior non Moror. The rest so tone, the Mottoes could not be read. Newes from Yorkeshire. CAptaine Hotham, Sir Iohn Hothams Son having fallyed out of Hull with 600. men lyes now at Doncaster, and intercepts all Letters up∣on Monday last, Septem. 26. My Lord Fairesay came to Leedge and brought with him 100. men to settle the Militia, Sir Iohn Savile came with 100. Men more to his aide, but the Commissioners for the Commission of Array sent out of Pontefract, whereby they lay, two troopes of Horse, who met Sir Iohn Savile at Loft-house kilde, one man hurt, sixe tooke 18. horses, and some prisoners, Sir Iohn being one, and all their Armes, all which were carryed to Pontefract Castle, and were there kept untill yesterday, in Levie of which prisoners they tooke my selfe and 6. other Gentlemen prisoners and kept us prisoners foure houres, the same day Monday for the prevention of bloud-shed, there was a Treaty of peace, a coppy of which I have sent you by Sir Iohn Ingram Hopton, Master Francis Nevile, pro Rege and my Lord Fairefax, Master Stockdale, and Master Farres, pro Parl. it was concluded that sixe of each side should meete at Rothwell on Thursday the 29. of this instant Septem. and did conclude a peace, God of his mercy grant it through this whole kingdome, Yours N. N.
Post-script. There are at Pontfract 800. Horse 13. peeces of Ordnance 4000. foot ready to March if occasion be. Here is at Knaresbrough 100. Dragoners 800 foote at Sheffeild 500. foote all which are to bee disbanded, for I am infor∣med he marched homewards last night 5. miles onward on his way, Your Friend to use. FINIS.
