T2669 13800193 101928
A True Declarati∣on of the last affaires in Ireland, Shewing the late overthrowes given to the IRISH Rebels. Sent over in two Letters, the one from the Earle of Ormond, and the other ftom Sir Iohn Temple, Red in the House of Parliament, and ordered to bee Printed. May foureteene 1642. Ordered that these Letters forthwith bee PRINTED. H. Elssing Cler. Parl. D. Com. London Printed, by R. B. for I. Franke, and are to be sould at his Shop, next dore to the Kings Head in Fleet-Streete. 1642.
My Lord, SInce the last Victory it pleased God to give His Maje∣sties Forces, under the Conduct of the Earle of Ormond against the Rebels. We have heard little of them here-abouts, Their maine power is certainly broken, and the peo∣ple so dispersed as they will not without great difficulty bee drawn together again in any considerable body. Our men are now grown to terrible unto them as the quit for the most part their places of strength if they doe but heare any part of our Army marching towards them; of which my Lord Lisle hath lately had the experience for his Lorship suddainely after his arrivall here, desirous to put himselfe into action, undertooke the reliefe of my Lady of Offaly, and some other Castles in those parts. He had the chiefe Commands, and being accom∣panied with Sir Charles Coote, some troopes of Horse out of his own Regiment, and two troopes of Dragons went on up∣on the most desperate peece of service that hath t yet beene undertaken; All his friends there were much against his Lordships going apprehending much hazard to his Person in the Journey. For indeed the Rebels were in great numbers in those parts and the passages through the Bogges and Woods so difficult as it was verily believed they would have (as with great advantage they might have done) made great oppositi∣on against him; But it seemes they durst not adventure to make good even those barricadoes and workes which they had made to impeach his passage over Rivers, and other sleights which hee passed without any encounter, untill hee came to Philips Towne a place of very difficultnesse, by rea∣son of the Bogs on every side▪ when they came, there, they found the Town abandoned, but the Fort kept by the Rebels, they resolve to assault it and so part the Dragons on foote;
The Rebls entertained them for 2. houres with their shot, and S. Charles Coote thinking he should do no good upon it, till the night came, when he intended to goe on with all his men and make a generall assault, our men seeing some of their fellows wounded, were impatient to attend any longer, some of got to the Spikeholes▪ out of which the Rebels shot and put in their Muskets to shoot at them: others having Crowe of Iron got to the Port in a litle time, and so made the Rebels yeeld presently, without any condition, their Captaines was taken and sent up hither, and many of them hang'd. From thence having some two Miles to my Lady of Offaly, which was over a narrow Causey thorough a Bog, they caused their Dragon to make good the way till the Horses went and re∣lieved the Lady of Offaly, whom they found in great distresse, but so well provided her, as it seems her Ladiship intends still to abide in her Castle, So they returned burning and spoyling all the Towns belonging to the Rebels in their way back, and came to termine a town of great importance within 20. miles of this Citie, which was defended by the Lords of the Pale. But their Lordships as it seemes were retired and they found some three or foure hundred men in it, they presently bee set the towne about the Walls, and resolved to take it by assault, but one of the gates being not very strong, a troop of Horse found first entrance there which the Rebels perceiving ran presently out the other way and were pursued by them and many cut off; My Lord Lisle as it seemes, likes the service and the Country so well, as hee resolves there to abide by it, and hath sent some propositions to the Lords Iustices, to have a Regiment sent down to him wherewith they purpose to do great service by the blessing of God in those parts, as I hope they will, the Lords of the Pale lying in the Navan, (since the writing of this I heare the Lords of the Pale have quitted the Navan and burnt it,) which after their manner they have for∣tified, it is within 7. Miles of Tryme, and there they are, as it is said, with 2000. men.
This businesse received a great debate the last night at the Boord▪ and though severall of the lords were of opinion to recall them, yet at length it was carried by pluralitie of voi∣ces, to send downe more forces to them, and it is resolved lieutenant Collonell Gibson shall march towards them to morrow with 1200. foot, and Captaine Sidneyes Horse troope, and there remaine under the command of my Lord Lesle, who I am confident will give a very good accompt of himselfe in that place, for I assure your lordship, he hath carried himselfe very gallantly and very discreetly in this action. There came last night two letters unto the Lords Justices from the Lord Conway at the Newry, advertising their Lordships, that he and Generall Major Monroe were mar∣ched downe thither with 3000. men, and had taken in that place, and intended to goe finde out the Rebels, who they heard were gathered in some numbers about the Countie of Armagh; Sir Henry Tichbourne hath likewise taken in Car∣lingford, and daily makes great destruction among the roagues in all those quarters. By letters which came lately from the Eale of Saint Albaines, wee understand that the towne of Galway since their defection hath made some attempts upon his Maiesties Forts there, as likewise upon one of his Majesties ships that came into that Harbour, in her passage towards Limberie, whether she was sent to relieve the fort there,, but without any successe, his Lordship is come downe with 1500. men within 4. miles of the towne, and gives such interruption to their Supplies, which they expect out of the Countrey, as in his letter he speakes as if hee hoped in a very short, time to draw in them upon submission. His Lordship carries himself very well there, and continues to doe very good service for his Majestie in those parts. My Lord Rannelagh hath likewise delivered Athoue from the seige, and is at libertie to walke abroad, which hee
cannot doe much, till the forces designed for Conaght arive. Thus your Lordship sees how it pleaseth God to blesse us in all our undertakings here. We hope thorough your Lord∣ships care and great zeale for the prosperitie of this service, we shall suddenly receive the long expected supplies of men, money, and munition and match, by want of which we are now in that condition here, as our men must lye still, as being altogether disabled to march out before the forces designed for this place doe arive, we have not beene failing particu∣larly to represent unto your lordship our most pressing neces∣sities, and the advantages the state of England will have by a rigourous prosecution of the warre here this Summer. If we let slip this opportunitie, while the Rebbels want armes and Munition, remain so extremely dejected and disanimated by our late victories, and give them space to breath while winter she shall againe put this whole Kingdome to a hazzard, or at least trebble the charge it would now cost for the recoverie of it, and occasion the perrishing of multitudes of our owne souldiers, the extremities they must then necessarily endure. But I shall adde no more, but that I am really Dublin in May 5. 1642. Your Lordships most humble and most faithfull servant I. Temple. May 14. 1642. Ordered that this Letter be forthwith printed. H. Elsyng. Cler. Parl. de Com.
My most honoured Lord, IN my last I acquainted your Lordship with a designe then undertaken by my Lord Lisle, for the reliefe of the Lady Ofaly, which his Lordship hath prosecuted with so much judgment and good successe, that not only her Ladyship is put into a condition of subsistance, in despight of what the Rebbels were or are like to be able to doe, but up∣on intelligence given him, he hath approved his first intentions, and taken in a Towne called Trim, from whence his Lordship sent hither a partie of Horse, desiring to be inabled to follow his good fortune, by the sending to him one troope of Horse more, and 1200. foote, which is condescended unto, and the troopes will be sent home on Saturday next, no man can observe his gallant inclinations, attended with his suitable events, with greater delight than I doe, Nor shall be more ready to serve him to Ward accomplishment of all his undertakings. I am bould to send unto your Lordship a Copie of the Commission, by which I have beene intru∣sted by your Lordship with the command of their Army; which as is most fit will determine upon your arrivall; but I observe by the commission that not only my command over the army, but my place of Lievtenant Generall will then likewise be at an end whereof I thought fit to give your Lordship
notice and to send unto you a drought of a new Commission varying nothing in substance from the former, saying that where the other was to bee of force, no longer then during your Lordships absence, this which I now desire (if it may stand with your good pleasure) hath no such limitation, but this I referre to your Lordships better judgement, and to inlarge or qualifie this draught as you shall thinke fittest, and most conduceing to the advancement of the Kings service whereunto I shall alwayes limit my desires, who am Dublin the 5. of May, 1642. Your Lordships faithfull and humble servant Ormond Ossory. May 14. 1642. Ordered that this Letter be forthwith printed. H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. de Com.
