V23B R219631 99831087 35549
Behold this Publican, i'th Temple praying; Plac'd in the front, as of our book beginner: The form of whose devotiō was this saying, O Lord be mercifull to me a sinner. God heard his suit; though short, 'tis not de∣ni'd: He came a sinner, but went justify'd.
Penitent publican at prayer in entrance to a church Priuate DEVOTIONS Lord  mercifull to me a London Printed for Geo: Badger and are to bee sould at his shopp at St Dunstons-Churchyard in fleetstreet
PRIVATE DEVOTIONS, Digested into SIX LETANIES; I. Of Confession. II. Of Deprecation. III. Of Supplication. IV. Of Thanksgiving. V. Of Intercession. VI. For the Sick. VVith Directions and Prayers For the Lords Day. Sacrament. day of Death. Judgment. And two daily Prayers, One for the Morning. Another for the Evening. The thirteenth Edition. London, Printed for H. Moseley at the Princes Arms in S. Pauls Church yard, 1654.
To the right Honorable, THOMAS Lo: COVENTRY, Baron of Ailesborough, and Lord Keeper of the great Seale of England, &c. My good Lord, THe Law permit∣ted a man that was not able to bring a lamb to the Altar, to offer a pair of Turtle Doves, or two young Pigeons. The Gospel commends Cha∣rity in a cup of cold water; & magnifies the devotion & af∣fection of the widow that cast in 2 mites into the Treasury. I must ever acknowledge,
that mine obligation to your Lordship might challenge a volume; but wanting that, I have presumed to present you with this Manuall, and En∣chiridion of private Devoti∣ons, the love and exercise whereof hath advanced your Lordship to publike honour. It is but a little one, yet since it was first presented to your hands, it hath so thriven by your Lordships patronage, that it hath had many Editions & Additions. And I am glad of it, for the bigger it grows, the better proportion it will carry with his service that is ever devoted to Your Lop in all Duty, Henry Valentine.
ORATIO Deo Sacrificium. Oranti subsidium. Daemonibus flagellum. That is, PRAYER IS a Sacrifice to God. Succour to the soule. Scourge to the divel. Praier is Clavis Diei. Sera Noctis. 1 A Key to open the Morning. My voice shalt thou heare in the morning.
O Lord, in the Mor∣ning will I direct my prayer unto thee, and will look up. Psal. 5.3. Unto thee have I cry∣ed, ô Lord, and in the Morning shall my prayer prevent thee. Psal. 81.13. 2 A lock to shut up the Evening. At Evening will I pray, and cry aloud, and he shall hear my voice. Psa. 55.17. Let my prayer be set forth before thee as In∣cense: and the lifting up
of mine hands as the eve∣ning sacrifice. Ps. 141.2. Morning and Evening. Aaron shall burn sweet incense every morning. And when he lighteth the Lamps at Even, he shall burn sweet incense. Exod. 30.7, 8. In the Morning sow thy seed, and in the Eve∣ning with-hold not thine hand: for thou knowest not whether shall pros∣per, either this or that, or whether they both shall be alike good. Ecc. 11.6.
I. CONFESSION OF SINNES. COnfession is a branch of praier, which searches out our sins, and discloses and spreads them open before the Lord, as He∣zekiah did those letters which he received from the King of Assyria: or as Josuah opened the cave of Makkedah, and brought out the five Kings that were there hidden; so this opens the
heart and brings out our hidden and bosome sins to light and execution. And as the opening of a vein rectifies the distem∣pers of the body, so this cures the maladies of the soul: for if we con∣fesse our sinnes, God is faithfull and just to for∣give us our sins, and to cleanse us from all un∣righteousness. In a word, it is commanded by God, and practised by the Saints, and Solomon makes it the character of a righteous man, to ac∣cuse
himself in the begin∣ning of his praier. A man dreames when he is a∣sleep, but cannot declare his dream till he awake. Confession is a sign that we are awakned from the sleep of sin by the grace of God. I said, I will confesse my transgressions to the Lord, and thou forga∣vest the iniquity of my sin. Psal. 32.5. I have not covered my transgressions as Adam; by hiding mine iniquity in my bosome. Job 31.33.
But I acknowledge my transgressions, and my sin is ever before me. Psal. 51.3. THE LETANY of Confession. BEhold, I was shapen in wickedness, and in sin hath my mother con∣ceived me. Lord be merciful to me a sinner. When I was a childe I spake as a childe, I un∣derstood as a childe, I thought as a child, and as yet have not put away
childish things from me. Lord be mercifull to me a sinner. When I grew up, the lusts of the flesh grew too strong for me, they fought against me, and prevailed; the cares of the world distracted me, the pleasures of the world deceived me, the pride of life swelled me, de∣sire of revenge inflamed me, and sin reigned in my mortal body. Lord be merciful to me a sinner. I have given up the
members of my body as weapons of sin, and in∣struments of unrighte∣ousness: my head to ima∣gine mischief, my hands to work wickedness, my tongue to swearing and blasphemy, my eares to filthy and corrupt com∣munication, my eyes to behold vanity, my feet to stand in the way of sinners, and to walk in the counsell of the un∣godly; so that from the crown of the head, to the sole of the foot, there is no sound part in me.
Lord be merciful to me a sinner. I have either omitted good duties, or done them slightly and wea∣rily: I have neglected the time of my visitati∣on, I have not known in my day the things that belong to my peace. Lord be merciful to me a sinner. I have offended thee, and trespassed my neigh∣bour by my improvi∣dence and rashnesse, by my anger and intempe∣rate speech; by my wil∣fulness,
envy, malice and uncharitableness. Lord be merciful to me a sinner. I have sinned in all them whom I have cor∣rupted by my words, counsel, or example: in all them whom I should have reproved, whom I might have reformed, and did not. Lord be merciful to me a sinner. I have sinned in neg∣lecting opportunities to visit the house and table of the Lord, in unworthy
and unprepared resort thither, in wandring and idle thoughts there, ei∣ther diverting me from the work of thy holy worship, or distracting me in it. Lord be merciful to me a sinner. I have sinned in unre∣verent and unprofitable hearing thy Word, in cold and careless invo∣cation of thy Name, without zeale and holy affection, which turned my prayers into sin. Lord be merciful to me a sinner.
I have sinned by un∣thankfull passing over thy many good favours, by slighting them with an unhearty commemo∣ration, so that my sacri∣fice of praise became the sacrifice of fools. Lord be merciful to me a sinner. I have broken all my vows and purposes, I have not kept my solemn promises of forsaking my sin, & amending my life. Lord be merciful to me a sinner. I have delaied my re∣pentance,
I have resisted the checks of mine own conscience, I have quen∣ched the motions of thy Spirit, I have put off the good works, whereby I might have glorified thee, bettered my self, & benefited my neighbour. Lord be merciful to me a sinner. I have corrupted the best of my thoughts, words, works, and ways, by cherishing the corrup∣tions of mine own na∣ture, by entertaining the secret temptations of Sa∣tan,
and the open intice∣ments of the wicked world. Lord be merciful to me a sinner. I have been an evill husband of the talent of grace which was com∣mitted to my improve∣ment; I have been an unthrift of that time which was lent me for repentance, and the work of my salvation. Lord be merciful to me a sinner. I have belied my cor∣rupt heart with fair sem∣blances
of goodness, and have hypocritically deceived the good opi∣nion of charity which beleeveth the best; I have boasted in the praise that I deserved not, to thy offence, who requirest truth in the in∣ward parts. Lord be merciful to me a sinner. I have overweened the measure of grace in my self, & corrupted it with my pride: I have under∣valued the goodness of my neighbour, and ei∣ther
have lessened it with abatements, or depraved it with unjust imputati∣ons. Lord be merciful to me a sinner. I have heard and seen thee my God dishonou∣red, my neighbour tra∣duced and wronged, & I have done right to nei∣ther: but either for fear of offence, for partial af∣fection, for base flattery, or ungodly modesty, or for uncharitable envy I have forborn to arise in their just defence.
Lord be merciful to me a sinner. I have not alwayes sought the outward bles∣sings of life by good meanes, sanctified by prayer: I have not al∣wayes received them with thanksgiving and contentednesse: I have not alwayes used them with sobriety, nor dis∣pensed the over-measure with the piety and chari∣ty that I ought. Lord be merciful to me a sinner. I have not used my
lawful pleasures so sea∣sonably, so moderately, so religiously, so thank∣fully as I ought, but I have offended thee my God in my mirth. Lord be merciful to me a sinner. I have not sought peace with all men, nor always imbraced it when it hath been offered: I have not loved mine e∣nemy, nor blessed him that cursed me, nor done good to him that meant or did me hurt: I have not given him such par∣don
as I begged from thee for my self. Lord be merciful to me a sinner. I have sinned in vaine thoughts, in vast desires, in ungodly hopes, in un∣chaste dreams, in secret covetings of the goods or delights of my neigh∣bour. Lord be merciful to me a sinner. I have sinned in the unconscionable practice of these sins without re∣morse or repentance, or if any good motions of
thy Spirit have bred in me a godly sorrow for them, the next temptati∣on hath either replased me into the old, or im∣plunged mee in some new sin. Lord be merciful to me a sinner. I have hid some of these sins as Adam, some of them I have excu∣sed with pretences, some I have denied against the testimony of my accu∣sing conscience, some I have wickedly maintain∣ed, none I have through∣ly
repented & amended. Lord be merciful to me a sinner. I have committed ma∣ny secret sins that I have not been aware of: I have sinned in the best of my works, and intentions of piety and charity, even when I most laboured to doe thee service. Lord be merciful to me a sinner. I have sinned all these wayes, and done many evils that I have forgot∣ten, many that I have past over without consi∣deration
and repentance: and now what shall I do to thee, O thou preser∣ver of men, and Judge of the whole world? Lord be merciful to me a sinner. Have mercy upon me O Lord, according to thy loving kindnesse, ac∣cording to the multitude of thy tender compassi∣ons blot out all my of∣fences. Amen. Amen. And that for Jesus Christ his sake, in whose most blessed name and words, we conclude these
our imperfect prayers, saying as he himself hath taught us: OUR Father which art in heaven, Hal∣lowed be thy name. Thy Kingdome come. Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive us our tres∣passes, as we forgive them that trespass a∣gainst us. And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. For thine is the Kingdome, the power, and the glo∣ry,
for ever and ever. Amen. Morning Prayer. OLord our heavenly Father, almighty & everlasting God, which hast safely brought us to the beginning of this day, defend us in the same with thy mighty power, and grant that this day we fall into no sin, neither run into any kinde of danger, but that all our doings may be ordered by thy gover∣nance, to do always that is righteous in thy sight,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Evening Prayer. LIghten our darknesse, we beseech thee, O Lord, and by thy great mercy defend us from all perils and dangers of this night, for the love of thy onely Son our Saviour Jesus Christ. Amen. THe grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fel∣lowship of the holy Ghost, be with us all e∣vermore. Amen.
II. DEPRECATION. DEprecation is a branch of prayer directed to God, either for the aversion and prevention of an e∣vill before it comes, or for the removing and ta∣king it away when it is come. And the evil wch we deprecate may be ei∣ther the evill of sin, or the evill of punishment. When we either feel or fear an evil, we must not with Eliah or Jonah sit
down, and in a sullen hu∣mour wish our selves out of the world, but we must pray as Christ did for his Disciples, Joh. 17.15. not that he would take us out of the world, but that he would keep us from the evil. And so doing, we have Gods promise not to be tem∣pted above our strength. For either he will abate the crosse, or increase our strength to bear it; ei∣ther he will remove the temptation, or give us his grace, which is suffici∣ent for us.
Deliver us from evil Luke 11.4. Deliver me from all my transgressions. Make me not the re∣proach of the foolish. Psal. 39. Remove thy stroke from me. Deliver my soul from the sword: my darling from the dog. Save me from the Li∣ons mouth, from the horns of the Unicorns. Psal. 22.20, 21.
THE LETANY of Deprecation. FRom all the sinnes that I have done, and from all that I would have done, if thy grace had not prevented and restrained me, Good Lord deliver me. From my close & bo∣some sins, and from those sins to which I am incli∣ned by nature, or inticed by company, or allured by pleasure and profit, or drawn by the example of this evil world,
Good Lord deliver me. From all the sins that I have felt in my consci∣ence, and confessed with my mouth, and bewailed with my heart, and beg∣ged pardon of thee with my tongue, Good Lord deliver me. From all the secret & unknown sins which my conscience hath not felt, nor my mouth confes∣sed, nor my heart bewai∣led, nor my tongue beg∣ged pardon, Good Lord deliver me. From the whole cor∣ruption
of my nature; from all the temptations of the Divel, from the al∣lurements of the world, from the lusts of the flesh and eyes, Good Lord deliver me. From all vanity of minde, dulness of under∣standing, perversnesse of will, crookedness of affe∣ctions, deadness & hard∣ness of heart, and from a benummed, blinded, or seared conscience, Good Lord deliver me. From all wandring imaginations, from all
loosness of desires, from all transgressions of thy holy and just command∣ments, and from the first motions to any sin against thee or my neighbour, Good Lord deliver me. From relapsing into the sins that I have re∣pented, from turning thy grace into wantonnesse, from treading under foot the bloud of thy cove∣nant, from neglect and contempt of the meanes of salvation, Good Lord deliver me. From all schism & he∣resie,
from infidelity and apostasie, & from the sin against the holy Ghost, Good Lord deliver me. From famine & scar∣city, from plague and pe∣stilence, and from all o∣ther thy sore and heavy judgements, at this time and ever hereafter, Good Lord deliver me. From poverty and ex∣treme necessity, from sickness and diseases in my body, from grief and vexation of mind, from losse of liberty, goods, or friends, from blemish and
scādal of my good name Good Lord deliver me. From giving offence unadvisedly, and from taking offence unjustly, Good Lord deliver me. From thy wrath and indignation, from final despair of thy grace and pardon, and from sudden death, Good Lord deliver me. From the sentence of condemnation, from the Lake of brimstone, from the chains of everlasting darkness, from the worm that dies not, and the fire
that shall never be quen∣ched, Good Lord deliver me. O Lord I beseech thee deliver my soul. Psal. 116.4. Amen. Amen. And that for Jesus Christ his sake, in whose most blessed name and words we conclude these our imperfect prayers, saying as he himself hath taught us: OUR Father which art in heaven, &c. Morning Prayer. O Lord our heavenly Father, almighty &
everlasting God, which hast safely brought us to the beginning of this day, defend us in the same with thy mighty power, & grant that this day we fall into no sin, neither run into any kind of danger, but that all our doings may be orde∣red by thy governance, to doe alwayes that is righteous in thy sight, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Evening Prayer. LIghten our darkness, we beseech thee, O
Lord, and by thy great mercy defend us from all perils and dangers of this night, for the love of thy only Son our Sa∣vior Jesus Christ. Amen. THE grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of the ho∣ly Ghost, be with us all evermore. Amen. III. SUPPLICATION. SUpplication is ano∣ther branch of prai∣er, whereby we in∣treat of God that hee
would give us such bles∣sings as we want, or con∣tinue and inlarge such blessings as we have re∣ceived. And these bles∣sings are either corporal or spiritual, temporal or eternal. For such bles∣sings as are spiritual and accōpany salvation, pray for them in the first place; First seek the Kingdom of God & the righteuosness thereof; & we may pray for them absolutely: for the other we must pray conditio∣nally, with a reference &
submission of our will to Gods will, who best knows what is good for us. Not my will, but thine be done. Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven. O Thou that hearest prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come, Psal. 65.2. Lord hear my voice, let thine eares be atten∣tive to my supplications. Psal. 130.2. Behold now that I have taken upon me to
speak to the Lord, who am but dust and ashes: O let not the Lord bee angry, and I will speak. THE LETANY of Supplication. THat it may pleafe thee to fill mine heart and my mouth with thy praise all my life long, for all thy faithfulnesse, and truth, and loving kind∣ness shewed to me in the land of the living. I beseech thee to heare me good Lord.
That it may please thee to give me a clear judg∣ment to see my sins, ho∣ly affections to hate and abhorre them, true re∣pentance to bewail and forsake them, with a sted∣fast purpose and resolu∣tion against them for the time to come. I beseech thee to heare me good Lord. That it may please thee to wash mee throwly from mine iniquities, and to cleanse me from my sins, that I may be whi∣ter then snow.
I beseech thee to heare me good Lord. That it may please thee to apply to my consci∣ence the obedience of the life, and the sacrifice of the death of Jesus Christ for the assurance of thy favour, and my pardon. I beseech thee to heare me good Lord. That it may please thee to create in me a clean heart, to renew a right spirit within me, to give me truth in my inward parts, and to establish me with thy free Spirit.
I beseech thee to heare me good Lord. That it may please thee to give me such graces as I want, and to increase those which I have, that I may grow frō strength to strength, till I become a perfect man. I beseech thee to heare me good Lord. That it may please thee to make me an instru∣ment of thy glory, & to direct all my thoughts, words, & works, for the inlargement & advance∣ment of thy Kingdome.
I beseech thee to heare me good Lord. That it may please thee to establish in mee the Kingdome of thy power to rule and awe me; and the Kingdome of thy grace to sanctifie me to the knowledge, love, and obedience of thy will. I beseech thee to heare me good Lord. That it may please thee to enable me to doe thy will with chearfulness & alacrity, with perseve∣rance and constancy, as thy blessed Angels and
Saints in heaven do it. I beseech thee to heare me good Lord. That it may please thee to open thy full hand, & to bestow upon me the necessaries of this life, & the fruits of the earth in due season, with the con∣tinuance of health, liber∣ty and peace. I beseech thee to heare me good Lord. That it may please thee to give me thy blessing with them: that I may use them wisely, soberly, justly, charitably, thank∣fully,
and contentedly. I beseech thee to heare me good Lord. That it may please thee to blesse me in all the works of my calling with grace and strength, to obtain, to keep, and to use a good conscience to∣wards thee & my neigh∣bours to my lives end. I beseech thee to heare me good Lord. That it may please thee to sanctifie my life, to sweeten my death, and to raise up my body in the day of the Lo: Jesus.
I beseech thee to heare me good Lord. Finally, that it may please thee to give me my masters joy, my fa∣thers inheritance, the Crown of righteousness, the glory of the new Je∣rusalem, & to satisfie me with that fulness of joy which is in thy presence. I beseech thee to heare me good Lord. O Lord hear my prai∣er, and let my cry come unto thee. Amen. Amen. And that for Jesus Christ his sake, in whose
most blessed name and words, we conclude these our imperfect prayers, saying as he himself hath taught us: Our Father which art art in heaven, &c. Morning Prayer. O Lord our heavenly Father, almighty & everlasting God, which hast safely brought us to the beginning of this day, defend us in the same with thy mighty power, & grant that this day we fall into no sin, neither run into any kind
of danger, but that all our doings may be orde∣red by thy governance, to doe alwayes that is righteous in thy sight, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Evening Prayer. LIghten our darkness, we beseech thee, O Lord, and by thy great mercy defend us from all perils and dangers of this night, for the love of thy only Son our Sa∣viour Jesus Christ. A∣men.
THE grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of the ho∣ly Ghost, be with us all evermore. Amen. IV. THANKSGIVING. Thanksgiving is a branch of praier, which, like the Leper in the Gospell, turns back to God with a confession and ti∣ation of what  hath done for . And it is so necessary and ess∣tiall a part of Gods wo∣ship,
that it is the very condition of the obliga∣tion, wherein God hath bound himself by his promise to hear us. Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deli∣ver thee, and thou shalt praise me, Psal. 50.15. so that if we praise him not, we break the Covenant, and are usurpers upon all his blessings and delive∣rances. Thy loving kindness is better then life: there∣fore my lips shall praise thee, Psal. 63.3, 4.
Thus will I magnifie thee al my life; and lift up my hands in thy Name. Seven times a day do I praise thee, Ps. 119.164. My mouth shall shew forth thy righteousnesse and thy salvation all the day long: for I know no end thereof, Ps. 71.15. While I live I will praise the Lord, I will sing praises to my God while I have any being, Psal. 146.2. Blesse the Lord, O my soul; and forget not all
his benefits, Psal. 103.2 O Lord open thou my lips, and my mouth shall shew forth thy praise, Psal. 51.15. THE LETANY of Thanksgiving. FOR the grace of Election, by which I was chosen ac∣cording to the good pleasure of thy will My soule doth magnifie thee O Lord. For the grace of Cre∣ation, by which I was made after thine image
in righteousnesse and ho∣liness, My soule doth magnifie thee O Lord. For the grace of Re∣demption, by which I was recovered from the guilt & dominion of sin, from the power of Satan, and the second death, My soul doth magnifie thee O Lord. For the grace of Voca∣tion, wrought in me by the inward working of thy Spirit, & the outward ministry of thy holy Word and Sacraments,
My soul doth magnifie thee O Lord. For the grace of Justi∣fication, whereby I am clothed with the righte∣ousness of Christ Jesus My soul doth magnifie thee O Lord. For my measure of Sanctification, by which I am made a new Crea∣ture My soul doth magnifie thee O Lord. For my formation in the womb, my birth, my baptisme, the illuminati∣on of my understanding,
the correction of my will, and all the spiritual graces received frō thee My soul doth magnifie thee O Lord. For the liberty of thy Word and Sacraments, for thy sanctuary and solemne assemblies, and for thy gracious presence with us in them My soul doth magnifie thee O Lord. For thy constant pro∣vidence in supplying my necessities, and defending me from dangers My soul doth magnifie thee O Lord.
For my good parents, my education, my health liberty, and peace, for the comfort of my friends, for my daily bread, and for all thy temporall blessings My soul doth magnifie thee O Lord. For thy prevention of evils, subvention in evils, & deliverance from evil My soul doth magnifie thee O Lord. For thy patience in forbearing, for thy mer∣cy in forgiving, for thy bounty in giving, even
when I sinned against thee with a high hand My soul doth magnifie thee O Lord. For my life, and the season given me for re∣pentance & good works, and for thy holy means of grace and salvation My soul doth magnifie thee O Lord. For the checks of mine own conscience, for the instruction of thy word, for the motions of thy good Spirit which have either restrained me from sin, or caused
me to repent of it My soul doth magnifie thee O Lord. For thy fatherly corre∣ctions by some spirituall conflicts with Satan, by diseases, or hurts in my body, by griefs of mind, losse of goods, molesta∣tion of injuries, discom∣forts for, or from those to whom naturall, civil, or Christian acquain∣tance had indeared me My soul doth magnifie thee O Lord. For all the holy Pa∣triarchs and Prophets
for the ever blessed Mo∣ther of our Lord, for all the holy Apostles and Evangelists, for all the godly Bishops and Pa∣stors of the Church, for all the noble Army of Martyrs, and Confes∣sors, and for all the faith∣full that have lived and died in the Lord My soul doth magnifie thee O Lord. For the happy transla∣tion of all Saints depar∣ted in peace, from this vale of tears to the in∣heritance of the just
My soul doth magnifie thee O Lord. For thine holy Angels; and the charge which thou hast given them to minister unto us, to pitch their tents about us, to keep us in all our ways, and to convey our souls into Abrahams bosome, My soul doth magnifie thee O Lord. For Jesus Christ the author and finisher of our faith, and the foun∣tain and foundation of all these favours; For his conception & birth;
For his circumcision and baptism; For his fasting and temptation; For his doctrine and miracles; For his agony and bloody sweat; For his cross & passion; For his death & burial; For his victorious de∣scension into hell; For his glorious resur∣rection and ascension in∣to heaven; For his sitting at the right hand of God to make intercession always for us;
For his sending the holy Ghost to a bide with his Church for ever, and for his being with us to the end of the world My soul doth magnifie thee O Lord. For thy blessed Spirit the enlightner of my un∣derstanding, the sanctifi∣er of my will, the helper of my infirmities, the comforter of my consci∣ence, the pledge and wit∣ness of my adoption, and the seal of my salvation My soul doth magnifie thee O Lord.
For all my personall & particular deliverances; for the religion, peace, plenty, strength, and ho∣nour of the State where∣in I live; for saving it all times, especially from the Spanish invasion, and the Popish powder treason My soul doth magnifie thee O Lord. For all the secret fa∣vours which thou hast done for us, for all the mercies which we have received from thee, and are slipt out of our re∣membrance, and for all
the goodness which thou hast laid up for them that fear thee, and love thy coming My soul doth magnifie thee O Lord. What shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits towards me? I will take the cup of salvation and call upon the Name of the Lord, Psal. 116.12. I will sing of the mer∣cies of the Lord for e∣ver: with my mouth wil I make known thy faith∣fulnesse to all generati∣ons, Ps. 89.1.
Let them that fear the Lord, say alwayes, The Lord be praised. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost. As it was in the begin∣ning, is now, and ever shal be, world without end. Amen. Amen. And that for Jesus Christ his sake, in whose most blessed name and words we conclude these our imperfect prayers, saying as he himself hath taught us:
OUR Father which art in heaven, &c. Morning Prayer. OLord our heavenly Father, almighty & everlasting God, which hast safely brought us to the beginning of this day, defend us in the same with thy mighty power, & grant that this day we fall into no sin, neither run into any kind of danger, but that all our doings may be orde∣red by thy governance, to doe alwayes that is righteous in thy sight,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Evening Prayer. LIghten our darkness, we beseech thee, O Lord, and by thy great mercy defend us from all perils and dangers of this night, for the love of thy onely Son our Saviour Jesus Christ. Amen. THe grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fel∣lowship of the holy Ghost, be with us all e∣vermore. Amen.
V. INTERCESSION. INtercessiō is abranch of prayer, extending and inlarging our de∣sires for others: as we see in Abraham, who interce∣ded for Sodom, and Mases for Israel, and Samuel for Saul. And this duty is very acceptable to God for necessity constrains us to pray for our selves, but charity moves us to become petitioners for others. And the prayer of charity is more acceptable to God, then
the prayer of necessity. Again, it is very profi∣table for us; for though our prayers should not profit them, yet they will profit us; for they shall be turned into our own bosomes, Psal. 35.13. Si pro te tantum roges, pro te tantum rogabis: Si autem pro omnibus roges, pro te omnes rog abunt. Amb. l. 1. de Cain, &c. cap. 1. I exhort therefore that first of all supplication, prayers, intercessions, & giving of thanks bee made for all men; for this
is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Saviour, 1 Tim. 2.1, 3. And pray always with all manner of prayer and supplication in the spirit: and watch thereunto with all perseverance and supplication for all Saints. And for me, that utterance may be given unto me, that I may o∣pen my mouth boldly to publish the secret of the Gospel. Eph. 6.18, 19. Is any sick among you? let him call for the Elders of the Church,
and let them pray over him. And the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up, and if he have committed sinnes, they shall be forgiven him, James 5.14, 15. But as for me, when they were sick my clo∣thing was sackcloth: I humbled my soul with fasting, and my prayer returned into mine own bosome, Psal. 35.13. Peter was kept in prison, but earnest prayer was made of the Church
for him, Acts 12.5. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem: they shall prosper that love thee, Psal. 122.6. THE LETANY of Intercession. THat it may please thee to bless thy Church militant here on earth, to preserve the purity of doctrine, the due administration of the Sacraments, and the preaching of thy Word, that the gates of hell may not prevaile a∣gainst it.
I beseech thee to heare me good Lord. That it may please thee to purge it from schism and heresie, and to reconcile all unhappy differences, that we may keep the unity of the Spi∣rit in the bond of peace. I beseech thee to heare me good Lord. That it may please thee to fence it about with the wall of thy pro∣vidence, to infatuate the counsel, & to disperse the powers and projects of all those that wish evill unto Sion.
I beseech thee to hear me good Lord. That it may please thee to blesse that part of thy Church wherein thou hast planted me, and to whose brests thou hast applied me, with peace and plenty, with a free exercise, and reverent e∣steem of all thine ordi∣nances. I beseech thee to hear me good Lord. That it may please thee to bless our gracious King Charls, our royall Queen Mary, our hope∣full
Prince Charls, and all others that are derived from that same sacred stock, or ingraffed into it. I beseech thee to hear me good Lord. That it may please thee to bless the government & preaching of the Cler∣gy, make them painful in their Ministry, and ex∣emplary in their lives, that they may save themselves and those that hear them. I beseech thee to heare me good Lord. That it may please thee
to blesse the Councell with wisedome, the Jud∣ges with integrity, the Magistrates with cou∣rage, the people with o∣bedience, & our Armies with strength & victory. I beseech thee to heare me good Lord. That it may please thee to blesse all schools and seminaries of learning & religion; especially the two Universities of this Land. I beseech thee to he are me good Lord. That it may please thee
to blesse all those that are near and dear unto me by the bond of na∣ture, or Christian ac∣quaintance. I beseech thee to heare me good Lord. That it may please thee to blesse all those that have been instruments of my good, and are yet li∣ving: Such as have edu∣cated and instructed me: Such as have counselled and advised me: Such as have clothed and fed me: such as have reproved and corrected me when I sinned.
I beseech thee to hear me good Lord. That it may please thee to remember the refor∣med Churches beyond the seas, to repair the ru∣ines & desolations which her enemies have made in her, to reduce such as are banished, to inlarge such as are imprisoned, to relieve such as are im∣poverished, and to com∣fort such as are persecu∣ted for the testimony of a good conscience, and the truth of thy Gospel. I beseech thee to hear me good Lord.
That it may please thee to raise up such as are de∣jected with the guilt of their own consciences, with the horror of their fins, with the apprehen∣sion of thy wrath, with the weaknesse of their graces, or jealousies of thy mercy, and to say to their souls, that thou art their salvation. I beseech thee to heare me good Lord. That it may please thee to prosper and assist all those that jeopard their lives for the maintenance
of the Gospel, go forth with their Armies, cover their heads in the day of battel, and bring them home with honour and victory. I beseech thee to hear me good Lord. That it may please thee to bless all women with child with safe delive∣rance, all young children with a godly and religi∣ous education, the Sea∣man with a prosperous voiage, the Husbandman with a plentifull harvest, the captive with pati∣ence
and deliverance, and all prisoners with repen∣tance and amendment. I beseech thee to heare me good Lord. That it may please thee to instruct the ignorant, to convert the obstinate, to confirm the righte∣ous, to comfort the di∣stressed, to binde up the broken-hearted, to re∣ctifie those that erre, and to reduce them that wander, into the right way. I beseech thee to heare me good Lord.
That it may please thee to remember thine anci∣ent people the Jewes, to open their eyes that they may see him whom they have pierced, and beleeve in him. I beseech thee to hear me good Lord. That it may please thee in thy good time to bring in the fulnesse of the Gentiles, and to re∣veal the glorious light of thy Gospel to such as yet sit in darkness and in the shadow of death. I beseech thee to hear me good Lord.
That it may please thee to forgive those that persecute and speak evil of me, those that injure and molest me, those that slander and traduce me, and to soften the hearts of all those that are mine enemies. I beseech thee to heare me good Lord. O Lord hear my prai∣ers for my self: O Lord hear my prayers for o∣thers: O Lord hear the prayers of thy Son Je∣sus Christ for us all, who sits at thy right hand
making intercession for us, and hath taught me to come to thee in this most perfect and abso∣lute form of prayer: OUR Father which art in heaven, &c. Morning Prayer. O Lord our heavenly Father, almighty & everlasting God, which hast safely brought us to the beginning of this day, defend us in the same with thy mighty power, & grant that this day we fall into no sin, neither run into any kind
of danger, but that all our doings may be orde∣red by thy governance, to doe alwayes that is righteous in thy sight, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Evening Prayer. LIghten our darkness, we beseech thee, O Lord, and by thy great mercy defend us from all perils and dangers of this night, for the love of thy only Son our Sa∣viour Jesus Christ. A∣men.
THE grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, & the fellowship of the ho∣ly Ghost be with us all evermore. Amen. A peculiar Letany to be used by, or for sick persons; Collected out of severall places and passages of ho∣ly Scripture. IN those dayes was Hezekiah sick unto death. Then turned he his face unto the wall, and prayed unto the Lord.
And Hezekiah wept sore. And the Lord said, Behold, I will adde unto thy dayes fifteen years, Isaiah 38.1, 2, 3. THE LETANY. O God the Father of heaven, whose property it is to kill and to make alive, to wound and to heal, to bring down to the grave, and to raise up again, Have mercy upon me. Thou who didst heal
Naaman of his leprosie, David of his noisome disease, Job of his ulcers, Hezekiah of his desperate sicknesse, Have mercy upon me. O Christ the Son of God, who madest the blinde to see, the dumb to speak, the deaf to hear, and the lame to walk, Have mercy upon me. Thou who didst cure Peters wives mother of her fever, the Centuri∣ons servant of his palsie, the ten Lepers of their
leprosie, and didst help such as were possessed with Divels, Have mercy upon me. Thou who didst cure her that was diseased with an issue of bloud twelve years, & her that was bowed together eighteen years, and him at the pool of Bethesda that had an infirmity thirty and eight years, Have mercy upon me. Thou who didst re∣store to life the daughter of Jairus, & the widows son, and raised up Laza∣rus
out of his grave, Have mercy upon me. Thou who didst bear our sicknesses and sor∣rows, thou who hast sty∣led thy self the Physici∣an of the sick, thou who hast called all such as are weary and heavy laden to come unto thee, pro∣mising them ease and re∣freshment, Have mercy upon me. By thy fasting and watching, by thine hun∣ger & thirst, by thy grief and sadness, by thy ago∣ny and bloudy sweat, by
thy cries and tears, by thy Crosse and Passion, Have mercy upon me. That it may please thee, who diddest cure many diseases by Peters shadow, many sicknesses by Pauls handkerchief, the eyes of the blind with clay & spittle, the lepro∣sie of Naaman with the water of Jordan, and rai∣sedst up the dead by the bones of thy Prophet; to blesse all those means that are or shall be used for my recovery. I beseech thee to hear
me good Lord. That it may please thee to give me grace to sub∣mit my self wholly to thy will; to take thy vi∣sitation with patience & thankfulness, & to drink of this bitter cup with∣out murmuring or repi∣ning. I beseech thee to heare me good Lord. That it may please thee to streng then me against all the temptations of the divel, to succour me in all the agonies & con∣flicts of mine own con∣science,
and to lay no more upon me then thou shalt inable me to bear. I beseech thee to hear me good Lord. That it may please thee to continue unto me my memory and un∣derstanding, my speech and senses, the comforts and graces of thy holy Spirit, that I fall not a∣way from thee. I beseech thee to heare me good Lord. That it may please thee, if it be thy will, to give me a longer time of
repentance, to rescue me from the gates of the grave, to spare me a little before I go hence, and be no more seen, that I may still praise thee in the land of the living. I beseech the to heare me good Lord. That it may please thee, if thou hast appointed me for death, to fit and prepare me for it; to strengthen my faith, to pardon and forgive me all my sins, and to assure me of my salvation, that I may render up my soul
with comfort and chear∣fulness. I beseech thee to hear me good Lord. Finally, that it may please thee when I have rendred it up, to receive it into thy hands, to de∣liver me from the pangs of everlasting death, and to set open unto me the gates of everlasting life. I beseech thee to heare me good Lord. Psal. 6.2, 4, 5. Have mercy upon me O Lord, for I am weak: O Lord heal me, for my
bones are vexed. Return O Lord, deli∣ver my soul, O save me for thy mercies sake. For in death there is no remembrance of thee: and who shall give thee thanks in the pit? Psal. 38. Thine arrows stick fast in me: and thy hand presseth me sore, ver. 2. There is no soundness in my flesh, because of thine anger; neither is there any rest in my bones, because of my sin, ver. 3.
For mine iniquities are gone over my head, as an heavy burded they are too heavy for me: ver. 4. My wounds stink, and are corrupt, because of my foolishness, ver. 5. I am troubled, I am bowed down greatly: I go mourning all the day long, ver. 6. My loins are filled with a loathsome disease, and there is no sound∣ness in my flesh, ver. 7. I am feeble and sore broken, I have rored by reason of the disquiet∣ness
of my heart, ver. 8. Lord, all my desire is before thee, & my groa∣ning is not hid from thee, ver. 9. Forsake me not O Lord, O my God be not far from me, ver. 21. Make haste to help me, O Lord my salvation, ver. 22. DIRECTIONS for the Lords Day. HEE that would spend a Sunday well, (living where he hath the liberty
of Gods house and Or∣dinances) must do some∣thing before Church, something at Church, something after Church. Before Church. 1. So soone as we a∣wake, we should have our hearts affected with the majesty and solemni∣ty of the day, putting a difference betwixt it and others, considering that it is The Lords day. An holy day. An honourable day. Great is the honour of
this day above others. God the Father honou∣red it. On this day he for∣med the elements of the world. On this day he crea∣ted the Angels. On this day he first rained Manna upon the Israelites. God the Son honoured it with his glorious resur∣rection, with his gracious apparitions after he was risen. For On this day he appea∣red to the two Maries
that came to the Sepul∣chre, Matth. 28.1, 9. On this day he appea∣red to his Disciples as∣sembled together, Tho∣mas then not being pre∣sent, John 20.19. On this day he appea∣red again to his Disci∣ples, Thomas being with them, Joh. 20.26. On this day S. John saw him walking in the midst of the seven gol∣den Candlesticks, Rev. 1.10, 13. God the holy Ghost ho∣noured it.
On this day he descen∣ded upon the Apostles in a golden showr of all spi∣rituall gifts and graces. Since which time, The Church hath honoured it, and made it the day of their solemn Assemblies, Acts 20.7. What God and his Church hath thus ho∣noured, that do not thou profane. Secondly, we must lay aside the cares of the world, and the works of our ordinary callings, leaving them behind us,
as Abraham did his ser∣vants when he went to offer his sacrifice upon Mount Moriah. Thirdly, we must cleanse our selves by confession & repentance, for other∣wise our prayers in the Church will not be ac∣ceptable to God, nor his ordinances profitable to us. Will ye steal, murder, & commit adultery, and swear falsly, and burn in∣cense unto Baal, and walk after other gods, whom ye know not, and come
and stand before me in this house? Jer. 7.9, 10. Shall I be enquired of by you, ô house of Israel? As I live, saith the Lord, I will not be enquired of by you, Ezek. 20.31. God heareth not sin∣ners: but if any man be a worshipper of him, and doth his will, him he heareth, John 9.31. The Lord had respect unto Abel, and his offe∣ring: But unto Cain and his offering he had not respect, Gen. 4.4, 5. I will wash my hands
in innocency, and so will I compasse thine Altar, Psal. 26.6. Hence was it that the Jews writ over the doors of their Synagogues this saying of David, This is the gate of the Lord, the righteous shall enter into it, Psal. 118.20. And now being thus qualified & prepared, go unto the house of God, and in the way meditate of some of these senten∣ces: One thing I have desi∣red of the Lord that I
will seek after: that I may dwel in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his Temple Psal. 27.4. I was glad when they said unto me, Let us go up unto the house of the Lord, Psal. 122.1. We will go unto his Tabernacles, we wil wor∣ship at his footstoole, Psal. 132.7. My soul longeth, yea even fainteth for the courts of the Lord, Psal. 84.2.
A short morning Prayer for the Sunday. O Most glorious, and immortall God, the eye of whose providence doth never slumber, I yeeld thee humble and hearty thanks that thou hast preserved me from the perils of the night past, & brought me safe to the light of this day, and the comforts there∣of. It is a day holy and honourable, a day which is consecrated to thine own service, and set apart
for thine own honour: Let my heart therefore, gracious God, be so af∣fected with the glory and majesty of it, that I may not doe mine own works, nor seek mine own plea∣sure, nor speak mine own words; but may wait upon thee in the use of thine ordinances, & dis∣charge those weighty duties which thou requi∣rest of me. Now forasmuch as thou art a God of pure eyes, and wilt be sancti∣fied in all those that draw
near unto thee, a God who regardest not the sacrifice of fools, nor hearest sinners though they tread in thy courts, and call upon thee in the House of praier; I be∣seech thee to pard on and forgive me all my sins, remove them out of thy presence, as far as the East is from the West: accept of me in the death and passion of thy Son Jesus Christ, that when I shall come into thy Temple, to compasse thine Altar, my prayer
may come up before thee as incense, and the lifting up of my hands as the evening sacrifice. And as I desire that thou wouldest hear me calling upon thee in my pray∣ers, so give me grace to hear thee calling upon me in thy word. It is the word of truth, of wis∣dome, of righteousnesse, of reconciliation, & that Word which is able to save my soul in the day of the Lord Jesus; grant therefore that I may hear it with reverence, receive
it with meeknesse, and mingle it with faith, that it may accomplish in me that good work for which thou hast sent it. And that this day may be every where a day of holinesse unto thee; san∣ctifie, and prepare the hearts of all thy people for thy service, fill the places of thy worship with thy glory, be pre∣sent with the assemblies of thy Saints, open the mouths of thy Ministers, & second the ministry of thy word by the effi∣cacy
of thy Spirit, that it may be powerfull to the casting down of the strong holds of sin, and Satan, to the advancing & inlarging of thy King∣dome, to the edifying & building up of thy body the Church, and to the perfecting of thy Saints, till we all come to the u∣nity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, to a perfect man: Thou ô God who art able to do exceeding abundantly for us, above all that we can ask or
think, hear me, and an∣swer me, even for the sake of thy dear Sonne Jesus Christ: to whom, with the Father, and the bles∣sed Spirit, be ascribed & given all power, praise, might, majesty and do∣minion now and ever∣more. Amen. At Church. COnsider first the place where thou art; it is The gate of heaven Holy ground The house of God Josh. 5.15. Gen. 28.17.
O how amiable are thy tabernacles, ô Lord of Hosts! A day in thy Courts is better then a thousand. Blessed are they that may dwell in thy house, Ps. 84.1, 4, 10. Then be carefull to discharge those duties which God there requi∣reth of thee, and they ordinarily are two; 1. Prayer. 2. Hearing the Word. In prayer, first look to the devotion of thy soul. It must be the lifting up of the soul, Psal. 25.1.
The powring out of the soul, 1 Sam. 1.15. A strong crying, Heb. 5.7. A wrastling with God. Hos. 12.4. Without this thy prayer will be but bab∣bling, Mat. 6.7. The howling of a dog, or wolf, Hos. 7.14. A bell without a clap∣per. A pile of wood with∣out fire. A bullet without pow∣der. A bird without wings.
A cloud without water. A tinkling cymball. The Jews writ this sen∣tence also over the doors of their Synagogues, and Oratories, Prayer with∣out intention, is as the bo∣dy without the soul. Then in the next place, look to the reverence of thy body. God is greatly to be feared in the assembly of the Saints: and to be had in reverence of all them that are about him, Psal. 89.7.
Uncover thy head. The four and twenty Elders fell down before him that sate on the throne, casting their crowns from their heads. Rev. 4.10. Bend thy knee. O come let us wor∣ship and bow down: let us kneel before the Lord our Maker. Psal. 95.6. The other duty is the hearing of the word read and preached, which re∣quires of us, First, attention. Speak Lord, for thy
servant heareth, 1 Sam. 3.10. Hearken O daughter and consider, and incline thine eare, Psal. 45.10. I will hear what God the Lord will speak unto me, Psal. 85.8. The Lord opened the heart of Lydia, that she attended unto the things that were spoken by Paul, Acts 16.14. He that hath an eare let him heare what the Spirit saith unto the Churches, Rev. 2.11. My sheep hear my voice, John 10.27.
And for this end we must consider it is The word of God, 1 Thes. 2.13. The word of Grace, Act. 14.3. The word of truth, John 17.17. The word of reconcilia∣tion, 2 Cor. 5.19. The word of righteous∣ness, Heb. 5.13. The word of faih, Rom. 10.8. The word of etenal life, John 9.68. That it is Good seed, Mark 4.
Sincere milk, 1. Pet. 2.2. Strong meat, Heb. 5.14. That it is A wholsom word, 2 Tim. 6.3. A lively word, Heb. 4.12. A good word, Heb. 6.5. That it is Better then thousands of gold and silver. Psal. 119.72. Sweeter then the ho∣ny, and the hony comb. Psal. 19.10. And all this, because it is that word which is able to save our souls. Jam. 1.21.
Secondly, the hearing of the Word requires retenti∣on as well as attention. Therefore ye shall lay up these my words in your heart, and in your soul, Deut. 11.18. Thy word have I hid in mine heart, that I might not sin against thee, Psal. 119.11. Mary kept all these sayings in her heart. Luke 2.51. And lastly, people must be here admonished not to depart from the Church till the Minister hath pro∣nounced
the blessing. All the people depar∣ted every man to his house, 1 Chron. 16.42. But it was after David had made an end of offe∣ring the burnt offerings and the peace offerings, and had blessed the peo∣ple in the name of the Lord, ver. 2. Surely there is some∣thing in the blessing of the Minister. Then the Priests and the Levites arose, and blessed the peo∣ple: and their voice was heard, and their prayer
came up to his holy dwel∣ling place, even unto heaven, 2 Chron. 30.37. Leave not then thine Angel, till he hath given thee a blessing. AFTER CHURCH. AND now being come home, it is thy duty yet further, 1. To meditate upon such things as have been taught thee. His delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in that Law doth he medi∣tate day and night, Psal. 1.2.
O how I love thy Law! it is my meditation all the day, Psal. 119.97. I have more under∣standing then all my tea∣chers: for thy Testimo∣nies are my Meditation, vers. 99. My meditation of him shal be sweet, Ps. 104.34. My heart was hot within me, while I was musing, the fire burned. Psal. 39.3. The beasts that chew∣ed not the cud were un∣clean. Secondly, thou must
praise God for so much of the means as he was plea∣sed to afford thee that day. Blessed be the God & Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath blessed us with all spiritual bles∣sings in heavenly things, Ephes. 1.3. As the liberty of his house; The comfort of his Day; The communion of his Saints; The instruction of his Word; The dispensation of his Sacraments;
The gifts of his Mini∣sters. Thirdly, we must pray for a blessing upon the means of our salvation. He only it is that can put his Law in our in∣ward parts and write it in our hearts, Jer. 31.33. Paul may plant, and Apollos water; but God gives the increase, 1 Cor. 3.6. The excellency of the power is of God, & not of us, 2 Cor. 4.7. Lastly, teach it thy fa∣mily.
You shall teach them your children, talking of them when thou fittest in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, when thou liest down, and when thou risest up, Deut. 11.19. I know him, that hee will command his chil∣dren and his houshold af∣ter him, to keep the way of the Lord, to doe ju∣stice and judgment, Jer. 18.16. I and my house will serve the Lord, Josh. 24.15.
If thou doest thus san∣ctifie this Day of rest here, thou shalt celebrate an everlasting rest and Sabbath hereafter. All manner of persons within the Church of Eng∣land shall from henceforth celebrate & keep the Lords day, commonly called Sun∣day, and other holy days, according to Gods holy wil and pleasure, and the or∣ders of the Church of Eng∣land prescribed in that be∣half; that is, in hearing the word of God read and taught, in private and
publick prayers, in acknow∣ledging their offences to God, and amendment of the same; in reconciling themselves charitably to their neighbours, where displeasure hath been; in oftentimes receiving the communion of the body & bloud of Christ; in visi∣ting of the poore and sick, using all good and sober conversation. Canon 13. of those 1603.
A short Evening Prayer for the Lords day. O Most glorious God, and in Jesus Christ my mercifull and loving Father: I confesse, and acknowledge those ma∣ny weaknesses & imper∣fections which have pas∣sed from me in the per∣formance of the duties of this day. I have called upon thee for the pardon and forgivenesse of my sins, but so coldly and carelessy, that my very
prayers are become sins, and stand in need of par∣don. I have heard thy holy Word, but with such deadnesse, & distraction of spirit, that I have been a very unprofitable and forgetfull hearer. So that O Lord, though I have done thy work, yet I have done it so negligent∣ly, that I may rather ex∣pect a curse then a bles∣sing from thee. But O God, who art rich in mercy and plen∣teous in redemption;
mark not what amisse hath passed from me, re∣member that I am but dust; pardon, and passe by all my sins, negligen∣ces and ignorances, look not upon the weaknesse of my flesh, but upon the willingness of my spirit, and so cover all my im∣perfections with the per∣fect and absolute obedi∣ence of thy dear Son, that those Sacrifices which I have offered up unto thee this day, may be ac∣cepted, in, and for that sacrifice which Christ
Jesus offered up upon the cross for me. And as I desire that my sacrifices may be pleasing to thee, so let thine ordinances be pro∣fitable to me. And as thou hast this day sown my heart with the preci∣ous seed of thy Word, so let neither the fowls of the air devour it, nor the cares of the world choak it, but let the gracious rain of thy blessing come often upon it, that it may bring forth in mee the fruits of repentance and
amendment of life. And forasmuch as thy Word is an unvaluable & inestimable treasure, better then thousands of gold and silver, sweeter also then the hony & the hony comb; blessed Lord God be pleased still to continue it to our Land and Nation, let not our crying sins of unthank∣fulnesse, impenitency, hardness of heart, & un∣fruitfulnesse under so great means of grace, cause thee to remove thy candlestick, or to quench
the light of our Israel. Inlighten also with the beams of thy Gospel those nations which yet sit in darkness and in the shadow of death: adde unto thy Church daily such as shal be saved, that so these sinful days being shortned, & the number of thine elect accompli∣shed, we may celebrate that eternal rest and Sab∣bath of our souls with thee in thy Kingdome. Blesse O Lord all the people of this land, from the highest to the low∣est;
our King & Queen, our Prince, & the rest of the roiall stock; our Mi∣nisters and Magistrates, thy whole Church, and every member of it, in what place or case soe∣ver: and prosper all de∣signs and enterprises that are undertaken for the advancement of the Gospel, and the inlarge∣ment of thy Kingdome. Finally, O Lord, as thou hast been good to me in the passages of this day, refreshing my body with thy good creatures,
and my soul with the spi∣rituall rest of this holy Day: so continue thy goodness to mee this night, receive me into the arms of thy providence, cover me with the fea∣thers of thy wings, that I may lay me down in peace, and take my rest, that being awakened to the comforts of the next day, my mouth may be filled with thy praises; and I may doe thee ser∣vice in the duties of that calling wherein thou hast placed & disposed of me:
that so thy good blessing may be still upon me; and thou maist never be weary to doe me good: all this, and what else thou knowest needfull and expedient for me, I beg in the name, merits, mediation, and words of thy Sonne Christ Jesus, saying as he himself hath taught me: Our Father, which art in heaven, &c.
Directions for the due receiving of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. WEE may not pre∣sume to come to the Lords Table without a due & serious preparation. That which is holy must not bee given to Dogges: neither must pearls bee cast before swine, Mat. 7.6. Josiah charged the Le∣vites to prepare them∣selves, and to pray for their brethren, and so to
kill the passeover, 2 Chr. 35.4, 6. The neglect of prepa∣ration is very dangerous. After the sop Satan enters into Judas, John 13.27. Whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink this cup of the Lord unwor∣thily, shal be guilty of the body and bloud of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11.27. Hee that eateth and drinketh unworthily, ea∣teth and drinketh dam∣nation unto himself, 1 Cor. 11.29.
For this cause many are weak, and sickly among you, and many sleep, 1 Cor. 11.30. Now this preparation consists principally in five things. The first is a self-exa∣mination. Let a man examine him∣self, and so let him eate of that bread, and drink of that cup. 1 Cor. 11.28. The thing chiefly to be examined, is sin: 1. In thought: The thoughts of our
hearts are only evil, and that continually, Gen 6.5 Out of the heart pro∣ceed evill thoughts, Mat. 15.19. 2. In word. Idle words. I say unto you, that of every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof at the day of judgement, Mat. 12.36. Filthy and immodest words. Let no corrupt commu∣nication proceed out of your mouth, Eph. 4.22.
Angry and rash words; As calling our borther Raca, or Thou fool, Mat. 5.29. False and untrue words, as lies, slanders, defama∣tions &c. Whosoever loveth, or maketh a lie, is shut out of the new Jerusalem, Rev. 22.15. Profane and impious words. Against GOD oathes and blasphemies. Let your communica∣tion be yea, yea; nay nay; for whatsoever is more then these com∣meth
of evil, Mat. 5.37. Against our selves or others, as curses, impre∣cations, &c. As he loved cursing, so let it come unto him. As he clothed himself with cursing, like as with a garment: so let it come into his bowels like wa∣ter, and like oyle into his bones, Psal. 109.18.19. 3. In deed. This is either of Omission, or Commission. Both are pointed at in that sentence of the A∣postle:
The good which I would do, I doe not: But the evill which I would not do, that I do, Rom. 7.19. Thus you have the thing to be examined. Now the rule of this examination must be the Law of God. For by the Law is the knowledg of sin, Rom. 3.20. I had not known sin, but by the Law, Rom. 7.7. Hence it is that our Church (which hath dis∣posed all things wisely,
and sweetly in the Litur∣gy) hath appointed the commandments to be read before the admim∣stration of this Sacra∣ment, that men might see their sins in the glasse of Gods Law. The second thing re∣quired of a worthy recei∣ver is Repentance and Contrition. The Paschall Lambe was to be eaten with sowr herbs. And Christ our Passe∣over must be received with a broken and a con∣trite spirit.
With a bitter soul. With a weeping eye. This bread must be eaten with the sweat of our brows, i.e. our tears. And I may say of the wine in this Sacrament, as the Mother of Solomon said unto him, Prov. 31.6. Give this wine unto such as bee of heavy hearts. And though in the sense of our own un∣worthinesse we may cry out with Paul, Who is fit for these things? Yet we may comfort our selves with that of the Psalmist;
A broken and a con∣trite heart O God thou wilt not despise, Ps. 51. The third thing requi∣red of a Comunicant, is Faith. He must beleeve, that Jesus Christ is the Mes∣sias, and Saviour of the world. He must beleeve, that he was crucified, & shed his bloud. He must beleeve, that the merits of his crosse and passion are able to save sinners. He must beleeve; that
these merits are convey∣ed to him in this Sacra∣ment being rightly admi∣nistred, and duly received: For what was bequeath∣ed in the Testament, is dispensed in the Sacra∣ments. This faith is the wed∣ding garment: he that intruded to the feast without it, was bound hand & foot, and cast in∣to utter darkness, Mat. 22 Fourthly, there is requi∣red a stedfast purpose and settled resolution against sin for the trme to come.
The Church in the ad∣ministration of this Sa∣crament cals such only, as intend to lead a new life, to follow the Comman∣dements of God, to walk from thenceforth in his holy ways. The Paschall Lambe was to be eaten by such only as were circumcised. The Manna was to be put into a pot of pure gold. The body of Christ crucified was wrapt in fine linnen, and laid in a new Spulchre. Sorrow for sin without
resolution of amend∣ment, is like the pumping in a Ship without stop∣ping the leak that lets in the water. In the Law, if a man held the unclean thing still in his hand, he was unclean, though he wash∣ed his hand never so of∣ten. Fiftly, there is requi∣red Charity with all men. The Paschall Lambe was to be eaten without leaven. The Serpent disgorges his poison, when he coms
to drink: Be as wise as Serpents. Let us keep the feast, not with old leaven, nei∣ther with the leaven of malice, 1 Cor. 5.8. If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there remembrest that thy brother hath ought a∣gainst thee: Leave there thy gift before the altar, and go thy way, first be reconci∣led to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift, Mat. 5.23, 24. The three wise men
went first to Ierusalem, & then to Bethlehem; first to the vision of peace, then to the house of bread. The cup of blessing which we blesse, is it not the Communion of the bloud of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the Com∣munion of the body of Christ? For we being many, are one bread, and one body, 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. The signs of bread & wine used in the Sacra∣ment may teach us love & charity.
Many grains are kneaded together into one loafe. Many grapes are pressed together in one cup. If thus thou hast made thy peace with God, and the world, draw neare, Tast and see how sweet the Lord is, Psal. 34.8. Eate O friend, drink, yea drink abundantly, O beloved, Cant. 5.1. A short Prayer before we receive the Sacrament. O Most gracious and merciful Lord God, thou hast called all those
that are weary & heavy laden with the burthen of their sins to come un∣to thee, and hast promi∣sed that thou wilt ease and refresh them; thou hast invited all those that hunger and thirst after thy Kingdome, and the righteousnesse thereof, to come to thy Table, to taste of thy Supper, and hast promised that thou wilt satisfie them. In affiance therefore of these promises, I come to thee blessed Lord Jesus, beseeching thee to ease
me to refresh me, to sa∣tisfie me with thy mer∣cy, for my soul hungers and thirsts after thee, & thy salvation. I confesse and acknow∣ledge that my daily sins have made me unworthy of my daily bread; much more of this Manna, this bread of life, which came down from heaven. I confesse also that I am not prepared accor∣ding to the preparation of thy Sanctuary; yet for as much as I have this day set my heart to seek
thee, thou O good God be merciful unto me. And though I cannot bring with me a clean heart (for who can say his heart is clean?) yet behold O Lord, I bring with me a contrite heart and a broken spirit, de∣spise not O God this sa∣crifice. As for the sinnes that I have committed against thee, binde them up into one bundle, and cast them into the bot∣tomlesse sea of thy mer∣cy, bury them in the wounds, and wash them
away in the bloud of that immaculate Lamb Christ Jesus; and for the time to come so sprinkle my conscience with the same bloud, that being clensed from dead works I may serve thee the li∣ving God in righteous∣ness and true holiness all the days of my life. That so this blessed Sacrament may be a means to quiet my conscience, to in∣crease my faith, to in∣flame my charity, to a∣mend my life, to save my soul, & to assure me that
I am in the number of those blessed ones, who shal eate at thy table, and be called to the marriage supper of the Lamb. Grant this O Lord for Jesus Christ his sake, in whose name and words I conclude these my im∣perfect prayers, saying as he himself hath taught me, Our Father, &c. At the receiving of this Sacrament. IN the receiving of the Lords Supper many particulars would rather
distract us, then direct us; these few I suppose most considerable. First, let thine eyes be upon the actions of the Minister, observe the breaking of the bread, and the powring out of the wine. The breaking of the bread will minde thee how the body of Christ was bruised and broken. The pouring out of the wine wil remēber thee of the shedding of his bloud. It was shed for thee: When he was circumci∣sed.
When he was scourged. When he sweat in the garden. When he was crowned with thorns. But especially, to which this Sacrament hath im∣mediate relation, When he was nailed to the cross. When his fide was pier∣ced. The bloud of Christ clenseth us from all sins, 1 John 1.17. It speaketh better things then the bloud of Abel, Heb. 12.24.
It is precious bloud, 1 Pet. 1.19. And all this because it is the bloud of God, Acts 20.28. Secondly, discern the Lords body, 1 Cor. 11.29. We must consider the consecrated bread, not as the bread of the Lord, but as that bread which is the Lord. Not as our common, ordinary, & daily bread, but as the body of Christ sacramentally. We must consider the wine, not as the bloud of the grape, but as the bloud
of Christ in a true, yet sacramentall manner. Christ is truly present in the Sacrament; it is the eating of his flesh, and the drinking of his bloud, John 6.56. Not naturally, and corporally. This is an hard saying, who can hear it? Joh. 6.60. The flesh profiteth no∣thing, the words that I speak unto you, they are spirit, and life, Joh. 6.63. Thirdly, receive it kneeling.
This gesture is most sutable. It signifies an humble and gratefull acknow∣ledgement of those be∣nefits we receive in this Sacrament. Again, the Minister when he gives, and we when we receive, joyn together in a short, but sweet prayer. The body of our Lord Jesus Christ which was given for thee, &c. The bloud of our Lord Jesus Christ which was shed for thee, &c.
No gesture so sutable for prayer as kneeling. Again, it is appointed & ordered by the Church. Let all things be done decently, and in order, 1 Cor. 14.40. Though I be absent frō you in the flesh, yet am I present with you in the spirit, joying, and behol∣ding your order, Col. 2.5. After the receiving of this Sacrament. WHen thou hast been partaker of the Lords Supper;
First of all give thanks. It is a duty which we owe for our ordinary suppers. It was called the Eu∣charist, from this duty of thanksgiving. It is the cup of blessing. God blesseth us, and we must blesse God. God gives us the cup of salvation, and we must take the cup of thanks∣giving. The Disciples when they had received it, sang an Hymne. And an Hymne is a
song of praise and bles∣sing, Mat. 29.30. Express thy thankful∣nesse, in Psalmes, and Hymnes, and spirituall songs; publickly in the congregation, privately in thine own family. Psalmes fit for this, are Psal. 8. Psal. 23. Psal. 66. Psal. 103. &c. Secondly, as there must be thanksgiving to God; so there must be almsgiving to the poor. It was a custome in the Primitive Church, and is still continued in many
places, to have gather∣ings, and collections for the poor at the admini∣stration of this Sacra∣ment. Davids servants told Nabal that they came to him in a good day, for it was a day of feasting, 1 Sam. 25.8. This is a day of feasting to thee; Let it not be a day of fasting to thy poor brethren. God hath fed thee with the bread of life, & canst thou deny the crums of bread that fall from thy table?
He hath refreshed thee with the bloud of his Son, with the wine of his san∣ctuary, & canst thou deny the drink of thy buttery, or a cup of cold water? Give chearfully. God loves a chearfull giver, 2 Cor. 9.6, Give liberally. Consider how great a gift God hath this day bestowed upon thee: His Son. His begotten Son. His only begotten Son. His beloved Son. His dear Son, Col. 1.13.
Thirdly, take heed thou relapse not into thy old sins. I have washed my feet, how shall I defile them? Cant. 5.3. If after we have esca∣ped the pollutions of the world, through the knowledge of our Lord & Saviour Jesus Christ, we be again intangled therein and overcome; If with the Dog we return to our own vo∣mit again: or with the Sow that was washed, to our wallowing in the mire;
The latter end will be worse with us then the beginning, 2 Pet. 2.20, 22 Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought wor∣thy, who hath troden under foot the Sonne of God, and hath counted the bloud of the Cove∣nant wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and hath done de∣spite unto the spirit of grace? Heb. 10.29. When the unclean spi∣rit is gone out of a man, he saith, I will return in∣to
my house frō whence I came out, and when he is come he findeth it em∣pty, swept, & garnished. Then goeth he, and ta∣keth with him seven o∣ther spirits more wicked then himself, and they enter in, and dwell there. And the last estate of that man is worse then the first, Mat. 12.43, 44, 45. He that washeth him∣self after the touching of a dead body, if he touch it again, what availeth his washing? Ecclus 34.25.
A short prayer after the receiving of this Sacra∣ment. O Most gracious God from whose bounty every good and perfect gift is derived, I, and all that is within me, praise and magnifie thy holy name for all the mercies and favours which from time to time thou hast bestowed upon me. Especially I thank thee for thy Son Jesus Christ the fountain and founda∣tion of all blessings; that
thou hast sent him into the world to take our na∣ture upon him, and to die for us; and that thou hast fed me who am un∣worthy of the least of thy favours, with the precious merits of his death and passion. Bles∣sed Lord God, thou hast been pleased this day to set thy seal to the par∣don and forgivenesse of all my sins, oh let me not tear it off again by un∣thankfulnesse, or relap∣sing into my old sinnes, from which thou hast
purged me, lest my last end be worse then my beginning. But when hereafter I shall be tem∣pted by the divel, allured by the world, or provo∣ked by mine own flesh, lay before mine eyes by thy remembring Spirit how deare the expiation of my sins cost my Lord & Saviour Christ Jesus, even the effusion of his most precious and sa∣cred bloud; that in the contemplation of his death, and application of his most bitter passion, I
may die daily unto sin, and so shew the Lords death till he come; That when he shall come, and bring his reward with him, I may receive that crown of righteousnesse which he hath purchased & prepared for all those that love and expect the day of his appearing, with the precious price of his incorruptible blood. And whereas I have this day renewed my co∣venant with thee my God, in vows, and pur∣poses
of better obedi∣ence, assist me by thy grace, and strengthen me by thy power, that I may pay the vows which I have made unto thee; & that by virtue of thy heavenly nourishment, I may grow up in grace & godliness, till at last I come to be a perfect man in Christ Jesus, in whose most blessed name and words, I conclude these my imperfect prayers, saying as he himself hath taught me: O our Father, &c.
EVERY DAYES Considerations. Consider 1. What good thou hast done 2. What good thou daily doest. 3. What thou shalt do hereafter. Consider these in The Morning when thou risest. The Day when thou walkest. The Night when thou wakest. These Considerations wel meditated on, will the bet∣ter prepare thee for these ensuing meditations of Death.
SECTION I. Meditations of Death. THE life of a Christian is or should be a continuall meditati∣on of death. The flight of a Bird is directed by her train, the course of a ship is steered by the helm, so is the
life of a man ordered by the serious appre∣hension of his last end. The first man was called Adam, which signifies a piece of red earth. He was cloathed in the skins of dead beasts. He was adjudged to the earth, to dig, and delve in it. God
would have his name, his garments, his imploiment con∣tinuall remembran∣cers of his grave, and monitors of his mor∣tality. It is reported by the Ancient Fa∣thers, that the people of God used the 90. Psalm in form of a daily prayer. In which Psalm there is a long ac∣knowledgment
of the shortnesse of our lives: and this petiti∣on to God: So teach us to num∣ber our days, that we may apply our hearts to wisdome, ver. 12. Oh that they were wise, that they under∣stood this, that they would consider their later end. Deut. 32.29.
Whatsoever thou takest in hand, re∣member the end, & thou shalt never do amisse, Eccles. 7.36. CAP. I. That the meditation of death is profitable a∣gainst pride. NEbuchadnezzars I∣mage had a head of gold, brest and arms of silver, belly & thighes of brasse, but feet of clay. Whatsoever thy wealth, wisdome, birth,
beauty, state or strength be, thy foundation is in the dust, Job. 4.19. There is a great diffe∣rence betwixt a Cedar and a shrub; a Vine and a bramble, so long as both grow: but cut them down, and burn them, & there will be no diffe∣rence in their ashes. Chess-men are distin∣guished upon the boord whilest the game is play∣ing, but being done, they are tumbled into a bag without order. In this life some are
set upon the throne: o∣thers are grinding at the mill. Some are cloathed in purple, and fare delici∣ously every day: others lie at the gates and have not so much as the crums of their Tables. But in the grave rich and poor meet together, and the ulcers of Laza∣rus will make as good dust as the paint of Jeza∣bel. Saul being anointed King over Israel, was ap∣pointed to go to Rachels
sepulchre: that the sight of a Sepulchre might al∣lay the haughtinesse of his new honour, 1 Sam. 10.2. Kings must pile up gaeir Crownes at the thtes of the grave, and lay down their Scepters at the feet of death. The daughters of Jeru∣salem, which are haugh∣ty, walking with stretch∣ed forth necks, and wan∣ton eys, mincing as they goe, and making a tink∣ling with their feet, must drop into the grave,
where in stead of sweet smels there shal be stink: and in stead of well set hair, baldness, Isa. 3.16, 24. They that glory in their Ancestours, in the nobleness of their birth, and bloud, must make their bed in the dark, and acknowledge corruption for their father, and the Worm for their mother and sister, Job 17.14. I have said, Ye are gods, and all of you are children of the most high: but ye shall die
like men, Psal. 82.6, 7. Why then art thou proud, O Dust and A∣shes! Nulla discretio inter cada∣vera mortuorum, nisi quod gravius foetent divitum cor∣pora distenta luxuriâ. Amb. Hexam. l. 6. c. 8. CAP. II. It is profitable against co∣vetousness. THe rich man in the Gospel when he had built his barns, and inned his harvest, was called away and carries nothing
with him of all the store he had provided, Luke 12. The Spider spins out her own bowels, to make a Cobweb, and present∣ly a maid comes with a broome and sweeps it down. Horses at night are un∣laden of their burthens, and turned into a dirty Stable with a galled back: So are rich men into the grave, and for the most part with a gal∣led conscience. A Mill wears it selfe with grinding, & though
it turn about continual∣ly, yet it removes not out of its place. It is but in vain for men to rise up early, and to sit up late, and to eat the bread of carefulness. For naked came I out of my mothers womb, and na∣ked shall I return thither, Job 1.21. I hated all the labour which I had taken under the Sun, because I should leave it unto the man that shall be after me; And who knoweth whe∣ther hee shall be a wise
man or a fool? Yet shall he have rule over all my labour wherein I have laboured, and wherein I have shewed my self wise under the Sun. This is also vanity, Ec. 2.18, 19 Surely every man wal∣keth in a vain shew, sure∣ly they are disquieted in vain: he heapeth up rich∣es, and knoweth not who shall gather thē, Ps. 39.6. We brought nothing with us into this world, and it is certain we can carry nothing out of it, 1 Tim. 6.7.
Why then art thou coveteous O Dust and Ashes! Facile contemnit omnia, qui se semper cogitat moriturum, Jeron. in Ep. ad Paulin. CAP. III. It is profitable against Lust. THe Prodigall seeing many spectacles of mortality by reason of the great famine, leaves his concubines, and rio∣tous living, and returns again to his Father, Luke 15.
One going to the stews meets by the way a dead corps carried to the grave: the sight whereof made such an impression in him, that he goes back again; and ever after li∣ved chast and continent. Let not sinne raign in your mortall bodies, that ye should obey it in the lusts thereof, Rom. 6.12. I beseech you as stran∣gers and pilgrims abstain from fleshly lusts which warre against the soul, 1 Pet. 2.11. The argument used by
these Apostles to beat down in us the lust of sin, and the sin of lust, is the mortality of our bodies. Why then art thou lust∣full, ô Dust and Ashes! Thus we see that the meditation of death is a soverein antidote against all the evill that is in the world. For all that is in the world, is either the lust of the flesh, or the lust of the eyes, or the pride of life, 1 Joh. 2.19 Nil sic revocat à peccato, quam frequens morti's medi∣tatio. Aug.
SECTION II. THere is nothing more certain then death, yet no∣thing more uncertain in the circumstances of it. Certain it is we must all die, but where, when, or how we shall die, of all things is most uncer∣tain.
CAP. I. Death is certain. ABraham the Father of the faithfull, and the friend of God, died. Iacob wrestled with an Angel, and prevailed, yet death was too hard for him. David was a man af∣ter Gods own heart, one that triumphed over ten thousand Philistims, yet death triumphed over him. Solomon knew the ver∣tues
of all plants from the Cedar in Libanus to the hyssope upon the wall, yet no plant had this vertue to make him immortall. The fathers have eaten Manna, and are dead. There is but one way into the world, but there are a thousand out of it. Man when he comes into the world, is like an hour-glasse new turned up, which never ceases running till it be all out. Like Peter and Iohn, we run who shall first
come at the Sepulchre, John 20.4. And they that are there already, rot and crumble away to make roome for us that must come after them. Dust thou art, and to dust shalt thou return, Gen. 3.19. What man is he that liveth, and shall not see death? Psal. 89.48. The dust shall return to the earth as it was: & the spirit shall return un∣to God that gave it, Ec∣cles. 12.7.
It is appointed for all men once to die. Heb. 9.27. We must needs die, and are as water spilt upon the ground, which can∣not be gathered up a∣gain, 2 Sam. 14.14. CAP. II. The time uncertain. AN infant in the wombe knows not the time when hee shall come into the world; and being come, knows not the time when hee shall go out of it.
The rich man promi∣sed himself many years, but fool that he was, that night his soul was fetcht from him, Lu. 12. Behold now I am old and know not the day of my death, Gen. 27.2. One dieth in his full strength, when his brests are full of milk, and his bones are moistned with marrow, another dieth in the bitternesse of his soul, Job 21.23, 24. Man also knoweth not his time; as the fishes that are taken in an evill net,
and as the birds that are caught in the snare; so are the sons of men sna∣red in an evil time; when it falleth suddenly upon them, Eccles. 9.12. God would have us ignorant of the last day, that we might be ready every day. Take yee heed watch and pray, for ye know notwhen the time is, Mark 13.33. To deferre repentance then till to morrow, is very dangerous. God hath promised thee par∣don
if thou dost repent to day: but if thou dost not repent, he hath not promised that thou shalt live till to morrow. Boast not thy selfe of to morrow, for thou knowest not what a day may bring forth, Prov. 27.1. If not an end of thy sins, it may be an end of thy life. If it bring not forth conversion, it may bring forth confusion. Go to now, ye that say, To day, or to morrow
we will do thus or thus: whereas ye know not what shall be on the mor∣row: for what is your life? It is even a vapour which appeareth for a little time, and then vani∣sheth away, I am. 4.13, 14 Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with all thy might: for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wis∣dome in the grave, whi∣ther thou goest, Eccles. 9.10. We are but tenants at will, and we know not
how soon our great Land-lord may dis∣charge us. Doe therefore as the wise Steward, before thou beest turned out of this house, make sure of another, Luke 16.4. CAP. III. The place uncertain. DEath surprized Abel when he was walk∣ing in the field, Gen. 4.8. Eli when he was sit∣ting at his doore, 1 Sam. 4.18. Jobs children at a feast, Job 1.19.
Eglon in his summer parlour, Judg. 3.20. Zacharias betwixt the Temple and the Altar, Mat. 23.35. Senacherib in the house of Nisroch his god, Isa. 37.38. Ishbosheth whilest hee slept in his bedchamber, 2 Sam. 4.7. The Philistims whilest they were sporting in the Theatre, Judg. 16.30. Herod whilest he fate upon his throne, Act. 12.23. Expect that therefore
in every place, which in every place expects thee. And let not the place of thy death trouble thee; for the earth is the Lords, and the fulnesse thereof. CAP. IV. The manner uncertain. THere is a naturall death, when a man dies as a lamp goes out, because there is no more oile to feed it: And there is a violent death, when the soul is thrust out of doors, and the lamp of
life not burnt, but blown out. There is a timely death, when a man comes to his grave in his full age, as a shock of corn cometh in, in his season, Job 5.26 And there is an un∣timely death, when a man is cropt as an ear of corn before it be white unto the harvest. There is a lingring death, when the soule is besieged with sicknesse, and as it were starved and tired out of her ha∣bitation.
And there is a sudden death, which strikes without giving warning. There is a quiet death, a departing in peace, when the soul doth as it were steal out of the bo∣dy unperceived. And there is a death, accompanied with ra∣ving madnesse, and di∣stemperature. Now who knows which of these deaths are appointed for him? Josiah dies by the hurt of an arrow, 2 Chr. 35.23. A Prophet of God by
the teeth of a Lion, 1 Kings 13.24. Abimelech by the fall of a stone, Judges 9.53. Jezabel is eaten up of dogs, 2 Kings 9.36. Two Captains with their fifties are consu∣med by fire from Hea∣ven, 2 Kings 1.14. There are ten thou∣sand diseases in the world, and no man in his health knows which shall make an end of him. For unto God the Lord belong the issues of death, Psal. 68.20.
SECTION III. NOW because Death is the King of terrors, and of all terrible things the most terrible, so that the very thought and remembrance of it is as bitter to flesh and bloud, as the waters of Marah, I thought good to
cast in these Medita∣tions to sweeten it. CAP. I. Death is a sleep. SLeep is nothing else but a short death; and death, what is it but a long sleep? Hence antiquity made these two brethen. Lazarus our friend sleepeth, John 11.11. And when Stephen had said thus, he fell asleep, Acts 7.60.
Brethren, I would not have you ignorant concerning them that are asleep, 1 Thes. 4.13. The places appointed for buriall were called Coemeteries, that is, sleep∣ing places. Now the sleep of a labouring man is sweet, Eccles. 5.12. Lord, if he sleep he shall do wel, Joh. 11.12. Hence also is it that our graves are called onr beds. They shall rest in their beds, every one walking
in his uprightnesse, Isa. 57.2. Jobs bed was full of tossings to and fro, Job 7.4. Davids bed was wate∣red with tears. Ps. 6.6. Nebuchadnezzars bed affrighted him with troublesome thoughts, fearfull dreames, and strange visions, Dan. 4.5. But this bed in the Hebrew tongue is called Dumah, because it is a place of rest, and si∣lence. I will lay me down in
peace and take my rest, Psal. 4.8. In vita vigilant justi, ideo in morte dicuntur dormire. Aug. CAP. II. Death hath no sting. DOgges that have no teeth may bark at us, but they cannot bite us. Serpents that have no stings, may hisse at us, but cannot hurt us. Bees, they say, when they have lost their stings, become droans ever after.
Death lost her sting in the side of our Saviour, and though it still leap upon us, we may shake it off as Paul did the viper, without hurt. Behold, I give you power to tread on Ser∣pents, and Scorpions, & over all the power of the enemy, and nothing shall by any means hurt you, Luke 10.19. Death is swallowed up in victory: O death where is thy sting? Thanks be unto God who hath given us victo∣ry
through Jesus Christ our Lord, 1 Cor. 15.55, 56. CAP. III. Death is good for us. WEE may say of death as David did of Ahimaaz, He is a good man, and bring∣eth good tidings, 2 Sam. 18.27. First, the death of the body frees us from the body of death, the Law of the members, the prick in the flesh, the re∣licks of corruption.
The good which I would do, I cannot do; and the evill which I would not doe, that doe I, Rom. 7.19. I see a law in my mem∣bers warring against the law in my minde, Rom. 7.23. This makes every child of God cry out, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me? Why, Death doth it, for he that is dead is freed from sin, Rom. 6.7. Secondly, it frees us from the miseries and
incumbrances of this life. So many are the mise∣ries and calamities of this life, that were it not for the hope of heaven, it would not be much bet∣ter then hell. Crosses come as thick upon us, as Jobs messen∣gers. The life of man is a winters day, very short, and very cloudy. Few and evill have the days of my life been, Gen. 47.9. Man that is born of a
woman is of few days & full of trouble; few are our days, but many our troubles, Job 14.1. The day of death is the year of Jubilee, and frees us of all these evils. There the wicked cease from troubling: & there the weary be at rest. There the Prisoners rest together, and heare not the voice of the op∣pressour. The small and great are there: and the servant is free from his master, Job 3.17, 18, 19.
Hence the Heathen said, it was the best thing not to be born at all, and the next to that was to die quickly. It was the custome of many nations to weep at the birth of their friends, and to rejoyce at their burials; and not unwise∣ly, says Ambros. in orat. de fide resurr. Lastly, death (like the Angell) plucks us out of Sodom, and conducts us to Zoar, a city of refuge and safety. It translates us out of
a prison, to a Palace; from a vale of misery, to a kingdome of glory; from Leeks and Onions, to Rivers of Milk and Honey. From the Tents of Ke∣dar, and Tabernacles of the wicked, to mount Si∣on, the city of the living God, the heavenly Jeru∣salem, to an innumerable company of Angels, to the generall Assembly, and Church of the first born which are inrolled in heaven, to God the Judge of all, to the spi∣rits
of just men made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the new Te∣stament, Heb. 12.22, 23. Death is like the com∣mon gate of a city, tho∣row which the Malefa∣ctor passes to execution, but the honest Citizen to his recreation. We know that if the earthly house of this ta∣bernacle be dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternall in the hea∣vens, 2 Cor. 5.1. Where God shall wipe
away all tears from our eyes: and there shall be no more death, nor sor∣row, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain, Rev. 21.4. These things conside∣red, we may with Solo∣mon praise the dead, that are already dead, more then the living that are yet alive, Eccles. 4.2. And say with S. Paul, To me to live is Christ, and to die is gain, Phil. 1.21.
CAP. IV. There shall bee a Resur∣rection. IT troubles us not to see the Sun set, because we know it will rise again the next morning. God restored to Iob every thing double but his children: they were not amissi, but praemissi: not lost, but laid up, and then shall be a day of restitu∣tion. Though after my skin, worms destroy this bo∣dy, yet in my flesh shall
I see God: whom I shall see for my self and mine eyes shall behold, and not another, though my reins be consumed in me, Job 19.26, 27. Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body shall they a∣rise: awake and sing yee that dwell in the dust; for thy dew is as the dew of herbs, and the Earth shall cast out her dead, Isa. 26.19. So then, death is but a Parenthesis, and the soul and body, though dis∣joyned
by it, will meet again together. Nay the body shall not onely arise, but it fares with the body as with old houses, which being pull'd down, new ones are erected in their rooms better and more stately then the former. It is sown in corrupti∣on, it is raised in incor∣ruption. It is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory. It is sown in weakness, it is raised in power. It is sown a naturall
body, it is raised a spiri∣tuall body, 1 Cor. 15.42, 43. Thus death like a rare Alchy mist, dissolves the base metal of our bodies, and converts it to a pu∣rer substance. The body when it rots in the grave, is as linnen worn to rags, and cast upon the dunghill: but at the resurrection it is like those Rags gathe∣red up, and made into paper, which many times becomes gilt, and capa∣ble of noble and divine impressions.
The fire burnt the bands of the three chil∣dren, but sindged not so much as a haire of their heads, Dan. 3.27. Death looses us from the bands of our sins, but shall not cozen us of a nail of the hand, or an hair of the head, for all our hairs are numbred. CAP. V. The goodness of God. SAint Ambrose being asked by his friends whether he was not a∣fraid to die, answered he
was not, because he had a good Lord. What time I am affraid, I will trust in thee, Psal. 56.3. Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evill, for thou art with me, Psal. 23.4. Into thy hands I com∣mit my spirit, for thou hast redeemed it, ô Lord God of truth, Psal. 31.5. He that hath created our souls after his own Image, and redeemed them with his owne bloud, will not refuse
them when they are commended and given up unto him. When Stephen was gi∣ving up the ghost, he saw the heavens opened, and the Sonne of man standing at the right hand of God, Acts 7.56. Christ who sits at the right hand of God, was then said to stand, to shew how ready he is to receive the souls of his servants. These considerations being applyed, and
wrought well upon our hearts, will make us cry out with David, Oh when shall I come and appear before him! Psal. 42.2. O that I had wings like a dove, that I might flie hence and be at rest, Psal. 55.6. Woe is me that I so∣journ in Mesech, that I dwell in the Tents of Kedar, Psal. 120.5. With old Simeon, Lord now lettest thou thy ser∣vant depart in peace ac∣cording to thy word, Lu. 2.29.
With Paul, I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, Phil. 1.23. With Saint Iohn, Come Lord Jesus, come quick∣ly, Rev. 22.20.
SECTION IV. EVery man de∣sires with Bala∣am, that he may dye the death of the righ∣teous, and that his last end may be like his: and I cannot blame them. For to die well is a point of the grea∣test consequence in the world, because e∣ternity
depends upon it. And as the tree fals so it must ly, whether it be to the North of Gods judgment, or to the South of his mercy, Eccles. 11.3. Now this work of dying well, cannot be done extempore, I have therefore in the last place contracted the art of dying well into a few precepts.
CAP. I. Live well. TO live well is to fear God, and to keep his Commandements, Eccles. 12.13. To love God and our neighbour, Mat. 22.37. To deny all ungodli∣nesse, and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righ∣teously, & godly in this present world, Tit. 2.12. To doe justly, to love mercy, and to walk hum∣bly with our God, Mi∣cah 6.8.
To repent of our sins, to beleeve in Christ, to keep his Command∣ments. Who so doth these things shall never fall, Psal. 15.5. A fair day may have a foul evening: but a good life cannot have a bad death. Such as the premisses are, such will be the con∣clusion. It is said of Moses, that he died according to the word of the Lord, or at the mouth of the Lord, for the Hebrew will bear
this reading: and the Chaldee paraphrases it, He died at a kisse of the Lords mouth: God kis∣ses the righteous in their deaths, and as it were sucks in those souls which he breathed into them, Deut. 34.5. Old Hilarion when he lay a dying, bespake his soul in this manner. Get thee out of me, O my soul, get thee out of me: why fearest thou, that hast served God almost this seventy years? Jerom in vita Hilarionis.
Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of that man is peace, Psal. 37.37. Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints, Ps. 116.15. Blessed are they that die in the Lord, for they rest from their labours, and their works follow them, Rev. 14.13. CAP. II. Particular directions. IN the time of thy sick∣ness, with Ezekiah call thy self to an account
for all thy sins, mourn for them, in the bitter∣nesse of thy soul confesse them to God, and ask forgivenesse. 2. Send for thy Mini∣ster. To whom, if need be, make a speciall con∣fession, and take along with thee the benefit of his absolution; Whose soever sins ye remit they are remitted unto them: and whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained, John 20.23. If I forgave any thing to whom I forgave it, I
forgave it in the person of Christ, 2 Cor. 2.10. Secondly, let thy Mi∣nister pray over thee: Is any sick among you? let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray over him. If he hath commited sins, they shall be forgi∣ven him, Jam. 5.14, 15. Thirdly, let him give thee the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. This is the best viati∣cum, and provision for so long a journey. I may say to thee as
the Angel to Eliah, Arise and eat, for the journey is too great for thee. And if with Eliah, thou dost eat and drink, thou maist travell in the strength of this meat to Horeb the mount of God, 1 Kings 19.7, 8. This is the bread that came down from Hea∣ven, that a man may eat thereof, and not die. Who so eateth my flesh, and drinketh my bloud, hath eternall life, and I will raise him up at the last day, Joh. 6.51, 54.
V. Euseb. hist. l. 5. c. 45.3. Set thine house in order, 2 Kings 20.1. This will not make thee die more quickly, but more quietly. 4. Remember the poor. When we have beene kindly entertained at a friends house, it is good manners to give the ser∣vants something when we goe away. Blessed is he that con∣sidereth the poore, the Lord will deliver him in the time of trouble. The Lord will streng∣then
him upon the bed of languishing: and will make all his bed in his sicknesse, Psal. 41.1, 3. 5. If thou beest a fa∣ther or mother of chil∣dren, call them before thee, and blesse them. So did Jacob when he departed, Gen. 49.1. 6. Make restitution (if thou beest able) to such as thou hast wronged, and defrauded. Without restitution there is no remission. Enquire with Samuel whose oxe thou hast ta∣ken,
or whose asse thou hast taken, whom thou hast defrauded, whom thou hast oppressed, or of whose hand thou hast received a bribe, and re∣store it. Send for them who have offended thee, and forgive them: and for those whom thou hast offended, and ask for∣givenesse. Lastly, resign, and give over thy self to God. Behold, here I am, let the Lord do to me, as seemeth good to him, 1 Sam. 15.26.
Not my wil, but thine be done. And if thus thou beest prepared at the day of death, oh well is thee, and happy shalt thou be, Psal 128.2. Blessed is that servant whom his Lord when he cometh shall finde thus doing, thus dying, Mat. 24.46. A short prayer for a happy departure. O Most glorious Lord, the GOD of the spirits of all flesh, in whose hands are the
times of all men, and the keys of the Grave, I most meekly beseech thee of thy goodnesse, to pardon and forgive me all my sins, and to make me e∣ver mindfull of my mor∣tality. Lay often before mine eyes by thy remembring spirit, that the days of my pilgrimage are but few and evil; that I have here no abiding and con∣tinuing City; that all flesh, and the goodlinesse thereof is but a flower that fadeth, & a shadow
that vanisheth away, that so numbring my days, I may apply my heart to wisedome, and with the wise Virgins provide Oil in my Lamp, and make my calling and election sure, before I go hence, & be no more seen. And when it shall please thee to cast me upon the bed of sickness, and to com∣passe me about with the sorrows of the grave, I beseech thee for thy names sake, for thy mer∣cies sake, for thy Son Je∣sus Christ his sake, not
to be far from me in that needfull time of trouble, when I shall finde heavi∣nesse in my flesh, and there be none to deliver me. But draw near unto my soul, and be about my bed to pardon my sins, to pacifie my conscience, to strengthen my faith, to mitigate my pains, & to receive my soul, when it shall be commended unto thee. Receive it O God the Father, for thou hast created it. Receive it O
God the Son, for thou hast redeemed it. Re∣ceive it O God the Holy Ghost, for thou hast sanctified it. Receive it ô holy, blessed and glo∣rious Trinity, that being translated out of this vale of misery, it may raign with thee, one ever∣living and immortall God, in the Kingdome of Glory, world without end: Amen.
SECTION I. Of the day of Judgement. CHristian Rea∣der, let my Me∣ditations now passe, as thou thy self must, from the day of death to the day of Judg∣ment. For it is ap∣pointed for all men once to die, and after that to come to judg∣ment, Heb. 9.27.
CAP. I. There shall bee a day of Judgment. IT is an Article of our faith, that CHRIST who nw sits at the right hand of his Father, shall come from thence to judg the quick and the dead. Enoch the seventh from Adam prophesied of it, saying, Behold, the Lord cometh with ten thou∣sand of his Saints; To execute Judgment upon all, and to con∣vince
all that are ungod∣ly of all their ungodly deeds which they have committed, and of all their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against hm, Iude 14, 15. God shall bring every work into judgement, with every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evill, Ec∣cles. 12.14. I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God. The Sea gave up the
dead which were in it: and death and hell deli∣vered up the dead which were in them: and they were judged every man according to his works, Rev. 20.13. It is very observable, that all other Articles of the Creed have been op∣posed by Heretiques ei∣ther in whole, or in part; but no Heretique denied a day of judgment. Vide Danaeum in his Cat. of heresies against the Creed. In this world, Solomon says, no man can know
love or hatred by all that is before them. For all things come alike to all: there is one event to the righteous and to the wicked, to the good and to the clean, and to the unclean: to him that sa∣crificeth, & to him that sacrificeth not; as is the good, so is the sinner; & he that sweareth, as he that feareth an oath, Ec∣cles. 9.1, 2. Now shall not the Judge of all the world do right? Gen. 18.25. There must be a day
wherein the wicked shall be punished, and the ver∣tuous rewarded. A day wherein God will put a difference be∣twixt an Israelite, and an Aegyptian; betwixt a Sheep and a Goat; be∣twixt wheat and tares. There shall be a day when I will make up my Jewels, and I will spare them as a man spareth his own son that serveth him. Then shall ye return, and discern between the righteous and the wick∣ed,
between him that serveth God, and him that serveth him not, Mal. 3.17, 18. I confesse the wicked are sometimes punished in this world, to assure us there is a God; yet it is but sometimes, to as∣sure us there is a day of judgment. Verily there is a re∣ward for the righteous: verily there is a God that judgeth the earth, Psal. 58.11.
CAP. II. An Objection answered. IT is certain that the soul so soon as it is se∣parated from the body, is presented to God, and receives an irrevocable doome, either of woe, or weal. The rich man died and presently was in hell in torments, the begger di∣ed and was immediately carried by Angels into Abrahams bosome. Luke 16.22, 23. So that it may be de∣manded;
What need is there of a general day of judgment, seeing every man is judged at the day of his death? Answ. 1. Every man consists of a Soul, and a Body. The Soul is judged at the day of death, the Body also at the day of judgment. For as these two doe either sin together, or serve God together; so they shall either burn to∣gether, or reign toge∣ther.
Every man must re∣ceive the things done in his Body, according to that he hath done, whe∣ther it be good or bad, 2 Cor. 5.10. Yet because the Soul may, and often doth sin, or serve God without the Body, it may in the state of separation be either punished or rewarded, though the Body rest in the grave. Answ. 2. There must be a general Judgment, for the mani∣festation of Gods Justice.
God disposes of every man at the day of his death, & that according to the rule of Justice; yet that which he did in secret, he will doe in the view of the whole world, that so the generall As∣sembly of men and An∣gels may give this testi∣mony and applause of his just proceedings: Righteous art thou, O Lord, and righteous are thy judgments. Psal. 119.137. Answ. 3. There must be a judg∣ment
besides that at the day of death, because men after they be dead, may be Instruments, and occasions either of vice or vertue, of sin or the service of God. The Patriarchs, Pro∣phets, Apostles, Mar∣tyrs, and Fathers of the Church are dead and gone: yet still they doe good in the Church of God by their godly ex∣amples, and holy wri∣tings. Jeroboam, Machiavel, Marcion, all Heriticks,
and prophane persons die, yet they poison the air with ill example, wic∣ked books, divelish prin∣ciples, and after their death infect posterity for many generations. Their word eats as doth a canker, or gan∣grene, 2 Tim. 2.17. Hence it is, that as there is a particular Judgment to reward the good, or punish the evil they have done them∣selves in their life time; so there shall be a gene∣rall Judgment to re∣ward,
or punish them for that, which after their death they have occasi∣oned to be done by o∣thers. V.S. Basil. in l. de vera virginit. CAP. III. The Names given to this Day. THis day is called in the Scripture, The day of the Lord. Alas, for the day: for the day of the Lord is at hand. Joel 1.15. Your selves know per∣fectly,
that the day of the Lord so cometh as a thief in the night, 1 Thes. 5.2. Looking for and hast∣ning unto the coming of the day of GOD, 2 Pet. 3.12. This life is called Our Day. O Jerusalem; if thou hadst known, at least in this Thy day, the things that belong to thy peace, Luke 19.42. For we think our own thoughts, & speak our own words, and doe our own pleasure.
But that shall be the Lords day; for the lofty looks of man shall be humbled, & the haughti∣ness of men shal be bow∣ed down, and the Lord alone shall be exalted in that day, Isa. 2.11. Secondly, it is called a Day of Revelation, or Opening, Rom. 2.5. Never was there such an opening, as will be at that day. The heavens shall be opened, and those ever∣lasting doors shall be lift up, that the King of glo∣ry
may go forth with his Angels to judge the world, and return back again with his Saints, when he hath judged it. The Earth shall be o∣pened, for the stone shall be rolled from the mouth of every Sepul∣chre, and the graves shall give up their dead. The Books shall be o∣pened. I saw the dead, small and great, stand before the Lord, and the books were opened: and ano∣ther book was opened
which was the book of life; and the dead were judged out of those things which were writ∣ten in the books, accor∣ding to their works, Rev. 20.12. The secrets of all hearts shall be opened. There is nothing hid that shall not be manife∣sted; neither any thing kept secret that shall not come abroad, Mar. 4.22. In the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ ac∣cording to my Gospell, Rom. 2.16.
Hell shall be opened to receive those wretch∣es, to whom it shall be said, Goe ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the divel and his an∣gels. Thirdly, it is called a Day of refreshing. Re∣pent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out when the times of refre∣shing shall come from the presence of the Lord, Acts 3.19. What a refreshing wil it be, when our rotten,
and worm-eaten carkas∣ses shall rise up in honor and in incorruption, as flowers after a long winter? What a refreshing wil it be, when these two an∣cient friends, the soul and the body, after so long a separation shall imbrace, and kisse each other? What a refreshing will it be to see the Divel our worst enemy, and Death our last enemy, cast into the lake of fire? What a refreshing wil it be to see Jesus Christ
the Savior of the world, and the head of his Church, come in his glo∣ry, attended with an in∣numerable company of Angels? What a refreshing wil it be, to hear those sweet sentences of absolution? Well done, good and faithfull servant, enter thou into thy Masters joy. Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdome prepared for you. Fourthly, in respect of
the wicked, it is called a day of wrath. After thy hardnesse, and impeni∣tent heart, thou treasu∣rest up for thy self wrath against the day of wrath, Rom. 2.5. As also a day of dark∣nesse and gloominesse, a day of clouds, and of thick darknesse, Joel 2.2. The Sun is pleasing to a good eye, but offen∣sive to an eye that is ill affected. The day of judgment is a bath of refreshing to the godly, but a burning
Oven to the wicked: Behold the day com∣eth that shall burn as an Oven, and all the proud, yea, and all that doe wickedly, shall be stubble, Mal. 4.1. Fiftly, it is called a great day. The Angels which kept not their first estate, but left their own habi∣tation, he hath reserved in everlasting chains of darknesse, unto the judg∣ment of the Great day. Jude 6. The Sun shall be tur∣ned into darknesse, and
the Moon into blood, be∣fore that great and nota∣ble day of the Lord come, Acts 2.20. It is a great day indeed, sith so many great and notable things shall be done in it. For the Lord himself shall descend from hea∣ven with a shout, with the voice of the Arch∣angel, 1 Thes. 4.16. And he shall send his Angels with a great sound of a trumpet, and they shall gather toge∣ther the Elect from the
four winds, from one end of heaven, unto the o∣ther, Mat. 24.31. And then the heavens shall passe away with a great noise, and the Ele∣ments shall melt with fervent heat, the earth also and the works that are therein shall be burnt up, 2 Pet. 3.10. How great a day must that needs be, wherein the accompts and recko∣nings of all Days must be audited and cast up? Lastly, it is commonly and usually called the
Day of Judgment, for it is the generall Assise wherein every man must be arraigned, and hold up his hand at the barre. Both old men and maidens: young men and children. Kings of the earth, and all people: Princes, and all Judges of the earth. SECTION II. THus having seen that there shall be not only a parti∣cular,
but a generall judgement also, let us in the next place inquire who & what manner of Judg he is, who shall pro∣nounce the sentence of life, or death up∣on us. CAP. I. Christ is the Judge. IT is true that the whole Trinity shall judge us: for so great an action cannot passe without the
consent and authority of the three Persons. Yet it is ascribed to Christ in respect of im∣mediate execution. He shall appear visibly in his humane nature, & give the sentence. The Father judgeth no man, but hath commit∣ted all judgment to the Son, John 5.22. He hath appointed a day wherein he will judg the world in righteous∣nesse, by that man whom he hath ordained, Acts 7.31.
We shall all stand be∣fore the Judgment seat of Christ, Rom. 14.10. So that where Christ sayes, he came not to judg the world, Joh. 12.47. understand it of his first, not of his second coming. Fit it is that Christ should judg the world who was judged by it: that so once in this world, he may shew his power, and Majesty, in the sight of all his crea∣tures, especially of Pon∣tius Pilate, Annas, Caia∣phas,
and the Jews, who condemned and crucifi∣ed him. They shall look upon me whom they have pierced, Zach. 12.10. Fit it is, that Men should be judged by one that is a Man. The comfort that we have against the terrors of this day is, that we shall be judged by the Man Christ Jesus. One man is a God un∣to another. Fear not, I am your brother Ioseph.
CAP. II. Christ a severe Judge. CHrist in his first com∣ing was a Lambe, but in his second he shall be a Lion. His fan is in his hand; and he will throng hly purge his floor, and ga∣ther his wheat into his garner, but will burn up the chaff with unquench∣able fire, Mat. 3.12. Hence it is that the very best of the Saints tremble at the apprehen∣sion of this day.
David was a man after Gods own heart: yet, My flesh trembleth for fear of thee: I am afraid of thy judgments, Psal. 119.120. Enter not into judg∣ment with thy servant, ô Lord, for in thy sight shall no man living be justified, Psal. 143.2. Job was a man emi∣nent for all graces: yet he stood amazed at the consideration of this Iudge. Whom though I were righteous, I would not
answer: but I would make supplication to my Iudg, Iob 9.15. What shall I do when God riseth up? & when he visiteth, what shall I answer him? Iob 31.14. Paul was a chosen ves∣sell, one that knew no∣thing by himself yet says he, I am not thereby ju∣stified, for it is the Lord that judges me. And the Lord judges not as a man judges, 1 Cor. 4.4. S. Ierome confesseth that his whole body trembled so oft as hee
thought upon this day. The righteous shall scarcely be saved, 1 Pet. 4.18. Many there are who passe currant in the judg∣ment of the world; who when they shal be weigh∣ed in Christs ballances will be found too light. Good reason then hath every man to pray as the Church teaches him; In the day of Judgement good Lord deliver me.
CAP. III. Christ an upright Judge. HEE shall judge the world in righteous∣nesse: he shall minister judgment to the people in uprighteness, Psal. 9.8. The Lord cometh to judge the earth: with righteousnesse shall he judg the world, and the people with equity, Psal. 98.9. Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousnesse, which the Lord the righteous
Iudge shall give me at that day, 2 Tim. 4.8. The Iudges of the earth may absolve the guilty, and condemn the innocent, being corrup∣ted By fear: Pilate for the fear of Caesar condemned Christ, whom the testi∣mony of his own consci∣ence pronounced inno∣cent. But this judge cannot be thus corrupted: for, Whom shall he fear, that is omnipotent? or of whom shall he be a∣fraid,
that shal come with great power and glory? Mar. 14.26. Or they may be corru∣pted with their own affe∣ction of love, or hatred. Herod adjudges John Baptist to death, for the love of Herodias daugh∣ter. Josephs brethren cast him into the pit because they hated him, Ge. 37.4. But this Judg cannot be thus corrupted: for, He is no accepter of persons, Acts 10.34. He shall not judg af∣ter
the sight of his eyes, but with righteousnesse shall he judge his people, Isa. 11.3, 4. He will render to eve∣ry man according to his deeds, whether Iew or Gentile, Rom. 2.6.9. Or they may be cor∣rupted with bribes: Je∣thro well advised Moses to chuse such men for Judges as hated cove∣tousnesse, Exod. 18.21. Thou shalt not wrest judgment, thou shalt not respect persons, neither take a gift: for a gift
doth blind the eyes of the wise, and pervert the words of the righteous, Deut. 16.19. Christ our Iudge can∣not be so corrupted. If he would take a bribe, thou shalt have none to give him at that day. But if thou couldest give him the Kingdoms of the world, & the glo∣ry of them, he would re∣fuse; for he is the Lord of lords, a great God, a mighty, and a terrible, which regardeth not per∣sons,
nor taketh reward, Deut. 10.17. A good conscience wil doe us more good then, then a full purse. Riches profit not in the day of wrath, but righteousnesse delivereth from death, Prov. 11.4. CAP. IV. Christ an All knowing Judge. AS his uprightnesse is such that he cannot be corrupted, so his knowledge is such that
he cannot be deceived. He shall not reprove after the hearing of his ears, Isa. 11.3. He shall not judge us according to the report and testimony of others which is uncertain, but according to his own in∣tuitive knowledg, which is infallible. Come and see a man which told me all the things that ever I did: Is not this the Christ? John 4.29. Neither is there any creature that is not ma∣nifest
in his sight: but all things are naked, & ope∣ned unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do, Heb 4.13. The word in the Ori∣ginall imports such an o∣penness, as when the skin is pulled off, & the back chined down, so that the very entrails, and most secret passages of nature may be discerned. These things hast thou done, and I kept silence, thou thoughtest I was altogether such a one as thy self, but I will re∣prove
thee, and set them in order before thine eys, Psal. 50.21. Hence it is that he is said to keep a book of remembrance by him, Mal. 3.16. Some sins are said to be secret in respect of him that commits them. Who can understand his errours? Cleanse thou me from my secret faults, Ps. 19.12 Or in respect of the world. The Adulterer eats his pleasant bread in secret, Prov. 9.17.
But no sins are secret in respect of God: for, He sets our iniquities before him: even our se∣cret sins in the sight of his countenance, Psal. 90.8. At that day then in vain will it be for us to deny the fact, or to ex∣cuse it, or to shift and transferre it from one to another: for, The Lord seeth not as man seeth, 1 Sam. 16.7.
CAP. V. Christ is an inexorable Judg. AS this Iudge cannot be corrupted, nor deceived; so neither can he be intreated: Now is the accepted time, now is the day of salvation, 2 Cor. 6.2. Seek the Lord whilst he may be found, call upon him whilst he is near, Isa. 55.6. That is a time of judg∣ment, and though we cry as loud as thunder,
he will not hear us, though we cut our selves with lancers, as Baals Priests, till the blood gush out, he will not re∣gard us. Wil God hear his cry when trouble cometh upon him? Job 27.9. Because I have called and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded: I also will laugh at your calamity, and mock when your fear cometh. Then shall they call upon me, but I will not
answer: they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me, Prov. 1.24, 26, 28. The foolish Virgins knock at the door of mercy, but it is shut a∣gainst them, Mat. 25.11. Then will I professe unto them, I never knew you: depart from me ye that work iniquity, Mat. 7.23.
SECTION III. HAving now seen who, and what manner of Judge thou shalt have, sup∣pose him now set upon the judgment seat attended with his glorious Angels, and calling thee up to answer these In∣terrogatories.
CAP. I. Who art thou? TO this thy answer wil be that thou art a Man. Christ wil reply unto thee, If a man, shew me my Image wherein I created thee. Caesars peny was known by Caesars Image, and su∣perscription. When Jacob saw the coat of his son Joseph, It is my sons coat, says he, but an evil beast hath devoured him, Gen. 37.33.
So Christ will say to us at the day of judge∣ment, This is the face and figure of a man, but an evil beast hath devoured my Image. The Drunkard hath lost the Image of God, and laid a swine in the room of it. The Covetous hath lost the Image of God, and laid a ravenous wolf in the room of it. The Adulterer hath lost the Image of God, and laid a goat or an horse in the room of it.
The crafty and con∣tentious person, hath lost the Image of God, and laid a fox and a dog in the room of it. They have corrupted themselves, and their spot is not the spot of his children, Deut. 32.5. Man that is in honour and understandeth not, may be compared to the beasts that perish, Psal. 49.20. And no beast shall en∣ter into the new Jerusa∣lem: for Without are dogs, Rev. 22.15.
CAP. II. Of what Religion. The next Interrogatory will be, Of what Religi∣on art thou? TO passe by Turks, Iewes, Infidels, thy answer will be, I am a Christian. Jacob professes to his Father, that he was his very son Esau, and yet was not. The Church of Sardis had a name to be alive, yet was dead, Rev. 3.1. Many shall say at that
day, Lord, Lord, we have been baptized in thy Name, we have called upon thy Name, we have prophesied in thy Name, who notwithstanding are workers of iniquity. A Christian is a name of Duty, as well as of Dignity. You are my Friends if you doe whatsoever I command you, Ioh. 15.14 By this shall all men know that you are my Disciples, if ye love one another, Iohn 13.35. As many of you as
have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, Gal. 3.27. They that are Christs, have crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts, Gal. 5.24. Art thou a Christian, who hast taken the mem∣bers of Christ and made them the members of an harlot? 1 Cor. 6.15. Art thou a Christian, who hast seen Christ na∣ked, & hast not clothed him: hungry, and hast not fed him: thirsty, and hast given him no drink:
sick, and in prison, and hast not visited him. In a word, art thou a Christian that hast lived in the practice of grosse and known sins? What Communion is there betwixt Christ and Belial, betwixt light and darknesse, betwixt righteousnesse & unrigh∣teousness? 2 Cor. 6.15. The Jews boasted they were the children of A∣braham, but Christ tels them they were the chil∣dren of the Divell, be∣cause they did his works, John 8.44.
If thou beest not a true, but a titular Chri∣stian, having a form of godlinesse, but not the power of it, thy judg∣ment wil be more heavy, and intolerable, then that of Turks and Infidels. The Servant that knows his Masters will, and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes. Unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall much be required, Luke 12.47, 48. Verily I say unto you,
it shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomor∣rah at the day of judge∣ment, then for you, Mat. 10.15. It had been better for them not to have known the way of righteousness, then after they have known it, to turn from the holy commandment delivered unto them, 2 Pet. 2.21. I therefore beseech you to walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called, Ephes. 4.1. And let every one that
nameth the name of Christ, depart from ini∣quity, 2 Tim. 2.19. And let us pray as our Church teaches us in the Collect for the third Sunday after Easter: ALmighty God, &c. Grant unto all them that be admitted into the fellowship of Christs Re∣ligion, that they may es∣chew those things that be contrary to their pro∣fession, and follow all such things as be agreea∣ble to the same, through
our Lord Iesus Christ. Amen. CAP. III. Of what Profession. THe next Interroga∣tory will be the same that the Marriners put to Jonas. What is thine occupati∣on? Jonah 1.8. Art thou a Magistrate? Supreme, an Emperour, King &c. or subordinate, an inferiour officer, Go∣vernor? 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. Thou shalt be exami∣ned;
First, if thou hast maintained Gods true Religion, and beene a nursing Father to the Church, Isa. 49.23. If thou hast rooted out Heresie, Idolatry, super∣stition, 1 King. 15.12. If thou hast provided Ministers to instruct the people, and maintenance for those Ministers. Jehoshaphat sent the Priests, and Levites, and the Book of the Law of the Lord with them, and they went about throughout all the Ci∣ties
of Iudah, and taught the people, 2 Chron. 17.9. Hezekiah commanded the people that dwelt in Jerusalem, to give the portion of the Priests, & the Levites, that they might be encouraged in the Law of the Lord, 2 Chron. 31.4. If thou hast built, and repaired the house of God, and places of his worship, as did Solomon, Josiah. Secondly, if thou hast been an example of ver∣tue and godlinesse to thy people.
David himself dances before the Ark, and the house of Israel follow him, 2 Sam. 6.14. The King of Ninivie was the first that hum∣bled himself in sackcloth and ashes, and then the inhabitants of the City did likewise. Examples of great per∣sonages have a strong in∣fluence, nay, as it were a violence upon inferiors. Caesar filled the Empire with Soldiers, Augustus, with Scholars, &c. Thirdly, if they have
provided good Laws, & executed them, that such as live under them may be godly and quietly go∣verned. Good Laws are such as are agreeable to the Law of Nature, and the word of God. And they are then ex∣ecuted, when great flies are taken as well as small ones. Fourthly, if thou hast punished the wicked, and cherished the good. Mine eyes shall be up∣on the faithfull of the
Land, that they may dwell with me; he that walketh in a perfect way, shall be my servant: But I will early de∣stroy all the wicked of the Land, that I may cut off all wicked doers from the City of God, Psal. 101.6, 8. Kings and Governors are sent by God for the punishment of evill do∣ers, and for the praise of them that doe well, 1 Pet. 2.14. It cannot be wel then if Crows be pardoned & Pi∣geons punished.
Fiftly, if thou hast heard the cries of the poor, re∣ceived their petitions, re∣dressed their wrongs. Defend the poor and fatherlesse: do justice to the afflicted and needy. Deliver the poor, and needy: rid them out of the hand of the wicked, Psal. 82.3, 4. Be wise now therefore O ye kings: be instructed ye that are Judges of the earth, Psal. 2.10. Remember there will be Deus & dies ultionis, A God, and a day of vengeance.
But art thou a Minister? Thou shalt be exami∣ned, First, if thou didst en∣ter in at the doore, or climb in at the window; if thou wert called of God, or intrudest thy self. A man may know if he be called of God, by those talents which are committed to him. It is required that eve∣ry Minister have scienti∣am competentem, if not eminentem; that is, com∣petent, though not emi∣nent knowledge.
For the Priests lips must keep knowledge, & the people must seek it at his lips, Mal. 2.7. Secondly, if thou hast taught and instructed the people committed to thee. Feed my sheep, John 21.16. I have not shunned to declare unto you all the counsell of God. Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the flock, over the which the Lord hath made you overseers, to
feed the Church of God, which he hath purcha∣sed with his own Blood, Acts 20.27, 28. It is required of a Mi∣nister that he be διδακτικὸς, apt and able to teach, 2 Tim. 2.24. He that is ignorant and cannot teach, is a dumb dog. He that can and will not, is a dumb Divel, (un∣less lawfully detained.) Where no vision is there the people perish, Prov. 29.18. His bloud will I re∣quire
at thy hand, Ezek. 33.6. Who then is a faithfull and wise servant, whom his Lord hath made ru∣ler over all his houshold to give them meat in due season? Blessed is that servant whom his Lord, when he cometh shall find so do∣ing, Mat. 24.45, 46. Thirdly, if thy life hath agreed with thy Do∣ctrine. He that was mis-sha∣pen, or had any blemish, might not come nigh to
offer the offerings of the Lord, Lev. 21.21. Moses when he blesses the tribe of Levi, desires of God, that his Thum∣mim and Urim might be with his Holy One, i.e. integrity of life, as well as the light of Learning, Deut. 33.8. It is said of Christ, that he was a Prophet mighty in deed and word, before God, and all the people, Luke 24.19. Thou that teachest another, teachest thou not thy self? thou that
preachest a man should not steal, dost thou steal? Thou that sayest, a man should not commit adul∣tery, dost thou commit adultery? thou that ab∣horrest Idols, dost thou commit sacriledg? Rom. 2.21, 22. Be thou an example of the beleevers, in word, in conversation, in charity, in purity, in spirit, in faith, 1 Tim. 4.12. Or, art thou an Officer? Thou shall be exami∣ned, If thou hast not exacted
more then was appoin∣ted for thee, Luke 3.13. If thou hast not dealt with the poor, as the ser∣vants of Elies sons did, If thou wilt not give it me, I will take it by force, 1 Sam. 2.16. Or, art thou a Souldier? Thou shalt be exami∣ned, If thou hast done vio∣lence to no man: If thou hast not accu∣sed any falsly: If thou hast been con∣tent with thy wages, Luke 3.14.
Or, art thou a tradesman? Thou shalt be exami∣ned, If thou hast not used false weights, deceitfull ballances, unjust mea∣sures; all which are an a∣bomination to the Lord, Prov. 20.10. If thou hast not some∣times taken the name of God in vain, to obtrude a bad commodity upon thy neighbour: & sic de caeteris. I may now say of our Judg, as Jacobs sons said of the Governor of E∣gypt:
The man asked us straitly of our state, Gen. 43.7. SECTION IV. WE have now seene how Christ will proceed with us in the day Judgment, let us in the next place consi∣der that final and ir∣revocable Sentence which shal pass up∣on us, and it is either
the Sentence of Abso∣lution, or Condemnation The sentence of Absolu∣tion. THe sentence of Abso∣lution shall be pro∣nounced in these words: Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the King∣dom prepared for you from the foundation of the world, Mat 25.34. In which sentence there is not a word, a syllable, a letter, but is musick to the care, hony to the
mouth, and a Jubilee to the heart. How wil our ears be ravished, and our hearts dance within us, to hear Christ pronounce us the blessed ones of his Father. To hear that sweet cal & invitation, Come ye. To hear the glory of that inheritāce, to which we must come; A Kingdome, The Kingdome, Prepared for us of old. Blessed are the people that shall hear this joy∣full sound, Psal. 89.15.
CAP. II. The sentence of Absolution shall be first pronounced. THE good Servant was rewarded & ad∣mitted into his Masters joy: and then the evil & unprofitable servant was punished and cast into utter darkness, Mat. 25. They on the right hand are called to a king∣dome: and then they on the left are cast into fire, Mat. 25. God will not cast the wicked into hell, till they
have seen something of the happinesse of the Saints, which increaseth their grief and torment. The wicked shall see it, & be grieved, he shall gnash with his teeth, and melt away, Psal. 112.10. Or, else, it may bee, Christ begins with the sentence of Absolution, to shew that he had rather save us, then damn us. He is slow to anger, Psal. 103.8. A God that delight∣eth not in the death of a sinner.
His own nature inclines him to save us, our sins urge and provoke him to damne us. Therefore if he must punish, he comes as it were unwillingly to it, and reserves it for the last place. CAP. III. The sentence of condem∣nation. THe sentence of Con∣demnation shal be de∣nounced in these words: Depart from me ye cur∣sed, into everlasting fire,
prepared for the Divel, & his angels, Mat. 25.41. Not a word in this sen∣tence, but is a wound; not a syllable, but is a sword piercing the heart; not a letter, but is as loud and terrible as a clap of thunder. How shall the loyns of the wicked tremble, and their joynts be loo∣sed, & their knees knock together, to hear Christ pronounce them cursed? Cursed, because of the punishment of losse, Depart ye.
There is their banish∣ment, & exclusion from him, who is the fountain of life, the light of glo∣ry, and in whose presence there is fulnesse of joy. Cursed because of the punishment of Sense. Depart ye into fire, there is the extremity. Into fire everlasting. there is the eternity. Prepared for the Di∣vel and his Angels, there is their Company. Immediately after these sentences are pronoun∣ced, shall follow execu∣tion.
The wicked shall goe away into everlasting pu∣nishment: but the righ∣teous into life eternall, Mat. 25.46. SECTION V. IT remains now in the last place to view the use and influence which the consideratiō of this great day of the Lord ought to have upon our affections. It is
matter of terrour to some, of comfort to others, but of instru∣ction to all. CAP. I. Terrour to the wicked. AS Paul reasoned of righteousnesse, tem∣perance, and judgment to come, Felix trembled, Acts 24.25. The Jews fell back∣ward when they came to apprehend Christ in the days of his humility: how then shal they stand
before him when he shal come in glory and maje∣sty? How terrible must this day needs be: when, The mountaines shall quake at him, and the hills melt, and the earth bee burnt up at his pre∣sence, yea the world, and all that dwell therein? Who can stand before his indignation? and who can abide the fiercenesse of his anger? his fury is poured out like fire, and the rocks are throwne down by him, Nah. 1.5, 6.
What a hard distresse shall the wicked be in, when they shall have On one side their sins accusing. On the other the ju∣stice of God terrifying. The gulf of hell ga∣ping under them. An angry Judge frowning over them. Within them a con∣science stinging. Without them the world burning? An∣selme. Surely the Kings of the earth, and the great
men, and the rich men, and the chief Captains, and the mighty men, and every bondman, and e∣very free man, shall hide themselves in the dens and in the rocks of the mountains; and shall say to the mountains, and rocks, fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that sitteth on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb. For the great day of his wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand? Rev. 6.15, 16, 17.
Rejoyce ô young man in thy youth, and let thy heart chear thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine own heart, & in the sight of thine eyes: but know thou, that for all these things God will bring thee to judgment, Ec∣cles. 11.9. O consider this, you that forget God, lest he tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver you, Psal. 50.22. Knowing the terrors of the Lord, we perswade men, 2 Cor. 5.11.
CAP. II. Comfort to the godly. THen shall they see the Son of man com∣ing in a cloud with pow∣er and great glory. And when these things begin to come to passe, then look up, and lift up your heads, for your re∣demption draweth nigh, Luke 21.27, 28. The Lord himself shall descend from hea∣ven with a shout; with the voice of the Arch∣angell, and with the
trump of God, &c. Wherfore comfort ye one another with these words, 1 Thes. 4.16, 17. When Christ ascen∣ded, the Angels comfor∣ted the Disciples in this manner: This same Jesus which is taken up from you in∣to heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven, Acts 1.11. Hence it is, that the righteous are said to love the day of his ap∣pearing, for then they
shall receive a crown of righteousness, 2 Tim. 4.8. The Lord is good, a strong hold in the day of trouble, and he knoweth them that trust in him, Nahum 1.7. But of this we have heard before, where this day in respect of the godly is called a day of refreshing & redemption. CAP. III. Instruction to all. IF it be thus, what man∣ner of men ought we to be in all holy conversati∣on
on and godliness? 2 Pet. 3.11. That which raised up the soul of S. Jerome to such a pitch of devotion, was the continuall me∣ditation of this day. Whether I eat or drink, or whatsoever I do, me thinks I hear the last trump sounding in my ears, Arise ye dead, and come to judgment. We must give an ac∣count not only for our presumptuous sins, but for our smallest sins. I say unto you, That
of every idle word that men shal speak, they shall give account thereof at the day of judgment, Mat. 12.36. We shall reckon not only for our own sins, but for the sins of others, which we have occasio∣ned by our command, company, counsell, or ill example. We shall reckon for the talents of grace and nature: and for the preci∣ous time afforded to us. Hear the end of all, fear God, and keep his Com∣mandments,
for God will bring every work in∣to Judgment, Eccles. 12.13, 14. Abound in the works of mercy and charity, for according to them wee shall be judged, Mat. 25. Judge your selves here, & you shall not be judg∣ed hereafter, 1 Cor. 11.31. As for the time when, or the place where the Judgment seat of Christ shall be erected, O my soul enter not into these secrets. Such knowledg is too
wonderfull for thee. Secret things belong to the Lord our God, and revealed things to us and our children. A short Prayer for the day of Judgment. O Most blessed Lord Jesus, who now sittest at the right hand of God the Father, and from thence shalt come to judg both the quick and the dead, in power and great glory; I confess and acknowledge, that such
is the hainousnesse of my sins, the guiltinesse of my Conscience, and the dreadfulness of that day, that my very flesh trem∣bleth, and my heart mel∣teth within me, when I consider that I must ap∣pear before the tribunall of thy just Judgment to give an account of what∣soever I have done in the flesh, whether good or evil. I know ô Lord, that if thou shalt enter into Judgment with me, I cannot be justified in thy sight: and if thou shalt
be extreme to mark what amisse hath passed from me, I shall not be able to answer thee one for a thousand. I appeal therefore, from the bar of thy justice, to the bowels of thy mer∣cy, beseeching thee in that day to deal with the soul of thy servant, not as a severe Judge, but as a mercifull Jesus. It will be O Lord a day of wrath, but gather me under the shadow of thy wings, untill the in∣dignation be past over.
It will be a day of darknesse, & of gloomi∣nesse: but lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon me, and I shall be saved. It will be a day of Judgment; but in that day by thine agony and bloody passion, and by whatsoever thou hast done, or suffered for me, good Lord deliver me. And to this end, I be∣seech thee give me grace to live soberly, righte∣ously, and godly in this present world; to keep a
good conscience void of offence towards thee my God, and towards all men; to abound always in the works of charity, and mercy; and to judg and condemn my self here, that I may not be condemned hereafter. That so whensoever this day shall seise upon me, I may not be bound up with the bundle of tares which shall be cast into unquenchable fire, but gathered with the wheat into thy garners, and set with the sheep upon thy
right hand, and called in the number of those blessed ones to inherit a Kingdom, & that Crown of righteousnesse which thou hast purchased, and prepared for all those that love and expect that day of thy appearing. Now unto thee ô Christ, together with thy Fa∣ther, & thy blessed Spirit, be ascribed all power, & praise, dignity and domi∣nion now and for ever. Amen.
A PRAYER FOR the Morning. OEternall and most glorious Lord God, and in Iesus Christ our merciful and loving Fa∣ther, we thine unworthy creatures sinful dust and ashes, are here in all hu∣mility of souls & bodies prostrate at the lowest footstool of thy glorious Majesty: beseeching thee to bow down thine ears unto our prayers, and to open thine eyes upon our supplication; who from
the ground & bottom of our hearts, do acknow∣ledg and confess that we have been unprofitable servants, prodigall chil∣dren, & bad stewards of that time which thou hast afforded us for re∣pentance & good works, & of those talents which thou hast committed to our improvement. If we put our hands into our bosomes, we must needs draw them out all leprous. For we are the brood of rebelli∣ous and disobedient Pa∣rents:
our hearts are ca∣ges of unclean birds, of noisome lusts; and the thoughts thereof have been evil, and only evill, and that continually. And if ô Lord we look forth unto the actions of our lives, there is no sin which we have not com∣mitted, no command∣ment which we have not broken. These eys which now look up unto hea∣ven, have beheld vanity; these tongues which now call upon thee, have blas∣phemed thee; and these
hands which we now lift up unto thee, have been many times lift up a∣gainst thee, and thy Sta∣tutes. So that we have made our selves unwor∣thy of the least of thy mercies, but worthy of the greatest of thy judg∣ments. But deal not with us after our sins, neither reward us according to our iniquities. Spare us good Lord, spare thy people, whom thou hast created after thine own Image, and redeemed with thine
own Blood. And accor∣ding to the multitude of thy tender compassions which have ever been of old to us, blot out the multitude of our trans∣gressions. Pardon our sins and receive us again un∣to thy favour, for his sake and sufferings, who hath satisfied thy Justice to the utmost farthing. And for the short re∣sidue and remainder of our days, give us grace to consecrate it to thy service, to redeem that time which we cannot
recall, and to make our calling and election sure before we go hence, and be no more seen. And because the cor∣ruptions of our nature are too many, and too strong for us, and the Divel like a roaring Lion goes about continually to devour us; leave us not to our selves, but as∣sist us by thy grace, per∣fect thy strength in our weaknesse, and preserve both our bodies and souls spotlesse, and un∣blameable, that when we
shall have finished our course, and run the race of our naturall Pilgri∣mage, we may receive that crown of righteous∣nesse, which thou the righteous and just Judg hast laid up for all them that love and expect the day of thy appearing. And together with us we intreat thee for a blessing upon our King, Queen, Prince, and the rest of the Roiall Progeny: upon our Councellors, Ministers & Magistrates: upon our friends, kinred,
and acquaintance: upon the whole Church, and every afflicted member of it. And accept of our morning sacrifice of praise, and thanksgiving for all the mercies and favours, comforts and deliverances which from time to time thou hast afforded, and continued to us: We thank thee for thy last mercy in pre∣serving us from the dan∣gers of this night past, for refreshing our bodies with seasonable rest, and
bringing us safe to the beginning of this day. Lord, what is man that thou art so mindfull of him, or the Son of man that thou shouldest thus visit, & remember him? Give us grace, O Lord, to remember thee, and to be mindfull of thy mercies, that we may praise thee for all the truth and faithfulnesse which thou shewest to us in the land of the living; that as thou hast brought us to the comforts of this day, so thou mayest
go along with us in the same, to enable us for the duties of those callings wherein we are placed, and to deliver us from those dangers to which we are exposed, even for Jesus Christ his sake, in whose most blessed name and words we conclude these our weak, and im∣perfect prayers, saying as he himself hath taught us in his holy Gospel. O our Father, &c.
A PRAYER FOR the Evening. O Most glorious and ever living LORD God, which inhabitest eternity, and dwellest in that light which no mor∣tall eye can attain unto; the God in whom we live, and move, and have our being; we thine un∣worthy servants do here in all lowlinesse and hu∣mility, present our per∣sons and prayers before thy divine Majesty: con∣fessing & acknowledging
that we were conceived in sin, and brought forth in iniquity; and, as if that had been but a smal mat∣ter, we have heaped up our actuall transgressions as the sand upon the Sea shore, and as the stars in the firmament for num∣ber. We have broken thy Commandements, we have prophaned thy Sabbaths, we have dis∣honoured thy name, we have abused thy crea∣tures, we have neglected the day of our visitation, & turned thy grace into
wantonness, whereby we have most justly provo∣ked thy wrath, and ever∣lasting displeasure, we have wounded our own consciences, weakned our assurance of salvation, & grieved thy good Spirit, which sealeth us up unto the day of our redempti∣on. And now Lord, if thou shouldest deal with us af∣ter our deservings, thou mightest pour upon us the deluge of thy wrath and fury to sweep us out of the land of the living,
into that place of tor∣ment prepared for the Divell and his Angels. But thou hast revealed thy self unto the sons of men to be the Lord, the Lord, merciful and gra∣cious, long suffering, and of great goodnesse, one that pardons sin, & passes by the transgressions of thy people: this is thy name for ever, and thy memoriall throughout all generations. We appeal therefore from thee, unto thee, frō the barof thy Justice, to
the bowels of thy mer∣cy, beseeching thee even for Jesus Christ his sake to be merciful unto us in the free pardon and for∣givenesse of all the sins that ever we have com∣mitted against thee. Ac∣cept of his obedience for our disobedience, of his righteousness for our un∣righteousness, of his suf∣ferings for all our sins; wash them away in his blood, nail them to his Crosse, hide them in his wounds, and bury them in his grave, that they
may never rise up for our confusion here, or con∣demnation hereafter. And as we desire thee to be unto as a father of mercy, so be unto us a GOD of consolation, speak peace unto our souls & consciences, and say unto us that thou art the God of our salvation. And for the time to come, give us grace to die daily unto sin by vir∣tue of thy Sons death, & to rise up to newness of life, by the power of his resurrection; wean our
hearts, & take off our af∣fections from the things of this world, which en∣dure but for a season, and raise them up unto those things which are at thy right hand for evermore. Inlighten the darkness of our understandings, sub∣due the stubborness of our wils, rectifie the dis∣order of our affections, and bring into obedience whatsoever exalteth it self against thy will, that at last we may come to be such as thou wouldest have us.
Deliver us ô God from the temptations of the divel, frō the allurements of the world, from the lusts of the flesh, & from the evil example of this crooked and perverse ge∣neration wherein we live, that we may run the race of thy commandements without turning to the right hand or to the left. And forasmuch as the days of our pilgrimage are but few and evil, and these earthly tabernacles of our bodies must be dissolved, give us grace
to passe the time of our dwelling in thy fear, that we may depart hence in thy favour, whensoever, wheresoever, or howsoe∣ver it shall please thee to call for us. And we entreat thee yet further to continue and inlarge thy blessings up∣on the Church, & Land wherein we live, upon the person & government of our King, upon the deli∣berations of his Coun∣cel, upon the patience & long suffering of all those who are afflicted with a∣ny
cross or calamity: & because they are unwor∣thy to receive new bles∣sings that are not thank∣full for those they have already received; wee blesse and praise thee for all the mercies & favours which thou hast afforded us for our souls, or bo∣dies; for this life or a bet∣ter. We thank thee for our election, creation, vocation, justification, sanctification in some measure, & assured hope of glorification with thee in thy Kingdome.
We thank thee for the peace of our Church, for the health of our bodies, for the plenty of our e∣states, and for the pro∣sperity of our families. And now, holy Father, seeing the night is upon us, & we are ready to take our rest, into thy hands we commit our souls & bodies, and all that we have, beseeching thee which art the Keeper of Israel, that neither sleep∣eth, nor slumbreth, to take care for us; for if thou protect us not, Sa∣tan
wil devour us, yea we shall sleep a perpetuall sleep, & never rise up to praise thee. We pray thee therefore be good to us this night, defend us frō danger, refresh us with comfortable rest, & raise us up to glorifie thee in the duties of the day fol∣lowing, that thou maist still be our God, and we thy people. Hear us and graciously answer us in these our requests, and what else thou knowest needfull and expedient for us, and that for Jesus
Christ his sake, in whose most blessed name, and words, we conclude these our imperfect prayers, saying as he himself hath taught us: Our Father &c. When thou art in bed cōmend thy self to God in the words of David: I will lay me down in peace, and take my rest, for thou only, O Lord, makest me to dwell in safety, Psal. 4.8. Consider, and heare me O Lord my God, lighten mine eyes, lest I
sleep the sleep of death, Psal. 13.3. So when thou liest down, thou shalt not be afraid: yea thou shalt lie down, and thy sleep shall be sweet, Prov. 3.24. Grace before meat. GOod Lord pardon & forgive us all our sins, which make us un∣worthy of all thy mer∣cies, bless these thy crea∣tures to the use of our bodies, bless our bodies to the use of our souls, and blesse both our bo∣dies
and souls to thy ser∣vice, for Christ his sake. Amen. Grace after meat. THou O God which hast created us by thy power, preserved us by thy providence, re∣deemed us by thy blood, and at this time fed us by thy good creatures, be blessed and praised now and evermore. A∣men. THE END.
London printed by Tho. Maxey for George Badger, and are to be sold at his Shop in S. Dunstans Church∣yard in Fleetstreet.
