W1639A R27064 9638419 43870
True Newes from IRELAND. Or the state of DUBLIN, As it stood the 27 of December, and of other parts of IRELAND. Being the Copy of a Letter sent from a good hand, to an Alderman of this City. Shewing that they attempt the blocking up of Dublin, and to that end are building two Sconces, at the Havens Mouth, out of the command of the Castle, upon which they have moun∣ted 12 pieces of Ordnance. By reading which, you shall find the Vanity and falshood of those foolish Pamphlets, in∣vented and published of late. With a strange and unheard of flocking together of severall kinds of Birds over the City of Dublin, on Christmas Eve Last. London, Printed, for F. C. and J.W. 1641.
The Copy of a Letter sent from Dublin, Decemb. 27 1641. by Tristum Witcome, a Factor there for a worthy Alderman of this City, declaring in what state the City there stands, with the strange and sudden departure of two Aldermen from thence, and the strange sight on Christmas Eve. SIR, OUr miseries are great, our feares more, if spee∣dy reliefe doe not suddenly arrive, hunger will certainely be more plentifull with us then bread; for the Rebels who daily increase have blocked up all passage two wayes into the City, so that Southward from Dongarvil, and Northeast from Clannoroe, no provision of victuall can come at us; neither can the present Garrison here be spared to cleare those parts. It stands farre worse with this City (God knowes) then the world with you will beleeve, otherwise they would not be so slow of their succours, as to our woes we find they are. For the Rebels grow strong, &
withall so daring, that they attempt the blocking up of the very harbour of Dublin, and to that end are building two Sconces at the Havens mouth, out of the command of the Castle, whereupon they gave al∣ready mounted twelve iron Peeces, howsoever they came by them: so that if they be not prevented, and that with sesonable opportunity, (which God in his mercy grant) they will not onely stop and hinder all our Posts and Messengers for England, but likewise be able to debarre and affront what succours should come from thence to us. The English not without just ground are in exce∣ding great jealousie and suspition of the Irish inhabi∣tants of the City, who although they make us faire countenance, as whose visage and habits sort with ours, yet their hearts and good wishes it is to be fea∣red are with the Rebels. Apparences are good proofs. Vpon the Eve of Saint Thomas Decemb. 20. two of the Aldermen of Dublin, Mr. Dominick Roch and Mr. Patrick Copingar fled our of Dublin, with their wives children, and whole families, whither, God knowes, but surely all is not well; their houses being observed to stand shut up for the space of two dayes together, without ingresse or egresse of any, either master, ser∣vant, or neighbour notice being thereof taken, at last report being thereof made unto the two Iustices, it was thought fit by them to send officers and souldiers who upon command to open, and none answering, forced the doores; but being entred found nothing within confiderable, in respect of their estates and qualities, which giveth great cause of iealousie unto the said Iustices, and to all loyall English, that these
Aldermen are not onely fled and stolne away to the Rebels, but further have discovered whatsoever may be advantagious unto them, as touching the state of the said City: as likewise of carrying a heedfull and watchfull eye over the rest: for it is greatly to be sus∣pected that the Rebels have more intelligence in this City, then stands for our profit; seeing that they make daily approaches towards us, sometimes in lesser bo∣dies, sometimes in greater; sometime on horse-backe, sometime onely with their soot; now staying onger, now retiring sooner, now drawing neerer the City, now retiring farther off, as they that looked for some signe or token of advantage to be shewed out of the City: and which increaseth our feares the more, is that the two great Rebels that have the command of these rebellious troopes that now are nearest the Ci∣ty, are Mack Odonnel, and Charles Mark Carty, who have but two great alliance, kindred, cosin germans, friends, fester fathers or foster mothers, or foster brethren in this City. I am heartily sory of what you writ mee the last weeke, that the King and the Parliament disagreeing about the pressing of men for Ireland: for I am much afraid that if the Parliament will have no men to bee pressed for that service, but what come hither to come voluntary, I am afraid that out helpe will come too late, if any come at all. Although it be true that there hath beene divers skirmishes in the Country, wherein (God be praised) our people have had the better, yet we have lost men likewise, and some brave and wor∣thy Commanders: and although wee bee weakned through victory, yet weakned wee are by reason that
we have no supply, and are but few in respect of the enemy, and their number daily increase. A strange and wonderfull thing by Fowles. A Most strange and unwonted accident happned in Dublin on Christmas Eve, as ever was heard of the Crowes, Ravens, and Sea Gulls, about foure of the clocke in the afternoone, being duske, assembled in such a numerous manner, hovering, pewling and croaking in such a strange unheard of wise over the City, that it amazed and affrighted all the inhabi∣tants; especially they continuing without departing in this sort, untill six of the said evening: a strange time of night for such Fowle to be abroad at, at such a time of the yeare. And which is more strange, that could not be frighted nor scared away with all the reports of Muskets, and some great Peeces out of the Castle that were shot off for rhat purpose. What this strange accident meanes or portends is not for me to divine: but surely by the knowledge of the ol∣dest men in Dublin, either England or Irish, never the like was seene.
Concerning other matter of trade, it behooveth rather to thinke of calling in, if we can, then of send∣ing any thing else over. Which if I can any reasona∣ble way accomplish, you shall by Gods permission shortly see me in London: till then, desiring you and all our friends to implore the assistance of Heaven for us here, I rest, Your Servant, T, W, FINIS.
