W640 R34713 14574396 102628
A PROSPECT OF The State of IRELAND, FROM The Year of the World 1756. TO The Year of Christ 1652. Written by P. W. Printed for Johanna Broom at the Gun in St. Pauls Church-Yard, 1682.
TO THE KING. SIR, I. Appear before Your Maje∣sty with the ill grace of a Man who comes for a Par∣don, and confesses he did the faut in hopes of it. For 'tis undeniably a guilty presump∣tion in me to make bold with Your Royal Name, and that to a slight Ar∣gument, or at least made so by ill handling; such as will give People too
much reason to say, Your Name is the only thing, which shews handsom in the whole Prospect. Neither have I any, but the sorry excuse of defence∣less guilt: I was drawn in, though not by others, by Counsellors as dan∣gerous and deceitful as my own thoughts. I considered that This, in the original design, was part of a Book which has the honour to be made Your's, and thought my altering the Method did not alter Your Majesties Property; neither could I conceive, when Your Name appear'd on the one half, any but Yours could shew well on the other. I considered that 'tis an account of part of Your People, and contains an account of part of Your Pedigree. To the King, and to the Head of the Family, Justice I thought appropriated both, For it is the glory of the Irish Nation to have contributed to Your Sacred Blood, as well as the rest under Your happy Government: and when they shed their own in Your defence, to know
they spend an inconsiderable part for preservation of the most Noble and most Precious: a sweeter and some∣times a stronger tye than the Duty of Subjects. As reciprocally, Nature with its secret allurements of propen∣sion towards a Country, from whence we are derived, and where our An∣cestours have lived great and glori∣ous, joyns with the common care of a King, and Father of all his People, to move Your Majesty to cherish them with the rest. Thus much I beg leave to say by the by in behalf of my Native Countrey, because e∣very Writer has not been either so curious to observe, or so kind to pub∣lish it. But leaving that matter, these reasons persuaded me I might find at least Companions in my fault, and where Your Sacred Name has been made bold with as improperly. Yet what wrought most, was a strong temptation, and which I could the less resist, because it came in the dis∣guise
of gratitude, to appear as little unworthy, as I could, of many and signal effects of Your Goodness. E∣very body knows I am deeply in Your Debt, and I thought it but just every body should know I own it, with the ense which becomes me; though I have not hitherto said so much as bare, I thank you, no not to Your Majesty Your self sometimes. The thoughts of Death, which it con∣cerns a man of my age to enter∣tain, would be too terrible to me, if it should carry me away with the imputation of an insensible or ungrate∣ul man. As I have always thought the best return a Subject can make to the favours of his Prince, is by his service to deserve them; I have in∣deed the comfort, that I cannot re∣proach my self with not having done my best. But alas! I must say to You as to God, after all I have, to my great grief, been but an unpro∣fitable servant. That thought is a
misery, which I am ill able to sup∣port. Should Ungrateful be added to Useless, it would certainly and soon sink my gray hairs to the Grave. Fear of this, as fear sometimes pro∣duces boldness, has cast me into that, of which I am now guilty, and in which my ill Fate still pursues me. For I am useless now too, having with much pains got a Present to make You, for which neither Your Maje∣sty, nor any body else perhaps will be the better, and I know not whe∣ther worth more, than just so much Paper. But yet 'tis all I can do. For we of the Scribling Trade are like Merchants who trade upon cre∣dit, and pay altogether in Bills. Be∣sides that in truth, there lives not perhaps the man, whose stock, or luck in managing it is great enough to an∣swer the mighty sum I owe You. These were the thoughts which slat∣ter'd my presumption with hopes of Pardon, to which all even Your Mer∣cy
will yet be needful. For I am an unrepenting Sinner, and who, far from sorrow, glory in the fault which gives me an occasion to tell all the World, I have lived and mean to die, Your Majestie's most Loyal, most obedient, and most humble Subject, Peter Walsh.
THE PREFACE. READER, You may well imagine by the Title and Method of this Treatise, the Author was very far from intending, it should pass for a History of Ireland. And for the Bulk I can assure you, that although, considering the extent of Times, and variety of Matters treated of therein, it be but little; yet, according to his first design, it should have been far less, at least by five parts of six. The truth is, I never had a thought of writing a word on this Subject, before the Earl of Castle∣haven desired, nor only desired but importun'd me a twelve month past, when his Lordship's Memoir's had been a working off the Press, that I would draw an Appendix to be publish'd with them, which might in short represent the original
Cause of the Rebellion broke out in Ireland on the 23d of October, 1641. and consequently somewhat of the State of that Kingdom, and Fa∣tal Feud betwixt the two Nations there, since Henry II's time. What little inclination I had to the Subject, it will be to no purpose I should tell, being you see I was at last persuaded: though nevertheless I must acknowledg, it was only the power this Nobleman has, and can justly challenge over me, See Castle-Haven's Memoir's pag. 87. wrought my acquiescence to his desires. But laying aside that matter, what I would next inform you of are these particulars. 1. That although eight or nine sheets in the Whole, was the most I had first design'd to write (because a larger Tract could not so well suit the Title of an Appendix to his Lordship's Memoir's:) yet when I was once en∣ter'd on the Subject, so great a variety of matters offer'd themselves to consideration, as took up more time and paper than I first intended. 2. That in the mean while some Copies of the said Memoir's chancing (by some unexpected accident) to be given out by the Book-seller: my Lord, considering he could not otherwise prevent a sinister interpretation of his meaning by them in the main, as they were seen thus imperfect, found himself necessitated not only not to stay my leisure; but instead of such an Appendix as he
expected from me, to change his former Preface, and write and print another; with an Appendix also of his own, though upon another Subject: and with such both amendments and accomplishments as he thought necessary, to order the free expo∣sing of his Book to publick view. 3. That not∣withstanding I had on this emergent occasion thought my self eas'd of any further study on a Subject I had no liking to, it prov'd much other∣wise. For his Lordship nevertheless continued his desires that I should prosecute and finish what I had begun: and to oblige me to it, without hopes of any change in him, gave notice in his Preface to the Reader of his Memoir's, how the Appendix he had first intended and promis'd of the State of Ireland was grown to such a Bulk as would require its coming out in a Book by its self. And therefore I found my self more deeply en∣gag'd. 4. That, however, seeing I was now at more liberty, as for Time, so for Matter and for Title both, I resolv'd to change my first de∣sign of so few sheets, and write under the Title of a Prospect, &c. about threescore sheets in all: but in the same method and Stile I had already begun with, as more agreeable to my purpose of giving (though not a strict much less a full Hi∣story, yet) the choicest Collections, and freest ob∣servations too, I could derive from, or in my way, i. e. in several, easie, plain Discourses make upon the History of Ireland; Thirty sheets re∣presenting
in short the state of that Kingdom from the first Plantation of it after the Flood, till the English Conquest: and the other thirty what follow'd since for the last five hundred years. 5. That because I considered the Form (as Printers call it) which I had also begun with already, and therefore must have continued the same, would be too narrow and little for a Vo∣lume of sixty sheets, not rendred unproportinoably thick: I give them divided as in two Parts, which I call the Former and Later, so in two Volums, each apart. So much for the Occasion, Title, Method, Form, Division of this Treatise. As for those matters of Irish Antiquity, so strangely far out of our ken, discours'd in this Former Part, I doubt not, some at least, or per∣adventure many of 'em will be excepted against by Criticks in this censorious Age. And that, where nothing else can be objected, Varro's Three Differences of Time must serve the turn. We shall be told, How the First, having been That which extended from the Creation to the Flood, is call'd Obscure and uncertain: because we are wholly ignorant of all things happen'd in it. The Second, which was That from the Flood to the first Olympiad, is termed Fabulous: by rea∣son of a world of Fables reported thereof. But the Third, extending frem the said Olympiad to our days, is called Historical: because the Acts of it are delivered in Histories that are true.
And indeed, I must confess that so said Varro (the most learned of the Romans 1700 years ago) following herein the Greeks; and after him (of late) our English Cambden, who lays so much stress upon this observation of Varro, that (page 17. Hol. Translat.) he makes it his only argument to ruin the credit of Geoffrey of Monmouth's new History of Brute. But withal I do profess, that, for my own part, I see no∣thing in it that stresses. My reasons are, 1. The sayings of Varro, how learned soever he was, are no Oracles. 2. The Histories of the Jewish Nation, at least the Books of Moses, and several more of the Old Testament Record a great variety of Matters hapned, some before the Flood, many more after it, both the one and the other with all certainty and truth imaginable; and yet all of 'em before the First Olympiad, which according to Cambden himself was no earlier than the year of the World 3189. though others make it earlier by fifteen years. 3. And to wave all kind of advantages from those holy Books which both Jews and Christians repute infallible, as being the Oracles of God; Josephus in his first Book against Appion, a Book written by him 1600. years ago, assures us, that even the Histories of the Phenicians, Egyptians, and Chaldeans have recorded likewise with great truth and certainty the Reigns of their own Kings, and other memo∣rable things happen'd in their Countreys many
hundred years before the first Olympiad; yea not a few of them happen'd even long before either Moses or Abraham himself was born. 4. There have been several Books written for true History of matters that (as the Authors would make us believe) happen'd since the first Olympiad, nay written partly of some things reported in them to have happen'd fourteen hundred years after that Olympiad, which yet we know to be most facu∣lous. Witness, among so many other, the fore∣said Geoffrey of Monmouth's seven Books of History; to say nothing at all of Annius Viter∣biensis. But to return back to Josephus; it is also re∣markable how (in the same Book against Ap∣pion) he wonders not a little at those who as to matters of Antiquity, suppose the truth ought only to be gather'd from the Greeks. Whereas indeed (says he) whatever is written by the Greeks, is new, and of late memory, and has been done in the World in a manner but yesterday. And this he proves in the same place at large. Besides he shews, that albeit their knowledg or practice not only of other Arts and Sciences, but of any kind of Letters, had been very late; yet the latest of all among 'em was that of History. That herein, even after they had given themselves industriously to it, they were notwithstanding very imperfect, un∣certain, short: their chiefest Authors contradict∣ing one another in what they wrote: (as know∣ing
there were no ancient Records, not even in Athens it self, to check their falsity, nor Laws to curb their Liberty of writing what they pleas'd at random) and what they wrote, being so little as to other Countreys of the World, that of Rome it self, though very powerful within Italy in those times, and so near home, they seem'd for some Ages wholly ignorant. That even their most curious Writers, and among 'em Ephorus by name, were so ignorant of the Gauls and Spa∣niards, as to have thought the later a People de∣nominated of one only City, and related the man∣ners both of the one and the other to be such, as neither are nor at any time were among either. Finally, that their knowledg of other Nations was a long time so extream little, as to have extend∣ed only to the bordering Thracians, and the Inhabitants of the Sea Coasts, lying Easterly, and Westerly, not far from Greece; all other In∣land or untraffiquing, nay and all trassiquing too, so they were far remote Countreys, being utterly unknown to them. Moreover, and more nearly to our present pur∣pose, it is observable how so excellent, so un∣byass'd a Writer, as Josephus undoubtedly is, not only has in the same Book this very expression, That he presumes not for matter of An∣tiquity to compare his own Jewish Nation with the Chaldeans, Egyptians, or Phaenici∣ans; but, for certainty and truth, highly cele∣brates
in particular, the Phenician Historian Dius, and the Chaldean Berosus. And yet we know from him, that as well the one as the other of these two Writers has treated of the Affairs of that second Difference of Time in Varro, espe∣cially Berosus. He tells us that Berosus, both mentioned the Flood, and Ark, and resting of this on the Mountains of Armenia, and continued the series of his Narration downwards all along from the first of Kings after the Deluge, even from Noah himself, that is, for the whole extent of that very Second period or Difference of Time. Whence it must follow, that however this Time might well and justly be reputed fabulous by the Greeks in relation to themselves and their own Historians; yet their ignorance ought to be no rule to conclude other Nations that, like to those ancient Egyptians, Phaenicians, and his Chalde∣ans in Joseph, were from the beginning careful to preserve their Antiquities, i. e. their Genealo∣gies, Adventures, Changes, Kings, Wars, and other Memorable Deeds, in publick Registers on Record for Posterity. Such are at present the Chineses in the utmost limit of the old World in Asia towards the Rising Sun: as the History of Martinus a Martinis abundantly sheweth. And that such also in the farthest Land of Eu∣rope, towards the Setting Sun, the ancient Irish have been while their State continued till about five hundred years since, may be sufficiently e∣vinc'd by many arguments. Among which are
those which you may briefly read in this Prospect, Former Part, Sect. II. page 46, 47, and 48. whereunto it will not be amiss to add what both Cambrensis and Neubrigensis do confess, that even from the beginning the Irish Nation has ever continued free from any forein Yoak or Conquest till Henry the Second of England's time. That is, according to Cambrensis, has continued so, even for so long an extent of time as the succes∣sive Reigns of a hundred eighty one Monarchs of their own Countrey and extraction from the same stock had certainly taken up. And therefore it must be also confess'd, That so long at least, they were in a capacity to preserve their own Re∣cords. And so indeed they did preserve the chiefest of 'em safe, even amidst the greatest fury of the two Danish Wars. Neither of which, how destructive, calamitous and heavy soever, especially the Former was, arrived to the nature of an absolute or total Conquest of the Natives, not even for one week or day. All which consider'd by indifferent men, I hope may be enough to remove out of their way all prejudgment of Criticks, from the foresaid obser∣vation of Varro, against those remote Antiquities of the Irish Nation, which you shall meet with in the Former Part of this Prospect. What or who were the Authors I have fol∣lowed, it will be but reasonable I should inform you next. And I think it as reasonable to tell you,
That although I have read whatever Cambren∣sis, or Campion, or Hanmer, or Spencer wrote of Ireland: yet in the whole Former Part of this Prospect, I have not borrow'd from any one or more of them above one Paragraph of a few lines: unless peradventure you account those o∣ther to be such. (i. e. borrowed from them) which animadvert upon some few of their many Errours. Nor certainly would I have ventur'd on writing so much as one Line of the State of that Kingdom before the English Conquest, if I had not been acquainted with other kind of Au∣thors; yea Authors not only more knowing, but incomparably better qualified to know the ancient Monuments of that Kingdom, than they or any other Foreigners that hitherto have gather'd, writ∣ten, printed some hear-say scraps of that Nation, could possibly be. In short, when I was a young man I had read Geoffrey Keting's Irish Ma∣nuscript History of Ireland. And now when my Lord of Castle-haven would needs engage me to write something, as you have seen before: I remembred how about four or five years since, the R. H. Earl of Anglesey, Lord Privy Seal, had been pleas'd to shew me another Manuscript, be∣ing an English Translation of that Irish History of Ketings. Besides I remember'd to have seen and read Gratianus Lucius, when he came out in print some twenty years ago. And because I was sre to meet in the Former, materials e∣nough
for such Discourses upon the more Ancient Irish, or State of their Countrey before the En∣glish Conquest, as were to my purpose: and that the Later too might be very useful in some particulars: having borrow'd Keting first, (i. e. that English Manuscript Translation of him, such as it is, from my Lord Privy Seal) I ven∣tur'd to begin somewh, in the method you have here, on so Noble and Illustrious a Subject. Though, I must confess, I am still the more un∣satisfied, that while I was drawing these Papers you have now before you, I could by no means procure the Reading either of Primat Ʋsher's Primordia Ecclesiarum Britannicarum, or Sir James Ware's Antiquities of Ireland. How∣ever, seeing I have expos'd my self to censure, as relying wholly on the ability and sincerity of Keting and Lucius in the performance of their several undertakings: I have the more reason to give here this following true account of them. Geoffrey Keting was a Native of Ireland in the Province of Mounster, as were his An∣cestours before him for many Generations, though not of Irish but English blood originally. He was by Education, Study, Gommencement a∣broad in France, a Doctor of Divinity; in his Religion, a Romanist; by Ordination and Cal∣ling, a secular Priest. He had by his former study at home in his younger days, under the best Masters of the Irish Tongue and the most
skilful in their Antiquities, arriv'd to a high degree of knowledg in both. In his riper years, when return'd back from his other Studies and Travails in Forein Parts, his curiosity and ge∣nius led him to examin all Foreign Authors, both Ancient and Modern, who had written of that Kingdom either purposely or occasionally, whether in Latin or in English. And this dili∣gent search made him observe two things chief∣ly. 1. That every one, even the very best and most knowing of those Writers, were either ex∣treamly out in many, if not most of their Rela∣tions concerning the State of that Countrey be∣fore the English Conquest, or rather indeed wholly ignorant of it. In so much, that like men groping in the dark, they related scarce any thing at all, well or ill, of what had pass'd a∣mong the Inhabitants of Ireland far above one and Thirty Hundred years. Except only what is by some of them reported of the Learning and Sanctimony of their Monks, during the first fervours of Christianity: and a very little more of their Wars at home in Ireland with the Danes; and even this very little involv'd in a mixture of Monstrous Fables, derived from such Romantick Stories, as were certainly written at first for meer diversion and pastime only. 2. That the generality of those Brittish Authors, who have written of that Countrey since the English Conquest, are against all Justice and Truth,
and Law's of History, in the highest degree in∣jurious to the ancient Natives. These conside∣rations improving by a fervent zeal for truth, and generous love to his Countrey, made Father Keting undergo the laborious task of writing the History of Ireland at large from the very first Plantation of it after the Deluge to Hen. II's time and 17th year of his Reign, being the year of Christ 1152. And this History (besides which there is no other full, compleat or metho∣dical one extant of all the Ages, Invasions, Conquests, Changes, Monarchs, Wars, and o∣ther considerable matters of that truly ancient Kingdom) be lived to finish in his old Age, that is, a little after Charles I. of glorious me∣mory had been proclaimed King. Nor did he only finish it, but prefix unto it a very judicious, large and learned Preface to the Reader. It is in this Preface he declares those two special motives of his writing, which you have seen al∣ready. Where also he declares who those Au∣thors are that gave him the occasion, and refutes them one after another at large: namely, Stra∣bo, Solinus, Pomponius Mela, S. Hierom against Jovinian, Cambrensis, Stanihurst, Campion, Hanmer, Cambden, Hector Boe∣thius, John Barclay, Morison, Davies, Bu∣chanan. All these in particular, as to some passages of theirs, he disputes against in the same Preface with the clearest evidence of Authority,
matter of Fact, and Reason grounded on both. As likewise he does in the Body of his Work a∣gainst other passages not only of some of these same Authors, especially Cambrensis, Hector Boethius, and Buchanan, but Nicholas San∣ders too in his First Book de Schismate An∣glicano. Besides in the same Preface he dis∣courses five or six other Particulars, which I think worth the while not to pass over wholly in silence. The first is, That although in his History he has not seldom made use of some Collections out of Foreign Writers; yet the main Body of it all along is compos'd out of the most un∣doubtedly ancient and authentick Monuments of Ireland, viz. Psaltuir Ardemach, Psaltuir Chasil, Psaltuir na Rann (written by Aon∣ghuis Ceile De) and then Leabhar na Hua∣congmhala, Leabhar Chluaino Huighnioch, Leabhar Fiontain in Leix, Leabhar Ghlinne Da-Loch, Leabhar Bidhe Mholing, Leabhar Dubh Mholaige, Leabhar na Gceart (writ∣ten by S. Benignus) and Ubhdir Chiarrain, writ at Cluain-mhac-Noise: in all Thirteen Books. For you are to understand here not only that Leabhar signifies a Book, and Psaltuir (we call it Psaltor) a Book in Verse, but, as he says, That from the beginning it was the custom of the Irish to have their Chief Antiqui∣ties done into the choisest, severest, strictest Mee∣ter,
without any redundance or want as to sense and point of truth: and this as well for the more safe preserving of them from corruption, as the more easie getting them by heart. And consequently you see the true reason why their chief Records of Tarach, Cashel, Ardmagh, &c. are called Psalters. But if you would further know the heads of these thirteen Books: he an∣swers in the same place, They are these. 1. The several Invasions and Conquests of Ireland. 2. The Division of its Provinces and lesser Countreys. 3. The Reigns of their Kings. 4. Their Annals. 5. Their Computations and Concordances of Times. 6. The Genealogy of their Male Gentry. 7. The Pedigree of their Females. 8. Their Vocabulary. Where also is a large account of the great School in the Plain of Sennaar, and three first Teachers of it, soon after the Confusion of Tongues at Nimrod's Tower. 9. The Visions of Columb-Cille, with sundry other Antiquities of Ireland. The Second Particular gives in effect four Reasons, or at least one compos'd of so many Heads, to persuade the credibility and truth of these Irish Books. It tells us of above two hun∣dred chief Chronologers together, from very ear∣ly times, conttinuing a Succession in the same Families and all Ages in that Nation while their Kingdom stood, whose peculiar and only Office it was to record faithfully all memo∣rable
Concerns. It tells us how these Antiqua∣ries had sufficient Estates in Land entail'd on themselves and Issue for ever on that Condi∣tion. It tells us of the publick Schools they had purposely and continually kept for the E∣ducation of their Youth in the knowledge of their Antiquities: and how these Schools were kept in the Countrey of Breifthne, as they call in Irish That which now we call the County of Letrim. It tells us of a Triennial search into and Revision of all their Records by a select Committee in the Publick Assembly of all the Estates of that Kingdom. And lastly, it tells us of the De∣position of fair Copies of the same Records, in the hands of the Bishops from time to time ever since the Nation believed in Christ 1200 years since. Whereof you may see more at large in my 46. page following in this For∣mer Part. A third Particular answers the Objection of some discordance among the Irish Books, con∣cerning the number of years from the Creation of the World to the Birth of our Saviour. It de∣sires the Objectors to consider the far greater discordance Because I was not sure that my Copy of Keting was right in eve∣ry of the particu∣lars or Discor∣dances noted here, I consulted of pur∣pose the most learn∣ed Sixtus Senen∣sis, l. 5. Bibl. S. (pag. 440. Imp. Colon. an 1626.) whither I remit you to see many more discordances, that is, Six and Twenty in all, in stead of these 15 here given by Ke∣ting, though most of these are among 'em. betixt as well the Hebrews as the Greek and Latin Chro∣nologers, each apart, on the same Subject. How, for Ex∣ample, 1. among the Hebrews,
Paul Sedecholim counts 3518. years: the Talmudists, 3784. the New Rabbins, 3760. Rabbi Naasson, 3740. Rabbi Moses Germidisi, 4058. Josephus, 4192. A∣mong the Greek Authors, Me∣trodorus, 5000. Eusebius, 5199. Theophilus, 5476. And among the Latins, S. Hie∣rom, 3941. S. Augustin, 5351. Isidorus, 5270. O∣rolius, 5190. Beda, 3952. Alphonsus, 5984. Now, says Keting, if so great a discordance on this very Subject impair not in other matters the credit of either Greek, Hebrew, or Latin Authors: why should it the Irish? Where also he acquaints his Reader, that because himself is of opinion, that such Irish Antiquaries or Books as count for this Period from the Creation to the Incarnati∣on 4052. This is the Computation fol∣low'd by Augusti∣nus Tornlellius in his Annales Sacri ab Orbe Condito ad Chri∣stum passum. Sext. M. Aetat. ad an. 4052. whether Keting had him for his Master, though I know not; yet I know he might, because Torniellius came out in Print at Francford, an▪ 1611. come nearest the Truth, he follows them in his History, or computation of times therein, either precedent or subsequent to the Birth of Christ. And farther, in the
some place, he acquaints us with his purpose to give at the end of his History an Appendix, or a Table of Synchronism, shewing what Mo∣narchies, Monarchs, Great Kings of the World in other parts, and since Christianity what Popes and general Councils were contemporary with the various Revolutions and Kings of Ireland. Whether he lived to finish this Table, I know not. But I remember to have seen, in stead thereof, two small Tracts of his in Irish, on another Subject, annexed to an Irish Copy of his History: the one being a Defence of the Mass; the other entitl'd in Irish, The Three Shafts of Death. An other Particular is That which tells how, and why, he thought it fitting, as to the number of years attributed to the several Reigns of some few of their Pagan Monarchs, especially Siorna Saoghallach, and Cobhthach Caolbh∣reag, to vary from their Book of Reigns where it's said, That the later reign'd fifty years; but the former a hundred and fifty, and that besides he was a hundred years old when he attain'd the Sovereignty, nor died naturally, but was murder'd after he had lived two hundred and fifty years in all. In the Fifth Particular, he speaks only to those who seem rather to admire than believe how it can be at least probable, That other Pede∣grees than those in Holy Scripture should be tru∣ly
and in a perpetual Line without any inter∣ruption carried up along to Adam and Noah, as the Irish Genealogical and Historical Books pre∣tend to do for all their Kings, Princes, and great Nobles. To such admiring incredulous men he answers, That the Irishry or Gathelian Off-spring, even all along from the time of Gathelus himself (whose name gave these Descendants from hin the general appellation of Clanna Gaodhel) till their arrival in Ireland, had with them a learn∣ed sort of men, call'd in their Language Draoi∣the (in ours Druids and Magitians) whose pe∣culiar Office it was to write and preserve as well their Genealogies, as all other Memoirs concerning them or their Travails and Adventures whatsoe∣ver, good or bad. That the more famous Branch of those Gathelians, to wit the Clanna Mileadh or Descendents from Milesius the Spaniard, after they had conquer'd Ireland from the Nation call'd Tuatha-De-Danann thought fit to continue the same course, and accordingly did continue for the 2500 years of their Government and Laws, an un∣interrupted numerous succession of Antiquaries for the same purpose, with large allowance and strict orders to regulate them; us has been said afore. That besides, and particularly to shew the like care among some other Nations for preserving the Genealogies of their great Heroes; he instances in the Pedegree of that excellent Saxon King Al∣fredus, and out of Asser Menevensis inserts it
carried up through all his Predecessours from Son to Father in a perpetual direct Line to Adam. To which Instance, alledg'd by Keting, I could my self most certainly, though without Book, add ano∣ther. For about five or six and forty years since, travelling in Brabant, and within a little English mile to Lovain, entring the Choire of the Cele∣stin's Abbey there, I saw and for a pretty while did view a Table hung up on the Wall, which con∣tain'd the Genealogy of the Illustrious Founders the Dukes of Arscot, carried up in like manner through a vast number of Generations to the First of all men. Which may be enough to persuade us, that the old German Nation, how meanly soever for matter of civility or Learning, describ'd by Tacitus, have been very careful in preserving at least their Genealogical Antiquities. And in∣deed, if my memory fail me not, I remember to have read in Favins Theatre of Honour, much to this purpose; where he tells, It was from the Germans that all the rest of Europe derived the custom of giving Goats of Arms to shew the Noble Antiquity of their Extraction. Though withal I must confess, that Keting in the Reign of the Irish Monarch Domhnal mhac Aodh mhic Ainmhire, who died in the year of Christ 642. not only de∣monstrates by a very special Instance, That custom of blazoning Arms to have been among the Irish in this Monarchs Reign very common, but farther says, It had been so in all Ages before, among
their Ancestours, ever since the days of Gathelus himself, who deriv'd it from the Israelites at the time of their passing the Red Sea, when each of the Tribes had its own peculiar Ensign carried be∣fore. But to return to my purpose: The Sixth and Last of those particulars (of Keting's Preface) I would acquaint you with, is That, being his whole History for the matter, is only of the Ancient Irish Nation, if any Reader shall perhaps apprehend his Relations, or commen∣dations or praises of them any where, or in any point, or as to any matter or Times, excessive: he desires it be considered, That the Author is no Irish man by blood, but English, though born in Ireland. And therefore cannot rationally be sup∣pos'd to magnifie the Old Irish, or speak more ex∣cellent things of 'em, than the very force of Truth and duty of a Historian exacts from him. Besides he had immediately before, in the same Place, de∣clar'd, That neither love nor hatred of any People, nor hope of any kind of Reward on Earth, made him either go through with, or indeed at first un∣dergo any part of the toil of so laborious a Work, but only those other considerations given before. But what his reason was only to write it in Irish; I cannot tell. Ʋnless it be, That he would not swerve from the custom of that Nation, while they were a free People before the English Conquest, of transmitting the Authentick Records or pub∣lick Acts and Monuments of their Kingdom to
after Ages in their own Language only. Which as I conceive, is the true reason why so little of them has ever yet been known elswhere in the World. However you have by this time a sufficient account of Keting, the Author I am mostly guided by in the whole Former Part of my Prospect, or (which is the same thing) in my Discourses of the State of Ireland till the beginning of the English Con∣quest in the year of Christ, 1172. I had almost forgotten to prevent your prejudice against Keting's History, from his relating about the beginning of it, those three unlikely Stories. 1. How Seth the Son of Adam, and three daugh∣ters of Cain in a Company together landed in, and view'd all Ireland over. 2. How last year be∣fore the Deluge three Fishermen of South-Spain, by name Laigne, Capa, and Luasad, had been Wind-driven thither, &c. 3. How Keasar, the daughter of Baioth son to Noah, with three men, viz. Fionntuin, Lothra, and her said Fa∣ther, and fifty Women, to save themselves from the Flood, which from Noah they had heard of as im∣pending, after they had first by her advice renounc'd the God of Noah, taken to themselves an Idol God, which the Irish in their Language call La∣imbh Dhia, and then wandred for seven years by Sea, at last arriv'd in Ireland, just forty days be∣fore the Flood, and there nevertheless perish'd by it. And indeed I must confess that Keting relates these Stories at large, with all their other circumstances.
But how or why does he relate'em? It is manifest he does it, of set purpose to explode 'em every one as incredible, and meer Poetical Fictions. For so himself expresly says. Adding withal▪ that such only and no other was the repute they had in the very days of Yore among the best Irish Antiqua∣ries. And for this he brings sufficient proofs, by alledging their own words. Gratianus Lucius is the next Author I make frequent use of to lead me in several remote affairs of the more Ancient Irish. And he likewise an Irish man by birth; but of the Province of Connaght, and (as himself professes) by name and blood of English Extraction. His own proper name and surname, John Lynch: his Function, Sacerdotal, and of the Secular Clergy too. His employ besides at Galway, for some years in our own time, was Teaching a School of Humanity, (as they call it) wherein he was excellent. In the differences be∣tween the Roman Catholic Confederates in the late unhappy War of that Nation, he join'd with those of them that were against the Nuncio Ri∣nuccini's Censures, for the Cessation with Inchi∣quin, submission to the King, and the two Peaces. After the surrender of Galway to the English Parliament Army he went to France. Where, em∣ploying his time as became a good Patriot & Loyal Subject, he wrote, printed and publish'd two La∣tin Books in Quarto, with a Dedicatory Epistle to the Congregation of Cardinals de Propa∣ganda
Fide, against a Factious disloyal Manu∣script which one Richard Ferral an Irish Capuc∣cin▪ had some years before written and presented to the same Congregation, as a Direction for them in their government of the Church affairs of Ire∣land: the former entitled Alithinologia; the Later, Supplementum Alithinologiae. Some years after, that is an. 1662. he publish'd under the name of Gratianus Lucius an other Latin Work in Folio, intitled Cambrensis Eversus, as being a full confutation of the Author that goes by the name of Cambrensis. Who this Cambrensis, and what the Quarrel was, to let you know▪ if I digress a little, it may peradventure be worth the while. His proper name and surname in English being Gerald Bar∣ry, that Additional of Cambrensis he had from his native Countrey, in Latin Cambria, in En∣glish Wales. His education of a Scholar, profes∣sion of a Divine, Function of a Priest, and (as I must suppose) merits in all brought him in time to be not only Arch-deacon of S. Davids, but Tu∣tor to the young Earl of Mortaign Fifth Son to Henry II. Ʋnder which Qualifications, first his zeal for the old Archiepiscopal privileges of that See engag'd him in a long Contest with the See of Canterbury, and then his Election to the same See of S. Davids, involv'd him in another. In so much, that however he came to be worsted in both (for so he was) yet his name has ever since remain'd on Re∣cord
in the Papal Canons. His extraction made him Nephew to Robert fitz Stephens and Mau∣rice fitz Gerald, Cousin to Meylerus, and Brother to Philip Barry and Robert Barry, five of the first chief men that adventured to Ireland of pur∣pose to advance their own fortune by helping on the Restauration of Diarmuid na Ngall King of Lein∣ster. His own Genius once, and once more his Place carried him to Ireland. For twice he was there: first to see his kinsmen daily acquiring large posses∣sions by their valour: and next to wait on his young Prince Earl John, when created Lord of Ireland, and sent thither by the King. And now, as him∣self confesses, being desirous of glory and immortal fame by describing Ireland, and informing the World not only of what he knew of the State of that Kingdom then under the English Conquerors, but of all former Conquests, and State thereof from the beginning, he wrote to this purpose five Books in Latin. The first three of 'em under the Title of The Topography of Ireland, and the other two under that of The Conquest of Ireland by Hen∣ry II. Indeed more specious Titles both, than his Relations under them do so much as meanly an∣swer. Besides, that the Title at least of Topo∣graphy must be very strangely applyed to signifie the Description of a whole Kingdom. And yet notwitstanding, This, together with the History of all former Conquests and other Antiquities of Ireland, is that which he promises to give under the same
Title▪ That he has very ill perform'd, that he has given his Reader's nothing less than such a History or such a Description▪ we must not wonder. He neither could understand the Language, nor so much as read the Books whether of History or Chorography written at large by the Natives themselves in their own Character. He saw not in any manner, nor travel'd, nor view'd e'en at a distance, above one Third of the Kingdom, nor dar'd for his Life ven∣ture into either of the other two parts. His whole stay in Ireland, being the whole extent of Yime em∣ploy'd by him in gathering materials for his intend∣ed Work▪ was but a year and a half; besides an other half years task▪ which he had left to his Com∣panion Bertram Verdon, who therefore stay'd so long behind him. His Collections, at least for such part of 'em as any way pertinently related to his foresaid promise, or Titles, were certainly extream little; but the rest of them, no less extream bad, and commonly false to boot. They were so little, that he describes not so much as one County, or Tract, or Town, no not of that very third Part of the King∣dom which he might have seen. Ʋnless peradven∣ture you take for a Description of all Ireland, his Fabulous Narrations of four Wells, three Islands, three Lakes, the Fountain head of four great Rivers, and the Fall of the greatest of them all, by name the River of Shannon, into the Northern Sea. Tho it be well known, That as all these Narrations are such, i. . meer Fables: so the one moiety of these Lakes, Wells, Islands, besides the Head-spring of Shan∣non,
are within those other parts of Ireland, which he never saw nor durst enter. As for the History of the former Inhabitants, Conquests, and other Antiquities of that Kingdom, promised by him, it is in like manner not only so im∣perfect, but so little in all respects: That 1. he has not the least mention of Tuatha-De-Danainn, though a powerful People that by a bloody War en∣tirely won it from Feara-Bolg, and were posses∣sors of it for a hundred ninty seven Years under the successive Reigns of seven (or rather indeed Nine) Kings of their own: that is, until they also in their turn were conquer'd by the Clanna Mi∣leadh about Thirteen hundred years before the Birth of Christ. 2. Of those Clanna Mileadh or Descendents from Milesius, though they were the People that continued the Possession and Government of Ireland ever since, about 2500 years, to this very Authors days; yet all the account he gives is only in short, that they had a hundred eighty one Monarchs, ruling successively over that Kingdom; but not a word more of their History, Polity, Laws, Conquests abroad, Militia, or Wars at home▪ may, not so much as a bare Catalogue of those very Mo∣narchs; for he names only the first and last of ; being Feidlimidius, whom he mistakes for one more, was not King of Ireland, but of Mounster only. So little he has of the very Milesians, or their Antiquities or Actions. Except only, 1. A few words of the six Sons of Muredus, Provincial King of Ulster, entring Scotland. 2. A slender
touch upon the Danish Invasions of Ireland. In which notwithstanding, he is mightily out, both as to the Year of Christ he fixes on for the first of those Invasions, viz. 838. and as to the name, person, feats, yea and Nation too of Gurmundus, all being meer Fictions, borrow'd mostly from Galfridus Mo∣numethensis. However, with such, and many more idle stories in other matters not only imperti∣nent to the Title of his Books, or discharge of his Promise, nor only not had from any Records or Wri∣tings whatsoever, as neither from the oral Testimony of men of knowledg or integrity; but wholly deriv'd from old Wive's Tales, and pastime of Ferry-men, and random reports of Soldiers, and imposture of some Knaves who fain'd things of purpose to im∣pose on his vain credulity: and besides, with most vile reflections, Invectives, Satyrs almost every where against the Irish Nation of his own time, their Princes, Priests and People generally, without spa∣ring any degree, not even the very Monks, nor even the very Bishops excepted, he patch'd up & finish'd at last, after five years study, all his foresaid five Books of Ireland: prefixing Dedicatories of some to the King, as of other of 'em to Richard Earl of Poictou, who soon after was Richard I. of England And now, putting an extraordinary value on these Works of his own, and no longer able to con∣ceal his ambitious design of glory by 'em, he goes to Oxford: renews the ancient Roman Rehearsals there, in the most publick Audience could be had:
continues 'em three days together, from morning till night; allowing a day for each of his Topographi∣cal Books. And to make his Comedy the more so∣lemn, feasts all the meaner sort of that whole City, on the firstday: on the second all the Doctors, Ma∣sters and chief Scholars of the Ʋniversity: on the third day, the rest of the Scholars, the Soldiers too and all the Burgesses of that Place. A sumptu∣ous and noble act, says Gerald himself glorying of it, whereby the ancient Custom of Poets was renewed, which neither the present Age, nor any former could shew in England. But after all, he came short of his expectation of glory. His little performance, and great ignorance, his many Fables and evil choice of other materials to, yea and his mortal enmity, hatred, malevolence to the Irish Nation were seen through, especially at Court; where, as himself complains, he had too many back Friends to malign him. Above all, his Satyrs and spleen against the very name of the Irish lai'd him open. Nor were the true causes thereof unknown. Besides the common concern he had in the destruction of that People for the sake of his Kinsmen, there was another more peculiar to him∣self that continually egg'd him to the greatest vio∣lence against them. He had even for his own sake very deeply engag'd in a particular controversie with Albinus O Molloy a Cistercian Irish Monk and Abbot of Baltinglass, wherein he was worsted. Whether any other causes mov'd him, I do not know.
But this I know, that in his Second Book of the Conquest of Ireland, he desir'd, that whole Na∣tion might either be throughly weakned, or to∣tally destroy'd; yea notwithstanding the Peace but lately concluded, and still observ'd by them. And that besides, in the same Book cap. 36. he prescrib'd the ways to do it. I see also that on every occasion as he is perpetually in the greatest extreams even of Romantic praises of his own Relatives, Fitz Stephens, Fitz Gerald, Meyler, the two Barrys, and all their Brittish Soldiers too, his own Coun∣trey-men: so, of the other side, upon the least pique he is no less passionately excessive in charging with and exaggerating the vilest things against the very Normans and English in Ireland, tho embarqu'd in the save public quarrel with them against the Irish Nation. Witness, among others, Herveus de Monte Marisco, and William Fitz Adelm the King's Lieutenant, and Progenitor of the noble Fa∣mily of Bourks in that Kingdom. Nay witness the King himself Henry II. Whom altho, during his Life, this Author made the Occidental Alexan∣der, the Invincible, the Salomon of his own Time, the most Pious of Princes, and his only Fame (tho far short of his Merits) to have repress'd the fury of all the very Gentils of Europe, and Asia too be∣yond the Mediterranean Sea: adding many more Hyperbolical expressions to magnifie him above all truth and reason; as for example, That his Victo∣  with the Circumference of the Earth▪
and That if you seek after the Limits of his Con∣quests you shall sooner come to the end of the World than of them: yet after this Great Prince's death (as David Powel very particularly observes) he, the same Author Gerald of Wales, most bitterly invey'd against him, in his Book de Instructione Principis; where he so belbed forth the venom of his malevolence, that he manifestly discover'd his old inveterate hatred of this King Henry. So says Powell. Moreover, and in reference particularly to his stories of Ireland, you may find in Primat Ush∣ers Sylloge (pag. 155.) how the expostulations of other men and evidence of Truth compell'd him at last to several Retractations: among which he con∣fesses, that altho he had some of his Relations from persons of credit in that Countrey; yet for the rest he had only common report and fame. Which if I be not mistaken is in effect to acknowledg, that he had common Lyes, and Forgeries to authorize them. Nay further, You may read Sir James Wares Cen∣sure of them in his own Antiquities of Ireland cap. 23. where in express terms he says in Latin. That Gerald of Wales in his Topography of Ireland has heap'd together so many Fabulous Relations, that to discuss them exactly would require a just Treatise. And then adds, in the same place, his own wonder, How it should come to pass, that some of this very Age, tho otherwise grave and learned men, have again for Truths obtruded on the World those Fictions of Gi∣rald▪
Besides, You are to know, that notwithstand∣ing so many just exceptions against those Books of Cambrensis: yea notwithstanding they had there∣fore lyen after his death 400 years neglected, ob∣scure, unknown, till Cambden had them printed at Francford an. 1602. yet ever since that year, they have proved the only chief warrant to all such men of little reading as were delighted in writing ill of the ancient Irish. To conclude; what I would say on the whole is, That if hatred, enmity, open pro∣fess'd hostility, and special interest and actual en∣gagement too in the destruction of that ancient Irish Nation: if ignorance of their Language, and wil∣ful passing by their History, even the most authen∣tick of their Records: if no knowledg at least of two Thirds of their Countrey: if hunting, collect∣ing, and hudling together the vainest and falsest and most ridiculous hear-say stories, and this forsooth of purpose to gain immortal fame by telling stupendi∣ous things not heard before: if Satyrs of the people in general, so virulent and frequent, that in very deed the publishing of 'em may be justly suspected to have been at least a great part of the Authors chief de∣sign: if a licentious humour and immoderate pas∣sion transporting him to the strangest exorbitancy either of praises or dispraises, or flatteries or inju∣ries, as he stood affected, in writing even of his own Party, and his own King for company among 'em: if his acknowledgment in Usher, and the Censure of him by Sir James Ware: in a word, if so ma∣ny
excellent Qualifications as are enumerated here, can render him an Author of Credit, or to be fol∣low'd or believ'd in any passage of his foresaid Books that is to any degree of prejudice either against the Irish Nation, or contrary to their Chronicles, or vain or exotick in it self, and not warranted by bet∣ter authority than his only word: I say, that if the matter be so indeed, then for my own part I must be of opinion, that no Author at all, how idle, or vain, or unwarrantable, or incredible, or false, or injurious, reproachful and satyrical soever his Relations of any People or Countrey are, is to be re∣jected. Tho in all contingencies, it must be also con∣fess'd, that wherever Cambrensis has delivered any thing to the advantage, renown, or credit of the Irish Nation, his testimony is doubtless above all exception for so much. For the confession of an Ad∣versary is valid in all Tribunals: and both Bodin and Reason requires it should be so in History. Thus having sufficiently inform'd you both of Cambrensis and the true original grounds of the Quarrel of Gratianus Lucius to him: I return to the finishing my account of Lucius himself. And this I shall dispatch by a little farther addition, first of those more special considerations that put him on writing his Cambrensis Eversus, and then of his performance therein. Those himself gives at large; but I shall contract 'em. 1. He had often consider'd, that altho soon after the coming out of Cambrensis in Germany from the Press, two
Learned Irish Gentlemen, Richard White a Je∣suit, and Philip O Suillevan a Soldier, to unde∣ceive the World, and right their injur'd Nation, had most exactly and convincingly written, each of them at large, against his impostures; yet through ill fortune their several Books on that subject were lost, and no body since had put Pen to paper to retrive this loss. 2. By daily conversation among Foreigners, he had found, That because in so many years since that Francford Edition of Cambrensis, nothing ap∣pear'd against him in Print, his very vilest Relations of Ireland were taken for confessedly true. 3. Ha∣ving read a great number of Books, and he thinks all whatsoever written of that Kingdom by English & other Brittish Authors; and observing how as many of 'em at least as came out since the change of Reli∣gion, were so unjust to the Irish Nation, that a∣mongst all there was not so much as any one Indivi∣dual, who does not either report Fictions, or conceal Truths, or exaggerate the bad, or extenuate the good Things of that People: he considered at last, that Giraldus Cambrensis was their first pattern. 4. And which to him was more grievous yet, he considered, that ever since the aforesaid German E∣dition, there was not a Book written, nor a Cos∣mographical or Geographical Table drawn, there was not (I mean) a Map, or a Card (as they are call'd) describing the customs or manners of Nations come forth in any part of Europe, which was not replenish'd with ugly base reflections on the Irish. In so much, that
in all Countreys and Languages they were on all occasions become a Fable to the Vulgar, and object of scorn to others. These were the considerations that prevail'd with Lucius to exert his zeal for Truth and Love to his Countrey, in taking all the foresaid Books of Cam∣brensis to pieces; laying open the most material of his Errors and Calumnies; (for it had been endless to pursue him in the more immaterial) convincing him every where; and therefore, when he had finish'd his Work, publishing it for the satisfaction of Eu∣rope in Latin, under the Title of Cambrensis E∣versus, which may be English'd The Cambrian o∣verthrown. How justly it deserves this name, o∣thers may judg, seeing the Book is extant, and has been since the year 1622. when it was printed. For my own part, I can do no less than acknowledg what I think of it my self: which is, That the Author shews himself very conversant in those Letters we call Po∣lite. That above all, for knowledg in History both Domestic & Forein, Sacred and Profane, he appears excellently well qualified to write on the Subject he undertook. That every where, and whatever mat∣ter is treated, he is very exact in quoting his Authors: and where the allegation must depend on Irish Books or Writers, he never omits to give 'em by name in the Margin: among which are the Annals of Inis Fail, the Common Annals, the Annals of Anonimus, the Annals of Tigernacus, the Continuer of Ti∣gernacus, the Books of Reigns, O Duuegan,
O Donel, Colgan, Philip O Suillevan, Peter Lombard Archb. of Ardmagh, Keting, Primat Usher, Sir James Ware. That in a word, his performances in this Book against Cambrensis are accurate, absolute, full: and therefore not unwor∣thy the Dedication they bear prefix'd to the Sacred Majesty of Charles II. of Great Brittain our gra∣cious King. I say against Cambrensis. Because I do abstract wholly from his occasional or incidental Reflections any where on the State of Ireland since the Year 1640. To deliver my thoughts of them, is no part of my business here. What more, concerning Lucius, must be directly to the purpose of this place, is to let you understand, that although Cambrensis Eversus be not a History of Ireland: yet because it is in many places fraught with choice Collections out of the Irish Antiquities: and in the VIII. Chap∣ter occasionally gives, together with a Catalogue of all the Monarchs of Ireland under the several Con∣quests, even from Slanius the first of them, a brief account of their Reigns, and Years of the World, or Christ respectively, when each King began & finish'd his Reign: therefore, next to Keting, I have made the greatest use of him, in the Former Part; tho no where before, page 130. for till I came so far I had him not. And out of him particularly it is, That in some places I add to such or such Monarchs the Year of the World, or of our Saviour Christ's In∣carnation. Now what Computation is follow'd by him, in giving the former Years, I mean those of
the World, albeit he does not himself expresly inform us, we may notwithstanding most certainly know by his fixing the Birth of Christ in the Year of the World 5199. as he does in his Reign of the Irish Monarch Criomthan Niadhnair (whom he calls in Latin Criomthanius Niadhnarius.) Whereby 'tis evident, he follows the computation of Eusebi∣us; holding therein with the generality of the Irish Chronologers, and consequently differing in so much from Keting: as he does also differ from him, and hold with the same generality, as to the length of Reign or Life attributed to the two Monarchs Cobh∣thach Caolbhreag, Siorna Saoghallach, & some others. In other matters treated by him in his Cambrensis Eversus, he seldom varies from Ke∣ting, otherwise than by addition of more particulars. So you have at last my whole Account, and I hope a sufficient one of these two Authors, whom I must ac∣knowledg to have been my only chief Directors, for what concerns those Irish Affairs, treated of in the Former Part of this Prospect. I say my only chief Directors, &c. For, I am to inform you now a little farther, That as to other matters, and some Irish too, whether pur∣posely or occasionally discours'd, I have not seldom in the same Former Part, especially in the V. and VI. Section, made use of my own reading and Col∣lections out of other Authors, some Ancient, & some Modern. As for example, out of Tacitus, and the Augustan History Writers, and Venerable Bede, &
Cambrensis, and Polychronicon, I have borrow'd some things: out of Roderic of Toledo, and Poli∣dore Virgil, Harpsfield, Bodin, William Cam∣den, and Buchanan, other: out of S. Bernard, the far greater part of my whole discourse of Mala∣chias: out of a French Anonimous Author in Mes∣singham, and Sir James Ware's Book de Praesu∣libus Hiberniae, what I write of Laurase O Tua∣thail, otherwise called (in Latin) Laurentius Du∣bliniensis: out of Rabanus, Jonas Abbas, Ode∣ricus Vitalis Angligena, Notkerus and Sponda∣nus, those matters you find related by me of Co∣lumbanus, Gallus; and their Associats: besides di∣vers other things out of other Authors. And these and those are commonly quoted where I make use of them: although sometimes they are not because both Margins being so narrow, and Pages so little; as you see they are, I thought it unfitting to croud them with quotations. From the Learned Cambden I seldom recede, tho almost as seldom made use of by me in the same Former Part. But the acknowledg'd either purity, or elegancy of Buchanan's style makes me no admirer of his skill in the Antiquities of that Nation he writes of. Much less can I esteem Hector Boethius in his writing at random of those matters what he had ne∣ver had but from errant Impostors, or certainly him∣self had forg'd. And this (without question) even contrary to what he had found written by that Irish great Furtherer of his, whose name was Corneli∣us
Historicus, and his Work entitled Chronicon multarum rerum; I mean, if this Cornelius was indeed no less by education in the Countrey, & know∣ledg in the Language than by birth an Irish man, and withal so learned as D. Hanmer, page 193. (out of Bale and Stanihurst) represents him to have been under Henry III. of England, about the Year of Christ 1230. that is, about 200 years before Boethius had written his History of Scotland. Of Hanmer, or Campion either (though each of them entitles his own Work, The History of Ire∣land: nay each of 'em ventures on deducing his Narration from almost the very beginning of times after the Flood.) I scarce make mention, but, once or twice where the Subject or leads or forces me to oppose their great mistakes. Which certainly are very numerous in both, especially in Hanmers Work, as this is by much the larger of the two; Campion's being only a little extemporary Piece, written by him in ten Weeks time, as himself confesses in his Dedication thereof 27 May 1571. To this year Cam∣plon brought his History. But Han∣mer deduc'd his Chronicle (for so he calls it) no fur∣ther than to the year 1286. I sup∣pose he intended to bring it to his own time, had he not been prevented by death, which seiz'd him at Dublin, where he died of the Plague, Anno 1064. to Robert Earl of Leicester. Nor must we much wonder, it should be either so brief, or so faulty: seeing we have his own, farther acknow∣ledgment in his Preface to the Reader, That he had never so
much as seen any of those Irish Books that treat of matters that happen'd before the English Conquest, much less could have any person to interpret them. A greater cause of admiration, Doctor Meredith Hanmer has given us by making his Chronicle of Ireland so large, and yet giving every whit as little of the true Antiquities of Ireland for those times preceding the same English Conquest as Campion before him had, e'en a few scraps out of Cambren∣sis; but many more additional meer stories from himself, where-ever he had 'em. Among which sto∣ries however, I do not rank his pious Relations of several Irish Saints, which take up above 20 leaves of his Chronicle. That is, from p. 33. to p. 104. But for Edmund Spencer, in his Dialogue be∣between Irenaeus and Eudoxus (bound up in the same Volume, as it was at first publish'd in print together with the two former Books of Campion and Hanmer at Dublin, an. 1635. by Sir James Ware,) I had  little occasion to quote him▪ as I could have no other exception against him, than what is common to Hanmer and Campion too. Save only those two Particulars (in his 33 & 46 Pag.) whereof Keting has taken special notice before me, viz. 1. The two Saxon Kings, Egfrid the Nor∣thumbrian, and Edgar of England, to have had the Kingdom of Ireland in subjection. . That the large spread Irish Families or epts of the Birns, Tools, and Cauanaghs in the Province of Leinster, were originally Brittish; and those other of the
Mac Swines, Mac Mahoons, and Mac Shehies in the Province of Mounster no less originally En∣glish. In both Particulars how mightily Spencer is out, and without any support either from History or Criticism, Keting in his Preface, has very suf∣ficiently, if not abundantly shewn. And therefore I will say no more of Spencer, than that although in writing his Faerie Queen he had the right of a Poet to fancy any thing; nevertheless, in the Histo∣rical part of his Dialogue (written by him, anno 1599.) he should have follow'd other Rules. I say Historical part, &c. For I am willing to acknow∣ledg, that where he pursued the Political main de∣sign of this Dialogue, which was to prescribe the ways and means to reduce Ireland (a design well becoming him as being Secretary to Arthur Lord Grey of Wilton and Deputy of Ireland under Q. Elizabeth) none could surpass him: no man could except against him, save only those that would not be reduc'd. But I digress again. For my purpose here in mentioning Spencer, should only have been to tell you, that in all my Former Part I quote him but once. Ʋnto which if I add in the last place, what I had almost forgotten, That I have more than once or twice either, quoted Geoffrey of Monmouth himself: I hope no man will be scandalized that considers, besides the occasion, what use I make of him. Nay I do persuade my self, That to see Former Part from page 3 5. to pag. 347. And a∣gain p. 363, 364, 369. in five or six leaves of this little Form, a pretty
just Abridgment of his famed Work, i. e. his Seven Books of the ancient History of Great Brittain, or supposed Posterity of Brutus, cannot be displeasing to those who never saw nor knew where to find the Author himself, or his History at large, nor per∣haps, were it lying by them, and in their own Lan∣guage too, would have the patience to read it over. And now, That I gave given what I would say (in this Place) concerning any of those other Au∣thors, whom besides Keting and Lucius, I either follow, or examine, or e'en utterly reject in the For∣mer Part of my Prospect: there remains but little more to be Prefac'd to it. For to the Latter Part I shall therefore prefix an other Preface; but one by so much the shorter, by how much it must be proper to that Part alone. In which other Preface I mean to observe the same Method I have in this; by gi∣ving an account of the Writers, who shall direct me in that Later Part: and how, and the reasons why I must therein be guided partly by some of those very men, whose testimonials in other matters, I slight in the Former. What more I would give for Preface here to the same Former Part only, are these Particulars. 1. That wheresoever I annex to any of those Irish Monarchs, treated of by me, Capital or other Let∣ters or Figures of Numbers, whereby I would sig∣nifie what rank they held▪ in their Catalogue; for example, whether of the Tenth, or Twentieth, or so forth: there I related only to the Catalogue of Mi∣lesian
Monarchs; not to any other containing both Milesian, and the other 18. Monarchs of the several Conquests that preceded theirs. 2. That although I have endeavoured with all diligence to extract in order those Milesian Monarchs out of Ketings vo∣luminous History, which no where adds to any of 'em the number, i. e. any such Letters, Figures, or Words importing it: after all I cannot be sure I have not mistaken, and this perhaps more than once, in adding my numbers. But the best on't is, that the errour, if any such be, is not material. 3. That where I speak of 2988 years, or sometimes of a year, or a few years more or less from the first of the Milesian Conquest: in all such places I follow the Account of Keting. Who to reduce the Irish Chronology to an agreement not only with his own Computation of the years of the World, but with the Relation also of Cambrensis and Polychro∣nicon (where they tell us, of the Milesians having conquer'd that Kingdom 1800 years before S. Pa∣tric's death) purposely cut off of the Reigns of several of their Kings, so many years as make in all 491. But elsewhere, that is, p. 496, &c. and in the Cata∣logue, I have strictly follow'd Gratianus Lucius (and consequently the Irish Book of Reigns) as to the number of years the Milesian Kings reigned, or Kingdom lasted. 4. That for want of Irish Books or Antiquaries to consult with, I confess it remains a difficulty with me still, How the six Sons of the Ul∣ster K. Muredus, as Cambrensis calls him in La∣tin, who in Irish is call'd Muiridhach by Keting,
even those very six famous Brothers that invaded Tath-Chruthnigh (for so the Irish by a proper name in their Language call'd the Countrey of the Picts, which now we call Scotland.) How I say those very six Brothers go sometimes by the name of the Six Sons of Muiridhach, and some∣times again by that of the Six Sons of Eirck. Ʋn∣less peradventure the same person had those two names of Muiridhach & Eirck: or that Keting de∣rived their being the Sons of Muredus from Girald of Wales only. 5. That if any where in these Dis∣courses of Ireland you meet with some Relations ei∣ther of Miracles above Nature, or Antiquities hard to believe: I must beg that you will notwithstanding be so just as at least to believe, I have no design to impose either upon your reason or upon your free∣dom. 6. That besides, it will be no more than Justice requires of you, to persuade your self, That no Relatour of matters so far beyond our ken is ac∣countable for his own belief or disbelief of them, much less for their objective truth or untruth (be∣ing or not being) in themselves. Provided he re∣lates no impossibilities, nor absurdities, nor contra∣dictions of all other Histories that are esteemed true; nor any thing whatsoever out of other Records than Authentick, or other Authors than Classick, or at least other than such as have been among their own People reputed men of Probity and Reason, and acknowledg'd so in such matters as they write of. 7. That I have commonly chosen to give the
Irish proper Names and Surnames, though not in Irish Characters, yet in such Italick Letters as answer them: because by having them so, the Reader may be much better assured, that he sees be∣fore him the true genuine names, whether he can pronounce them rightly, or not, than he could be▪ if according to the custom of others, I had transform'd 'em into the English or Latin, either syllables or terminations. And yet withal, my Copy of Keting being very bad in many places▪ and which I do wil∣lingly acknowledg my own skill to correct the Irish Orthography of it very small: I must in reason su∣spect my performance in this matter. But neither can the Errours herein be either material or any way considerable. 8. That I confess I have taken a quite contrary course to the late Brittish Writers, in magnifying, so far as good Authority did war∣rant me, the Ancient Irish Nation: which they, a man would think, made it their business to lessen and vilifie all they could. But nevertheless, I doubt not, all judicious impartial men will acknowledg; how much more it must redound to the honour of the English Nation, to have conquered an an∣cient, civil, warlike, brave People in the days of Yore, than such an obscure, barbarous, vile, hideous generation of men as partly the Cambrian Author, partly others that follow'd the pattern left by him represent those Old Inhabitants of Ireland in their time. Besides, if without any relation to others, but on the naked sole contemplation of some excellencies
in that ancient People I have suffer'd some transport, who can blame me? None, I believe, that considers attentively the import and consequence of this Say∣ing of the Roman Sage, though delivered by him on an other subject. Some acts of Liberality, some of Humanity, some of Fortitude had astonish'd us: and we began to admire them as perfect, Under 'em lay many vices, which the appear∣ance & splendor of some conspicuous Fact did conceal: and these we dissembled. Nature bids us magnifie deeds that are commendable. None but has extol'd the glorious beyond truth. So said Lucius Annaeus Seneca (in his one Hundred and Twentieth Epistle) as rigid a Stoick as he was. And yet I can say for my self this much, that I have been so far from dissembling in any such kind, where I had unquestionable Authors to lead me, that I rather fear to have exceeded on this side, than on that other. 9. That when I had almost fi∣nish'd this Former Part, I was unexpectedly desir'd to print before it a Catalogue (tho containing only the bare Names) of all the Kings that in the succession of so many Conquests, and many more Ages, for even 3204 years reign'd from Slanius the Son of Dela to the sixth year of Rotheric O Connor the Last of the Irish Race, when Hen. II. of England was receiv'd Lord of Ireland in the year of Christ 1172. And though I had my self no inclination to it, as ap∣prehending, that since I have not given any kind of History, great or small, of all their Lives or Reigns,
nor indeed any particular account in any Method▪ Historical or not Historical, no not scarce of the Tenth among 'em: it would seem a vanity in me to promise more by the Frontispiece than the whole Structure is worth: yet after I was persuaded. So prevalent with me was the esteem I had of his judgment that urg'd it: altho he gave me no other reason, than that certainly it would prove at least some satisfa∣ction to all curious Searchers into such remote pat∣terns of Antiquity. And truly had he or any other given me this occasion before I had engag'd too far in pursuance of the Method taken by me all along: I would have given another kind of Catalogue. I mean such a one as, together with the Name of each King, should have had annex'd the years of his Reign, the means of his attaining the Sovoreignty, the manner of his death, whether natural or violent, some one at least of his most remarkable Kingly Ac∣tions, if any such were recorded of him, the Year of the World or Christ respectively, answering both the first and last of his Reign: and all this of each in a small number of Lines: and the whole of all in se∣ven or eight sheets, at most, or thereabouts. I am sure I might with far less trouble have done it, than the collecting, digesting, and discoursing on the matters handled in any one, at least in the sixth Section of this Former Part, have given me. Gratianus Lu∣cius, in his Eighth Chapter, would have eas'd me of other care in doing it, than that of rendring his Catalogue there into English, & in some few places
abridging him, by referring the Reader to those pages of my own where I treat the matter at large; and in very few places more, by adding somewhat out of Keting, and then animadverting on both Keting and him. But no easing me in that kind could hinder the unproportionable swelling of this Former Part, if I should annex to it such a Ca∣talogue as this. And therefore in stead thereof I give that of bare Names, which take up but little room. Perhaps hereafter I may give the other too in a small Treatise bound together with the Later Part. I mean, if that Later Part can better than this here admit of such a conjunction, without rendring it self unproportionably thick. However that happen, there needs no further Preface now.
A Catalogue of the Kings of Ireland; Who, (according to the Irish Book of Reigns, and Computation particularly of Lucius) Reign'd (in all) 3204 Years, before Henry the II's landing there Anno Christi 1172. Kings of the Fir-bholgian Conquest, Reigning (in all) 36 Years. 1 Slainghe. 2 Rughruigh. 3 Gann and Geannan, two Brothers. 4 Seanghann. 5 Fiacha Cinn Fion∣nain. 6 Rionnal. 7 Oidghen. 8 Eochdh. Kings of the Tuatha-De-Danann Conquest, Reigning (in all) 197 Years. 1 Nuadhad Airgidla∣imh. 2 Breas. 3 Lugha Lamhfhada. 4 Andaghdha. 5 Dealbbaoith. 6 Fiacha mhac De∣albhaoith. 7 Eachtur, Teachtur, & Ceachtur, surna∣med Mac Coill, Mac Ceacht, and Mac Greine, the three sons of Cearmada. Kings of the Clanna Mile∣adh
or Milesian Conq. Reigning (in all) 2971 Years. 1 Eibhir Fionn and Erimhon, two Sons of Mileadh, joyntly reigning. 2 Erimhon, singly. 3 Muininne, Luigne, and Laigne, three Sons of Erimhon. 4 Iriall Faidh. 5 Ear, Orba, Fearon and Feargna, Four Brothers, Sons to Eibhir Fionn. 6 Ethriall, mhac Iri∣all Faidh. 7 Conmhl. 8 Tighearnmhais. 9 Eochodh I. Ead∣ghathach. 10 Cearmna, and Soh∣airce, two Brothers. 11 Eochodh II. Faobh∣arghlas. 12 Fiacha I. Labh∣ranna. 13 Eochodh III. Mu∣mho. 14 Aonghus I. Oll∣mhuicidh. 15 Eunna I. Airgthe∣ach. 16 Roitheacthuigh I. mhac Maoin. 17 Seadhna I. mhac Artri. 18 Fiacha II. Fion∣scothach. 19 Muinemhon. 20 Allerghoid. 21 Ollamh Fodhla. 22 Fionshneachta I. 23 Slanoll. (ach. 24 Geithe Ollghoth- 25 Fiacha III. 26 Bearnghall. 27 Oillioll I. 28 Siorna Saoghal∣ach. 29 Roitheachhuigh II. mhac Roin. 30 Elim I. Ollfion∣shneachta. 31 Giallchadh. 32 Art I. Imleach. 33 Nuadhad II. Fi∣onnfail. 34 Breasrigh.
35 Eochodh IV. Ap∣thach. 36 Fionn mhac Bra∣tha. 37 Sedhna II. Innar∣rhuidh. 38 Siomon Breac. 39 Duacha I. Fionn. 40 Muiriadhach Bol∣grach. 41 Eunna II. Dearg. 42 Lughadh I. Jar∣ann. 43 Siorlamha. 44 Eochodh V. Vair∣cheas. 45 Eochodh VI. Fiadh∣mhaine, and Conn Begeaglach, 2 Bro. 46 Lughadh II. Lamh∣dhearg. 47 Conn Begeaglach, the second time. 48 Art. II. mhac Lugh∣aidh. 49 Fiacha IV. Tol∣grach. 50 Oillioll II. Fionn. 51 Eochodh VII. mhac Oilliolla. 52 Airgiodmhair. 53 Duacha II. Ladh∣ghrach. 54 Lughha III. La∣idhe. 55 Aadh I. Ruadh. 56 Dithorba. 57 Ciombaoth. 58 Macha, the Queen. 59 Reachta Rith∣dhearg. 60 Eoghan Mor. 61 Buchadh. 62 Laoghaire I. Lorc. 63 Cobhthach Caol∣bhreag. 64 Lauradh Loinn∣seach. 65 Meilge Molbh∣thach. 66 Modhehorh. 67 Aonghus II. Ol∣lamh. 68 Jar Ainghleo. 69 Fearchorh. 70 Connla I. Cruaidh∣cheallgach. 71 Oillioll III. Cass∣hiaclach. 72 Adhamhair Folt∣chinn.
73 Eochodh VIII. Alt∣leathan. 74 Ferghus I. Forta∣bhaile. 75 Aonghus III. Tuir∣mhidh Teamh∣rach. 76 Conall I. Columh∣rach. 77 Niadh Seadhgha∣mhaine. 78 Eunna II. Aig∣nioch. 79 Criomthann I. Cos∣grach. 80 Rughruidh I. mhac Sithrigh. 81 Jodhnambar. 82 Breassal. 83 Lughadh IV. Lu∣ighnioch. 84 Conghall II. Clar∣igneach. 85 Duach III. Dall∣tha Deaghniodh. 86 Fachna Fathach. 87 Eochodh IX. Feidh∣lioch. 88 Eochodh X. Aimh∣remh. 89 Eidrisgceoil. 90 Nuadhad II. Ne∣acht. 91 Conair I. Mor. Immediately after the murder of this Conair (surnamed the Great) committed on him by some Irish Outlaws, but headed (as Keting says) by Hainchill Keagh, Yon to the King of Brittain, there follow'd, An Interregnum of five Years: which being over, the Succession was re-as∣sum'd and continued thus: 92 Lughadh V. Sri∣amhndearg. 93 Conchahhar I. Abh∣raruadh. 94 Criomthann II. Ni∣adhnair. 95 Fearadhach I. Fi∣onnfachtuach. 96 Fiacha V. Fionn. 97 Fiacha VI. Finn∣olaidh. 98 Cairbre I. Ceann∣cheit.
99 Feilim I. mhac Conruidh. 100 Tuathal I. Te∣achtmhur. 101 Mal. 102 Feilim II. Racht∣mhur. 103 Cathaoir Mor. 104 Conn II. Cead∣chathach. 105 Conair II. mhac Moghalaimhe. 106 Art III. Aoinfhir. 107 Lugha VI. alias Mac Con. 108 Fearghus II. Du∣bhdheadach. 109 Cormuc Ulfhada. 210 Eochodh XI. Gun∣nat. 111 Cairbre II. Lith∣fiochair. 112 Fothach I. Airg∣theach, and Fo∣thach II. Cairb theach, two Bro∣thers. 13 Fiacha VII. Sra∣ibhtine. 114 Colla Vais. 115 Muireadhach Ti∣reach. 116 Calbhach. 117 Eochodh XII. Mu∣ighmheadhion. 118 Criomthann III. mhac Eochuigh. 119 Niall I. Naoighi∣allach. 120 Fearadhach II. a∣lias Dathi. Hitherto the Pagan Kings. For, according to Gra∣tianus Lucius, all that follow were Christians. 121 Laoghaire II. mhac Neill Naoighiallu∣idh. 122 Oillioll IV. Molt. 123 Lughadh IV. mhac Laoghaire. 124 Muirchiortach I. mhac Ercha. 125 Tuathal II. Maol∣gharbh. 126 Diarmuidh I. mhac Fearghussa Ceirbheoil. 127 Fearghus the III. and Domhnall the I▪
two Brothers. 128 Eochodh XIII. and Baothan I. the former being Ne∣phew, and the later Uncle. 129 Ainmhire. 130 Baothan II. mhac Ninnede. 131 Aodh II. mhac Ainmhire. 132 Aodh III. Slaine, and Colman Rimh∣igh, two Brothers. 133 Aodh IV. Vairi∣dhneach. 134 Maolchoha. 135 Suibhne I. Meann. 136 Domhnall II. mhac Aodh. 137 Conall III. Ceile, and Ceallach, two Brothers. 138 Blaithmbae, and Diarmuid. II. Ru∣ainnigh, two Brothers. 149 Seachnasach. 140 Ceannfodl. 141 Fionneachta II. Fleadhach. 142 Loinnsioch. 143 Conghall IV. Kinn∣mhaghair. 144 Fearghal I. mhac Mhaoilduin. 145 Foghortach. 146 Kinaoth. 147 Flaithbhiortach. 148 Aodh V. Ollan. 149 Domhnall 3. mhac Murchaidh. 150 Niall II. Fras∣sach. 151 Donnchadh I. mhac Domhnaill. 152 Aodh VI. Oir∣nigh. 153 Conchabhar II. mhac Donnchaidh. 154 Niall III. Caille. 155 Maolseachluinn I. mhac Mhaoilrua∣nuidh. 156 Aodh VII. Finn∣liath. 157 Flann mhac Si∣onna. 158 Niall IV. Glun∣dubh. 159 Donnchadh II. mhac Floinn.
160 Conghallach mhac Mhaoilmhidhe. 161 Dombnall IV. mhac Muirchiortuidh. 162 Maolseachluinn II. mhac Domhnaill. 163 Brian Boraimh. 164 Maolseachluinn II. restor'd. 165 Donnchadh III. mhac Briain Bhora imh. 166 Diarmuid III. Mhaoil-na-mbho. 167 Toirrdhealbhach I. mhac Taidhg. 168 Muirchiortach II. mhac Toirrdheal∣bhuidh, and Domh∣nal V. mhac Ard∣ghair. 169 Toirrdhealbhach II. Mor O Conchab∣hair. 170 Muirchiortach III. mhac Neill. 171 Ruairidh II. O Conchabhair. In the sixth year of this Monarch's Reign, be∣ing the year of Christ, 1172. Henry II. of En∣gland, with a Fleet of 400 Sail invaded and landed in Ireland at Waterford: Some Observations on, and Inferences from this Catalogue. TO understand this Catalogue (which I have drawn with all the care and exact∣ness I could, out of Ketings History at large, and Gratianus Lucius's VIII. Chapter of his Cam∣brensis Eversus) be pleas'd to observe, 1. That the Surnames of such Kings as had any, are given here, in a different Character from that of their first and proper Names.
2. That to all Kings of the same Proper Name, who had no Surname (I mean any other second Name, derived from some peculiar qua∣lity of Mind, or Body, or Fortune, as all their Surnames were,) I have likewise for distin∣ction's sake, in a different Character (besides Figures signifying what place each of 'em held among the rest, for Example, whither the First, or Second, or so forth among those of the same Name) I have I say added their Fathers Name also, with the word Mac (which im ports a Son) before 'em. 3. That the Marginal or First Figures in the head of the Lines, rather signifie the order of Succession, than the number of Kings: because many of the Lines have two, one of 'em three, and an other four Kings, ruling together in a joint Sovereignty, at least for some time. 4. That although both Keting and Lucius concur in telling us how the four Brothers of the Milesian Conquest (numb. 5.) Ear, Orba, Fearon, and Feargna, sons to Eibhir Fionn (we call him Heber) had in the Third year of the former joint Sovereignty of the Three sons of Erimhon, (after the death of the First of these Three) kill'd in Battel the two surviving Kings Luighne and Laighne; yet Lucius only (not Keting) has rank'd 'em in the Catalogue of Kings; who notwithstanding confesses, their Reign was but Three months in all, when their
own Cosin German Iriall Faidh (the fourth and youngest son of Erimhon) gave them Battel at Cuile-Mertha, vanquish'd and kill'd 'em all four in that Field. 5. That neither Buchadh (N. 62.) tho told us by Keting to have been the Man that kil'd the Monarch Eoghun Mor, is counted by him a∣mong the Kings, as who had had the Sovereign Power only 36 hours, or a day and a half in all. But Lucius nevertheless inserts him as one of 'em: adding however to his memory this Motto of the Poet, Ʋnus{que} Titan vidit, at{que} unus dies, stantem, & cadentem. 6. That in the same manner Diarmuid-Mha∣oil na-mo (N. 167.) is laid aside by Keting; tho not only Lancarnaruensis and Gemiticensis call him King of Ireland; but Sir James Ware pla∣ces him in his Catalogue as such. And this very justly too a man would think; as in the Prospect (Form. P. p. 180.) you may see at large. 7. That Domhnal mhac Ardghair (N. 169.) is likewise pass'd over by Keting; yet not so by Lucius, nor Colganus neither. See the Prospect, F. P. p. 178, &c. 8. That Erimhon, Conn-Begeaglach, and Maol∣seachluinn II. are each of 'em twice inserted. The first, Num. 1 &. 2. the second, Num. 46 & 48. the last, N. 193, & 195. whereof the rea∣sons are these. Erimhon had been first only join'd in the Sovereignty with his elder Bro∣ther
Eibhir Fionn; but after Eibhir had been kill'd by him in the Battel of Geassil, he was ab∣solute, as ruling alone. Conn Bgeaglach, though when his Brother and Colleague in the Sove∣reign Power was kill'd, he had been forc'd to ly, & leave the Kingdom to the Victor; yet after some few years he recover'd it again, by killing him. And Maolseachluinn II. who had been de∣pos'd to give place to Briain Boraimh, came to be the second time King of Ireland after Clan∣tarff Field. 9. That the Irish Historians differ about gi∣ving the Title of King of Ireland to Maolseach∣luinn II's Successors: some giving it to one; and others, to another; and some (sometimes) to more than one: but all of 'em generally cal∣ling those Kings that succeeded him, Gafra Sa∣bhrach, as who had assum'd the said Title a∣gainst the consent of some Provinces. For so Lucius (pag. 80.) has observ'd. And now that for your better and easier un∣derstanding of this Catalogue you have the ne∣cessary Observations: I'll only add one more; which tho unncessary for that end, may not∣withstanding give you cause enough towonder, by considering the general Fate of about Nine Parts of Ten of so many Sovereign Princes as you see in this whole Catalogue, from Slainghe, the First of the Fir-bholgian, to Ruaridh, the Last of the Milesian Conquest. For I can assure you
here, that after the greatest diligence I could use to satisfie my self by taking Notes out of Ke∣ting and Lucius both, I find That of so vast a number of Milesian Kings, not above six and twenty in all had other then violent ends. Which is three less than what I have elswhere insinuated the number of such of them as had natural ends to have been. As for the Fir-bhol∣gian & Tuath-De-Danann Kings, tho proporti∣onably fewer e'en of either died violent deaths; yet of their 18. which was their whole num∣ber, fourteen lost their Lives by the Sword. But how many, or how few soever you please, of all these and those Kings of all the Former Conquests ended their days either by the hands of other men, or some prodigious judgment of Heaven, or means of other extrinsick secondary Causes, in such manner as rendred their deaths properly violent: the Inferences out of this Catalogue are plain. 1. That if we count severally each of those Milesian Princes, who jointly, or in Association with any other, govern'd as Kings of Ireland: and withal not count the same Person twice; nor count among 'em either Cairbre I. surna∣med Ccann-cheit, or Feilim I. mhac Conruidh (see Numb. 98. & 99.) as indeed we ought not, being these Two are the only noted for meer Usurpers, because both were chosen, one after another, by the Plebeians only, nay and only too to head their most hideous bloody Rebellion of
25 years continuance, against all the Royal Line (and as for the former of 'em, viz. Cairbre, he had not so much pretence of right as to have been either of the Milesian or e'en Gathelian Race, but originally a meer Dane:) I say that if we count so, we shall find the whole number of those Milesian Kings, as it is in this Catalogue, to agree exactly with that which Cambrensis himself, 500 years since, reported it to have been. That is, just 181 in all. 2. That counting, together with these Mi∣lesians, those 8. Fir-bholgian and Tuatha-De-Donann Kings who preceded them: and withal admitting both Cairbre Ceann-cheit & Feilim mhac Conruidh as Kings of Ireland (for so they really, tho illegally were in their time; the Former 5 years, till he died a natural death; and the Later 20. at the expiration of which he was kill'd in Battel by Tuathal Teachtmhur:) it must follow that they make in all 201 Kings of Ireland, while the Former Three Con∣quests held one after another. 3. That hereunto adding 22 more of the Fourth and Last (i. e. our English) Conquest; the whole Number of the Sovereign Princes of Ireland, from Slainghe to Charles II. must be 223. whereof Three were Queens, Macha, Mary, and Elizabeth.
A PROSPECT OF The State of Ireland, &c. The Former PART. SECTION I. First Planter of Ireland, Ciocal; First Invader, Partholan; then Neimh, and his four Sons; then Fir-bholg; then Tuatha-De-Danann; and last of all the Eight Sons of Mileadh. Fights of the former Invaders. Nine of Ferr∣amh Bolg, and Nine more of Tuatha-De-Danann, ruled as Kings of Ireland. Fir-Bholg divide it into two parts. Three Septs of these remaining still. The adventures of Mileadh. His eight Sons conquer Tuatha-De-Danann. How Erimhon came to be sole Mo∣narch
of Ireland. He was the first of 181 Kings of the Milesian Conquest. Eoghun Mor, 620 years after Erimhon, set up the Pro∣vincial Kings. Picts first appearing. They are the first time, and together with them all the Islands of Scotland, Conquered by Aonghus Ollbuadhach. Many Plantations of the Irish in Scotland. Niall Naoighiallach's Invasion of that Countrey: and an other by the six Sons of Muireadhach. Fergus Mor mhac Ercha made the first-King of Scots; that is, of the Irish in Scotland. Coilus, King of Great Brittain destroy'd by him. Three Walls built by the Romans against the Irish. King∣dom of the Picts  by these. Da∣nish Wars in Ireland. Bad success of Rode∣ric the King of Britain's Son. The Danes va∣rious success. They are at the same time plagued, as by others, so by Ceallaghane (King of Mounster) most singularly. The Mo∣narch Conghallach Mhac Mhaoil Mhithe routs 'em and kills 7000 of them in Battel. What of his two next Successors in the Mo∣narchy. Briain Boraimh, does Wonders in 25 Battels, and last of all in that of Clan∣tarff Field. Maolseachluin, that succeeded him, and Hughaire mhac Tuathail King of Leinster, destroy the Reliqnes of the Danes. The vain attempt of Magnus King of Nor∣vegia to revenge their Fate.
IReland, before that fatal War broke out in the year 1641. had two different Nations, (like the Twins of Rebecca) strugling in its Womb perpetually, al∣most five hundred years; the one called by themselves the Ancient Irish, the other the Old English, or English Irish. And indeed the former may justly glory in the Epithet of Ancient: since, as Cambden himself confesses, they fetch Britannia, trans∣lated by Phile∣mon Holland, Edit. Lond. Tit. Ireland, pag. 64. the beginning of their Histo∣ries from the most profound and remote Records of Anti∣quity; so that in compari∣son of them, the Ancientness of all other Nations is but Novelty, and as it were, a matter of ye∣sterday. It is now at least 2988 years since their Fore-fathers, the Sons of Mileadh (a∣lias Milesius the Spaniard) in a Fleet of three∣score Sail, arrived in Ireland from Gallicia in Spain, conquer'd it, and left it to their Posterity. I say at least: Because, although Polychronicon, and Cambrensis (Topog. Dist. 3. c. 17.) by their saying, That from the Arrival of those Milesians in Ireland, till the death of S. Pa∣trick their Apostle, were efflux'd 1800 years. (See Jocelin, Vit. Saucti Patricii, c. 196.) agree exactly with Ketings Epocha here: yet the Irish Book of Reigns, makes the Arrival of those
Milesians much earlier; that is, (to this pre∣sent year of Christ 1680.) e'en as long since as 3480 years compleat. But I follow Ke∣ting's Reformation of that Book, and his Ac∣count (in his Mss. History, l. 1.) whereby he places the Milesian Conquest in the year of the World, 2736. after the Floud 1086, after Moses's passing the Red Sea, 192. and before the Birth of Christ  308. Were it to my main purpose, which is, or only, or at least mostly concern'd in those Mi∣lesians, I could insert here, out of Keting, the several Plantations and Conquests of that Countrey before they knew it. How one Ciocal, about a hundred years after the Deluge, in a small Fleet of Vessels, each Vessel having fifty Men, and fifty Wo∣men aboard, arriving there, was the First that planted it. How Bartholanus and his three Sons Langui∣nus, Salanus, and Reterugus, with their Wives; and as This Author li∣ved (as himself writes) An 830. under Anaraugh, King of Anglesey and Guinech, or North-Wales. Nennius writes, a thousand Fighting Men, about 300 years after the Flood, Anno Mundi, 1956. before the Birth of Abraham 95 years, invaded it: had many dough∣ty Battels therein with those Aborigines the Issue of Ciocal, and Progeny of Cham, who (come thither from Afric) were called Gyants,
because partly of their stature or corpulency (which yet was no way exceeding the tallest growth of other men) and partly of their wic∣kedness, endeavouring to destroy every where the Descendants or Progeny of Japhet. And how this Bartholanus, alias Partholan, having Conquer'd at last those Aborigines, and Affri∣cans, his Issue after him were, at the end of three hundred years, consumed by a Pestilence; not one remaining of them. A just judgment from Heaven (without peradventure) on him, who had fled thither (as it were) from Hea∣ven, for having in his own Countrey, in Scy∣thia, kill'd both his Father and Mother, to make way for a Brother of his, and their Son, to come to the Royal Throne. How, in the end of 30 years more, Nemedus, another Scythian (some of the Irish Chronolo∣gists say he was a son to Bartholanus, left by him in Scythia when himself had departed thence) with his four Sons, Starius, Gervale, Annin, and Fergus, in a Fleet of 34 Ships, and 30 Marriners in each of them, arriving in Ireland, overthrew in three Battels the remainder of those Affrican Gyants, but was overcome in the fourth. And how soon after this defeat Ne∣medus being dead, his People rousing them∣selves, put it to the issue of one great Battel, sought at the same time both by Sea and by Land, they having 30 thousand at Land, and so many more at Sea: and the Fight proved
so mortal, that albeit they had the victory, yet they could reap no benefit by it; the very Air being so corrupted by the stench of the Carcasses which lay unburied every where (for they kill'd promiscuously in every place after that Victory, Man, Woman, and Child of their Enemies) that all over the Land there was an universal Pestilence; which after seven years more made 'em depart and quit the whole Country, leaving only ten Captains to defend those of their People (that could not have Shipping) against the remainder of the Gygantick Affricans. How these Children or Posterity of Nemedus (Clanna Neimheadh, the Irish call 'em) to avoid that dreadful and continual Pestilence, de∣parting in a thousand Vessels, great and small, under the Conduct of three Chieftains, Simeon Breac, Ibaath, and Briotan; the other two sailing to Greece, Briotan with his adherents Landed in the North of that Countrey, which we now call Scotland: and, with his and their Posterity remaining there, gave the denomi∣nation of Brittain to this whole Island, which is now called Great Brittain; as holy Cormac, the K. of Mounster, and Bishop of Cashel, in his Psalter of Cashel, together with all the Chronologers of Ireland, affirm. Wherein surely they have at least much more probability of their side, than any late Authors have, that derive that
name from Brutus, or his Romantick History either in Galfridus, or in any other. For if from Brutus, besides other reasons, why not Bru∣tannia rather than Britannia? How the five sons of Dela, viz. Gandius, Ge∣nandius, Segandius, Rutheragus, and Slanius, being the 8th. Generation from Simeon Breac, and calied in Irish Fir-bholg. after 217 years compleat from the former arrival of Nemedus there, invaded Ireland with 5000 men of all sorts in their company: and studing no great resistance, won it entirely, routed utterly out of it the remainder of that cursed Generation of Cham, the Affrican Giants, and divided it into five Provinces or Portions; which Di∣vision continues till this day. How they, and four of their Children after them, were in succession Monarchs of all Ireland, after that Slanius, who was the youngest of them all, had by force and War upon the rest erected it to a Monarchy; though he enjoy'd it but one year, Death having given him no longer joy of his Conquest over his Brethren. How none before them, i. e. none of the former In∣vaders called themselves Kings: they being the first Kings, and Slanius among them too, as I have now said, the first Monarch that Ireland ever had. Yet the Reigns of all the nine made not above 36 years in the whole.
How Eugenius, or Eoghun, as the Irish Books call him (and so they have quite other termi∣nations, both for all these and all other Names too expressed by us with Latin terminations) being the last of them, and prosperously Reign∣ing in peace and plenty over Ireland, the Na∣tion whom the Irish call Tuath-De-Danann, under their King Nuathad Airgidlaimh, as de∣scending from the foresaid Nemedus, or Ne∣meus, or Neimh, (which you please to call him) and therefore claiming that Kingdom, as their right, invaded it, fought a great Battel in Connaught, with Feramh-Bolg (the Genera∣tion of Simeon Breac, and Neimheadh, or Neme∣dus) kill'd a hundred thousand of them, and thereby, and without much loss to themselves, conquer'd the whole kingdom; the Reliques of Ferramh-Bolg retiring to the small Islands of Arrain, Ile, Rachluinn, and many other about Ireland and Scotland, where they continued till such time as Ireland came to be govern'd by Provincial Kings under the Milesians. How the Posterity of those Reliques of Ferra∣imb Bolg being forced away by the Picts, had their refuge back again to Ireland: and first to the King of Leinster, turning Tenants to him for such Lands as he was pleased to lett unto them: and next from Leinster, because of the heavy rent there, to Connaught: shifting so in the best manner they could for themselves, until
by Co-Chulain and Connall Cearnach, and the Inhabitants of Ʋlster, they were wholly driven away the second time, and quite Banish'd for ever: only three Families, Sur-names, or Septs of them excepted, which according to the judgment of some Irish Antiqnaries, remain still in Connaght and Leinster; as Dr. Keting, who also names these Septs, does write. Adding thereunto this further animadversion, as a ne∣cessary consequence, that these three Families are not of Clanna Gaoidhel, or Posterity of Gathelus, from whom all the Milesians descen∣ded long before either Milesius himself, or his Predecessors came into Spain. Lastly, how according to the Book called Psaltuir Chassil, the aforesaid Colony, or Nati∣on of Tuatha-De-Danann, held the Sovereignty of Ireland for 197 years, under seven, or ra∣ther indeed nine Kings; for after Fiacha, who was the 6th of them, reigned the three Sons of Cearmada by turns, yearly. But neither to prosecute, nor so much as to insert any of these Plantations or Conquests of Ireland by Ciocal, or Partholan, or Neimhe, or Feara Bolg, or Tuatha Dee Danann (as the Irish names of them are) can be much, if any thing at all, to my main purpose here. And though perhaps it might be in some sort material to tell you what a famous man in his Generation, nay in a great part of the World, Milesius him∣self
(otherwise called Galathus in Latin, but in Irish Galamh) had been. Or to tell you. 1. Of his first adventuring from Spain to Scythia, and serving there as General of the Army, under his Kinsman Refloir, the great Monarch of that Countrey. 2. Of his marrying this Refloir's Daughter, and Refloir's growing jea∣lous of his greatness, and preparing therefore to dispatch him, and his preventing the King by taking away his life: and then his quit∣ting Scythia, and passing to Egypt by Sea, with a Fleet of sixty Sail, and his being there em∣ploy'd by Pharaoh as General against the King of Ethiopia's Forces warring at that time on Egypt. 3. Of the many over-throws given by him to them, and Pharaoh's so great favour to him thereupon, that seeing him a Widower, (his former Wife, the Scythian Kings Daughter having died before he came to Egypt) the gave him one of his own Daughters to Wife. 4. Of his departure from Egypt by Sea, and various adventures for some years, roaming about all the Northern Seas and Isles of Europe. 5. Of his return at last to his own Countrey of Spain, and the five and forty Battels fought there vi∣ctoriously by him, and under his conduct by his near Cosins the Children of Breoghuin (the Son of Bratha, who founded Braganza in Por∣tugal) against the forein Enemies that inva∣ded that Kingdom then. 6. Of the destruction
and utter extirpation, at least for a good while, of all those Foreiners out of Spain, by his Va∣lour and Wisdom: and (which was conse∣quent) of his possessing, by himself and his foresaid Kinsmen, the greater Part of this Kingdom. 7. Of his two and thirty Sons, part Legitimat, but the most part Illegitimat. 8. Of the great Dearth in his time all over Spain, continuing six and twenty years, thro want of Rain. 9. And lastly, how this Dearth, together with several other reasons, but parti∣cularly that, of his minding now the Pro∣phetical Prediction of him by his own Magiti∣an Cathoir some years before, That his Posterity should settle in Ireland: made him, and (soon after his death) eight of his Sons think upon invading Ireland. Tho, I say, these are mat∣ters not wholly foreign to my purpose; yet because they are unnecessary, it sufficeth to have touch'd 'em lightly. And so I proceed to what I intended, as more material here to let you know. Which is, 1. That of those 8. Sons of that Great Milesius (for no more of his two and thirty Sons ventured to Ireland) who presently after their Fathers death, setting forth from Breoghuin's Tower, a place in Gallicia, long after called Notium, but of later years Compostella) and put∣ting to Sea with the first convenience, and landing in Ireland then when the three Sons
of Cearmada, ruled there by turns: and by their great Valour, destroying all three at last in the Battel of Tailtinn: and thereby subduing tho∣rowly the whole Nation of Tuatha-De-Da∣nann: two only (I mean of those eight Bro∣thers) survived to rejoyce in their Conquest finish'd by that Battel, Eibhir and Erimhon (a∣lias Heber and Herimon, as the Latins call them:) the other six being lost by various Chances. 2. That Eibhir and Erimhon assuming now the sovereign power of the whole Island, & af∣ter partition made first to themselves, then to their Cousins German, then to their other Cap∣tains, and last of all to the common Soldiers, of convenient proportions of Land) ruling se∣verally over all (that is, Eibhir in the Southern, and Erimhon in the Northern Division) the first year in perfect peace together: and then falling at odds, through the Pride and instiga∣tion of Heber's Wife, that put her Husband upon having all in both Divisions to himself alone; to the end forsooth, she might sit and strut upon the three chief Ardes or Heights of Ireland, as the only Queen thereof: and then coming to a pitch'd Battel, and Heber kill'd in it: and then Herimon remaining the only King, without any Competitor until his death, which hapned fourteen years after: He was the first of a hundred fourscore and one, that as Monarchs of all Ireland, suc∣cessively
governed it, and the Milesian or Irish Nation the only possessors of it, for two thou∣sand, four hundred, eighty eight years, until the landing of Henry the second there in the year of Christ 1172. 3. Cambrensis himself (tho Giraldus Camb. Topog. Hiber. dist. 3. c. xv. 17. 36, 37, & 44. otherwise no great favourer of the Irish) does certifie so much, by computing from Herimon the first King, to Laogirius, (who was King when St. Patrick landed there, An Christi 432. to preach the Gospel) a hundred, thirty and one: from Laogirius to King Fedlimidius, which contain'd 400 years of the flourishing state of Christianity among the Irish, three and thirty more: and from that period to Ruaridh O Conchabhair, who was the Monarch when Henry II. landed as before, the whole remainder of that number of a hundred four∣score and one: who (besides a far greater number of the Provincial Kings under them) governed, as Sovereign Monarchs▪ of all that Island for so many Ages, from the year of the World, 2736. Argument e∣nough I think for the Antiquity of the Irish Nation, to be no where parallel'd, if not per∣adventure by the Chineses only, in the late History written of them by Martinus à Mar∣tins.
4. That for their bravery in Martial Ex∣ploits (to say nothing now of a thousand bloody proofs thereof given by them at home for much above 2000 years, fighting almost continually, either the Progeny of Heber in general against Herimon's for the Sovereignty; or one Province, or greater Division, Leath Cuinn, and Leath Mogh, invading the other, especially after the Provincial Kings had set up by the Authority of Eoghun Mor or Eu∣genius Magnus the Monarch, about 600 years after the death of Herimon: so that very few of their Monarchs in so large an extent of time died other than violent deaths, and this in Battel commonly; but to say nothing of these proofs given by them at home) their manifest Invasions abroad, their Plantations, and at last even total Conquest of the King∣dom of Albain, that part of Great Britain which in after Ages came to be called Scot∣land, from their conquering and planting of it with Colonies of their Children (for they themselves were in this part of the World, the original Scots, as their Countrey now called Ireland, or in Latin Hibernia, was then the only Countrey named Scotia) is an argu∣ment which cannot be refuted. 5. That the Nation which we call Picts, but the Irish, in their Language, Cruinith, having in the reign of Herimon, the first Irish Mo∣narch,
roam'd about by Sea from Scythia till they arrived at last in Ireland, and there de∣siring to inhabit, and being denied this re∣quest, but however directed by Herimon to that part of the now Great Britain, which lying Northeast of Ireland was called Albain then, and is so still by the Irish; and here seated themselves, and then multiplying ex∣ceedingly for two hundred and fifty years; at the expiration of this time, upon some difference hapned, Aonghus (or Aenaeas) Oll∣bhuadhach, the VII. Monarch of Ireland, suc∣ceeding Herimon, made so sharp and long a War upon them, and not on them only, but as well on the Northern Britains remaining still their Neighbours, as upon the Inhabi∣tants of the barren Orcades the Race of Fir Bholg long before expelled Ireland, that in fifty fierce Battels given them, he utterly broke their whole strength and made them Tribu∣taries. Nor was this the only Conquest made by the Milesian Irish either on the Heathen or Christian Picts, and their Associats in Albain. For to pass over those six or seven Inva∣sions more of the Irish into Albain, under se∣veral of their Monarchs from the Reign of the foresaid Aonghus, or Enaeas, to the Reign of Niall the Great, surnamed also Naoighiallach. Likewise to say nothing how this very Niall
not only went himself in Person with a pow∣erful Army thither, partly to confirm, and partly to enlarge those antations made there by his Predecessors, but was himself the first of Mortals, that by his own Authority, and at the instance of those Plantations gave the name of Scotia Minor, (or Scotland the Lesser) to that Northern part of Great Britain, or∣daining all his Subjects to call it so. Besides, to pass by as well the Invasion, as the ex∣traordinary great and famous Plantation made therein by the six sons of that Ʋlster King Muiredbach (whom Cambrensis calls in Latin Muredus) either in the Time of Lapghaire the II's being Monarch of Ireland, when St. Patrick conquered that Kingdom to Christian Religion, or at least somewhat later. To pass I say all these matters in silence, though otherwise both great in themselves, and no less attested by sufficient Authority: that I think is very great and very true, which Cambden Title Scots. page 26. and be∣fore, page. 128. in his Britannia writes, That the Scots come from Ireland, after a long War, at last in the year of Christ 740. and in one great Bat∣tel destroyed the Picts so, as there was scarce one of them left alive; whereby that whole Nation and very name of the Picts was utter∣ly extinguish'd.
6. That besides; the Irish Chronicles, with∣out contradiction from any, tell us, how the foresaid Niall the Great, surnamed Naoighel∣lach from the nine Hostages taken by him, five from the five Provinces of Ireland, and four from the Picts and other Inhabitants of Scotland or Albuin, not only made the other parts of Great Britain, even so far as the South of it, tributary, but with a mighty Force of Irish, Scots, Picts, and Britons in one Army pass'd the Sea to France, landed in Armorica, and march'd so far as the River Loyre. Where, being encamped, hewas trea∣cherously kill'd by Eochae King of Leinster, whom he had formerly so punish'd and plagu'd, that he forc'd him to fly even out of all Ire∣land, and who therefore studying still re∣venge, followed him unknown to France, and finding there an opportunity, took it. For standing one day by chance on the bank of the foresaid River, and seeing Niall at the same time on the other Bank, not far off, he bent his Bow presently, and with all his might letting fly at him, shot him dead in the place by piercing his head through both scull and brain. 7. That moreover, Fergus the Great, King of all Ireland, as Buchanan calls him, enter'd Scotland with a puiffant Army, gave Battel to Coilus King of the Britons, who invaded
both the Picts and Irish Plantations together, fought him, kill'd him, overthrew his whole Army, was thereupon himself both declar'd and receiv'd the first King of the Scottish Nation inhabiting the North of Great Britain; and after this being gone for Ireland, as he was returning back again to Scotland, was drown'd hard by the Rock, which from his fate before it, hath ever since been called by the Irish Carig-Fherus, now Knock-fergus by the English: and that all this Rerum Scoti∣car. l. 1. happened, says Buchanan, a∣bout the time that Alexander the Great enter'd Babylon. For albeit the Irish Books agree not with Buchanans relation of this Fergusius the Great; not either, I say, as to his quality of being King of Ireland, or as to this time of his Adventure in Scot∣land, or elsewhere, mentioning him only as a Brother to Mairchertach Mor mhac Ercha Monarch of Ireland, and then fixing both his life and death immediatly after Saint Patricks death, that is about 530 years after the Incarnation of our Lord: yet since they agree with Buchanan in all other material points related by him of this famous Fergus; especially that of his entring Scotland with a great Army, being the first King of Scots in Britain: I think the allegation of what they so agree upon is mightily to purpose.
8. That therefore it is easie to be under∣stood (whatever Cambden's admiration be) how the Mi∣lesian Irish Race were those In his Britan∣nia. Tit. Picts. p. 115. daring men, that having the assistance of the Picts their Tributaries, and some few Britons, withdrawn to them for protection from the Roman yoke, drew forth at one time thirty thousand armed men a∣gainst Agricola, and gave Severus the Empe∣rour so much trouble, that of Romans and Associats, he lost in one expedition against them fifty thousand men. And were yet the men against Dio. whose incursions into the Ro∣man Province here; first the Fence was built by Adrian from Edinborough Frith to Cluyd, fourscore miles Spartianus. in length, the foundation of it being laid deep within the ground of huge piles or stakes, fastned together like a strong hedg or mound: then the work of Turff and Earth by Severus across the Island from one Sea to another; then under Hono∣rius, the Wall of stone running the same extent, eight foot broad, and twelve foot high: and last of all, the Towers and Bul∣warks all along the Southern Coast of Bri∣tain, at convenient distances, raised against their landing on that side out of their plunder∣ing Fleets.
6. That a further argument yet, and such as of all hands must be confess'd to shew a∣bundantly their Martial spirit and fortitude in those days of old, was their brave defence of their own Countrey at home against the manifold powerful and almost continual Inva∣sions of it from abroad by the Heathen Danes, Norvegians, and Easterlings, at least 200 years. For I pass wholly over those little, short and inconsiderable Invasions of them, either by Egfrid the Saxon King of Northumberland, in the year 640. according to Cambden, Britannia Tit. Ireland. or (rather indeed) by his Ge∣neral Berthus in the year 684. as Beda l. 4. c. 26. has it; or by some other Brittish Commanders joyn'd with the Picts, at two or three several times in the seventh Century after Christ. Of none of these do I take notice, because they signifie not much, save only the preying and burning at two several times and places a part of the Countrey by the▪ Sea-side, and three inconside∣rable Fights, as they are related in the Irish Books. The first under the Sovereignty of Blathmhac and Diarmuid Ruannigh, two Bro∣thers ruling peaceably together as Kings of Ire∣land; wherein the Saxon King and thirty of his Nobles were kill'd, say the Irish Chronicles, without mentioning other loss, or any at all
of the other side. The second under the Sove∣reignty of Fionachta Fliadhach: whereof all the account they give is, that Comghusgach King of the Picts, and a great many of the Irish were slain in it. The third, after a few years more, under the Monarchy of Loionsiogch mhac Aonghussa, fought against the men of Ʋlster by the Brittons, but to their own loss. And this is all the Irish Chronicles (in Doctor Keting) have of these matters. So that neither the loss nor Victory signifying much of either side, at least as to Ireland in ge∣neral, by any of these Invasions, there was no∣thing more heard of them or of the Invaders. Much less was there ever in any Chronicle or Book that I could see, either in English, Irish, or Latin, before Cambden's Britannia came forth, any mention made of Edgar King of England, how puissant soever he was, his having conque∣red a great part of Ireland, and Dublin withal, or indeed so much as one foot of Land there, nay or so much as his having attempted any such thing. And therefore I take no notice of Cambden's old Charter of King Edgar, wherever he found it. And so I do as little of Buchanan's relation, where he writes, that Gregory the Great, King of Scotland (who began his Reign Anno Christi 875. and ended it with his life Anno 902.) invaded Ireland with a puissant Army,
during the minority of Donogh King of Ireland, and Tutorship of this young King by Brien and Conchuair: beat these Tutors in two several great Fights: took Dondalk, Droghedagh, and Dublin: visited here the young King, assum'd his Tutorage to himself: placed Governours in the strong Towns: receiv'd threescore Hostages for their fidelity: and with them return'd victorious to Scotland. Certainly Ireland never had at any time, since the very beginning (not even since the first Monarch Slanius, who reigned above three thousand years ago) any King that was a Minor, as Doctor Keting well observes, and may be seen by any that reads over in his Chronology and History all the Reigns of the several Monarchs, who during that vast ex∣tent of time successively govern'd Ireland, or had the Title to govern as Monarchs there, until it came under the English Power in the year of Christ 1172. There was not one of them all that came to the Soveraignty, but either by election of the people, or power of the Sword: as there was not one in seven but came to it by this latter way, that is, by killing of his Predecessor, Keting in the life of Brian Bo∣rumha. and this commonly too in Battel. Besides their very fundamental Law of Tani∣stry did exclude a Minor. What then must
we think, where so many thousands descend∣ed of Heber and Herimon were at hand to claim their Titles, rather than a Minor should have it? But to say no more to this feigned Inva∣sion from Scotland, nor any thing, other than what I have already, of those former true however inconsiderable ones from elsewhere in Great Britain: and to return back where I was, to the Invasions both true, and ter∣rible and lasting indeed of the Danes: what I would say is, that notwithstanding those cruel Heathens had from the year of Christ 820. (when they first invaded Ireland in the Reign of Hugh, in Irish Aodh, surnamed Ordnighe Monarch of Ireland, and Airtre mhic Caithil Provincial King of Mounster; and after that year, all along in the Reigns of both that Monarch and his two Succes∣sors Conchauar mhac Donchadha and Niall Caille, as likewise of Feilimidh mhic Griom∣thaine, the Latins call him Feidlimidius, successor to Airtre in the Kingdom of Moun∣ster) in several Fleets, the two first, one after another, landing in Mounster, the third in the North, the fourth in vibh Cinsallach in Leinster, fifth, in the Harbour of Limmerick, sixth, of 60 Sail at the River Boyne, seventh, of forty Sail on the River Liffy, eighth and ninth, extraordinary great mighty ones at
Lough-Foyle in Ʋlster, poured in continually from time to time for above forty years to∣gether, those almost incredible Numbers of men, related by Hanmor: yet the Irish fought 'em still, and foyl'd 'em too in eight or nine Battels. And although, being too much overpow∣red by the continual supplies of new men coming to their Enemies, who were absolute masters of the Seas; they, after a tedious cruel and continual War, became at last for some little season Tributary to their Captain General Turgheise (for so the Irish call him, by us called Turgesius) who now stiled himself King of Ireland; lived in the middle thereof at Lough Ribh near the place where now Ath∣lone is; had both there and all over the whole Kingdom in every Province and Countrey, and almost nook of it, his Dane-Raths and other Fortifications made, and strong Garrisons planted in 'em: yet (very soon after the gene∣rality of their Princes and people (I say the generality: for some of them held out still in some inaccessible places of Rocks and Bogs' and Woods) had so yielded to him) their wisdom & valour enfranchiz'd them most wonderfully in little above one Months time, by their utter de∣struction of this Tyrant & all his Heathen Crue. For upon his lusting after the beautiful Daugh∣ter of Maolsechluin King of Meath, and his de∣siring
her of her Father to be his Concubine, and the Fathers seeming of purpose to con∣sent, and then sending her privately at the Night appointed, but attended with fifteen resolute Youths in Womens attire with short Swords under their Gowns, and instructions what to do: and then when it was very late at Night, and all the rest of the leacherous Tyrants great Commanders withdrawn each to his own Apartment, their seizing him so soon as he began to be rude with her, and the Armour too of all the rest laid together in one heap on a Table in the Hall: and then her Fathers rushing in at the same time, and kil∣ling all those Commanders every one when they expected other Company, each one of them one of the young beautiful Damsels, as the Tyrant had promised them: hereupon, I say, and upon the word given by Messengers, who were ready of purpose, flying into all parts, the Irish to a man throughout the King∣dom are presently in Arms, fall upon the a∣stoish'd Danes, attack and carry their Forts, fight their Troops wherever they embody, rout 'em, kill 'em, and pursue the remainders of them to their very Ships, getting now away out of the Roads, as Wind & Weather serv'd 'em. As for Turgesius himself, Maolseachluin, reserv'd him in Fetters for a time, and then drown'd him at last in Lough-ainme.
So that, after much about forty years bloody, continual and general War at home in all the Provinces, and several years most miserable and general thraldom under the yoke of such powerful, barbarous and fell Tyrants, who left not a Monastery or Church, or Chappel standing where ever they came; who placed a Lay-heathen Abbot, in every Cloyster, and endowed Church to gather the Revenues; who layed so many times all their Countrey in Ashes; who no less than four several times in one Month burnt Ard∣magh, the most holy See and Metropolitan City then of all Ireland; who slew indi∣stinctly for so many years both Priests and Clerks and Laicks, and mean and great, and rich and poor without mercy; and who at last having subdued the miserable remainder, imposed those burdens of Bondage on them which were such, that if as to the particu∣lars they were not attested by all the Irish Chronicles in Dr. Keting, they would surpass all belief: we see how at last, and for that present, the Irish Nation were by the wisdom of this Maolseachluin King of Meath, and by the great Valour and resolution of the rest of their Princes and People, delivered. I say for that present. For pursuant to what has been said before, you are to understand now,
10. That but a very few years after, because in the Keting. Poly∣chronicon. Reign of the same Maolseach∣luin mhic Mhaolruanuidh King of Meath, (who deservedly upon the aforesaid expulsion of the Danes was by the Princes and Nobility made King of all Ire∣land, and continued so until his death, i. e. full sixteen years and no more) three Norvegian Brothers, Amelanus, Cytaracus, and Ivorus, as Polychronicon calls 'em, with their Train, being come to Ireland in a peaceable manner, and under pretence of Trafficking, got leave of the Princes of the Land to build three Ci∣ties, paying Tribute for them, Dublin, Water∣ford, and Limeric. Which they had no sooner finished, and strongly forti∣fied, than the Irish found Keting. themselves engaged in as great a War as the former, by new and nu∣merous Fleets both of Norvegians, Danes, and Oostmans (as they call'd 'em then) arriving continually from time to time in all the Quarters of the Kingdom. The difference only was, that the former continued forty years, or thereabouts; but this War now off and on a hundred and fifty years compleat. And when the former began, the Irish had no strangers in pay whose Revolt might en∣danger them: but when this began they had
a great number even of Danish, or other Ea∣sterling Foreigners (whom immediately up∣on ending the former War, they entertain'd in pay, and therefore call'd 'em Bownies) to guard their Coasts all round the Kingdom, and these every one turned against them now. Besides in the former the Irish were all of a mind against the common Enemy; but in this they were often divided, some of them confederating openly and fighting in conjunction with those forein Enemies against their Native Soil, especially the little King of Desies in Mounster, and the King of Leinster too not seldom. Moreover, to end the for∣mer War, and redeem them from their bon∣dage under Turgesius, the stratagem of Maol∣seachluin was necessary; but in this later all along both in the procedure, and final issue of it, they owed their great and frequent Vi∣ctories not to any stratagem, but under God to pure Valour and manly Resolution. But that I may at last come to an issue on this point, I will pass over all those Victo∣rious Battels fought by the Irish in the pro∣cedure of this second Danish War made up∣on them. As first the Battel of Dromma Dam∣haigha, fought by the foresaid King of Ire∣land, Maolseachluin himself. 2. The Battel of Loughfoill by his Successor Aoth Finliath. 3. The many Battels in the Reign of Donn∣choe
mhic Floinn, fought by Ceallaghane King of Mounster, whereby he not only took Limme∣rick, Cashel, Cork, and Waterford from the Danes, but quite extirpated them at least in his days out of that Province. His Sea-fight also with their Fleet before Dundalk; which proved extreamly fatal to them. Likewise the great slaughter of their fellows in Con∣naught by the Conacians about the same time. Moreover, and which was somewhat extra∣ordinary, and before Ceallaghane had taken Limmerick, the Battel of Roscrea, where the Merchants and Townsmen at a great Fair held in that place on Saint Peters day, under∣standing of an Army of Danes coming on them from Connaught and Limmerick under a Danish Earl called Oilsin, set forth against them in the best order they could, fought them, defeated them, and kill'd three or four thousand of them in that Field. Besides Muirchiortach mhac Neill King of Ʋlster, his killing 800 with their chief Commanders, Abilaine, Aufer, and Roilt, and soon after Conuing mhac Neill 1200 more of their Hea∣then wicked Crue. And further yet, the De∣feat given to Rodoricus the King of Britains Son, who Anno Christi 966. as Hanmer says, invaded Ireland with a puissant Army, but lost both Army and Life by those he invaded. 4. The Battel of Muine Broghaine fought by
the Monarch Conghallach mhac Maoil Mhithe, with the slaughter of 7000 Danes on the spot, though with great loss of his own side too. 5. and last∣ly, even all those four & twenty bloudy Battels fought against the Danes, and their Confede∣rats before the Battel of Cluain-Tairbh, and fought I say every one of them by that hap∣py victorious Prince until his death Brien mhac Kinedie, alias Boraimhe, who in the fourth year of the foresaid Monarch Conghallach's Reign came to be King of Mounster, and within eight years next following made all Leath Mogha, i. e. the Southern half of Ire∣land acknowledg him their Sovereign: and ruled so for seven and thirty years, until he was chosen at last Monarch of all Ireland: in which last Supremacy he continued flourish∣ing the remainder of his life, which after twelve years more he ended victoriously at Cluain-tairf Field. And as I do pass over so many former Battels wherein the Irish were victorious in this second War: so I shall those many other too wherein they were to some purpose foiled in the same War; tho Martial courage, tho true Valour may sometimes exert it self no less in the Foil than in the Victory. I'le take no notice, neither of the stoning to death Maolguala, King of Mounster, by those barbarous heathen Foes, in the Reign of Aodh Finliath: nor of
the mighty overthrow given the Leinster men by Jomhar one of their Generals, in the reign of Niall Gluindubh: nor of Sitric, another General of theirs, both defeating and kil∣ling, and that in a more considerable fight also, the said Monarch Niall Gluindubb him∣self: nor of the Battel of Biothlane against the Leinster men again, under the Reign of Domhnal mhac Muirchirtae: nor finally of the Battel of Cille mhoane, fought by the Danes and Lagenians both, joyn'd together now against their Monarch Domhnal mhac Muirchirtae; wherein the King of Ʋlster Ard∣gall, and Dombnal King of Oirghiellae, and many others of great quality were kill'd of the Monarch's side. As well every one of these unsuccessful Battels, as all the former, ten times both in number and weight, more successful to the Irish in the second War, I willingly pass over, to come unto, and give you the famous Fight of Cluain-Tairbh at last. It was the five and twentieth and last of all the Battels fought so bravely by that victorious King of Ireland, Brian Boraimhe himself. It was in∣deed the Battel that put an end to all the Danish, hopes in that Kingdom. Besides, it was, if ever any was, by mutual consent of both sides, a pitch'd Battel, and the Field, whereon it was fought, some weeks before
agreed upon between them. So that there was no place at all for Ambuscadoes, Tricks, or stratagems in it; but pure Valour must de∣cide the quarrel and win the day. The occasion, manner and issue of it, take thus in short. About the end of Brian Bo∣raimh's Reign, the Kingdom of Ireland being all over in peace and flourishing with all earthly blessings under him, and no more Danes left in the Land, but such a certain number of Artificers, Handy-craftsmen, and Merchants in Dublin, Weixford, Waterford, Cork, and Limmerick, as he thought and knew could be master'd at any time if they dared rebel: he sends to his Brother-in-law Maolmoradh mhac Murchoe King of Leinster, desiring three special Masts for shipping out of his Woods. Maoldmoradh consents, and goes himself to see them drawn along by the streingth of men to Cean Choradh, the Mo∣narch's House in Tomond. A difference hap∣pening in the way between those men, and thereupon Maolmoradh alighting, and help∣ing them to draw one of the beams up a high Mountain which they must have cross'd, he toare off the clasp of his outward Robe. Which, so soon as he came to the Monarchs Court, and visited the Queen, his own Si∣ster Garmlaigh, he desires her to fasten, telling her how it was torn off. She
takes the Robe, throws it into the fire, burns it before his face, and then rebukes him smartly for his unworthy subjection of him∣self and his people of Leinster to Briean, though her Husband. And the Monarch Maolmoradh taking to heart her words, and turning aside to see Murchoe the Prince, Brian's eldest Son, playing a game at Chess, advises against him on some draught, whereby the Prince lost his game. Who thereupon fretting and twit∣ting his Uncle this Leinster King; told him, that his advice formerly given to the Danes at the Battel of Gleann Mama lost them the Field. Maolmoradh replyes, that his next should prove otherwise. The Prince defies him. Maolmoradh withdraws, goes to bed Supperless, and early in the morning un∣known posts away to Leinster. Where the very next day after his coming, he assembles his chief Noblemen, represents to them what had past, sets them all on fire to renounce their Allegiance to Briean, confederate with the Danes, and send the Monarch defiance. Then he posts immediatly to Dublin, en∣gages the chief of the Danes there to send forthwith to the King of Denmark for a strong supply to help him against their mortal E∣nemy Brian Boraimhe, and promises them his destruction. And then he prepares at home for War. And then within a little more time
having seen twelve thousand men under the command of two of the King of Denmark's Sons, Carolus Knutus, and Andreas, landed safe∣ly at Dublin, and both kindly received them, and refreshed them very well; he without longer delay by a Herauld bid defiance to Brian, and challenges him to fight on Magh∣nealta a spacious Field at Cluain-Tairbh (o∣therwise Clantarf) within two miles of Dub∣lin. And Brian, with what speed he can, joyning together all the Forces of Mounster, Connaght, and Meath (for those of Ʋlster he neither sent unto, nor would stay for, as confiding mightily in those he had already out of the three other Divisions, and hastning to fight) marches directly to the place ap∣pointed, Maghnealta, and sees the Enemy there, prepared to receive him, viz. sixteen thousand Danes, twelve of the new, and four of the old ones, together with all the power of Leinster, headed by their said King Maol∣moradh the only Author of this Battel. To be short, both Armies drawing near, and view∣ing fully one another, the fatal sign is given at last, and Trumpets sound and skies re∣sound with the terrible shouts of both sides, as they closed. But Maolseachluin the King of Meath, who had been Monarch before Brian Boraimhe, and was deposed to give him place (the only Monarch of Ireland, that
from the beginning did survive his depositi∣on) finding it now his time to be in some sort revenged on Brian, stands off with his Forces of Meath so soon as the signal was given, and continues a meer Spectator du∣ring the whole time of the Battel, without joyning with either side. And yet notwith∣standing this treacherous carriage of Maolseach∣luin, (for it can be term'd no better, though after this Fight was over, he recovered the Mo∣narchy by it, and was the last Monarch of the Milesian Race obeyed or acknowledged as such universally throughout the Kingdom) yet I say, notwithstanding it, the valorous undaunted Prince Murchoe, eldest Son of Brian Boraimhe, having persuaded his Father to retire into his Tent by reason of his great age (for he was now fourscore and eight years old) behaved himself with his Momo∣nian and Conacian Forces so bravely, and made such and so many furious impressions on e∣very side into the main Battalions of the E∣nemies, that although neither courage, nor dexterity, nor ambition, nor glory, nor re∣venge, nor despair, proposed unto them re∣spectively, were wanting to make the Danish and Lagenian Forces withstand him a very long time, and sell the Victory at a very dear rate; he won the Field at last, or rather indeed his Father and his Army won it after
his death. For this renowned Prince was kill'd in the Battel. And, which is far more strange, the Father himself Brian Boraimhe the Mo∣narch, now after the Field had been clearly gain'd, and the remainder of the Enemy scattered into the four Winds, was kill'd in his own Tent by one Bruaodor a Dane, who in the general Rout leading a party after him was forc'd to fly that way where the Monarch's Tent was pitch'd. Whereinto, as he pass'd by, entring, and seeing the Mo∣narch whom he had formerly known, he slew him; though himself and his followers were presently cut in pieces by those that pursued them. Of the Monarchs side, besides himself and his Son the Prince, were kill'd in this Battel, seven little Kings, most of the other Nobi∣lity both of Mounster and Connaught, and 4000 of inferiour degree. But of the other side were kill'd, first the King of Leinster him∣self, Molmoradh mhac Murchoe (the Challen∣ger of Brian to this Battel) with his chief Nobles, and 3000 common Souldiers: then of the Danes, the two Sons of the King of Denmark, all their great Nobility, 6700 of the Souldiers newly come with them, and of the old Danes, that were before their com∣ing to Ireland, 4000 more: in all of both sides, 17000 seven hundred, besides Princes
and other Noble men. It was fought in the year of Christ 1034. Apr. 22. on good Friday. After this Battel we hear but little of the Danes in Ireland. Only that the foresaid Maol∣seachluin (who now the second time suc∣ceeded in the Monarchy for nine years more until his death) took Dublin the next year, sack'd it, burnt it, and killed in it all those Danes that escaped from Clantarff. That soon after this again, i. e. in the Sovereignty of this same Maolseachluin, Huaghaire mhac Duinling mhac Tathil King of Leinster (a man of another mind, race and interest than Molmoradh mhac Murchoe was) gave a mighty overthrow (and it the very last given) to Si∣teric the Son of Aomlaibh, and the Danes of Dublin: who, it seems, after the Battel of Clantarff, and the burning of Dublin next year by Maolseachluin, had once more recruit∣ed from the Isle of Man, and other Islands possess'd as yet by the Danes; but were now finally destroyed in Ireland by the said new King of Leinster. And lastly, as Hackluyt reports in his Chronicle, and so does Han∣mer too, that in the Reign of Muirchiortach mhac Brien, who was the fourth after Brian Boraimhe, Magnus, then King of Denmark, would needs venture the attempting Ireland once more, to recover what his Predecessors
held there; but that landing with part of his Fleet before the greater part of them came up, he was set upon immediately by the Countrey people and kill'd, and his Fleet understanding it return'd presently from whence they came.
SECT. II. The Irish for 2600 years a free Nation. They were never subject to, nor so much as invaded by the Romans. Their Political Government, or three Great Councils, of Teamhvuir, (alias Tarach) Eumhna, and Cruachain. The first, a Triennial Parliament. It's Laws, Feastings, and other Ceremonies. The strict examination therein of their publick Acts and Monuments. What of that nature done in the great Parliament under Laogirius; St. Pa∣trick himself being one of the Examiners. What matters debated in the Councils of Eumhna and Cruachain. The Titles of Duke, Marquess, Earl, Baron, Knight, not in use with them: as neither in Scotland till William the Conqueror's time. Their Leinster Militia, called Fiona Eirlonn, commanded by Fionn mhac Cuuail as General of it. Hector Boethius and Hanmer cor∣rected. Their other Militia in Mounster, by name Dal-Gheass. Their celebrated Learn∣ing, after their Conversion to Christianity. Their four chief Ʋniversities: whereof Ard∣magh had 7000 Scholars at one time. Their wonderful Sanctity, i. e. the prodigious Num∣bers
of their holy Monks and Nuns, under S. Patrick first, and next under the great Abbot Conghall, alias Congellus. This Abbot in person founded and governed the Monaste∣ries both of Beanchuir in Ulster, and Bangor in Wales near West-Chester: his Disciples, those of Lindisfarn in England, Luxeu in Burgun∣dy, Bobie in Italy, &c. They converted several foreign Countreys. But Scotland par∣ticularly was converted by Columb Cille. A special priviledge given him and his Suc∣cessors the Abbots of Hy. AND so by this time I think enough is said of the Warlike Spirit and Valour of the ancient Irish for so many Ages of the World, until that time which was near the Eleventh Century of Christian Religion. For as yet the infinite goodness, patience and mercy of God, expecting still their amend∣ment, restrain'd his Justice from bereaving them utterly of that Virtue, that masculine bold Heroick Spirit I mean, which preserv'd them so long, even well nigh six and twenty hundred years a free Nation, independent of any other: unsubdued, undisturb'd, uninva∣ded otherwise, and no longer, nor no oftner, nor with other success or issue than we have seen. Not even the old Roman Empire it self, whose conquering Eagles made all the
rest, at least of the Western World, and among them, all, even the very most unaccessible remote recesses of Great Brittain, a prey to their uncircumscribed ambition; having ne∣ver at any time had either footing, or com∣mand, or tribute, or acknowledgment in Ireland. Though we knowwell enough out of History (Tacitus in vit. Agric.) what a longing they had to be doing there: at least to see that Countrey and people, which dared receive continually so many fugitives (Cum suum Romani Imperi∣um▪ undique pro∣pagassent, mul∣ti proculdbio ex Hispania, Gallia, & Britannia huc se receperunt, ut iniquissimo Roma∣norum jugo colla subducerent. Cam∣den, Hibern.) from their power in Spain and France, and Great Brittain and protect them to their face. But I am not to dwell or dilate on this Subject, nor indeed on any other concern∣ing that Nation: the method I prescribed my self and bulk of this Treatise not allowing it. 11. What I would in the next place reflect upon, and as briefly as I well can, is somewhat of their Policy or Government, their stand∣ing Militia, their Learning, and their San∣ctity, when they were a happy flourishing people before the first Invasion of the Danes. For their Government, besides a Monarch, five Provincial Kings, and in process
of time, especially since the first Danish War, manyother much lesser Kings, they had anciently three great Councils held in three several places: the Council of Taragh, the Council of Eumhna, and the Council of Gruachain: all three called in their language Feis Teambrach, Feis Eumhna, and Feis Grua∣chain. The first was a Triennial Parliament of all the Estates assembled at Taragh in Meath, at the Monarch's pleasure, about that time of year, which we call now All Saints. It was ordained first by Ollamh Fodhla the Twentieth Monarch after Herimon, to be thence∣forth from time to time perpetually observ'd in after Ages. It was death, without mercy, without any hopes of it, without any power in the Monarch himself to extend it to any person whatsoever, either to ssault, or wound, or strike or draw upon any man attending that great Assembly, or to be convicted ei∣ther of robbery or stealth, during the Session of it. It was called only for making Laws, reforming general abuses, revising their An∣tiquities, Genealogies, Chronicles, and either restoring or preserving peace and love among 'em by feasting together for seven days in one great House. And therefore it is notable what Dr. Keting has in the Reign of Tuathall Teachtvair the Monarch, of the manner of their meeting and sitting at these Feasts. That the
Room prepared to receive them all being made of purpose, tho very longs yet narrow, with Tables set on both sides and both ends, and all things ready for the Entertainment: and then the Room cleared of all persons whatsoever, only the Marshal, the chief He∣rauld or Chronicler, and a Horn-winder ex∣cepted: and then at three convenient little distances of time, this Horn-winder calling to Dinner by the winding of his Horn; at the first of 'em, all the Esquires or Shield∣bearers to the Princes and Nobility came to the door, and there delivered their Shields to the Marshal, who by the Heraulds direction hung them up in their due places over the Tables prepared of the right hand-side for the Estates. At the second, in like manner all the Taget-bearers to the Generals and other great Commanders of the Militia de∣livered up theirs, and were on the other side of the House placed orderly as the former. But at the third, all the Kings, Princes, E∣states, Military men, and other chief Gentry came in and fat down, each one under his own Goat of Arms blazon'd on his Shield, without any disorder about precedency, or of places; no man sitting on the outside of the Table, nor any Woman at all admitted: the Table in one end being for the Antiquaries, and in the other for other Officers.
But to pass over this matter of Ceremony, Herauldry and Feasting, what I chiefly note in their procedure, when they sat in Council or Parliament, is their extraordinary care, diligence and exactness in providing, That all their monuments of Antiquity, their Ge∣nealogies, Cronicles and Records should have nothing foisted into them, nothing at all in∣serted, but what was true and certain by the approbation of a special Committee of the most skilful in such matters. That all such, and only such National Concerns, An∣nals, or other matters, which they approv'd, after their diligent search and examination of them, should be there in publick written in the Kings or Monarchs book of Royal Re∣cords called the Psalter of Taragh: and what∣ever was repugnant to that Book, should have no credit. That, in prosecution of this great care of their National Monuments, it was, that when they became Christians, a Parlia∣ment of all their Estates both Temporal and Spiritual (held under the Monarch Laogirius at the same Royal Habitation of the Monarchs, Taragh) deputed three Kings, three Bishops, and three of their most singular Antiquaries (even Saint Patrick himself there present be∣ing one of these Bishops, as the other two were Benuin and Caraioch; and the three Kings, the foresaid Laogirius Monarch of Ire∣land,
tho never converted, Daire King of Ʋlster, and Cork mhac Luighioch King of Mounster; the Antiquaries also being Dubthach, Fergus, and Rosse mhac Trichim) to review and reduce into order all their National Chronicles. That this Committee of Nine having done so with great pains and industry, they reduced all into one Book fairly written. That the keeping of this original Book, was intrusted after, by the Estates to the Prelats: and those Prelats, for its perpetual preservation, caused several authentick Copies of it to be fairly engross'd: whereof some are extant to this day, and several more faithfully tran∣scribed out of them; their Names (taken from the places where they were for many Ages kept) being the Book of Ardmach, The Psalter of Casshell, The Book of Gleann da Loch, &c. Whereunto I may add, as not very imper∣tinent in this place, That the Irish Nation were all along from the beginning so ad∣dicted to, and had so great an esteem of the knowledg of their own Genealogies & Histories, that Keting in his Preface. anciently there have been in Ireland above two hundred chief Annalists or Historians, by place and office such, who had Estates in Land set a∣part and assign'd them and to their Issue af∣ter
them in perpetuity for attending wholly that Calling and study of it; every great Lord having a peculiar Sept of them to re∣cord and transmit to Posterity what espe∣cially concern'd him and those deriving from him; besides what concern'd the Nation in general; yet all continually subject to the foresaid Triennial Scrutiny in Parliament. A care of Antiquity and History, I think, not to be match'd by any other Nation in Europe. And as they took that care to pro∣vide for their Antiquaries, so they did also, as Cambden Britannia, tit. Ireland. p. 140. hath observed, the like for their Poets, Physicians, and Har∣pers, by assigning them Estates in Land to live independently of others, only the duty they owed their great Lords excepted still. In the two other Councils of Eumhna and Cruachain, the matters principally debated by the Nobility, Gentry, and other mem∣bers of them were the concerns of all the Artificers, Tradesmen, and Handicrafts-men of Ireland, Smiths of all sorts, Carpenters, Masons, &c. whereof a great number was summon'd to be at each Assembly. Out of which number these two Councils did cull out sixty the most eminent in their professions, and gave them authority all over the King∣dom, allowing them distinct jurisdictions,
to reform all the abuses of their several Cal∣lings, and suspend such as they thought fit from exercising them. So that none could set up or continue any Mechanical occupa∣tion but with their Licence, after they had examined and made trial of the sufficiency or insufficiency of the party concern'd. These Masters so authorised they call'd in their Language Goldannuigh; which imports omni∣scient or skilful in all Mechanicks. So much of their Councils and Government as to Civil Affairs in the more ancient times both of Paganism and Christianity. Of their Judicatures, and Judges, whom they call Bre∣hons, he that please may see very singular and wonderful things related of them in D. Keting, (Reign of Laoghaire the Monarch in St. Patricks days.) even when they were Pagans, But if you desire to know the several de∣grees of their Nobility, or the different Titles of Honour among those Irish Noblemen who sat in their Parliaments or Councils: I can only answer, besides what is said al∣ready, that in Ireland until the English Con∣quest, they had none of our Titles, that is, not those either of Duke, or Marquess, Earl, Viscount, Baron, or Knight (only such Knights as they called Niadha-Nask, and may
be called by us in English Knights of the Chain, or in Latin Milites Torquati, from a certain kind of Chain put about their Necks): as no more in truth had Scotland any such Titles before the year of Christ 1074. when Malcolm III. Reigned there, and William I. surnamed the Bastard and Conquerour had subdued all intirely here in England. Con∣cerning which custom of not using any such Titles of Honour, in Scotland particularly, as likewise concerning the other of the Lan∣guage spoken till that time in the very Court of Scotland, (though as well the one as the other may seem foreign to this place:) this following Note, in Samuel Da∣niel's words, may give you further satisfa∣ction. As in the Court of England, the French Tongue became more generally spoken, (viz. in William the Conquerours Reign, for of that time this Author speaks here) so in that of Scotland, did the English, by reason of the multitude of this Nation, attending both the Queen and her Brother Edgar, and daily repairing thither for their safety, and combination against the common Enemy. Of whom divers, abandoning their Native distressed Countrey, were by the bounty of that King preferred: and there planted, spread their off-spring into many Noble Fa∣milies,
remaining to this day. The Titles for distinguishing degrees of Honour, as of Duke, Earl, Baron, Rider, or Knight, were then (as is thought) first introduced: and the nobler sort began to be called by the title of their Seigneuries (according to the French manner) which before bare the name of their Father, with the addition of Mac, after the fashion of Ireland. Sam. Dan. in the Reign of William I. pag. 34. Where, in the Margin, he hath this further observation, that Scotland before this time generally spake a kind of Irish. 12. As to their constant ordinary Militia, what it was in their times of peace we find in the Reign of Cormock Ʋlfada (the Son of Airt) King of Ireland a little after the Birth of Christ. For then it consisted of three Battalions or Divisions, of equal number each, in all nine thousand men, under se∣veral Commanders, and Fionn mhac Cuual their General; who was neither Gyant, nor Dane, nor other Foreigner, as no more were any of his Commanders, Captains or Soul∣diers. He was himself but of the ordinary stature of other men; though Hector Boethius makes him a Giant of 15 Cubits high: and he was an Irish man both by birth and de∣scent lineally come, of his Mothers side, in the fifth Generation, from Nuatha Neacht King
of Leinster, and so upward all along from Herimon; whatever is repor∣ted by D. Hanmer Page 24. to the contrary, in his History of Ireland. Hanmer might as well have made the Cappadocian Knight a Saxon, as Fionn the son of Cuual, a Dane. And so might Hector Boethius have as well turn'd Huon of Burdeaux, or Amadis de Gaul, or the Knight of the Sun, or the Seven Champions of Chri∣stendom, and such like Romances into the very truest Histories, as the Fables written of Fionn mhac Cuual, and the Captains un∣der him called Fiona Erionn, only to en∣tertain leasurable hours and Fancy. For the Irish had their Romances too for divertise∣ment. They had Bruoidhuin in Chaorhuinn, and the Battel of Fionthraghadh (or Fentra, as Hanmer calls it) and the story of Gilla∣deackuir's Jade, and many other such, and so among these, some also of Fionn mhac Cuual and his Commanders. Which yet every one of common sense among the Irish could distinguish from their Chronicles and other Monuments of real story. In short, these Gentlemen Fionn mhac Cuaal and Fiona E∣rionn were the stoutest and bravest fighting men of their time in Ireland. And they were kept in constant pay by the Monarch, Princes and people of that Kingdom, to guard the
Coasts from abroad, and keep all at home quiet. With power nevertheless, that if the case required it, either to suppress a Rebel∣lion, or withstand an Invasion, or succour Dal Riadac in Scotland, the said General Fionn mhac Cuual might make up the stand∣ing Forces to seven Battalions, that is, one and twenty thousand men in all. And this is the naked truth concerning these Fiona Erionn so famous in their Generation. On which truth many fabulous stories have been superstructed. To them may be added those other brave Warriors, whether of a later or earlier Genera∣tion (but as to the reality of things for ought I know, of as much bravery and Valour) called Dal-Gheasse. These were the standing Militia of those fortunate successful Kings of Moun∣ster, Ceallaghan, and Brian Boraimhe in the second Danish War, and the only Gens d'Armes about their persons, and continued to be so to the succeeding Kings of Mounster, and Leathe Mogh, who were Monarchs of Ireland, at least bore that Title, three of them in succession, after the death of that Maolseachluin, who immediatly succeeded Brian Boraimhe. What number these Valiant men Dal-Gheasse did make, I cannot find. But see them all along represented for incompa∣rable Warriors, till being over-power'd at last by the King of Connaght and Leathe Cuinn,
and presumed Monarch, Torlagh More O Con∣nor, they were utterly destroyed a little be∣fore the English Conquest, and with them the Kingdom of Mounster extinguish'd. For this by that Monarch was divided in two, and continued so till the English abolish'd them both. 13. Of their Learning, Historians make no mention till after their conversion to Christianity. Which Conversion, if we speak of it as to the generality of Ireland, was be∣gun by Saint Patrick their Apostle, as we have seen before, early in the fifth Century, that is in the year 431. upon his second landing in that Countrey, and compleated by him within threescore and one years more. For so long he lived carrying on that holy Work, though he had been full threescore and one aged upon this second landing of his when he began it. About this time all the Western and Sou∣thern parts too of the Roman Empire being over-run by the Goths, Vandals, Huns, Franks, and oher barbarous partly German, partly Scythick Nations, and consequently all kind of Learning for the matter destroyed by them where ever they set footing: and the little remainders of the learned Contemplative men retiring still from the noise of Arms: and find∣ing themselves no where on the Continent, and
as little in Great Britain at rest or in safety: many of them at last passed over to Ireland. That is, to a Countrey, where, as they were told for certain (and so it was indeed) the Romans never challeng'd any right: and con∣sequently neither could the Barbarians on account of such right pretend any quarrel to it; and yet a Countrey to admiration religious and holy. This of all likelihood was one of the causes or means whereby Ireland began suddenly to flourish above any Countrey of Europe at that time in Learn∣ing. Besides, and to speak without likeli∣hood, but by the authority of good Authors for matters of Fact, their blessed Apostle St. Patrick himself at his coming thither to con∣vert them in the aforesaid year, brought with him, besides other Clerks, in his own Company thirty Bishops whom himself had in his Journey through foreign parts ga∣thered together, and before his shipping for Ireland, and for that mission of purpose con∣secrated: because he foresaw the Harvest would be very great, and therefore he need∣ed many Workmen. So affirmeth an an∣cient French Author of good repute Henricus Altisiodorensis, (Vitae S. Ger∣mani, cap. 168.) who flourish'd in the Emperour Carolus Calvus's Reign. Moreo∣ver, the Irish Chronicles tell us, that he al∣so
brought along with him all those of Ci∣niodb Scuit, or Scottish (that is Irish) Nati∣on, whom he met abroad any where that were Christians. So here you may clearly see be∣tween these Bishops, Clerks, and other Chri∣stians, the first Seminary of that great Learn∣ing in Ireland then, when all the other We∣stern Kingdoms and Provinces were grown illiterate, barbarous, rude. However, or whatever the causes or the Teachers of that Learning in Ireland were (besides these Bi∣shops and Clerks, who no man will doubt but they were at least the Chief Instructors in holy Scripture and all matters of Divi∣nity: as were also, next unto them, those other Bishops consecrated by S. Patrick at home in Ireland, during the time of his Apostle∣ship, even 355. in number (says Nennius) that is, one for every two Churches founded by him in that Countrey, and those 3000 Priests (Jocelin says 5000) likewise that were not Bi∣shops, all of them every one consecrated by himself in this Kingdom:) it is confessed of all hands, and venerable Bede (Histor. An∣glic. l. 3. c. 4, 5. 19. & l. 4. c. 25.) of old, and Cambden (Britan. pag. 730. edit. London. in Fol. an. 1607.) of late, are sufficient vouchers for it, That in those dayes the Saxons flowed over into Ireland as to the Mart of good Literature. And that,
when any was wanting here from home, it came to be a Proverb, He is gone to Ireland to be bred. Pursuant hereunto is that Distich in the life of Sulgenus (who flourish'd about 700 years since) Exemplo patrum commotus amore legendi, Ivit ad Hibernos sopbia mirabile claros. Besides all the Irish Chronicles tell us of the four great Universities in Ireland, Ardmagh, Cashel, Dun-da-Leathghlass, and Lismore; not to mention many other Colledges of lesser note elsewhere. And then I think seven thousand Scholars at one time, in one of these Universities, to wit, Ard∣magh, (Manusc. of Keting. Reign of Conchuuair Mhic Donochoe.) is a considera∣ble evidence how Learn∣ing did flourish at that time in Ireland. To all which may be added, that they were the Irish of those days, who gave a begin∣ning abroad, if not to the Schools of Oxford, (for I have an Author by me that says they did so even to these) yet cer∣tainly to those of Paris and Pavia (Monach. Sangal. de Gest. Car. Mag. c. 1. apud Canis. Tom. 1. Antiq. Lect.): yea and to many other great Colleges of Learning in fo∣reign parts; or the most famous Monasteries of Europe then, that is of France and Germany, and Italy, have not been at any time reputed Col∣leges of Learning; which yet we know, and shall presently see they have, and have indeed equally both of Learning and Sanctity been re∣puted
the chief Schools in those parts. Finally, both Camhden (Supra.) and Spencer (View of Ire∣land, or Dialogue be∣tween Irenaeus and Eudoxus, pag. 29.) acknowledge that from Ireland our Fore-fathers in Great Brittain, the Ancient Saxons, or English, learned the very form and manner of framing their characters for writing. 14. But if their Learning was great (as in those Ages) from the year of Christ, 431. or soon after, to the year 820. when the Heathen Danes and Norvegians first invaded them, it was esteem'd to be: the sanctity of those among them who gave themselves to a religious life, was yet much more admirable, as their num∣bers were almost beyond belief in these our days. And yet Cambden, that excellent Anti∣quary was convinc'd of both. Verily Hieric of Auxer (otherwise in Latin Henricus Altisio∣dorensis, whom I mention∣ed before) hath 800 years since written, (Vit. S. Ger∣mani, c. 174. Jocel. vi. S. Pa. c. 174.) that S. Patrick having converted Ireland, did so prevail with the Princes and People thereof, that he obtained a tenth of all the Lands, Goods, Cattle, and Persons of the whole Kingdom to be dedicated by them to God; the Men to be Monks, and the Women Nuns, forsaking all worldly joys most willing∣ly for a religious life: and that every where an∣swerably
to the Lands and other goods de∣voted so to God, he built Monasteries apart, the one half for Men, and the other for Wo∣men. From whence it came to pass within a very little time (says another ancient Author of great credit, Jocelinus the Monk, in his life of S. Patrick) . 174. that there was not a Wilder∣ness, nor corner, nor place so remote any where in the whole Island, but was reple∣nished with perfect Monks and Nuns; in so much that Ireland came to be called then by a special name, The Island of Saints. For says he) all those religious persons lived ac∣cording to the rule given them by S. Patrick, in perfect contempt of all earthly things, de∣sire of celestial only, mortification of their flesh, and quitting of their own proper will, equal to the Monks of Egypt, both in merit and number. Besides these testimonies, tho very many more of the ancient Writers of all Nations in Europe might be quoted; it will be sufficient to quote S. Bernard only, in the life written by him of S. Malachias, cap. v. where he relates that Ireland sent forth whole swarms of Saints into other parts of the world. And therefore I need not add but little more upon this subject than the sense of Cambden, and that in his own words, as Britannia. tit. Ireland. P. 67. they are given by his Transla∣tor, Philemon Holland. The
Irish Scholars of Patrick (says he) profited so notably in Christianity, that in the Age next ensuing, Ireland was termed Sanctorum Patria, The native Coun∣try of Saints; and the Soottish See before, how at that time, by the name Scottish, were under∣stood only the Irish, because as yet Ireland was called Scotia Major. Monks in Ire∣land and Brittain highly excell'd for their holiness and learning; yea, and sent out whole flocks of most devout men into all parts of Europe, who were the first Foun∣ders of Luxeu Abbey in Burgundy, of Bubie Abbey in Italy, of Wirtzburg Abbey in Franck∣land, of S. Galius in Sweitzerland, of Malmes∣bury, Lindisfern, and many other Mona∣steries in Britain: For out of Ireland came Celius Sedulius a Priest, Columba, Columbane, Colman, Aidan, Gallus, ithan, Maidulph, Brendan, and many other celebrated for their holy life and learning. Of these Monks is Hieric of Auxerres to be understood, when he writeth thus to the Emperour Charls the Bald, What should I speak of Ireland, which setting light by the dangers of the Sea, flitteth all of it well near with whole flocks of Philosophers unto our shores? Of whom so many as are more skil∣ful and learned than the rest, do voluntarily banish themselves to attend dutifully on the wise Solo∣mon, and be at his command.
Then (says he, I mean Cambden, delivering his further judgment, and continuing his re∣lation) this Monastical profession, although but then newly come up, was far different in those days from that of our time. They de∣sired to be that indeed which they were named to be: they were far from colourable dealing or dissembling. Erred they in any thing? It was through simplicity, not through lewdness, much less of wilul obstinacy. As for wealth, and these worldly things, they so so highly contemned them, that they did not only not seek after, but also refused the same, tho they were offered unto them descended by inheritance. For a notable Apophthegm was that of Columbane (a Monk of Ireland) who, as the Abbot Walafride writeth, When Sigebert, King of the Frankners, dealt very very earnestly with him, and that by way of many large and fair promises, that he should not depart out of his Kingdom; answered him in the same sort as Eusebius has reported of Thaddeus, name∣ly, That it became not them to embrace other mens riches, who for Christs sake had forsaken their own. Hitherto Cambden. who else∣where p. 144. tells us, that we must not wonder at the austerity of those ancient Irish Monks in their generation, that is, during those primitive ages of Christianity in Ireland, tho nothing indeed can be more
wonderful than what is written of them in that kind, For (says he) in very late times, Such as gave themselves to Religion there, did mor∣tifie their flesh even to a miracle, by watching, pray∣ing, and fasting. And verily Cambdens relation both of the sanctity and prodigious numbers too of the Irish Monks in those first ages of Christianity in Ireland, before the Danish Invasion is abun∣dantly confirm'd by the Irish Chronicles in Dr. Keting (Reign of Louis the Son of Laogirius, Son to Nial the Great. The Irish call him Lugha, mhac Laoghaire, mhic Neill Naoighiallaoi.) where he tells us that the holy Abbot Comghall (who about the end of the first, and beginning of the second century of Christian Religion in Ireland, built the famous Monastery of Beannchuir in Ʋlster) had 20000 Monks cloistered in several Mona∣steries under his own government. Which is the more credible, because S. Bernard, six hundred years agoe, in his life of S. Malachias, Archbishop of Ardmagh, and sometime Abbot and Restorer of Beannchuir, who died with him at Clara Vallis in France, report∣eth, Cap. 5. that this Monastery, under the first Founder of it, the blessed Comghall (or, as the Latins call him, Congellus) was the most noble head of many Monasteries, and fruitful Mother of many thousands of holy
Monks. That one by name Luanus, a Son of that holy Congregation of Beannchuir, was him∣self alone Founder of a hundred Monasteries in other places. That from thence flowed such a prodigious inundation of Saints, all over Ire∣land, Scotland, and other foreign Nations in those days, as we have spoken of before out of Cambden. That Columbanus, who came to France, being another Son of that holy place, founded the Cloyster of Luxeu in Burgundy, in which the number of Religious men was so great, that both day and night the Quire was replenish'd with Singers, praising God perpe∣tually by turns, even all the 24 hours through∣out the whole year, without intermission of one sole moment of time. That Beannchuir it self, the happy Mother of so blessed an Issue, had likewise of her own peculiar Conventuals at home constantly praising and serving God, such a number, that on a time some foreign Pirats Landing there unexpectedly (for't was upon the Sea-side) to spoil and burn it, as they did both, found nine hundred Monks in the place: whom they slew, and burnt alto∣gether most inhumanely, as the Histories of that Countrey tell. (Which Martyrdom, and first destruction of this Monastery hap∣pen'd, says Keting, in the Reign of Ceanfolae, Monarch or King of Ireland. That is, as I take it, about a hundred and fifty years before the
the first Invasion of the Danes.) Finally that Malachias, about 400 years after this first destruction of Beannchuir, and a second too by the Danes, restored it once more to its ancient religious dedication to God, tho not to the like number of Monks, and was himself Abbot of it, before his being Bishop ei∣ther of Connor, Ardmagh, or Down. I add in the last place Down, because this wonderful Servant of God Malachias, against the will of all others resign'd Ardmagh, and chose the poor Bishoprick of Down to retire unto, of purpose to cultivate the Barbarous Inhabitants hereof, as he had successively those of the two former. To illustrate with a few more particulars this relation given of the memorable Abbot Congellus, I Hanmer, p. 62. and 53. can out of Hanmer's Chro∣nicle, add (passing over his vain attempt to challenge him for his own Countreyman, and make him at least of British blood and birth. But he soon gives over his claim in the very next page, where on better grounds he confesses) that Con∣gellus, not far from Westchester, founded the Monastery of Bangor, which then among the Brittons was call'd the Colledg of Christian Philosophrs, and was himself the first Abbot of it, in the days of King Arthur, An. Christi 530. That he also founded the famous Mo∣nastery
of Benchor, as he calls it, but the Irish Beannchuir, in the Ardes (alias Altitudo Ʋltonum) in Ʋlster, which had 3000 Monks, and bred and train'd up many singular and eminent men of Learning, not only Irish, but Brittons, Saxons, and Scots, who dispers'd themselves far and near into foreign Coun∣treys, and converted and confirmed thou∣sands in the true faith of Christ. That se∣ven years after the founding of this Abbey in Ʋlster, he founded the other near Chester; but then return'd again to his former in Ʋlster, where he resteth in peace. And, be∣sides other particulars, to conclude all, and acknowledg indeed both the Native Countrey of Congellus, and Countrey also of his breed∣ing in holiness, that he was born in Dal-Naraidh in Ʋlster of honourable Parents, bred under Abbot Fiontan in Mounster, and then at last under Kieran at Cluain-mhac-Noise, &c. 15. I might here enlarge on the Conver∣sion of many Infidel Nations, especially in the North of Great Britain, and the Lower and Higher Germany, by the power of the words and Example of the lives of those wonderful Irish Monks. But having said e∣nough already on this Head of their San∣ctity, I will dilate no further on it. I will not recount any thing, not so much as of
St. Aidam that holy Bishop of Lindisfarn, and great Instructor of King Os∣wald's Saxon Subjects in Christianity: (Beda Hi∣str. Eccles. l. 3. c. v. & vi.) nor much neither of Columb-Cille him∣self. Only of this later give me leave to de∣liver a few things. As 1. That he was born in Ʋlster, and the Son of Feilimidh, the Son of Fergus, the Son of Conal Gulbhann, the Son of Niall the Great, surnamed also Naoighiallach, Monarch of Ireland. Which I note against some Scottish Authors, that contrary to all known truth, would make him a Scotchman. 2. That his proper name received in Baptism was Criomhthan: and the name of Columb-Cille was given him by Children, his Play-fellows; who because of his Dove-like simplicity, and because when he came to them upon a certain day, once every week, where they with great longing expected him, he always came to them immediatly out of the Church or Mona∣stery wherein he was educated (at Dubghlaissa in Tirconel) therefore they, so soon as he ap∣pear'd to them, cried forth unanimously with one voice, Columb ne Cille. Whereof his In∣structors taking notice at last, thought it the will of God he should be so called thence-for∣ward by all others too, even as the innocent Children had already and constantly once a week by their joyful acclamations begun to do:
those three distinct Irish words importing in English the Dove of the Church. For in that Language Celumb is a Dove, and Ceall, or Cill is a Church, Monastery, or Cell. And hence it was that Criomhthan came to be generally called no more Criomhthan, but Columb-Cille; the middle word at first used by the Children, being left out of the composition for brevities sake. 3. That having in his youth dedicated himself to a Monastick life, and having by stu∣pendious mortification arrived to the highest pitch of holiness, he founded the Monastery of Ardmagh, otherwise Dear-magh, in Latin Campus Roborum, as Beda notes. He pass'd from thence over to Scotland in the 43 year of his age, but of Christ 565. He Preach'd the Gospel Beda. l. 3. c. 4. there with so great power, that he converted to Christianity all the Picts then inhabiting the more Northern parts of Great Britain. He founded here another no less famous Abbey in the Isle of Hy (in Latin Iona) on which Abbey Connall mhac Conghvill, King of Dal-Rheuda, not a Pict, but an Irish Scot, bestowed that Keting in the Reign of whole Island, with the Sove∣raignty thereof to be transmit∣ted to all future Abbots of it for ever. He was held in such extraordinary great vene∣ration, both in his life and after his death,
that as Venerable Bede records it, not only all In quibus omnibus, sci∣licet Monasteriis, per Hiberniam & Britanni∣am propagatis ex utroque Monasterio, idem Mona∣sterium Insulanum, in quo ipse requiscit cor∣pore, principatum tenat. Habere autem solet ipsa Irsula Rectorem semper Abbatem presbyterum, cu∣jus juri & omnis Pro∣vincia, & ipsi etiam Episcopi ordine inusitato debeant esse subjecti, jux∣ta exemplum primi Do∣ctoris illius, qui non E∣piscopus, sed presbyter extitit & Monachus. Beda, ibid. the Monasteries propa∣gated in Ireland or Bri∣tain, from either of those two Abbeys founded by himself, were subordi∣nate to this latter of Hy, wherein he lived long∣est, and died at last, be∣ing 77 years aged: nor only all the whole Pro∣vince: but even the very Bishops themselves, con∣trary to the custom of the Church in other Countreys, were subject to the jurisdiction of all the succeeding Abbots thereof, tho Presbyters only by ordination: to wit, according to the primitive pattern of their first Doctor, who was himself no Bishop, but only a Priest and Monk. In fine, he most justly deserved the title which Posterity gave him of the first Converter of the North of Scotland, and great Apostle of the Picts, as Cambden himself calls him. And so he might have call'd him too, the great and chief (if not the first) Instructor in Christianity of all the Irish Scots. 4. That although I cannot
tell certainly what Venerable Bede means here (in the Marginal Note) by his (omnis Pro∣vincia) whole Province; that is, whether he mean all the Kingdom of Scotland, as it lies now extended, and as then comprehending all the several petty Kingdoms, both of Scots and Picts (for by the Battel fought in Scotland at Monadoire, in the Reign of Diarmuid mhic Cearbheoil, King of Ireland, by the Family of the Neals, against the Picts, we understand this Nation of Picts had several petty Kings at that time: being they lost in this one Battel, together with the Victory, seven of them kill'd in the place by those Irish, formerly planted there;) or whether he mean the King∣dom of the Irish in Scotland, or (which is the same thing) of the Scots or Dal-Rheudans only (all three signifying the same People) or whether only the Dominions of those Northern Picts, converted by Columb; and there can be no other to be meant by omnis provincia, since the Island it self, wherein that Monastery was, exceeded not five English miles in length: yet thus much I can certain∣ly say, that Keting tells us in his Reign of Aodh (or Hugh Ainmhirioch, Monarch of Ire∣land, that Columb-Cille, in his Voyages and Journey to the Parliament, held by this Mo∣narch at Drom-Ceath, in that Kingdom, was
all along out of Scotland, attended not only by 30 Sub-deacons, 50 Deacons, and 40 Priests, but 20 Bishops also, to praise God continually, and officiate in divine Offices in his company; whereby we may somewhat guess at the largeness of that Province, where∣of Venerable Bede does speak here.
SECT. III. The Scene altered. Cause of admiration. Bloody horrible feuds begun, encreas'd, multiplied, continued 2600 years. No People on earth so implacably set upon the destruction of one ano∣ther as the Milesian Irish were. Above 600 Battels fought between themselves. A hundred and eighteen Monarchs slaughter'd. Fourscore and six of those very men that kill'd them, suc∣ceeded immediatly in their Thrones. Other strange deaths of several of them. Of the whole number of 181 Monarchs, not above 29 came to a natural end. The Author of this account. Battels fought by the Monarchs Caomhaol, Tighearnmhuir, Tuathal Teachtvair (where somewhat of the Plebeians 25 years War) Conn Ceadchathach, alias Constantinus Centibellis, and Mogha Nuadhat, King of Mounster. What Leath Cuinn, and Leatha Mogh import. The feuds rather inflam'd than allaid under Christianity. Number of main Battels fought, and Monarchs kill'd the first 400 years after their Conversion by S. Patrick. By two of them, the one betwixt the Monarch Fearghall, and Murcho O Bruin King of Leinster; the other between the Monarch Aodl
Ollan, and Aodha mhac Colgan King also of Leinster, may be guess'd how bloody the rest were. Foreign Conquests, and Plantations neglected all that while. Occasionally some∣what of the Heathen Monarch Dathi's Landing in France with an Army to pursue Niall the Great's example: and of his being kill'd by a Thunderbolt near the Alps: and of the ten se∣veral Invasions of Scotland by the Irish Pagans, and but one (if one) by the Christian Irish. The Families descended from those Irish, re∣maining to this day in that Country. A word of those call'd English Scots. Columb-Cille himself Author of fighting three of the foresaid Battels in Ireland. The heavy pennance during life, enjoin'd him therefore by S. Molaisse, and his humble performance of it, and much greater wonders of him. Why the particular of those Battels of Columb-Cille mentioned here. The Parliament of Dromceathe in his time. Ba∣nishment of the Poets, one of the three ends it was called for. Great Injustice, Cruelty, Pride, &c. instanc'd severally in their Monarchs Tua∣thal Teuchtvar, &c. Nial Naoighiallach, Diarmuid mhac Ceirrbheoil, and Aodh mhac Ainmhiriogh. Some of the Murders and Bat∣tels that happened about the end of their fourth Century of Christian Religion particulariz'd.
HItherto I have briefly run over the Anti∣quity, Martial Exploits, Political Go∣vernment, or Grand Councils, ordinary Mi∣litia, and (after their Conversion to Christi∣anity) the Learning also and Sanctity of the Ancient Irish. And so have, I think, delivered in short all the most glorious Excellencies re∣corded of that Nation, eitheir in their own Monuments, or any foreign Histories, that I have seen. 16. What follows next, is on the other side of the Medal to represent unto you not only a mixture of great imperfections with so many excellencies, nor only the prevalency of downright evil men against so many good, a∣gainst so prodigiously numerous and great ex∣emplars of virtue living among them, after their being enlightned with the doctrine of salvation: but, according to the vicissitude of all things on earth, the change, and wane, and strange decay, and utter fall at last of that People in general from all the glory of their Ancestors. And this, whether we re∣gard the greatness of their former dominion and power abroad, or the more ancient policy of their Government at home, or the stupen∣dious fame of their Letters and Holiness every where in those days of old. Nay, and this alteration too, in every point, as happening to
them even before the English had set one foot in their Country under Henry II. All which I am to represent unto you now, because the order of things, and both title and nature of this Tract require I should. Though I shall ne∣vertheless do it by so much the more briefly, by how much I am less inclined to dwell on this subject. However, I must confess that when I reflect on the most authentick Monuments of that Nation, as written by their own most select Antiquaries, and believed by themselves: I am absorpt in admiration, at the wonderful patience of God with them in particular, a∣bove all other People that I have read of, ex∣pecting their amendment so long, that is, well nigh 3000 years compleat, before he would quite destroy them. A period so large, that with∣in a far less extent of time, his wrath subverted utterly the Assyrian, Chaldean, Median, Persian, Macedonian, Roman Empires, and all the Re∣publicks of Europe and Affric, and all other Kingdoms or Dominions, how great or how little soever any where on earth; whereof we have but the least competent knowledge out of ancient History, or other authentick book. And yet he continued still the Irish Nation and Monarchy beyond that extent of time. And yet 'tis no less apparent in their own Chronicles, that according to the judgment
of man, they had as little deserved the mercy of God as any of their Neighbours, or other the destroy'd Nations. For to lay aside their Idolatry, and all the appendants of it, which yet among them in their time of Paganism, were as great and hor∣rible, and provoking of Heaven as any where else in the world: and to pass over also those other Immoralities of theirs, how enormous soever in the sight of God, which were never∣theless but common to them with other Na∣tions, reputed the most civil among men: certainly (if not among Cannibals, or Le∣strigons, or such other Monsters, unworthy to be called men, or at least to be brought in comparison with any People that make use of reason, live in society and approve Govern∣ment) never has any other Nation upon Earth anneer'd the Milesian race (inhabiting Ireland) in the most unnatural, bloody, ever∣lasting destructive Feuds that have been heard, or can well be imagin'd. Feuds so prodigi∣ously bloody, that as they were first founded, so they still encreased and continued in blood, even along from the first foundation of the Irish Monarchy in the blood of Heber, shed in Battel by his Brother Herimon, until the slaugh∣ter of Muirchiortach mhac Neill (the last re∣puted Monarch saving one) by the hands of Fearrnibh Fearrmhaighe, and O Brian, or even
until the death of Diarmuid na Ngall (the last King of Leinster) at his Town of Ferns. And yet such Feuds as not only had for necessary concomitants the greatest pride, most hellish ambition, and cruellest desires of revenge; but also had for no less necessary consequents, the most horrible Injustices, Oppressions, Extor∣tions, Rapins, Desolations of the Countrey, Perfidiousnesses, Treasons, Rebellions, Con∣spiracies, Treacheries, Murders: and all this from time to time, for six and twenty hun∣dred years, only a very few lucid intervals of the frenzy excepted. These prodigious pro∣vocations of Heaven to that excessive degree wherein they were National and peculiar to that People only, and the contemplation there∣of, is it that, upon return of it, suspends my soul in admiration at the patience of God bearing so long with them, in particular, above all other Nations, far less guilty for ought ap∣pears to us in History, and much sooner utterly subverted by his revenging hand of justice. Never have we read of any other People in the World so implacably, so furiously, so eter∣nally set upon the destruction of one another, as first, The Progenies of Heber and Herimon: then those two or three other descended from Ire and Ithe, and Breoghuin, all of the same Milesian stock or kinred: and then again the two former: and then last of all, the descen∣dents
of each apart among themselves, contend∣ing for the sovraignty of the whole Island, were. To say nothing now of those no less bloody contentions of others of them very often about Provincial, or even lesser Kingdoms and Rights, after that either these or those petty Kingdoms came up. Never have we heard of any other Countrey on Earth, so frequently, so misera∣bly, beyond almost all belief afflicted, harassed, wasted, turn'd into a Wilderness, by the ac∣cursed Pride of her Nobles, Tyranny of her Princes, Rebellion of their Subjects, Fury of her Men at arms, and other Souldiers, Preying, Sacking, Burning all that stood over ground in the Provinces invaded by them. Never has either book or man told us of any Region be∣sides Ireland, that beheld so many of her beau∣teous Fields turn'd ruddy, all cover'd with the bloody gore of above 600 Battels fought on 'em so cruelly and unnaturally by her own Children of the same Language, Lineage, Re∣ligious rites, tearing out the lives of one ano∣ther partly for dominion, and often for meer re∣venge. Never has the Sun bestowed his light on any other Land, to behold a hundred and eighteen Monarchs slaughter'd by the hands of their own disloyal Native Subjects; four and twenty of them in Battel, and the rest by down∣right Assassination and Murder. And which is yet more hideous, fourscore and six of them
succeeded immediately in their Regal Thrones by those very men that so villanously had dis∣patch'd them. Nay, and a Brother, and a Son also to be in this number: besides a wicked Sister too, that by the priviledge of her Sex more finely indeed, but I am sure no less im∣piously adding one more to the former num∣ber of Royal Victims; and this of purpose to make way for her own Son to mount the Throne, bereav'd of life the Monarch Criomh∣than mhac Fiodhuigh, her own Brother, with a cup of Poyson ministred by her own hand to him. I say nothing of Lughac Riamh-Ndearg, murder'd by himself: Nothing of Aodh Ruadh, Diahorba, Niall Caille, those three destroy'd by water: Nothing of Roithsoigh mac Roain, Dathi, Laoghaire mhac Neill, or Lugha mhac Laoghaire, all four struck dead by Thunder∣bolts: Nothing of Cormuck Ʋlsada, that was choak▪d by the evil spirits for not adoring them: Lastly, nothing of Tighernmbuir, long before any of the former, by either good or evil Angels, on a sudden destroy'd, on Magh Sleachta in Letrim, and together with him three parts of the People of Ireland on the same Field, and same night, (which was our All-Souls Eve, and the night of the day we name All-Saints, or All-Hallows) for their adoring on that very day and place, the devillish Idol
set up by him there to be adored as the only God. Of none of all these, however strange∣ly kill'd, either by their own hands, or by water or thunder, or invisible Demons, or o∣ther miraculous means, do I take notice here, because none of them was taken away by any other man. Yet I cannot pass over without special note either Sedhna Jonnarruydgh, or Simeon Brea, two of the number dispatcht by the hands of men, their own Subjects: Whereof the for∣mer was in a most barbarous manner, even that of straining his members asunder, tortur'd to death by the later, who nevertheless did suc∣ceed him next: and this later again in the very same manner bereaved of life by Duach Fionn, the formers Son, succeeding now by a cruel retaliation in the Soveraignty, and so transmitting to others this particular feud, which tho not by torture, yet by murder con∣tinued on still. For the same Duach Fionn lost both his Soveraignty and Life by the hands of Muireadhach Bolgrach, Son to the above Simeon Breac: and this Muireadhach also both his in like manner to Euno Dearg, Son to that very Duach now mentioned. Which Euno having thus not only satisfied his revenge by sacri∣ficing to his Fathers Ghost, but his ambition too by acquiring the Monarchy, and enjoying it twelve years, had the great luck to die a
natural death. I say great luck, &c. For in short, of so vast a number of Irish Monarchs of the sole Milesian Race or Conquest, as we have seen in the beginning of this Treatise, in all 181. not above nine and twenty (for ought we know, or I can observe by reading over their Lives) came to a natural end. All the rest of them (besides a few whose deaths, what they were, or how, are not mentioned at all) perishing as you have seen, except only Nial Gluinndubh, and Conghallach mhac Maoil∣mhithe, both in two several Battels kill'd by Foreign Enemies, the Danes, in their second War on Ireland; unless peradventure you may think it fit to except also Brian Boraimhe from that general rule, upon this ground that he was kill'd by a Dane; tho the Battel against him was no less composed of Irish than Danes. Which account as well of those Irish Mo∣narchs, as of all the foresaid prodigious num∣ber of Battels fought between the several con∣tending Parties of that Nation, during their eternal bloody feuds in the long succession of so many Ages, I have taken the pains by read∣ing over attentively, at least twice or thrice, Dr. Ketings History, and all the several Reigns of the said Monarchs, and consequently all the memorable acts performed or happen∣ed in each of them, to give here in brief: that is by summing up together what is so
dispersedly given by him in his far more Vo∣luminous work. Which, whoever please to consult, may find not only the names and acts, but even the genealogies of all the said Monarchs carried up along to their several stocks, Heber, Herimon, Ire, Ithe, and Breog∣huin, the Son of Bratha, who dyed in Spain long before Milesius himself was born. And he shall moreover find not only the principal actors in and occasions of fighting every one of so vast a number of Battels, and the time or Reign of the Monarch under whom each of them happened; but the particular places or Fields, on which at least one half of them had been fought, and from which each of them re∣spectively has its particular denomination. I say at least one half, &c. because I find not in Keting the Fields or places (by particular name set down) either of sixteen of those 25 Battels fought by Caomhaol, youngest Son to Heber, against the Progeny of Herimon; or of fourteen of those other 27 Battels, wherein Tighearnmhuir that kill'd Caomhaol, and there∣upon succeeding him in the Soveraignty, foil'd both his and all his Fathers Race; or of any, except the first of all those hundred and five of Tuathal Teachtvair fought by him and the No∣bility in five and twenty years, against the Ple∣beians, and the two usurping Monarchs e∣lected by them successively one after another,
Cairbre Caitcheann and Conrach mhac Rossae; or even of any of those other, yet much more nu∣merous of Con Ceadchathach, in all 260 (whence the Irish gave him in their own Lan∣guage the furname of Ceadchathach, Cead in Irish, im∣ports an hundred; and Cath, a Battel. and in Latin call'd him Constan∣tinus Centibellis, which we may render in English Con of the hundred Battels) which he had Victoriously fought to reduce the Provinces of Ireland to his own terms: foiling the Province of Ʋlster in a hundred of them, the Mounster men in a hundred more, and those of Leinsten in sixty: though after all, he was himself in ten other Battels by Mogha Nuathat, King of Mounster, so mightily beaten and worsted, that he was forced at last even fairly to part stakes, and come to a new division of Ireland, in two e∣qual parts between 'em, by the Meer of Eisger-Riada, as it were a line drawn from the Eastern Sea at Dubh-linn (now Dublin) to the Western at Galway: quitting so the whole Southern side of the line for ever to Mogh, and con∣tenting himself with the North-side only. Which division, as it continued in after Ages (tho not as to the first purpose of it, but sel∣dom) and took its name from those two Di∣viders, the Southern part of it being in Irish called Leath Mogh, and the Northern Leath
Cuinn; the former importing the half of Mogh, and the latter the half of Con (for the word Leath signifies half): So it transmitted to their several Posterities, and rest of the Princes and People inhabiting either of these two halves, a strong addition to their former Feuds, and new general occasion of many cruel Fights. Of all and every of which Fights, and all the rest whatsoever, except only those but now excepted, the date, and place, and persons principally concern'd, and particular occasions too not seldom, may be read in the foresaid History of Dr. Keting. And among them, seaven of those ten Battels fought by Mogha against Con Ceadchathach, particularly named from the places where they were fought, viz. the Battels of Brosnuighe, and Sampaire, and Greine, and Atha-Luaine, and Luighe Croich, and Asail, and Ʋsnach; the names of the other three are lost. 17. But that which in this whole account of their Battels fought, and Monarchs kill'd by their own Natives, must be not only strange, but astonishing, is, that the fury extended even to many Ages of Christianity, or rather in∣deed in a very great measure to the whole ex∣tent or duration of their being a free People. In the very first four hundred years of Chri∣stian Religion flourishing in Ireland so con∣spicuously, as we have seen before, with My∣riads
of holy Professors, yet their Princes and Nobles, and other Martial men were as furi∣ously given to the destruction of one another, as their Ancestors had been in the time of Pa∣ganism. In so much, that of 33 Monarchs, who (according even to Polychronicon and Cambrensis) had Reigned successively in that Nation from Laogirius (in whose Reign, and fourth year of it, S. Patrick entred upon the work of their Conversion) to the Reign of Aodh Ordnigh, in which the first Invasion and War of the Danes upon em began, four and twenty were by their own Irish Christian Sub∣jects most unchristianly murder'd in the Island of Saints; six of them in Battel, and eighteen without battel or other solemnity or ceremo∣ny, than that of the vilest Assassination com∣mitted on great Princes. Nor were the six Battels in which those six Monachs were kill'd the only Battels fought in that space of time wherein the primitive fervour of Christi∣anity most flourish'd among other Professors of it in that Country. So far otherwise, that of those 33 Monarchs who Reign'd in that time before the first Landing of the Danes, I find but three only, Aodh Slaine, Colman Rim∣high, and Swine Mean that were not in Arms against any at all, Subjects or Foreigners; who nevertheless were all three murdered by some wicked Irish men, their own Subjects:
and besides them, Blaithmhac and Diarmuid Ruannigh, two Brothers in like manner joynt∣ly enjoying the Soveraign Power, and then Seachnasach immediatly succeeding, in all three more, that although they were in Arms at home, it was not against any of their own People, but the two former against the Saxons and Brittons invading them under the lead∣ing of their General Brit (or Berthus) and the third against the Picts Landing in Ʋlster, whom the Forces of that Province overthrew presently; and yet he also was murdered by his own People. All the rest of the three and thirty Monarchs had their Swords drawn (whether justly or injustly I dispute not here) against their own Rebellious Subjects at home; and these against them. So that besides infinite depredations, wastings, burnings of the Coun∣trey; besides the endless harrassing of the poor Peasants; and even sometime the violating of Sanctuaries, and burning of Churches, and killing of Clergy men, and Priests, and Bishops too for company; besides lesser Fights and skirmishes without num∣ber: you may read in Manuscript. in the se∣veral Reigns of those Kings. Keting above 58 main Battels fought between their Princes, Kings, and Monarchs, within that period of time: a period that wanted se∣ven or eightyears of 400.
18. And that you may understand how bloody, how destructive indeed those greater Battels might have generally been: I will in∣stance here in two of them. First, in that which they call the Battel of Allmbain, wherein about the year of Christ, 920. the Monarch Ferghall mhac Maolduin with an Army of one and twenty thousand men invading and fighting Murchoe mhac Bruin King of Leinster, who had but nine thousand one hundred and sixty men to oppose him, was himself kill'd, and together with him seven thousand of his Army on the place; besides 269 persons more of them so strangely frighted, that they fell in∣to that kind or heighth of frenzy which the Irish call in their Language Dubhghealtacht, flying over ground, like frighted Fowls from all People they met or saw. This ill fortune of this Monarch Fearghall was thought to have happend him, because a Party of his men in their march to this Field had spoild a Sanctua∣ry call'd Cillin, and the Anchoret there living had curs'd the Monarch and his whole Army. Secondly, in that which they call the Battel of Seanaigh and Vchaidh, fought between the Monarch Aodh Ollan, and Aodh Colgan, King (also) of Leinster, yea sought with that fury on both sides, that besides this Monarch himself mortally wounded, and a very great slaughter of his Army; and besides Aodh Colgan kill'd,
together with Bran Beg, the petty King of half Leinster; nine thousand more of the Leinster men alone remained dead on the Field; tho the said Monarch died not of his wounds re∣ceived here, but was kill'd sometimes after in the Battel of Seir. But what I cannot here but particularly take notice of, as worthy of special remark, are two things. The one, that this fury of pursuing one another with Battels, and Slaughters, and Murders, even all along from their conversion to Christianity, for the extent of 400 years, had been so strangely vio∣lent, that it gave them no leasure at all to think of preserving, much less enlarging their former Conquests. In their time of Paganism how bloodily so∣ever the several Factions had been commonly bent to mutual destruction; yet the prevailing Parties now and then had such generous pub∣lick resolutions, as to give over at home, and employ their Warlike spirits abroad to enlarge their Dominions. We have formerly seen their brave exploits in subduing the Orcades, Hebrides, Isle of Man, and then all Scotland; and then making the rest of Great Britain tri∣butary, and last of all enterprizing on France it self in the decay of the Roman Empire, till Niall the Great was no less treacherously than revengfully murder'd there amidst his Army camping on the River of Loyrc, as has been said
before. I might also have added another ad∣venture and enterprize of theirs on France, with a resolute Army under the leading of their Monarch Dathi, alias Fearadhach, who as in the Sovereignty of Ireland, so in his design on France succeeded immediatly to the foresaid Niall the Great: tho having Landed there, and march'd through till he came near the Alps, he was here struck dead by a Thunder∣bolt from Heaven: for so the Irish Chronicles deliver his death. As they do also the cause of it (according to the conjectures of men) to have been, that he suffered the Cell of a Chri∣stian holy Anchorite, by name Parmenius, to be ransack'd: who thereupon cursing this Hea∣then Sacrilegious King, and calling to Heaven for Vengeance, that exemplary punishment shewed his prayer was heard by God. But whatever the cause of it was, the place where it happen'd shews how vigorously he pursued the brave adventures of so many other Pagan Kings and Princes of Ireland to enlarge their Dominions abroad. 19. And because peradventure it may be worth the while, take here in short a Cata∣logue of those Irish Monarchs, Princes, and o∣ther chief Nobles, who by their first subduing, and then planting of Albain (as they call it) gave it the name of Scotland. 1. Aongus Ollbhuathach, not the VII Monarch, nor Mo∣narch
of any number at all, but Son to Fiachae Labhruinne the XIV. Monarch or King of Ire∣land (for so you must correct what is said of him otherwise before pag. 17.) I say this Aongus entred Albuin to recover of the Picts the chiefry due to the King of Ireland his Father. Wherein finding them refractory, he gave them and the Britains, or Aborigines, inhabiting at that time the Northern parts of Great Britain so many overthrows, that he reduced them at last to his own conditions, making them not only Tributarles but Subjects to the Kings of Ireland: which happen'd about 250 years af∣ter the arrival of the Iberians there from Spain, that is well nigh 2800 years since. 2. Aongus surnamed Ollmhucuidh (from his extraordi∣nary great Hogs: for Muc in their Language signifies a Hog in English) the XVI. King of Ireland, of the Milesian Conquest, fought the Picts and Firr Bholg inhabiting the Orcades, and other Islands of Scotland, and utterly sub∣dued them in 50 Battels. For it was he, and not the foresaid Aongus, surnamed Ollbhua∣thach (or the Victorious) that fought them and subdued all those Islanders. And therefore by this observation also, be pleased to correct what you find otherwise in the foresaid 16 page. 3. Many centuries after, the sixtieth Mo∣narch of Ireland, Reachta Righdhearg crossing the narrow Seas, and Landing in Albain (as
the Irish call that Country still, which we call Scotland) once more established on the Picts what those other Princes did before him. This Reachta Righdhearg was the first of three Irish Monarchs born in Mounster, that enjoyed the Sovereign Power of Albain. The other two were Mac Con (otherwise called Lughae) and Criomthan mhac Fiodaigh. 4. There went also thither (about the year of Christ, 150.) on his own account with considerable Forces Cair∣bre Riadfadae (Son to the 106. Monarch of Ireland, by name Conaire mhac Mogha Lauae) who Conquer'd large Dominions for himself in the more Northern parts of that Kingdom, and left his Posterity after him there; who are those, or at least a great and the more ancient part of those called by da. Nistor. Eccles. l. 1. c. 1. Venerable Bede Dal-Rheudini, as being the Inhabitants and first Irish Planters of Dal-Rheuda, or as the Irish call it, Dal-Riada, in Scotland. Whether it be not called so from that Cairbre Riadbfadae, that is from this surname of his, Riadfadae, being changed by V. Bede to Rheuda, as it might ea∣sily be, I know not. But this I know that Dal, which is prepos'd in the composition, signifies Part, or Lot. And so the whole word Dal-Rheuda, or Dal-Riada signifies the Part of such a man who was the chief in Con∣quering it. 5. The foresaid Mac Con, alias
Lughae, within a few years more, at least with∣in less than thirty, purfuing the same exam∣ples, Landed in Scotland with a power of his Country-men Adventurers. For it was from thence he returned back into Ireland to fight the Battel called Maigh Mhuchruimhe, wherein being Victorious, and killing the Monarch Art Aoinfir, he made himself Sovereign in his place. 6. This Mac Con's Grand-Son, Fiachae Ceanann entring likewise Scotland, not only gain'd large possessions, but left his Posterity after him to give a beginning to Mac Allin and his Family there, who are all descended from him. 7. Colla Vais, who had been four years, tho by Usurpation, the 115. Monarch of Ire∣land, when he was by the lawful Heir, his own Cousin German, Muireadhach Tiriogh, defeated in Battel, and forc'd to flie, adventuring over to Scotland with the two other Collaes, his Bre∣thren, and rest of his adherents, and acquiring great scopes of ground there, became the Grandsire of the Clan Ndomnaills both in Scot∣land and Ireland. For all of this Surname, in either Kingdom, in their several generations or branches derive their extraction in a direct line from this Colla Vais: and consequently neither from Herimon or Heber, but from Ithe, a Cousin of theirs, who was the Son of Breog∣huin mhic Bratha, of the same stock with Mile∣sius. 8. Next after that Colla, did Criamhthan mhac Fioda, the 120. King of Ireland, with a
Royal Army invade Albain, I mean Scotland. He had in his company another very powerful Noble man called Earc mhac Eocha Muingrea∣har, mhic Aongussa. And from him the Septs, not only of Clann Eirc, and Cineall Gabhrain, but those of Cineall Conghvill, Cineall Naonghussa, and Cineall Conriche Anile, with their distinct propagations and Families in Scotland, ever since to this present are descended. 9. Corck mhac Luighdhioch is the next in order that de∣serves mention. Because that by the false and wicked surmises of his Step-mother, upon his refusal to consent to her incestuous Lust (she was Daughter to Fiachac mhac Reill, King of Ely) falling into his Fathers displeasure; and thereupon forced to seek his fortune in Scot∣land, and arriving there, accompanied with such armed Troops as he could raise; and then by his own deserts coming into such extraordinary favour with the Scottish King Fearradhach Fionn, otherwise called Fionn Chor∣mac, that he obtain'd his Daughter call'd Muing∣fionn to Wife; he had issue by her, besides o∣ther Sons, Manie Leambna, from whom the Sept of Leambnuidh in Scotland, and Cairbre Cruith∣nioch, from whom the Families of Eoghanacht Muighe Geirghin, in the same Kingdom were propagated. 10. Soon after him Niall Naoighi∣allach the 121. and most powerful indeed of all the Irish Monarchs that were at any time before or since, entred Scotland with so great a force
that there was no resisting him. But having said enough of him before, I need not add to it here. 11. In the last place, and year of Christ 493. (much about ninety three years af∣ter the said War-like Prince Niall the Great, surnamed also Naoighiallach, had been kill'd in France, and in the 20. year of Lugha the 125 Monarch (Son to Laogi∣rius) his Reign, the six Sons of Muireadhach So says Keting in the Reign of Niall Naoighi∣allach. yet formerly in the Reign of Oilioll Mol, he calls them the six Sons of Eirc mhic Eachae Muinreamh∣air. mhic Eoghuin, Mhic Neill, King of Ʋlster, being six Brothers of Mairchiartach Mor, that soon after came to be Monarch of Ireland, namely to the two Fergusses, the two Aon∣gussaes, and the two Loarns, together with o∣ther Septs or Families of Dal-Riada, in the same Province of Ʋlster, adventur'd for Albain: and whether or no they gave the denomination of Dal-Rheuda, or Dal-Riada to the Country there mostly possessed by them, tho at least for a great part of it planted before (as we have seen) by the Progeny of Cairbre Rioghfadae; Eochae Muinreamhar of the Progeny of Cair∣bre Ridhfadae, had two Sons, Earcha and Elchon. From the former, the the Families of Dal-Riada in Scotland were descended. From the later those of Dal-Riada in Ulster. So Keting soys in the Reign of Art Aonsir. where he further says that the two Dal-Riades, or Families of them have been distinguished by the surname or nick-name of Russach, given those of Dal Riada in Ulster. the Irish Chronicles are plain and positive herein, that they gave to them∣selves
and all their Country-men the Scots of Albion the first King that ever they had of the name of Fergus, who was one of those six Bro∣thers. And it is he that both the Irish and English Scots have since, for his honor, sur∣named the Great; as likewise Fergus I. Not that he was indeed the first Irish (or Scottish) King of Dal-Rheuda, (wherein Buchanan, and all the rest of his Fellow-Historians that were English Scots, are extreamly out: for long be∣fore that very Fergus there have been many Scottish Kings of Irish descent in Dal-Rheuda:) but that he was greater than any of the former, and the first of his own name that ruled there. To conclude, so many were the Invasions, and so great the Plantations made in that Country by the Irish Milesians, and other Gathelians in their time of Paganism, that as they Con∣quer'd, so they planted it throughly at last, having quite expell'd the Picts. And so they kept it possess'd intirely by themselves, as Lords thereof, for some Ages: That is, until after the Norman Conquest of England, very many of the Saxons retiring thither under their pro∣tection, others invited in, and accompanying William the Scottish King, and both of them
multiplying mightily▪ they not only made the other Nations which are now called Eng∣lish Scots, but by degrees gained from them, as we see, even all other the better parts of that Kingdom besides the Lowlands. I say accompanying William the Scottish King. For Stow in his Chronicle tells, That this King William of Scot∣land, Fol. 152. after he had been taken Pri∣soner by Henry II. of England, carried over to Normandy, confin'd at Roan, until he com∣pounded for his Ransom; return'd back to England; set free at York upon his paying down 4000, &c. and now being on his journey home, and seeing the Noble-men, his own Subjects, would come no nearer than Pembels in Scotland, to receive him; therefore took with him many younger Sons of such of the English Nobility as shew'd him most kindness in the time of his Imprisonment. That he en∣tertain'd them, and detain'd them, and be∣stow'd on them great Estates and Possessions in Scotland, which he took from such as had rebell'd against him there. That this of their waiting on him to Scotland was in the year of Christ, 1174. And that their names were Bailliol, Brewse, Soulley, Moubrey, St. Clare▪ Hay, Giffrd, Ramsey, Lanudell, Biscy, Berk, Ley, Willegen, Bys, Montgomery, Valx, Cole∣nuille, Friser, Gran, Glay, and divers o∣thers.
20. Yet my meaning is not to assert posi∣tively, that the foresaid last Invasion or Plan∣tation made by those Ʋlster Dal-Rheudans, and six Sons of Muredus King of Ʋlster, had been made in the time of Irelands Paganism. I know it happen'd in the 20th. year of the Sovereign∣ty of Lugha (mhac Laoghaire) Monarch of Ire∣land, which was of Christ, 493. and conse∣quently the very next year after Patricks death, according to Ketings computation; tho ac∣cording to Jocelinus, it must have been the next saving one. I know also, it is supposed by the Writers of this holy mans life, especially Jocelinus, c. 191. that even three and thirty years before his death, all Ireland, together with the Isle of Man, and all other Islands then subject to the Irish, had been throughly and wholly converted to Christian Religion by him. Which makes it indeed very probable, that this last expedition of the Irish into Scot∣land was wholly consisting of Christian Adven∣turers. And yet I am not certain of it for these reasons. 1. Because Jocelinus (c. 49.) and others tell us that notwithstanding all the prodigious wonders done by S. Patrick, and many of them in the very presence of Laogirius the Mo∣narch, (Father to this Lugha,) he was never converted, but died in his Infidelity, being kill'd at Greallach (a Village near the River Liffy in that Country, which we now call the
County of Kildare) by a Thunder-bolt shot at him from Heaven. Tho Keting partly at∣tributes this Vengeance of God fallen on him, to his perfidious breach of solemn promise made by him upon Oath, invoking the Sun, Moon, and all the Planets to attest it. Which Oath he made to obtain his Liberty, when he was foiled and taken Prisoner in the Battel of Ath-Dara, by the Lagenians and Criomthan mhac Euno: the contents of it being, to remit for ever the heavy Borimh (as they call it) or Fine, which he challeng'd from them as due to him and all other Monarchs after him. 2. Because this very Monarch Luigha, in whose Reign that Expedition of the Ʋlster Dal-Rheudans, and six Sons of Muredus happen'd, tho he lived and continued his Sovereignty 15 years longer, was nevertheless at last struck likewise dead by a Thunderbolt: and the Irish Antiquaries of those times have interpreted this Judgment on him as a just punishment of the great disrespects and dishonour done by him to the same extraordinary wonderful Servant of God. And these are my reasons for doubting. For it seems not likely, that if Lugha had been converted, he would after his Conversion have so behaved himself towards that Saint, as to incense Heaven to punish him in so dreadful a manner. And as unlikely it is, that in case he had so mis-behaved himself, during his Infide∣lity,
he would not after his Conversion have repented so heartily thereof, as to merit the Saints prayers for him to God, at least for di∣verting so terrible a judgment. And then we know how far the example of a wicked Mo∣narch might have prevail'd with other wicked men to keep them still in their Infidelity. But be this conjecture true or false; nay, be it suppos'd for certain, that Lugha and all Ire∣land every one, and consequently those six Sons of Muireadhach King of Ʋlster, with their Dal-Rheudans were Christians then, when they enter'd Scotland: it appears notwithstanding out of the Irish Chronicles, that as they were the first, so they were the last and only Adven∣turers any where abroad out of Ireland, since its Conversion to Christianity; the War-like humor of its Monarchs, Princes, and Nobles, being always after that, wholly imploy'd at home in destroying one another. Insomuch that they gave not themselves either opportu∣nity or leisure to look after not so much as the paiment of Chiefries or Tributes due to them from their Dominions abroad in the Islands or Terra Firma it self of Scotland. Not one of all their Monarchs, for ought appears in their History, having at any time since entertain'd no not a thought of employing their Arms that way, save only Aodh mhac Aiumhiriogh the 10th. undoubted Christian Monarch, who
propos'd it in his great Parliament at Drom Ceatha, and was generously resolv'd upon it' until by the customary obstacle of a Civil War at home, he was not only soon diverted from that resolution, but himself kill'd in the Battel of Beluigh Duin Bholg, fought against him by Brandubh King of Leinster; as this Brandubh also, not long after, was by his own Lagenian Subjects in the Battel of Cam-Chluana. By all which you may perceive that Christi∣an Religion wrought so little on that People to∣wards the abatement of their mortal feuds, that under it, even in its first four hundred years among them, their Princes were much more fatally engaged in pursuing one another with fire and sword, and horrid slaughters, to the utter undoing of themselves, and weakning of their Country, and making it an easie prey to Foreiners after, than their very Pagan Pre∣decessors had been, whereof so many had ex∣tended their Dominions far and near, and still enlarged and kept them for so many Ages a∣broad; whatever in the mean time their dis∣sentions were at home. And this is one of those two things I would especially remark here. 12. The other is, That not even the great∣est holiness of some of their very greatest and most justly celebrated Saints has been exempt from the fatality of this genius of putting their
Controversies to the bloody decision of Battels; tho they foresaw the death of so many thou∣sands must needs have followed, or at least be hazarded to follow. Even Columb-Cille him∣self, so religious a Monk, Priest, Abbot, so much a man of God, was nevertheless the ve∣ry Author, Adviser, Procurer of fighting three several Battels, namely those of Cuile-Dreimbne, Cuile-Rathan, and Cuile Feadha. The first on this occasion. At a Parliament held at Taragh by the Monarch Diardmuid mhic Fer∣gusse Ceirrbheoil, it happened that contrary to the most sacred and severe Laws of that pri∣viledg'd place, one Cuornane mhac Aodh had kill'd a Gentleman: and that this Cuornne flying away presently to shelter himself under the wings of Domhnal and Ferghusse, the Sons of Muirchiortach mhac Earcha, two powerful men in their own Territory: and they, for his better assurance, recommending him to Co∣lumb-Cille's protection: the Monarch never∣theless lighting on him, put him to death for his unpardonable crime at Taragh. Which Columb-Cille resented so grievously, that he persuaded such Families of the Neales as inha∣bited the North (who, by way of distinction from those other Neales living in the South of Ireland, were called Clanna Neill in Tuaisgart, as the said other were Clanna Neill in Disgcart) to fight the Monarch, while himself pray'd to
God for their good success. And it seems God was pleased to hear his prayer for hum∣bling the Monarch. For the issue of the Battel fought so by those Neales at Cuile Druimhne was, that Diarmuid not only saw himself rout∣ed, but almost his whole Army kill'd in that very Field. The second on this occasion. Dal-Narruidh and other Ʋltonians had in a diffe∣rence twixt Columb-Cille and Comghall shewed themselves unjustly partial against Columb, as he thought. And therefore he had the Battel of Cuile Rathan fought against them. Who this Comghall was, I cannot certainly tell▪ tho I think he might be the great Comghall, alias Congellus, Founder and Abbot of Beannchuir, of whom so much has been said before. I am sure he and Colum-Cille were contemporaries, and of the same Province of Ʋlster. But for being Author of the third Battel, Columb-Cille had a much more specious cause (it I may pre∣sume to interpose my simple judgment) than either of the two former. Baodhan mhac Niue∣adha, who had been Monarch but one whole year, being in some extraordinary danger from his Enemies, Columb-Cille pass'd his word in the nature of a Sanctuary to him, to keep him safe in that extremity. Which Col∣mane mhac Colmain not regarding, he had him set upon and murder'd by the two Cummins (viz. Cummin mhac Colmain Bhig, and Cummin
in hac Libhrein) at Carrig Leime in Eich, or the Horse-leap in Jomairge. And this was the cause that moved Columb-Cille to persuade and be Author of the Battel of Cuile Feadha, fought against Colmane mhac Diarmuda. It is true, That whatever, or how just soever the causes of each, or all those three Battels had seem'd to Columb-Cille; yet the holy Bishop Molaisse was so far from approving any of them, that for engaging in them any way, he not only most severely reproved Columb-Cille, but enjoyn'd him the grievous pennance of departing presently out of Ireland, and never more during life to see it. It is also true, that Columb-Cille with all humility and readiness obeying this injunction departed forthwith to Scotland: where the power of God was with him so eminently in converting such vast num∣bers of Infidels to Christ, as if God himself from all eternity had preordained those three Battels to be the occasion of saving the Picts. And no less true it is, That when the great Parliament of Ireland was summon'd by the Monarch Aodh mhac Ainmhirogh to assemble at Drom Ceatha, as they did, and sate there thirteen months, without intermission or Pro∣rogation, debating principally those three things which he proposed to them. 1. That of Banishing for ever all the Poets out of the Kingdom, by reason of their being an ex∣cessive,
intolerable burden to the People. Where∣of you may see strange particulars, in the fol∣lowing account. This was the fourth time the Poets (whom the Irish in their Language call Ollamhs) were by a general Decree all of them condemn'd to Banish∣ment into Dal-Riada in Scotland, by reason of their insolency, excessive number, and burthen to the People. For 1. They beg'd all what-ever seem'd to be most valued by the Noble-men; who out of a foolish custom that prevail'd too long, could deny them nothing. And therefore they had the impudence to beg of this very Monarch Aodh mhac Ainmhiriogh the richest and most precious Jewel in all his Treasury, and had it. 2. Their number was near a third part of the People of Ireland. So says Keting, if my Copy of his work be right. There was a thousand of them that kept Trains of Ʋnderlings waiting on them continually where-ever they went. The chiefest of all had 30 men, for his own particular train. The next to him 15. and so forth descend∣ing; every one of them had some number in his own proper retinue, to the very last of 1000 leading Poets. 3. They were all of 'em, with all their numerous trains, yearly cess'd on the o∣ther Inhabitants of the Kingdom from All∣hallows-day till May-day, even six entire months of the year. And these I think were sufficient reasons to Banish them, as I have said they were
three several times before this Parliament of Drom-Ceatha had been chiefly called for the same end. For you are to understand, that after each of their former Banishments they were still harbour'd in the North until they procur'd licence to return to all the other Provinces. The first time, being a thousand in number, at the intercession of Columb-Cille, who went in behalf of Conchabhar King of Ulster, to meet and invite them, they were staid, received and maintain'd by him and his Nobles of that Province till seven years were over. The second time by Fiachna mhac Baodhaine King of Ulster, but for one year only, their number be∣ing seven hundred. The third time by Maob∣choba King of Ulster; likewise one whole year, when their number was full 1200. But this fourth time, at the Parliament at Drom-Ceatha, tho Colum-Cille had interposed for them all he could, yet being convinc'd by the Monarch's rea∣sons he acquiesed at last in what was decreed there, not only for the suppression of their multitudes, and reformation of their abuses, and ease of the People; but even for preservation of their own Language, Laws, Poetry, History, Genealogy, and Chronology, arts both useful and delightful to all ingenious Men, and civil Nations. As 1. That the Mo∣narch, Provincial, and other lesser Kings, and every Lord of a Cantred (or Barony) should each of them entertain a Poet of his own; bestow on him and his Posterity for ever, a competent Estate
in Lands, to live upon; and that both his Person, Lands, and other Goods should be exempt from all publick duties. 2. That for preserving the sciences they profess'd, there should be some pub∣lick Free Schools both appointed and endowed with Lands by the Estates of the Kingdom in ge∣neral. And pursuant to this Decree those two in Breithfne, the one at Rath-Ceanaidh, the o∣other at Magh-Sleacht, were establish'd. 3. That the Monarch's Poet or Ollamh, should be the Ard-Ollamh, that is Arch-Poet and Arch-Pro∣fessor of their knowledge: and that he should have the appointment of, and a superintendency too over the rest. 4. And lastly none otherwise, or above this number to be allow'd. 2. That of deposing Scanlane Mor mhac Ceanfoaladh, King of Ossory, who was then his Prisoner, and committed even by Authority of that Parliament, for his refusing to pay the said Monarch a certain annual rent challeng'd as due from him. 3. That of invading Scot∣land with a Royal Army to force the payment of Chiefry, Tributes, and other Duties for∣merly paid thence to his Predecessors. And when Columb-Cille was persuaded to go thither out of Scotland, of purpose to intercede for the Poets, interpose for his devoted Friend the said Scanlane Mor King of Ossory, and to divert the Monarch from his resolution of invading Scotland: nevertheless he was so rigorously, and
even so literally observant of that pennance en∣joyn'd him by Molaisse, that he had continu∣ally during the whole time of going thither, staying there, and returning back, a Sear∣cloath in such manner hanging down before his eyes, that he never saw light all the while, nor did at any time after during life, as neither before since the command laid upon him by Molaisse, any part or foot of Irelands ground. Which admirable instance of the most per∣fect resignation of his will, judgment, soul, to the greatest exactness of Christian discipline, together with the prodigious austerity of his life, and mortification of his body, by watching and fasting to such a degree, that he seem'd a very Skeleton alive: even all his ribs, and other bones of that side whereon he lay on the sandy ground, which was his ordinary bed in his little Cell, being perfectly countable in the print of them remaining there, when he rose up from it I say that all this together duly con∣sidered, besides his continual prayer and con∣templation, makes me not wonder at all that he should have both converted Nations, and wrought so many stupendious miracles above all the power of Nature by invoking God, as are reported of him in his life. Nor conse∣quently that in this very Parliament of Drom∣eath, upon denial of his two last requests, the
one for setting at liberty the foresaid King of Ossory, the other for not making War on Dal-Rheuda in Scotland, or requiring Chiefry or other duties of them any more, he should, as he was departing and taking his leave of them, so confidently have prayed to God, and withal prophetically told the Monarch there in pub∣lick. 1. That Scanlane Mor should be freed that very night by God himself, and be with him wherever he should chance to be that same night before he went to midnight Prayers. 2. That Scotland should never more pay tri∣bute, chief rent, or other duty of subjection to Ireland. Both which predictions were to a tittle accomplish'd. But these matters, either of his austerity, or sanctity, or miraculous power, and prophetical spirit are foreign to this place. And therefore I return to tell you, that I had no other design in relating those three Bat∣tels fought by his authority, than to let you see by such convincing proofs the native genius of that People, even in those early days of Ghri∣stianity flourishing among them in all its glory. A fatal genius indeed, to put their controver∣sies to the decisive judgment of the God of Hosts in Battel, without regard either of any other way of arbitration of man, or of so many thousand of unfortunate men that perish'd still by this bloody Test, or even of the consequen∣tial
weakning of their Country by it; and this to such a degree as must have expos'd them all at last an easie prey to Foreigners. Yet such their genius was, and so it continued still. Neither Monarchs, nor Provincial Kings, nor other Princes or Leaders among them seem'd to be at all moved by the holy injunction of Molaisse, or penitential divine observation of it by Columb-Cille all his life after, in expiating his former zeal. They, notwithstanding all their Christianity, went on all of them gene∣rally in the old beaten road, either of Battels, (or which was worse) of Murders, even from this very Monarch Aodh Aimmhiriogh for 300 years more. That is, just as their Predecessors had done before in the very first century of that holy religion among them. For it was within this earliest and holiest Age of all, that we read of six of their first Christian Sove∣raigns of Ireland downright murdered by their own Subjects at home, besides one more kill'd in Battel by them: Baodhan mhac Nineadha, by the two Cummins: Ainmhire mhac Seadna, by Ferghussa mhac Neill: Diarmuid mhac Ferg∣hussa Ceirbheoil by Aodh Dubh mhac Suibhne: the two Brothers who joyntly ruled, Eochae and Baodhan, by Cronan mhac Tighernaigh King of Cionachta Ghlinne Geimhion: Tuathal Maolg∣harubh, by Maolmortha at a place called Grealla Eillte: and Oilloll Molt the first of them all,
in the Battel of Ocha, by Lugha mhac Laoghaire, who thereupon immediatly succeeded him in the Soveraignty: S. Patrick himself their great Apostle being yet alive among them. 22. To this unhappy Unchristian genius of the Princes and Nobles among that People for righting themselves, or deciding their quarrels whether right or wrong, by their own swords either in Battel, or the baser way of surprizal and murder, you may add, as no less worthy of special remark, the highest injustice of too many of their Monarchs both Heathen and Christian, in punishing the personal crime of one man by laying intolerable Fines on whole Provinces at their pleasures, and exacting them by Military execution, if otherwise not pre∣cisely paid. For example, Aongus Ainchille King of Leinster, having in the time of Paga∣nism Married Dairin one of the two only Daughters of Tuathal Teachtuar the 101. Mo∣narch of Ireland, and within a little time after visited his Father in Law at Tarach, and made him believe that Dairin was dead, and then prayed that for the greater strengthning of their Friendship he might have his other Daughter and her Sister (by name Fithir) to Wife, and by earnest suit obtained her: She was no sooner brought home by him to his own House, than seeing her Sister alive, and thereby finding her self abused, not only she,
through extremity of shame seizing her, pre∣sently fell down dead in the place, but Dairin likewise through excess of grief breath'd out her last upon her Sisters Corps in the very same place, and almost same moment of time, ac∣companying so her Ghost to the other life with her own. Which coming to the Monarch, their Fathers knowledge, did so enrage him, that entring Leinster with a mighty Force to destroy all the People of that whole Province indistinctly with Fire and Sword, though they knew nothing at all of the crime; he could not be otherwise appeas'd or withdrawn from this resolution, than by their universal sub∣mission for themselves and Posterity after them to a Fine (Eirick they call it) of 6000 Beeves, 6000 Muttons, 6000 fat Hogs, 6000 Mantles, 6000 Cauldrons or Pots of ass, and 6000 ounces of Silver, to be every second year paid by them to him, and all future Kings of Ireland for ever. A Fine indeed both heavy, unjust, tyrannical, and which added so mightily to their former feuds, that upon the sole account of it divers Battels have been fought; and much even Christian blood in after-Ages spilt. For one third of it was for the Conacians, ano∣ther to the Oirghillians or Methians, and ano∣ther to the Clanna Neills of the North: as who had all of 'em assisted that Monarch Tuathal Teachtvar with their Forces to impose it. And
fourty Monarchs in a continual succession after him, did even by Fire land word exact the payment of it when refused, until at last Fio∣nachtae Fleadhach the four or five and twen∣tieth Christian Monarch, did about the year of Christ 922. at the intercession of S. Moling, set Leinster free by remitting and abolishing it for ever after. Another example here of, might be the for∣mer Fine laid (about 160 years before Tuat∣hal Teachtuar▪ time) on the same Province of Leinster, by the Monarch Conaire Mor Mhac Eidrisgoil, for the death of his said Father Eidrisgoil, who was likewise Monarch of Ireland before him, but after six years Reign was murder'd in Leinster, at Allmhain, (we now call it Allon) by Nuadhath Neacht, who thereupon succeeded him in the Soveraignty, though he held it only for half a year. For at the expiration of so little a time of his Reign, he also was kill'd by the foresaid Conare Mor. Now this Cnaire having thus possess'd himself of the Soveraign power of all Ireland, and (whatever his end was at last) reigned pro∣sperously many years (some say 30. others 70▪) did by his absolute authority, which had no controul▪ and for the said death of his Fa∣ther Eidrisgoile, lay upon Leinster a perpetual yearly Eiriook of 300 white Cows, 300 fat Hogs, 300 Vessels of Ale, and 300 Swords with golden
handles. And withal, as part of their Eiriock, forc'd them to quit the whole Dominion of Ossory (which had a very large extent then, and they were three Countreys of that name joyn'd together) from Gawran to Greine Airbe, near the Moore call'd Main Eile, and give it up for ever to the Division or Province of Mounster; yea, and to confirm this surrender by invoking all the Planets to witness that they and as much as in them lay, their Posterity af∣ter them, should stand to it irrevocably. All which taken together was peradventure a no less (if not much more) oppressive Eiriock, than the latter impos'd by Tuathal Teachtvar. Yet because I find not how far the Leinster men were, or were not guilty of Eidrisgeoil▪ death, I say nothing positively of this matter▪ though Keting relates that six Provincial Kings of Mounster, viz. Oilioll Olum, Enghan mhae Oiliolla, Fiacha Muilleathan, Oilioll Flann, Beg, Lugha, his Son, and Gorck mhac Luighiodh, in a suc∣cession Reigning there, had this Eiriock duly paid them, or at least forc'd it by arms from the Lagenians. By what right, other than that Conaire Mor, the foresaid Monarch that im∣pos'd it, was himself a Mounster man born, and therefore perhaps assign'd it to that Province, I know not. But this I know, that Keting tells how by this time the Momonions, had got such footing in Leinster, that they possess'd all
to Maisdion, a height now better known by the Irish compound name of Mullach-Maisdon, in the County of Kildare. And how notwith∣standing they were much about the same time, that is, above 200. years after the imposition of this Fine, beaten out of all, and their Fine to boot, and Ossory recover'd from them by three several Fights, as they retired from Maisdion; the first at a place then call'd Truis∣dion, now by us Athy, on the River Barrow; the second in Cadirthin Amhaigh Riada, which after was called Laoighis by the Natives, and from thence Lease by the English; the third at Slighe Dala, now the Beallach Mor in Ossory. And how this War and three Battels against the Mounster men, were manag'd by Cu-Chorb, King of Leinster, not only with the assistance of Eochae Fionn, second Son to the Monarch Felim-Reachtvor, and consequently Brother to Conn Ceadchathach, likewise Monarch in his time, but under the conduct of Laoighseach Ceannmhor (or Lewis of the Gread Head, who was Son to the famous Warrior and Champion Conall Cearnach) as General of the Field under Cu-Chorb. And finally how this Leinster King rewarded the said Eochae Fionn by giving him for ever the Countreys then call'd the seven Focharties; and the King of Ossory in like man∣ner rewarded Laoighseach Ceannmhor with a grant of the seven Leases, besides many other
Priviledges bestowed upon him by Cu-Chorb. All which may be read at large in Keting. For I speak of this matter but occasionally. 23. After the great injustice and bloody cousequences of those Tyrannical Eiriocks, what I purpos'd next to observe as most re∣markable is the greatest cruelty, the strangest insulting carriage, and the most inhuman ri∣gour of some other Monarchs, even towards the very Provincial Kings of their own Na∣tion, when their Captives or at their mercy. To conclude this point, I give three instances; the first of a Pagan, and the other two of two Christian Monarchs. First instance. Upon the death of the Mo∣narch Criomthan mhac Fiodae, poyson▪d by his own Sister, and Niall Naoighiollach's succeeding him, but not yet possess'd of Taragh, the Royal Mansion of the Monarchs, Eochae King of Leinster, pretending some title to the Monar∣chy, anticipates him, and possesses that place. But Nialls Magitian or chief Druid, by name Laighichin mhac Bairrchedha, dissuades him on the religious, or rather indeed superstitious ac∣count, That none could succesfully possess Taragh, who had not been created a Niadh-Naisk, that is a Knight of the celebrated Chain, call'd in their Language Naisk. Which who∣ever receiv▪d with due solemnity about their necks, were stiled Niadha-Naisk, importing
in Irish the same with Milites Torquati in Latin. For this of the Chain was an Order, and the only Order of Knighthood among 'em. How∣ever Eochae who had never been receiv'd into that Order, nor had that Chain about his neck, being thus dissuaded, and retiring pre∣sently into Leinster, but in his way lodging unluckily a night in the said Magitians House, it happen'd that on some provoking Language given him by his Son, he kill'd him presently in the place. This with all vehemency is ex∣aggerated to Niall by the old Magician, Father to him that was kill'd. And Niall thereupon egg'd on partly by Eochaes late attempt on Taragh, and partly by the extream incessant opportunity of Barrechedba to lay all Leinster in ashes for the death of his Son, enters that Pro∣vince with so vast an Army that no power of the Lagenians was able to withstand him: and with such a revengeful bloody resolution too, that no prayers, no tears, no offers of the Leinster Nobility, though meeting him of pur∣pose, and humbling themselves before him, could obtain any other answer from him, than that he was resolved without delay to ruin their whole Province with the utmost devasta∣tion imaginable, unless they did forth with de∣liver into his hands their King. Eochae seeing this desperate condition of his people, like a brave, just, and noble Prince, considering him∣self
to be the only Criminal, chooses rather to lose his own life, than they who were inno∣cent, should theirs: and therefore delivers himself freely up. But the merciless Monarch, not moved either with his generosity or humi∣lity, commands him to be tied presently and straightly about the middle with a strong iron Chain, to a huge stone like a Rock, which to this day stands an end on a Field that is on the West-side of the River Slaine, between Kilbride and Tullo-O-Feilimm, in the County of Cather∣logh: both ends of the chain carried through a hole that ran from one side to another in the Stone, and then fastned in the backside with an Iron-bar put into both the extream links: and then nine bloody Fellows well arm▪d to attack him, and mangle him in pieces, while he had nothing at all, no kind of weapon to defend himself. Though God and Nature, and the horror of so base a death did help him so strangely, or rather miraculously indeed, that seeing himself in this case (for his back was to the Stone, and his face to the People:) and hearing at last the word given to his Exe∣cutioners, who were yet at a little distance off: he thereupon roused up his spirits so wonder∣fully, that by violent straining of himself, he tore in pieces the Chain before the Executio∣ners were come so near as to reach him: and with part of those very pieces laid about him,
so that some of the Villains lay dead at his feet, and he escaped the rest by running away. Whereby it seems that God himself in his secret Counsels had design'd so strange a pre∣servation of Eochae at this time, that he might be at another time in his own very person the punisher of that extraordinary cruel judgment given by Niall against him. For so in truth it happen'd at last in this manner following▪ Eochae, as now it has been related, having saved his life first by his valour, and then by his heels, to shun Nialls further cruelty, gets himself away, so soon as he could privatly, over into Scotland, where he is incognito receiv'd in∣to the protection of Gabhran mhac Domhung∣hoirt, King of Dal-Riadd there, and of all the Scots. And after some years more expired, when this Scottish King had by commands re∣ceived from that (now mighty) Monarch Niall, with all the power he could make and spare out of Scotland, pass'd over to him in France (or Gaule, as it then was call'd) Eochae accompanies him still incognito: and so conceals himself, until at last he found his opportunity at the River Loyre: where, as you have it before, he treacherously slew (by the flight of an Arrow) in the very mid'st of his Royal conquering Army, this otherwise invincible, though cruel Prince. But these later passages of Eochaes preservation, and revenge (as nei∣ther
indeed any other of the evil consequences following, which were many and great) are to my purpose now. And therefore I proceed to the Second instance. Which though it have not so much either effectual or intentional cruelty, yet peradventure it shews the strangest insult∣ing carriage of one Christian Prince a Con∣queror towards another, not taken in Battel, or otherwise, but freely coming in of himself, and submitting to his mercy, that ever has been delivered in writing. Diarmuid mhac Ferghussa, mhic Ceirrbheoil, of whom I have said before, that he was the Tenth Christian, and now say that he was not only a Christian, but perhaps of the very best Christian Monarchs of Ireland, being held for many respects a very good man, and very just King: so just, if not rather over just he was, that he put his own Son Breassal to death upon the complaint of an old Religious woman of Kill-Ealchruidh, That notwithstanding the immunity of that Sacred place, and her own right, he had forc'd from her a Cow, because it was extraordinary fat, or to his liking, for a Feast, though indeed he had first offered her seven Cows, and a Bull too in compensation: this very Diarmuid, I say, in the seventh year of his Reign, and upon the like complaint of another Nun called Sinioch Chro, about one single Cow taken from her,
having made a sharp War on Guaire mhac Col∣main, Provincial King of Connaght, by over∣throwing him in a great Battel: and there∣upon this Guaire, who was no less held as good a King as ever Connaght had, hospitable to ad∣miration, bountiful without compare, so libe∣ral to the Poor, that he never denied a conside∣rable Alms to any such person craving it in the name of Christ; insomuch, that when at any time he wanted money about him, he strip'd himself, and gave his very Cloaths off his back to help them: I say this Guaire, so good a man and King too, after his said de∣feat, rallying his Troops again the next day, and then consulting the Chief among 'em, whether he should venture another Fight, or go freely of himself and submit to Diarmuids mercy: and by their advice choosing the latter, and therefore going presently to the Victors Camp, entring his Tent, and laying himself in an humble posture on his knees before him, begging pardon: Diarmuid nevertheless, with∣out any regard either of the inconstancy of Fortune, or of Guaire▪s voluntary submission, or penitent posture, or of his regal dignity, or of his renowned vertues, without other cere∣mony or more adoe, commands him to lie down on his back, while himself standing up, held one foot on his breast, and the point of his Sword between his fore-teeth. 'Tis true,
that after this trial made, he did Guaire no fur∣ther hurt; yet that does not wipe off the ex∣cessive pride and barbarity of the action or trial it self. How ever, before I pass from this instance, it will not be amiss to let the Reader know, that notwithstanding all the praises given by Keting to this Connaught King Guaire, yet he was the very man (as even Keting himself elsewhere relates it) who had the Bishop Ceallach, Dis∣ciple to St. Cieran of Cluan mhac Noise, and eldest Son to Eoghan Bell, the former King of Connacht, murdered by three of that Bishops own Servants: which happen'd in the Reign of the former Monarch Tuathal Maolgharbh. These Villains Guaire suborn'd to commit this horrid sacriledge: and this only on account or supposition of the said Bishops endeavouring to make friends for his own younger Brother to recover that Kingdom of Connaght, which his Father Eoghain Bell had some time be∣fore enjoy'd, and held all along till death. Third instance, and it is an instance, I think, of very inhuman rigour. Aodh Ainmhi∣riogh, another Christian Monarch of this time (for he came to the Sovereignty within eight years after Diarmuids death; and we have spoken of him before, as who held the great Parliament for 13 months at Dromceatha) was so rigorous to Scanlane Mor mhac Cinfoale, King
of Ossory being his Prisoner, that he command∣ed him to be straightly bound in Prison with twelve chains of Iron loading him; fed only with salt Beef; allowed not a drop of any kind of liquor, no not so much as of water to drink; had all this rigour effectually put in execution against him, and rejected even Columb-Cille's Petition for his release, though come of pur∣pose out of Scotland to obtain it. And so I have done with my Instances, nor have I more to say in reference to them. Only that although I cannot tell what reasons either of these two Christian Monarchs had for such extream rigour towards Christian Princes of their own Nation, though their Prisoners, or at their mercy: nor can tell, as to particulars, how considerably this cruel usage did add unto, or inflame the former feuds: Yet this much I can tell, that neither of them had other than a violent death: the former murder'd by Aodh Dubh mhac Suibhne; the later kill'd in Battel by Brandubh King of Leinster, as I have said be∣fore, upon another occasion. And so by con∣sequence I have likewise done with all my spe∣cial remarks on this large subject of the mani∣fold bloody Feuds of that Nation, both in the time of their Paganism, and in that of their being under the Gospel of Christ: for I in∣tended no more such heer than I have given.
Which is the reason, that now returning once more thither, where I was before, I con∣clude at last this long Section with one general remark on that People, as they were under the Gospel in the more early Ages of it among them. viz. That from the killing of their fore∣said Christian Monarch Aodh mhac Ainmhiriogh (the last we spake of here) the Fate not only of the Milesians, but other Gathelians what∣soever in Ireland, and the Genius of their Kings, Princes, Nobles, and other Martial men, con∣tinuing for 300 years after him, the very same it had been in the Age before him, car∣ried them on perpetually, from time to time, fighting, and slaying, and murthering one another at home, until the four and twen∣tieth of those Christian Monarchs of theirs, who died violent deaths by the hands of their own Irish Subjects within the first 400 years of Christian Religion generally planted among 'em, by name Aodh Ollann, had been slaughter'd in the Battel of Seir by Domhnal mhac Murchadha, that immediatly succeeded him. Nay until that in this Domhnals Reign, which continued 42 years, and the Reign of his Successor Niall Frassach, which lasted but four, besides Colman, the Bishop of Laosaine murdered by Ʋibh Tuirtre; the Battel of Beallach Cro, between Criomthan mhac Euno and Fionn mhac Airb, the Battel of Beallach Gawran,
between Mac Conchearca King of Ossory, and Dunghall King of Ʋibh Cionsallach, kill▪d there∣in; the Battel of Leagea, betwixt Ʋibh Mbruine and Ʋibh Mainne; the Battel of Corann betwixt Cinneal Gonnail and Cionneal Eoghuin; and fi∣nally the killing of Combhasgach King of Ibh-Failghe by Maolduin mhac Aodha Beanainn King of Mounster. (whether in Battel, or out of Battel, I know not) had fill'd up at last brim full the measure of their domestick unnatural slaughters happening within that term of time, their first four Centuries of Christianity.
SECT. IV. National sins. Very slight causes of War. Cor∣mock Ulfada's beard: Muireadhagh's Ti∣riogh's revenge: and the three Colla's War on Ferghussa Fogha King of Eumhna. Sundry warnings from God to the Irish Christians (but not like the judgment at Magh-Sleachta, or the other by Loch Earne on their Pagan Prede∣cessors.) 1. The loss of all their Dominions a∣broad. 2. Those two Epidemical Plagues at home, called the Crom-Chonnioll and Buy-Chonnioll. 3. Mortality of Kine, and great Famil that follow'd. 4. Those three or four Inroads made into their Country by the Saxons and Brittons. 5. Prodigies, with another extraordinary Famin. Notwithstanding all, no amendment. This instanc'd in the death of the Monarch's Loinnseach, Conghall Cinn, Fearr∣ghall, Foghartach, and Kionaoth. What of Flaithiortach? The flood-gates of the North set open at last to pour Vengeance on this contu∣macious people. Yet they amidst all continue their intestine feuds. Witness the Monarchs Aodh Ordnigh, Conchabhar mhac Donochadh, and Niall Caille. A sad Interregnum. The particulars of their Bondage under Turgesius. The glory of their Learning and Sanctity now gone for ever. Scarce delivered from that Bon∣dage,
when they relapsed again far more enor∣mously than before. This also instanc'd, 1. In eight of those eleven Monarchs that Reign'd in the second Danish War. 2. In the Reigns of those other six following that as∣sumed the title of Monarchs, though not al∣low'd for such by near at least one half of the Provinces. Maolseachluinn the Second by his death put an end to the real Monarchy of Ire∣land, among the Irish; and Ruaruidh O Conchabhair saw in his own days not only the pretence or shadow of it gone, but the very Be∣ing of this Nation any more a free People on Earth. 24. SUch were the National provocations of Heaven, peculiar to that People hitherto, i. e. for two and twenty hundred years (besides what we shall yet see did hap∣pen after) above any other Nation of the whole Earth. Immortal Feuds of death, ty∣rannical oppressions of the Subject, cruelty as well of justice as revenge, Treason, Conspi∣racies, Rebellions, Murders even of their So∣vereigns, effusion of human blood like water. And this without pity, without remorse, with∣out any cause sometimes but very slight, and sometimes vain and ridiculous. An arbitration between two religious Monks in a difference, deciding against one of them, must engage
Families and Countrys in Arms, to fight it out in Battel, and cut one another in pieces. A known Murtherer proscrib'd as unpardouable by their most sacred Laws, and therefore justly put to death by the Monarch, must neverthe∣less, on pretence of his being seiz'd upon after he had been received into the protection of an Abbot, be a just cause of rebelling and fighting that very Monarch, and killing his whole Ar∣my to boot. Nay, one single Beast, a Cow, at most but very little worth, taken away I know not how from the owner, was the only cause of a great Battel fought between the same Monarch and the Provincial King of Connaught, and a Battel wherein most of the Gentry of that Province and Mounster too were kill'd. As if nei∣ther the Assailant nor Defendant, tho Christian Kings both, could find any other way to satisfie the poor Woman that was rob'd of that Cow: or rather indeed as if they had sported so with the lives not only of their Subjects, but of their Friends. I say nothing of the Candle-snuff, or of its firing the Monarch Cormack Ʋlfada's beard at an entertainment given him in Maig-Breag by Giolla King of Ʋlster, who shuffing a Candle, instead of throwing it aside, threw it (whe∣ther by chance, or of purpose) into Cormack's long beard, which presently catch'd and burn'd up to his tresses. Only I say, That however
this ridiculous matter happen'd or pass'd at that time, it cost Ʋlster dear, long after Cor∣mack's death. That Muireadhach Tiriogh, the great Grand-child of this Cormack; and sixth King of Ireland after him, took it for a pretence to pour an Army of one and twenty thousand men under the command of the three Collaes into Ʋlster, to destroy it, and conquer as much Land for themselves in it as they could. That in pursuance of this Order, they made so sharp War on Ferghus Fogha King of Eumhna there, that in seven several Fights against him, fought seven days consequently, without the inter∣position of one free day, they had the killing and taking of all the Ʋlster Forces: having as they beat 'em, still pursued them all along from Cearnagha to Gleann Ruigh. That be∣ing Masters of the Field, they returned back to Eumhna, spoil'd it, burn'd it, and destroy'd it so, that never after any King resided there. Finally, that by this expedition they con∣quer'd for themselves the large Territories of Modharnaigh, Vibh Criomthaine, and Ʋibh mhic Vaise, which their Posterities after them did hold, while the Milesian Kingdom stood in Ireland. But I pass over these matters depending on Cormack's beard: not because he and the rest mention'd in this story were Pagans (for I shall have occasion yet to speak somewhat, tho
but little, of as great Pagans as they:) but be∣cause peradventure the cause it self was not slight. Tho however I must acknowledg the punishment was too severe and unjust: as nei∣ther inflicted on the Criminals, nor on any that ought in such a distance of time to suffer for them; much less after legal summons, or any respit given them, to make reparation un∣der peril of abiding the justice of Arms. But leaving this to the Readers judgment, I return back to the Christian Princes, where I was before animadverting the sport they made, on the sligtest causes that well might be, of the lives of so many thousands of other Christians, their own faithful Friends and Sub∣jects. Yet what I am to consider now, is ano∣ther thing. It is, That all this while nor they nor their Successors after 'em for 300 years more, seem'd any way sensible that the All-avenging God began already to warn them. For so in truth he did, and that not once nor twice, but much oftner, within that very term of time, even while they were in their full career persecuting one another at home, with the greatest violence of deadly Foes. In which respect he dealt far otherwise, that is much more kindly and mercifully with them, than he had done with their Pagan Fore-fathers in that very Land; upon whom, about a hundred years after their conquering it, with∣out
any such gracious Fatherly warnings given them (for ought we find in History) he laid on a sudden the whole weight of his heavy hand in a most prodigious manner, at two se∣veral times. For what could be more dread∣fully prodigious than that which I have re∣lated before, and you may remember here, three parts of four of all the people of Ireland, toge∣ther with their Monarch Tighernmhuir (who was the tenth from Heber) slain in one only night upon Maigh-Sleacht, by invisible De∣mons, the Executioners of Gods fury enrag'd against them? Or what, next to that, could be more prodigiously terrible than a rich Plain of forty miles long, and fourteen, fifteen, six∣teen miles broad, in most places, throughly planted, and thick of Inhabitants, in Ʋlster, to be on a sudden over-flown, cover'd over with a deluge of waters, burst out of its own in∣trels, and neither Man, nor Woman, nor Child, nor Beast, nor other goods of so large a tract of ground to be saved, but all in one hour perish'd under this Flood of God's a∣venging irresistible wrath? How-ever, because their heinous Idolatry, i. e. their universal adoration and prostration of themselves before their grand Idol Crom Chruoigh, which by all circumstances, was the sin that brought upon 'em the former of those two stupendious Judgments, though it was
national, yet it was not peculiar to their Na∣tion only: and because the most beastly of sins (whence it has its proper name of Bestiality) which brought the latter of the same Judg∣ments on those bestial Wretches that so asto∣nishingly perish'd for it, was peculiar only to that tract of ground, or rather indeed to them who were Inhabitants of it, and no way Na∣tional, or involving or affecting so much as any one other part of Ireland: therefore I pass over these punishments, as not inflicted (either of them) upon the Irish Nation, for those enor∣mities which I have said before, were both National and peculiar to Cambden's Ireland, in the County of Ferma∣nagh, pag. 106. them. Besides Cambden himself declares in parti∣cular, as to the latter of the said Judgments, how the Irish Annals de∣ny those bestial Inhabitants of the destroyed Valley to have been other than certain Islanders out of the Hebrides, who being fled out of their own Country, lurked there, and consequently de∣ny them to have been at all of the Irish Na∣tion, much more deny 'em to have been either of the Milesian or Gathelian Race. Then Keting, tho he tells us particu∣larly Keting. (in the Reign of the foresaid Tighernmhuir) of the breaking out of that In∣undation of Water, the great Lough Earn, which it presently made, and so continues ever
since; yet has not a word of the horrible sin of Bestiality, as neither indeed of any other sin or cause whatsoever thereof on the part of the Inhabitants. And last∣ly Cambrensis, who is the Girald. Cambr. Topog. Hib. dist. 11. cap. 9. first Author of this rela∣lation, brings no o∣ther warrant for it but hear-say. Yet be it, or be the original of Lough Earn (so famous ever since for Fishing) what you please: what I would be at to tell you here, is, That after that prodigious eruption of Wa∣ter in the North, and the no less. (if not far more) prodigious slaughter on Maghsleacha (we may call it in English the Field of Adora∣tion) in Letrim; both which happen'd in the Reign of the self-same King, and near the same time, about 2900 years ago: We do not find in the Irish Chronicles, that God had once in any special or visible manner concern'd himself either in warning or punishing that People (at least otherwise than by themselves) until they became Christians; but let them go on securely without controul from him in those National peculiar enormities of their own: I mean their immortal Feuds, and prodigal effu∣sion of human blood, even that of their own Country-men and Kinsmen, on every little oc∣casion. That nevertheless he continued still their Victories and Dominions abroad unto
them, and gave them the spoils of Forein Kingdoms to enrich their own at home: and all this for causes known to his unsearchable Wisdom, but wholly unknown to us: at least otherwise than by conjecture, that he had per∣adventure so long contain'd hi Wrath in his mercy, for the sake of those vast numbers of holy Men and Women, those great Saints who were in after Ages to issue from their Loyns, and to carry his glorious Name far and near by Preaching the Gospel, and converting so ma∣ny incredulous Nations to him, as they did. That after they were become Christians, and yet nevertheless pursued the bloody courses of their Pagan Ancestors, and not only pursued but exceeded them, as being wholly intent up∣on destroying one another at home: he thought it now high time to warn them as his Children. And that he did so both early and loudly, and often, by laying his hand upon them wth smart enough, though not to their extermination or destruction as yet. 25. It was within the first Century of Chri∣stian Religion among them, he warn'd 'em with the loss of all their Dominions abroad, The Orcades, and the Hebrides, and all the Islands, not Mannuinn or Isle of Man) it self excepted; nay, the Terra Firma of Scot∣land, and all their Conquests and Plantations there, both ancient and late, those very De∣scendants
of their own loyns, renounced ut∣terly in that very Age any further payment of Tribute, or Chiefry, or other duty of Allegi∣ance or subjection to them. And I think any in∣different looker on would esteem so great a loss then, both an early and loud warning indeed given them to amend. But they did not re∣gard it, as not touching them yet in their sen∣sible Being at home. And therefore God pro∣ceeds thenceforwards by other (i. e. by nearer and keener) methods, touching 'em to the quick, where they should have more feeling. Such undoubtedly were those two dreadful Plagues; the one in the Reign of Diarmuid mhic Ferghussa mhic Ceirrbheoil, which they call'd Crom-Choinnioll (in English the Fading or Falling Candle,) that swept away infinit num∣bers of them; yea, very many of their most admired Saints, and among others Mac Dail the Patron of Kilcullin: the other call'd by them an Bhuidh Choinnioll, or the Yellow Candle, no less contagiously mortal; whereof, even their very Sovereigns, in whose Reigns it hap∣pen'd, the two Brothers Blaithmhac and Diar∣muid Ruannigh died. Such also were those three or four several Invasions and inroads made into their Country by the Saxons and Brittons, either in conjunction or apart, close one after another. The first of them in the joynt Sovereignty of the foresaid two Bro∣thers:
when the Irish, who had so long and so unnaturally fought one another, were now constrain'd to fight a forein and common E∣nemy at their own doors at home, and give them Battel at a place call'd Pancti. The se∣cond in the Reign of Fionachta Fleadhach, when Egfrid King of Northumberland sent an Army under the conduct of one Brit or Berthus, to Invade 'em. Who, as Venerable Beda Anno Dominicae In∣carnationis, 684. Eg∣fridus Rex Northanhym∣brorum misso in Hiber∣niam [Scotorum Insu∣lam] cum exercitu Duce Bertho, vastauit misere Gentem innoxiam, & Nationi Anglorum sem∣per amicissimam; ita ut nec Ecclesiis quidem aut Monasteriis manus par∣ceret hostilis. l. 4. c. 26. re∣lates it, in the year of Christ, 684. so miserably wasted the Irish Nation, though a Nation most harmless to others, and always most friendly in particular to the English, that he spared neither Church nor Chappel, nor Monastery. His Army (says Keing in the Reign of the foresaid Fir∣nachta) spoil'd and burn'd all the Sea-coasts of Leinster, without any difference put between sacred and profane. And either a little before or after this devastation it was that in the same Reign they, or some other Forces Landing out of Great Britain, fought the Irish in the Battel named Cath Rath Moire in Moghlinne; where besides a great many of the latter, Comhusgach a Pictish King was lost. Lastly, in the Reign
of Loinnsioch mhic Aonghussa, the Brittons prey'd, harras'd, ransack'd the whole Country call'd Magh-Mhuir Theimhne, until the fortune of a Battel, I mean that of Cullinn, or Muigh Cullinn, which the Ʋltonians were compell'd to at last, made them retire. Besides these several Inroads touching them pretty near the quick at home, in divers parts of their Country, the mercy of God, seeing not their amendment yet, was pleas'd in this very Loinnsioch's Reign to try other means more general to the whole Nation of Ireland, by afflicting them all with such a Mortality of their Kine, and Famin thence ensuing and continuing for three years, in such extremity, that men ate one another, as Keting writes. But neither was this kind of warning any whit more effectual to work a Reformation. For Loinnsioch himself, their Monarch, was kill'd in Battel by Ceallach King of Connaght. And, af∣ter his immediate Successor Conghall Kinn, who most sacrilegiously rob'd and burn'd as well all the Churches and Sanctuaries, as all the rest of the Town of Kildare, before he was seiz'd upon by a sudden death; the just re∣ward of his Sacriledge, as all men thought in those days: the very next three Monarchs, Fearrghall, Foghartach, and Kionaoth, were all of 'em, one after another, kill'd in three Battels fought by their own Coutrey-men and Sub∣jects
against them. And though Flaithiortoch, immediate Successor to the last of these three, escaped violent death by making himself the only happy man of all the Irish Monarchs (at least of all until his time, except Maolchoba) in putting off voluntarily his Royal Robe, changing it for a Religious Weed, and both living and dying in peace, a profess'd Monk in the Monastery of Ardmagh; yet he that suc∣ceeded him next in the Sovereignty, Aodh Ollan was kill'd in Battel by Domhnal mhac Murchadha, as we have seen before. All which notwithstanding, the patience and goodness of God to them still was such, that he would warn them yet, and warn 'em indeed now even by prodigies and wonders, both in Heaven above, and in the Earth be∣low. In the Reign of this Domhnal mhac Mar∣chadha, who both kill'd and succeeded Aodh Ollan, the form of a hideous horrible Serpent appear'd a long time, moving over their heads in the Firmament. And in his next Successor, Niall Frassach's Reign, the Earth under 'em throughout Ireland shut up her fruitful Womb in such extraordinary manner, that she deign'd them no return at all of their Seed; but instead thereof, brought upon them a second, and it a most cruel, most universal Famin through all their Quarters. Then follow'd in the Monarch Aodh Ordnighe's Reign that Prodigious Thun∣der
and Lightning, which in one little nook of the Land, between Corca Bhaisgin and the Sea, kill'd in a trice a thousand and seven per∣sons dead. What shall I say of that wonder∣ful threefold, and peradventure greatest pro∣digy of all, pour'd down from Heaven in a tripartite division, at the Birth of the foresaid Niall Frassach? I mean those three stupendious showers fallen at that time on three several Fields in Ireland: the one of Honey, on Fothan∣beg; the other of Silver, on Fothain mhor, and the third of blood, on Maigh-Laightonn. In∣deed according to Keting, they fell in the Reign of the above Fearrghall, the seventh Monarch in order ascending up from this Niall, sur∣named Frassach in Irish, (in Latin Nimbosus or Imbricus) from those wonderful showers happening at his Nativity. And though I am no Diviner to interpret what they portended for certain; yet taking the shower of blood in conjunction with those other Prodigies that one after another so closely follow'd in so small a tract of time and circumstances of Ireland; I think he would not judge amiss that took it for one of the very last warnings from Heaven to this Nation, that the Anger of God was now on the point of overcoming all his patience; and his rage and fury at hand,
since nothing else would do And indeed it ought the rather to be taken so, because that much contrary to Ketings re∣lation, so good an Au∣thor as Tigernacus ma∣ny hundred years before his time has told us, that the shower of Blood fell in the Reign of this Niall; and that the three showers fallen at his Birth, were one of Honey, one of Silver, and one of Wheat.. Certainly the se∣quel did soon evince it to have been so. 26. For not long after that Prodigious Thunder and Lightning which hapned in the Reign of Aodh Ordnigh, the patience of God being wearied, and his justice inrag'd by the unreclaimable contumacy of that People, he call'd out of their Northern Enclosures his ex∣terminating Angels, the Heathen Danes, Nor∣vegians, and other Easternlings, and in the same Reign of Aodh Ordnigh, pour'd them in on Ireland, to execute on the Christian Irish those very heaviest of Judgments that either such former Warnings would have prevented, or such later Prodigies had predicted, or that any People in the World for so many years after did suffer. Except only those, if any such have been whom God design'd to extinguish totally root and branch: or the incredulous Jews that must be still preserv'd, though still dispers'd among all Nations, to be a living Monument of Gods Vengeance on the unpar∣donable sin of their Ancestors. But the sin of
the Irish, how heinous soever, was not of that kind: nor was it the design of God to extin∣guish or extirpate them yet. And yet this first War of the Danes upon them, besides its having fully paid all their old scores to God, that is, abundantly punish'd them for above 40 years at least, in the very same methods they had offended him, and therefore covered all their Provinces with blood and ashes, and horrors of death, without any discrimination of People, or Professions, or Parties, it reduced them at last to a bondage and slavery far sur∣passing the Egyptian, Circassian, or any other I have read of any where on earth. For to pass over the life worse than death, that those of their Church-men that escaped the Sword were forc'd unto: and in particular how Foranan, with a few more of the Clergy of Ardmagh Gracianus Lucius, p. 328. relates this mat∣ter otherwise. He says, that Turgesius having taken the City of Ard∣magh, in the year 843. or 848. made Foranan, and all the Clergy and Religious men, and all the rest of the Students too of that University, Prisoners, and Ship'd them all for Limmeric, which his People held in their possession at that time. What became of them there, or any where else after that time, we have no account., having fled so far as Cashel first; and together with the Arch∣bishop of that See, and his Clergy too, thence again to the horrible ha∣bitation of Bogs, Woods, Rocks, and Subterranean Caves about, or not far
off Jomlaigh Jobhair, must have been content to hide themselves there, and even to luk for several years like wild Beasts: But, I say, to pass over this condition of their Church-men only, wherever any of them did scape the Sword; who cannot but be astonisht at the particulars of their bondage in general? These particulars I have omitted before: and therefore give them now for better satis∣faction to the Reader. 1. Every Canthred, or Division of ground containing one of our Baronies, had a Danish King: every Tuath, or Seigniory, a Chieftain: every Church a Lay-Danish-Heathen Abbot: every Town a Serjeant: every House a Souldier Cess'd (the Irish call'd him a Sairioch, or Buanna:) all of 'em Danes; and each com∣manding absolutely within his own Precinct, only subordinate respectively to the higher, till they came to the Supream, who was Turgesius him∣self. 2. The very Buanna did so command the House wherein he was Cess'd, that not so much as an Egg, or cup of Milk could be disposed of till he had been serv'd; though in the mean time a Suck∣ing Babe did perish for want of it. And if his Host had but one Cow in the World, he must have kill'd her upon demand to give him flesh. Or fail∣ing therein, or in any other thing demanded of him, he was presently taken and lead away Prisoner to the next Danish Rath, where he was sure to be detain'd in Fetters till he had fully satisfied all the
Buanna's demands either of Victuals, Money, or any thing else whatever. 3. Every House-keeper must have yearly paid into the Treasury an ounce of Gold (the Irish call'd it Vinghe Oir:) and failing, have his Nose cut off: which made them call this kind of Tax Nose-rent. 4. Neither Lord nor Lady, much less an inferior person suffer'd to wear new Cloaths; but only the Cast-cloaths of the Danes. 5. None to keep School, or be taught any kind of Learning, not even in their own Houses. 6. None to enter any Monastery, Church, or Chappel: for they were all possess'd by the Danes. 7. None to have either Clergy-man, or any other Learned man, Philosopher, Poet, Lawyer, or other Artist, whom they call Sruithe. 8. None suffer'd to have any kind of Book; but all Books the Danes could light upon, either burn'd or taken away by them. 9. Neither Lords nor Princes, nor even Kings Daughters permitted to embroider in Gold or Silver, or so much as work in any kind of Silk. 10. Nor even Kings Sons to learn or use any feats of activity. 11. None of what quality soever permitted to give or take any kind of entertainment, not even from or with his private Familiars; but all of 'em must e' have contented themselves with the Leavings of the Danes. I say nothing of that other barbarous Im∣position forc'd on every Brid; at her first Marriage to lye the first night with the Danish Captain of the Precinct, before she had Bedded
her Husband, if the Captain desired it; but if he did not, or dislik'd her, in either case to pay him a certain Tax in Money. How much this Money was, I cannot say. Tho I have known a custom derived thence, to have been continued in my own time by a Christian Landlord of English extraction, one Mr. Scur∣log (who was commonly call'd Scurlog the Poet) a Gentleman of two or three hundred a year in the County of Wexford. To whom every Maid living upon his Land, when she was Married, was bound to pay, and according∣ly did pay half a Crown English money, if he did not remit it. However, I pass over that Heathen Danish Original of this Un-christian custom, because I find nothing of it in Doctor Keting. Those other manifold particulars of the Irish bondage undoubtedly true, besides all their riches lost, and all their best blood spill'd, and all their Provinces and Countries laid in Ashes, during this first Danish War, before they were totally subdued, give us to understand sufficiently, to what degree their everlasting feuds and obstinacy had incensed Heaven. An obstinacy it was indeed so strangely, so inveterately and unreclaimably fix'd, that not even all the present terrors of so many mighty Fleets of those Heathenish cruel Barbarians, pouring in Armies and new Supplies conti∣nually
for so many years together from all the four winds, into all their Provinces, could re∣move it, or make them relent. For 1. Aodh Ordnighe himself, the Monarch in whose Reign the Danes begun their first In∣vasion of Ireland, after he had twice in one month prey'd and spoil'd Leinster, was by one Maolcannaid, in the Battel of Fearta, fighting against his own Rebellious Irish Subjects, kill'd. 2. The next succeeding him, namely Con∣chabhar mhac Donchadha, who Reigned 14. years, though he had the fortune to die in his Bed, and (for ought I can find) never once in his life to have fought the Danes, notwith∣standing their sore incursions often made upon his Subjects within that extent of time: yet he had the good leisure, and took the oppor∣tunity of giving Battel to the Galleanguibh, his own Country-men, at the Fair of Tailtean. 3. Again, his immediate Successor Niall Caille (who was sur-named Caille from his being drown'd in the River of Callon; but drown'd as he was attempting to perform a very chari∣table deed. For being to pass this River, and seeing it high, and therefore having com∣manded a young man to try it: and then ob∣serving this youth presently in danger, and all others refusing to hazard themselves to re∣scue him from the violence of the flood; he spur'd on his own Horse to do it himself. But
it pleas'd God that the bank breaking under the fore-feet of the Horse, he tumbled down, and so was lost.) This Niall Caille, I say, Reigning likewise 14 years more, and conse∣quently in the very mightiest heat of this for∣mer Danish War: and therefore (a man would think) having need enough to employ all his power that way; as he did indeed when he gave the Danes Battel at Magh-Ith, and worsted 'em too: yet withal was so unfortunate, as to have (whether justly or unjustly, I know not) at two several times during his Reign, and the last of them but a little before that Battel, made War on his own Country-men: that is, with a great Army wasted Leath Cuinn, first from Biorrha to Teambhuir, and then again Fercaill and Deallbhna Ethra. So that, I think, by these Instances of the only three Monarchs that Reign'd while the first Danish War continued, it appears how little Reformation of their bloody Feuds, all the terrors of so many mighty Fleets pouring in foreign Enemies continually, had wrought in that People, at least in their Princes, Nobles, and other Men of War. Which undoubtedly we may justly think to have been it, or at least a most extreamly provoking addition to it, that by this time exasperated Heaven, and even forc'd the Almighty to pour without further delay the very utmost of those evils design'd
either by his justice or mercy to punish them. For now, that is, upon the death of Niall Caille, in the River of Callainn, their Monarchy, King∣dom, Dominion ceased e'en as intirely at home, as it had long before abroad. There was no more Monarch in Ireland now; but the saddest Interregnum that ever Christian People had, or Heathen Enemies could wish 'em: None, I am sure, either of the Milesian, or other Gathelian Race. No more King henceforth over that People, but that barba∣rous Heathen Tungesius, who assumed that title to himself till the days of their bondage which I have before, tho only in part describ'd. No more now the Island of Saints, nor the Mart of Literature in Ireland. No more Beann∣chuir to be seen, but in Ashes now a second time, and all the Learned holy Monks thereof Murder'd by those cruel Danes, and buried un∣der its rubbish. No more the Monastery of Fionbhar at Corck, which had 700 Conventual Monks, and together with them 17 Bishops at one time wholly devoting themselves to a contemplative life. No more now the most wonderful Cloister of all for Angelical Visions and Communications under S. Mochada, at Ratha first, and then at Lismore, containing no fewer hundreds of the most stupendious Monks for Sanctity that everhave been in any
Age or Nation. No more the celebrated Cells of Magh-Bile, or any at all of so many other holy places ecchoing forth continually the praises of God. No more the renowned Schools of Dun-da-Leathghlaiss, Ardmagh, Lismore, or Cashell. No more University, nor Academy, nor Colledge of Learning in all the Land: nor Foregners coming to admire and study in them: nor so much as the Natives to enter them, but only to stand aloof, and weep over their ruins, as the Jews did over Jerusalem in the Emperor Adrians time. This was the deplorable condition of the Gathelian off-spring in Ireland, which the hey∣nous enormity of their no less National than peculiar sins, and among the rest their strange contempt of so many fair warnings from God given them continually from time to time a∣bove 300 years, brought them to at last, and kept them in until his Justice was in some mea∣sure satisfied. For so long he continued the Interregnum of their Monarchs, and slavery of all their People under that Heathen Tyrant Turgesius. And though I cannot exactly tell, at least be positive in it, how many years in all this miserable condition of theirs lasted, I mean as to the general Bondage of the whole Nation universally in every Province and Part: be∣cause we do not certainly know in what year
of Aodh Ordnighs Reign the Danes first entr'd: yet I can say out of Keting, that under other Commanders they Warred 12 years on the Irish before Turghesius Landed in Ireland out of Norway with a much mightier Fleet than any of the former. That he continued his joynt endeavours with the rest of the Heathen Inva∣ders in carrying on, and prosecuting the most cruel War could be against the Natives for 17 years more, before he was chosen Captain Ge∣neral of all the Invaders, both White Danes & Black Danes So the Irish distin∣guish 'em, calling the Norvegians the White Danes, and those ar∣rived from Denmark it self the Black Danes. though in their own Language the general or common name they give them, and the Easter∣lings too is Loghlon∣nuidh, which says Ke∣ting, imports Great Ro∣bustious Scourers of the ea. For Lon in old Irish is a strong man, and Loch the Seas and Easterlings; which consequently he was in the 29th. year of this former Danish War. That now he went on furiously, spoiling, ran∣sacking, destroying all before him every where; but particularly with se∣veral leets of small Ves∣sels and Boats all the Islands in Loch Neachach, Loch Erna, Loch Riogh, and other great Lakes of Ireland. And that being at last wholly Master of the Field, and taking advantage of the Interregnum after Nial Caille's death (for none of the whole Irish Nation had
the ambition, or lust, or heart, or valour now to entitle himself to that Soveraignty which had cost their Fore-fathers so many hundred Battels, and such Rivers of blood to conquer it from one another) he now usurps the title, as he had before the power of King of Ireland; though not acknowledged for such by the Irish, at least not otherwise than by the meer∣est Galley-slaves their cruel unjust tormentors may be. In fine, that how long, or how short soever it continued after this, although it was indeed unsupportable to any human Creatures not wholly devoid of sense or feeling: never∣theless it was no other than the most eminently prophetical Saints of that Nation, Columb-Cille and Berchane, observing even in their own time the detestable Pride, Ambition, Injustice, Violence, Licentiousness, Avesation from all good Government, so common and so ingraf∣ted in their great Lords and Chieftains, had 200 years before it happen'd, fore-told should happen as a just judgment from God upon so sinful a Generation of men. And, which is very remarkable, that Columb-Cille particu∣ly foretold how, in that very Monastery which in his time had been founded at Ardmacha, such a Heathen powerful Stranger from beyond Seas, and such in all respects as Turgheis was, should make himself Abbot of it; as verily he did, upon his chasing away Foranan the Christian
Abbot, long before he had assum'd the Title of King of Ireland. Yea, and (which I am sure is no less, if not more remarkable yet) that Berchan in express terms prophesied how un∣der such a Forreign Tyrant every Church or Cili in Ireland should be possess'd by an Abbot of his Gang. 27. Besides, I can inform you, that altho, in regard of the extraordinary mortifications offered, and prayers incessantly pour'd out to God by the small remainder of the Irish Clergy, who had hitherto saved themselves in uncouth horrid Wildernesses, he was merci∣fully pleas'd, as Keting says, about this time, i. e. after some few years of the universal Bon∣dage, to inspire that counsel to Maolseachluinn mhac Mhaolruanuidh, the Irish King of Meath, which as we have related before, destroy'd both the Tyrant himself, and all his Armies, and Fortifications too on a sudden, and conse∣quently set all the Irish Nation free; being now restored every private person to his for∣mer possessions, as the Lords and Princes, and Provincial Kings were each of them to his own respective jurisdiction at large; and the said Maolseachluinn, by common consent made Mo∣narch; and so their Policy and power of Do∣minion at home fully recovered: Yet so were not their Riches, their Treasures, their Gold, Silver, and Jewels, those former spoils of so
many forreign Provinces, & for so many hun∣dred years gathered home to Ireland by their Pagan Predecessors. During so many strong impressions of the late conquering Heathen Foe into the very heart and all the most secret recesses of Ireland, all were taken by them, and carried away by their several Fleets, some to Norway, some to Denmark, and the rest to other Eastern Borderers on the German or Bal∣tick Sea. And which was a greater loss to the Learned, their Libraries, their Books were ne∣ver recover'd. Only the few Religious men that preserv'd themselves, preserved also a few of their Books. But the greatest loss of all was not only of Learning in the Mart of Litterature, but of Sanctity in the Island of Saints. Nei∣ther the one nor the other was ever at any time after this restor'd in Ireland, at least not near the former degree of eminence. The only thing, the only virtue indeed, that after so many great losses, revived illustriously, and continued eminently conspicuous in that People, was their Military prowess, their Va∣lour, Bravery, Fortitude in the second Danish War; to say nothing more of their destroying Turgesius, and all his Forces, by help of that stratagem which ended the first. And yet I must confess that all their Martial spirit in that very second War did exert it self in, was only in defending themselves at home, without any
design or thought (for ought appears to us) of imitating those former Heroes among their Ancestors, that carried the terror of their Arms both far and near abroad. The truth is, they were no sooner enfran∣chiz'd from the Tyranny of Turgesius, than they resign'd themselves wholly to ease and rest, and a life of extream, unworthy, un∣masculin laziness. Insomuch that they not only neglected all kind of Navigation, and provision for it: tho they might have con∣sidered that the like neglect formerly since they became Christians, had been at least one of their greatest banes, and that which gave their Invaders the opportunity of attacking them without fear on every Quarter of their Island, whether with great or small inconsi∣derable Fleets: but were so far besides blinded, that having slighted all the Danish Fortifica∣cations throughout the Land, they made none at all in their stead, nor indeed in any place, not even on the Sea Ports, for their own defence from abroad. And which was yet more strange, would not themselves be at the trouble of guarding so much as any one of all those very Ports, but entertain'd in pay some of those very Forreigners (their late vanquisht enemies) for that employment of greatest trust▪ whom therefore, that is, from their being hired for pay, they call'd Buannacidhs. In a word,
they gave themselves over to Luxury and full enjoyment of the good things of the Land; which naturally of it self, without much la∣bour, was a Country flowing with Milk and Honey, and all things else necessary both for life and pleasure. But the greatest of Curses expecting them was, that by the time (and it was but a very short time when) they had surfeired on plenty and wantonness, they presently (says Keting) return'd to their old vomit again. They re∣new'd their fatal Feuds, divided, were at cruel discord, fell a persecuting one another like mad, as in former times, with all kind of ho∣stility. This kindled anew the wrath of God against the Nation in general to such an ex∣tream, that notwithstanding his mercy pre∣vail'd with him still so far as not to bereave them of their Martial Fortitude, tho they had so long and so often, and so freshly now again abus'd it so mightly, but to expect for a much longer time, even two or three Ages yet, their amendment and repentance before he would utterly destroy them: nevertheless he did without delay permit his justice to set open once more the Flood-gates of the North, to pour in the second time upon them those Mi∣nisters of his Vengeance, the Norvegians, Danes, and their other barbarous Heathen Associats known to us only by the name of Oostmans,
or Easterlings; and to continue their unda∣tions in Ireland, to Plague a Rebellious un∣grateful Generation of Christians, and plague 'em now for a hundred and fifty years more compleat. For, as I have already noted else∣where, so long at least did this second Danish War continue heavy upon 'em, only some few lucid intervals it had excepted. And yet nei∣ther in the beginning, nor progress, nor issue of it, did they amend. So that Almighty God, the great Justicier, the great Striker of them from above, might justly say to them at this time, what he had formerly said to the Jews by the mouth of his Pro∣phet Jeremy. In vain have Frustra percussi filios vestros; disciplina non receperunt. Jerem. 2. 30. I stricken your children they received no correction. And the pious Observer of this continual recidiva∣tion, this fatal contumacy of theirs, Dr. Keting might have no less truly either complain'd or acknowledg'd it of them to God, than Jeremy did the like of his own People. Lord, thine Eyes Domine oculi tui respi∣ciunt fidem: Percussisti eos & non doluerunt: attrivisti eos, & renue∣runt accipere discipli∣nam: induraverunt fa∣cies suas supra petram▪ & noluerunt reverti. 5. 3. are upon the truth: Thou hast stricken them, but they have not grieved; thou hast consumed them, but they have refus'd to receive cor∣rection. They have made their faces harder than a Rock: they have refus'd to return.
To satisfie the Reader that I speak not hy∣perbolically, or at random in this matter; I give here in short a sufficient number of in∣stances that may serve for proofs thereof, as I find them in Ketings History. Indeed they are there (I confess as little intentionally for this purpose, as much more to his purpose) dispersedly given as they happen'd. That is, the former part of them in the several Reigns of eight of those eleven Monarchs, that by the unanimous consent of the Irish Annals and Historians, were undoubtedly such over all Ireland, from Maolseachluinn 1. in whose Reign the second Danish War begun, to Maol∣seachluinn II. being the second time elected or submitted to as the Monarch, some few years before this long War ended▪ and the latter part of them likewise in the several Reigns of those other six that pretended to be such after this Maolseachluinn II. whereof Ruaruidh O Con∣chabhar was the last, and consequently of all the Irish that were any way such. But for saving you a labour, I have collected all those instances together, and so give 'em now: that if you please, you may read 'em over in a con∣tinual series, without interposition of any thing else. Where, I doubt not, you will admire how notwithstanding all the heavy pressures in every Province of Ireland, by so many power∣ful foreign Enemies, and so many Battels
fought, and so much blood lost in the same War by the Irish defending their Countrey against those Pagans, they could nevertheless have time, and men, and blood to spare for so mis∣chievous a work as the fighting and destroying one another so cruelly. And yet it seems they wanted none of all, not even so early as the third Battel fought by them against the Danes in this very second War. For Maolseachluinn I. who had so Victori∣ously fought the first of these Battels, being dead in the 16th. year of his Reign; and Aodh Fionnleath, who had no less bravely fought the second of them, departing this life within or immediatly after the next 16 years: Flann mhac Sionnadh, who then succeeded in the Monarchy, and Reigned 38 years, gave the fatal beginning to that new series of intestine Broils, Depredations, Battels, Slaughters, Mur∣ders, among the Natives themselves, that fol∣low'd. Certainly the very first Act of this Monarch, I mean the first recorded of him in his Reign by Keting, is that he enter'd in ho∣stile manner, Plunder'd, Ransack'd, Preyd the whole Province of Mounster, and brought a∣way Captives and Pledges thence. And after this, though I cannot say how long after, the great Battel of Beallach Muidh Mughna was fought between him and holy Cormock, the good King of Mounster, and Archbishop of
Cashel. For this vertuous Prince, who was both King and Priest together, though much contrary to his own judgment and inclination, yet by the great importunity of his Mounster Noble-men, but chiefly by the advice of Flaithbhiortach mhac Johaincine, Abbot of Inche-Cathaigh, march'd with an Army to∣wards Leinster, pretending that this Province ow'd him chiefry, as being lawful King of Leath-Mogh. But in his entring it, he was met and fought, and defeated, and kill'd, both himself and seven lesser Kings with him; be∣sides other Nobles, by the said Monarch, who had of the other side in his Army Cearrbhall mhac Muirregin, King of Leinster, and ten petty Kings more. Besides, in this Monarch's Reign Aidheith mhac Laighnigh, King of Ʋlster, was murder'd by his own Associates. And tho in the Reign of Niall Gluindubh, who after the said Flann was the next Monarch for three years only, there be nothing recorded of action among the Irish themselves; but all against the Danes: and this Monarch Niall to have bravely in his own person fought 'em twice; though he was kill'd in the second Fight, and together with him Donchubhar mhac Maolseachluinn (called Riogh Damhna, or Tanist to the Monarch of Ireland) Aodh mhac Eoghagain King of Ʋlster, Maolmhithe mhac Flannegain King of Breag, and Maolchraoibe O
Duibh seanaigh King of Oirghiall, besides others of chief note and estimation: we shall find it otherwise in all and every one of the succeed∣ing Reigns, at least, until this Danish War is wholly over. Donachadh mhac Floinn, immediat Successor to Niall, for twenty years more in the Sove∣raignty, enter'd as an Enemy the Countries about Athlone, where many of his Army were kill'd, and among others, the petty King of Ibh Failghe. In his Reign Fearrghraidh, suc∣ceeding Ceallaghan for two years in the King∣dom of Mounster, was treacherously murder'd by his own followers. And in the same Reign Mathgamhain mhac Kinedy, Successor to Fearghraidh, and a brave, constant, successful Warrier against the Danes, was betrayed in his own House by one Donomhan; thence con∣vey'd to Mac Brain King of Eoghanach, a Con∣federate of the Danes; shut up in Prison by him, and there soon after murder'd by his People. Conghallach mhac Mhaolmhithe, the next Mo∣narch, notwithstanding his bravery against the Danes, invaded Mounster with a main Army against his own Countrey-men; upon what quarrel I know not. Though I find special notice taken of his killing in that expedition the two Sons of Kinede mhac Lorcaine. In his Reign also Damhnal Claon King of Leinster,
and Domhnal O Faolain King of the Desies in Mounster, joynd with the Danes. From which conjunction follow'd not only many bloody Battels between them and Brien mhac Kinede (after surnam'd Boraimh) younger Brother and Successor in the Kingdom of Mounster to the foresaid Mathgamhain; but the destroying of this Monarch Conghallach himself in the Town of Ardmagh; where he was by an Army composed partly of Danes, and partly of Leinster-men, set upon, fought, defeated, kill'd; ending so his ten years troublesome vexatious Reign. Domhnal mhac Mairchiortae, succeeding him for ten years more in this fatal Soveraignty, could be at leisure to make War on Fearrghal∣lach O Ruairck King of Connaght, prey all that Province, and bring away thence a great number of Captives. And so could one Conghallach some time after this, but in the same Monarch's Reign, make it either his in∣terest or his revenge to murder that very same Connaght King. Besides it was against this Monarch Domhnal mhac Muirchiortac, that a∣nother Domhnal, the Son of Conghallach, had the prefidious, hard, unnatural heart to joyn with the Danes of Dublin, and fight him in the great Battel, which the Irish call in their Language Cath Chille Monae: wherein Ardg∣hall mhac Madagain, King of Oirghillac, and
many other illustrious persons of the Mo∣narch▪s side were lost; although himself after this, and many other Battels fought in his Reign, had the good luck to die a natural death at Ardmagh. Maolseachluinn the II. who appears next, for 20 years, as Monarch on the stage of Ireland, notwithstanding that he had known very well how one Gluneran had lately assum'd the Title of King of the Danes in Ireland: that he had fought them victoriously in the Battle of Taragh: that he had from thence directly march'd to Dublin, forc'd it, enter'd it, en∣rich'd himself with all the spoils of that City: and that he could not but see work enough remaining still among so many several sorts of Enemies, Danes, Normans, Easterlings, and their Irish Confederates: yet he found leasure and pick'd some quarrel to march his Army to Mounster against Dal-Gheass and prey and spoil them too; albeit they were the bravest Warriours there against the common Ene∣my. In his Reign the three sons of Gearb∣heoill mhac Lorcain sacrilegiously spoil'd the Sanctuary of Glean-da-Logh. For which im∣piety they were all three kill'd the very next following night. And in his Reign Muirchi∣ortach va Conghalla, heading, or at least assisting the Danes of Dublin, plunder'd the Sanctuary of Domhnach-Padruig though to all their cost, for
they all every one died within a month after this wickedness committed by them. Now Brien mhac Kinede, surnam'd Boraimh, succeeding his murder'd Brother in the King∣dom of Mounster (which happen'd in the fourth year of the Monarch Conghallach mhic Mhaolmhithe) after he had in the second year of his reign over that Province only, and in revenge of his foresaid Brother's most bar∣barous death, challeng'd Maolmodh mhac Brain King of Eonachta to a set Battel: sought it accordingly at Bealach Leachta: kill'd the greater part of Mac Brains Army, and taken all the rest prisoners; an Army consisting of a numerous Body of Irish, and 1500 Danes that join'd them: and when this Battel was over, upon intelligence brought him that, du∣ring his diversion by it, Domhnal O Faolan King of the Desies over-ran the greatest part of Mounster, preying and spoiling all before him: after Brien hereupon had immediately march'd towards him, overtaken him, fought him at a place called Fane mhich Conrach, routed him, pursued him, kill'd him in his flight, and together with him the most part of the Danes of Waterford that join'd with him; then forc'd that Town, plunder'd it, burn'd it, and enrich'd his Army the brave Dal-Gheass with the spoils of it, and preys of all the parts about it: after that within the
8th year of his reign over Mounster, he had brought the whole Division of Leathmogh to acknowledg his Sovereignty with perfect obe∣dience: and that nevertheless upon the death of Domhnal Claon King of Leinster, which soon follow'd, that Province withdrawing their obedience, and joyning anew with the Danes, he had with the whole power of Mounster enter'd it, and given both the Lein∣ster-men and their Danish Confederats, join'd together, the memorable overthrow at Gleann∣mhama, killing 4000 of them in that place: I say that after all these, and many other bloudy Fights against the Danes only, fought by him during his Reign over the Provinces of Mounster and Leath-Mogh, under the succes∣sive Reigns of three Monarchs or Kings of Ireland, Conghallach mhac Mhaolmhthe, Domh∣nal mhac Mairchiortae, and Maolseachluinn the Second: yet when he was chosen by the far greater part of Ireland, in the 23d year of this Maolseachluinn, to be Monarch, he was nevertheless necessitated to make that choice good, and establish himself by fighting on still against some other Irish Lords that opposed him, till he had subdued all at last by main force and dint of Sword. For to this end it was, That with the flower of his Army he march'd to Cineall Laigthagh, prey'd it, spoil'd it, and brought thence 300 Hostages. That
in like manner he enter'd the Countrey call'd Magh Coruinn seiz'd there Maolruanuidh King of Cineal Gonuill, and brought him prisoner along with himself to Ceann Chorah in Tuath Mhumhan. In fine, That Leinster was wholly over-run and burn'd by him, even to the Val∣ley of Gleann-da-Logh, and from thence again cross to Cill-Mhuighnionn (we call it now Killmainam) within a small English mile of the walls of Dublin, Westward. And yet that also may be true which Keting here observes, viz. that Brien was mightily moved to this destructi∣on of Leinster, because they were Leinster-men that join'd with the Danes in ansacking, spoil∣ing and leading away a great number of Cap tives from the Sanctuary of Termon Feichin in Meath. I say nothing more of any part of those 21 Battels in all, fought (as you have elsewhere seen) by this Brian Boraimh, a great part of them while he was only King of Mounster, and the rest after he was Monarch: only that in 'em all, taking one with another, especially counting among 'em, as I should, the greatest & last Battel of them, which was that of Clantarff, I doubt not, there was much more Irish bloud spilt by the Irish themselves on both sides, than there was of Danish or by the Danes on either. Besides I observe it, as worthy of special remark here, That immediately after this Battel of Clantarff had been over, and the
Victorious Army of Brian Boraimh had buried their dead (especially this Monarch himself and Murchoe the Prince his oldest Son, with the rest of greatest quality of their side that were lost in the Battel) and interr'd 'em all at Cill-mhuinionn: after those funeral rites per∣form'd by the whole Army before they separa∣ted: after the Conacians had then parted, and re∣turn'd the shortest way home to their own Countrey of Connaght; and the Momonians like∣wise in one body taking another as the nearest way to Mounster: these being in all but 4000 men, and marching through an Enemies Coun∣try, were no sooner come to Mullach Mastion, a∣bout some 20 miles from Dublin in their way to Mounster, than those of them who were of West-Mounster, and they were three parts of the whole (i. e. 3000 men) withdrew themselves muti∣nously apart from the rest who were only a thousand North Mounster men, but Dal-Gheass, the survivors of those other brave Dal Gheass their Companions that with the loss of their own lives made all their Army Victorious. That the Westmounster men being so withdrawn a little distance of ground, immediatey sent defi∣ance to Donochadh, the Leader till then of both parties, as being one of the sons of Brien Boraimh, and heading still and remaining with the Dal-Gheass; but a conditional defiance it was, requi∣ring Donochadh to send them Hostages for his
acknowledging one of their own West-Mounster Tribe as rightful King of all Mounster, by vertue of the ancient disposition made (some 800 years before) by Oillioll Ollum the first Provincial King of both Mounsters to his second Son Cormock Caisse, and his Grandchild or his eldest Son Eoghun Mor's child (by name Fiochae Muilleathan.) That Donogh relying on his valiant Dal-Gheass though but so few, and a great many of them very grievously wound∣ed, gave the Messenger nothing to hope, but return'd him with an answer of disdain and scorn; bidding him tell those who had sent him, that his Father came to the Sovereignty of that Kingdom, not by vertue of any such or other ancient disposition, but by his Sword: and that he would endeavour to keep in the same manner what his descent from such a Father had entitled him to. That pursuant to this answer, preparing to fight, when he had put into the Danish Rath which re∣mains to this day on that Height of Maistion all his wounded men, and appointed a third part of the rest to defend them: not only those very wounded men, understanding the cause, and thereupon seeing their wounds to open and bleed afresh, fill'd them with green Moss, call'd for their Arms, took 'em, march'd forth, and embodied with their Companions, resolv'd to live or die with them in fighting;
but the Mutineers, observing (for they saw all) their desperate resolutions, thought bet∣ter of it; and whether out of compassion, or cowardize, or some other motive, I know not, march'd off presently their own way home to West Mounster; leaving Donochadh with his few Dal-Gheass to fight theirs out in passing on towards Tomond, through a greater Army of profess'd enemies that expected to re∣ceive them near Athy; where they were to pass the River Barrow, some four or five miles from Maistion. That Donochadh mhac Brien Boraimh was no sooner come so far and encamped close by that River, then Donochadh mhac Gil∣la-Phadruig King of Ossory, that with an Army rais'd out of all parts of Leinster ten times the number of Dal-Gheass, lay not far off on the other side of the same River, at a place called Magh Cloinne Keallnigh, sent him a He∣rald requiring him forthwith to deliver consi∣derable Hostages, or fight his way: though Mac Gilla-Phadruig's quarrel was no other, nor otherwise grounded than upon his Fathers imprisonment for twelve months by Brian Bo∣raimh some time past. That a much more scorn∣ful answer than the former being made to his Messenger, and Donochadh mhac Brien Boraimh, in the same manner he had so lately at Mastion, preparing now the second time to fight: his wounded men would not be excused, but fil∣ling
again their wounds with green Moss, and taking to their Arms, they prevail'd with the Prince to have great Piles or Posts of wood fastned deep in the ground where they were to stand, with two of their unwounded friends, one on each side of each of them: and then themselves tied to those Piles at their backs to keep them from falling while their hands were at work against their Assailants. That the sight (for now the Enemy was so near that they had a full sight) of this unu∣sual preparation of men so strangely devoting themselves to death, did so abate the courage of Mac Gille-Phadruig's Army, that notwith∣standing all his eagerness, and all his anger, and even his upbraiding them with the great∣ness of their number of one side, and the paucity of Dal Gheass on the other, which, says he, is such that if they were meat, you are enough to devour 'em up in one meal, yet he could not prevail with them to make the Onset, or do other than stand still. That Donogh O Brian see∣ing now at last there was no further hope of Battel, broke up his little Camp, and march'd on the best he could, very slowly indeed (for how could it be otherwise?) being forc'd to skirmish almost continually in the Rear, and sometimes in the Front and sides too, for several days, and forty or fifty long miles, un∣til at length, having lost in all a hundred and
fifty of his wearied men, he got clear of this hard hearted Foe and his cowardly Forces that pursued him so far and in such manner attacking him. 28. Maolseachluin the II. that was formerly depos'd to give place to Brian Boraimh, is now again immediately after the Battel of Clan∣tarff, the second time Monarch of Ireland▪ In this second Reign of his, after he had, as you have seen before, kill'd in Dublin the whole remainder of the Danes fled thither from the Battel of Clantarff, then with∣out delay he march'd with all his Forces against his own Countreymen. And first against those of Cionsallach (we call it now the County of Wexford,) where he turn'd all into ashes, and slaughter'd a great many of the Inhabitants. Nxt in like Hostile man∣ner against those of Ʋlster; whence he re∣turn'd with a great number of Hostages. About this time it was that Donochadh mhac Gille Phadruig, in the head of his own Troops, in the streets of Leith-Ghlinn (alias Laghlin) kill'd Donochan King of Leinster and Teadhg O Ryan King of Idrona, with many more of their followers. Nor was it long after, that Maolseachluin himself, the Monarch enter'd Ossory, kill'd Dunchall mhac Donochadh, then (after his Fathers death) King of that Coun∣trey, slaughter'd a great number of his ad∣herents,
and for the future fidelity of the rest led away as many Hostages as he pleased. Lastly in this second Reign of Maolseachluinn it was that Dunn Sleibhe mhac Mhaoilmhorda mhac Muirreigheine burn'd the King of Leinster Ʋghaire mhac Tuathail mhac Duinlingine, mhac Ʋghaire, mhac Oiliola mhac Duinling, in his dwelling house at Dubh-Loch Easa-Chaille, even that brave Ʋghaire, that fought the very last Battel in Ireland against the Danes, and de∣feated them so mightily that they never after could any where make head against the Irish. And now both the second War of the the Danes, and second reign of Maolseachluinn the II. ending here; I also end the former part of my Instances. In which, if I be not much deceiv'd, you may observe a wilful, obstinate, furious Nation, maugre all their Christianity, maugre the hand of God him∣self so heavy on 'em, proceeding still from worse to worse. For in the former Danish War, notwithstanding they had most enor∣mously transgressed at several times, by turn∣ing the edg of their Swords against one a∣nother; yet all that while none of them ar∣riv'd to the impiety of leaguing or joyning with the common barbarous Heathen Foe against any Soul whatsoever, or upon any terms at all. But in the later we have seen a very great part of 'em do so, and do it even
all along from the very beginning to the end. At least I am sure they did so full 55 years compleat from time to time, before the Battel of Clantarff had broke all the hearts, and hopes, and Leagues together of those that did it. Though after all, the goodness of God put off a little further still that heaviest of his judgments on the Nation in general, which they (whether by relapsing again the third time into their accursed Feuds, or whether by continuing in 'em at all times, and parti∣cularly at this of their last delivery from all forein Enemies) brought on themselves not only at last, but ere very long. And yet I must confess it was no sooner than 127 years more were over. For so long still, even after the second Danish War of a hundred and fifty years continuance had been wholly ended by the destruction of all their Northern and Eastern Invaders whatsoever, did the wonderful mercy of God to them expect their amendment: certainly a longer period of time than he expected the repentance of the old World, when he had warn'd them to it by the building of the Ark. At present he was content only to add to the former losses of this Nation that which really was the last disposition to that heaviest doom expect∣ing them: as it was indeed the very last sym∣ptom of their dying Commonwealth. He
removed their Candlestick; that is, he sub∣verted their ancient Monarchical Govern∣ment. The power and majesty of which, as it had been for so many long Ages their only firm prop: so it was the only National glory they had left after the destruction made (by 200 years continual War with Foreiners) of all whatsoever else had been great or illustri∣ous in their Nation. But this is now departed like all the rest. For, after this Maolseachluinn the II. had by death ended his second Reign of nine years continuance, there was never more in Ireland any Monarch truly such; never any at all (I mean) universally either obey'd, or acknow∣ledg'd, or accounted such by the Irish in ge∣neral, at least till Henry the II. nay, I might say, till James I. of glorious memory reign'd over 'em. Yet because, I must confess, there have been six more in Title and pretension such, that succeeded this Maolseachluinn, in their several periods of time, for a hundred and twenty seven years in all: and because the later part of my Instances are delivered in their Reigns, I give them also now in or∣order. 29. Donochadh mhac Brien Boraimh succeeded next to Malseachluinn II. for two and fifty years, says Keting, and was acknowledg'd by Leath Mogh and the greater part of Ireland.
In his reign Art Cuilioch O Ruairck King of Breithfne, violated, spoil'd, plunder'd the San∣ctuary of Cluain Fearta Breanuinn; but on the same day, after he had committed this horrible sacrilegious villany, was met, and fought, and defeated by the Monarch. In his reign (be∣sides the sacking of Waterford by Diarmuid Mhaoil-na-mbho King of Leinster; which I pass over, because they were, at least most of them were Danes that lived there at that time) the other famed Sanctuary of Cluan mhic-Noise was in the like impious manner spoil'd by those Irish called the Comhacnuibh; though ere long severely punish'd (says Keting) by a general mortality sweeping both themselves and their Cattel away. In his reign Carthach mhae Saoirbhreathaigh, King of Eoghanachta Casshell, and a great many other Gentlemen of Note were burn'd together in a Thatch∣house by Mac Longhargain mhac Dunn Chuan. And after all, this Monarch himself, Dononachadh mhac Brian Boraimh, was not only depriv'd of his Kingdom, but glad to save his life by flying away, and going a poor Pilgrim to Rome, where he died in St. Stephen's Abbey. Which in short being the whole account, we find in Keting, of what happen'd, to our pur∣pose here, in the long reign of this Dononachadh: what follows now is out of the Gratianus Lu∣cius, p. 81. Author of Cambrensis Euersus. For
this accurate Writer, tho he delivers many excellent things of this Donogh; yet he tells us, That he was an Usurper on the rights of his elder Brother Teadhg (the undoubted Heir of the Crown, say the Annals of Innis-Faile:) and put him into the hands of those Ely-O-Carrol-Men who treacherously mur∣der'd him. That in the year 1027. which was the next after Maolseachluinn's death, he prey'd all Meath, Fingall, Leinster, Ossory: and camp'd for two days near the Walls of Dub∣lin, without any opposition. That An. 1036. with only one Vessel he fought, sunk and took 14 Breithfne Ships; and sufficiently re∣veng'd on 'em their plundering of Cluan Feart. That in the year 1050, the Ossorians and La∣genians rebelling, he broke again their Stub∣bornness: and in the year 1060. having enter ed Connaght with a good Army, he compell'd Ruadhruigh the King of that Proviuce to give him Hostages. So much indeed Gratianus Lu∣cius tells us consequently (in the first place) of this Donochadh mhic Brien Boraimhe. But then going on he relates (in the next) of Diarmuid mhic Donochadh, surnam'd Maol-na-Moa, King of Leinster, Nephew to this very Donochadh O Brian the Mounster King, by Dearbhrogil his Daughter, That, he taking into his care and espousing against this Usur∣ping Uncle the quarrel of young Toirrghial∣lach,
who was the Son and Heir of the mur∣dered Teidhg, and consequently his own Cousin German, to the end this injured youth might be restored to his right, made sharp War on the said Uncle, Keting's pretended Monarch of Ireland. That, to the end, he begun with Waterford in the year 1037. took, sack'd, and burnt it. In this year 1048. he set upon Glanuson, turn'd it to ashes, kill'd a hundred of its defenders, and brought away 400 more Captives. In the same year he wasted all the Desies, and return'd with an infinite num∣ber of their Cattel and very many Prisoners. In the year 1058. he burnt Limmerick, plun∣der'd Inis-Ceath, fought Donochadh at the Mountain Croth, and routed his whole Army. In the year 1061. he made a miserable slaugh∣ter of the Momonians at Cuamchoill, wasted their Countrey, and put all both Houses, Stacks, and standing Corn into a light flame of fire. Anno 1063. he burnt Limmerick the second time, forc'd the Momonians to give him Hostages out of all parts of their Coun∣trey; nay soon after upon a new rebellion or insurrection of theirs plagued them again and compell'd 'em to new submissions and Ho∣stages; which Hostages he delivered all every one to the foresaid Toirrghiallach. The next year, which was 1064. he beat Donochadh out of all his Kingdom, made him fly beyond
Seas, plac'd Tourrghiallach in his Throne, at least of Mounster: and in the following 1065. upon intelligence of Donochadh's son Murchadh▪s setting up for himself, he march'd the last time into Mounster, suppressed that Insurrection, chas'd Murchadh into Connaght, receiv'd the third time Hostages from all Mounster, and, as he had done before, put them into the hands of Tourrghiallach now King after his Uncle. Moreover this Author writes of the same Diar∣muid King of Leinster; that, besides his pul∣ling down and setting up so whom he pleased in that Province of Mounster, he made Con∣naght also yield, having marcht into it with a smart Army, harrass'd it, and reduced Aodh O Conchabhar, the King of it, to such streights, that in the year 1061. he was e'en forc'd at last to buy his peace by coming to his House in Leinster and submitting to his pleasure. That before this, in the year 1048. at three several times he wasted Meath so cruelly, so without any discrimination or distinction made 'twixt sacred and profane, that he de∣stroy'd with fire even most of the very Churches there: and in the year 1053. en∣tring it the fourth time, he led away both a very great number of Captives, and innu∣merable preys. That for the Danes or Ea∣sterlings of Dublin, who (it seems) stood upon terms of Contest with him, he in the year
1052. plagued them so mightily by burning not only Fingall, but all other Territories round about them on every side, and then fighting and worsting and slaughtering a great num∣ber of them hard by their own Walls, that they were glad at last to proclaim him their King also, and wholly submit to his will. That notwithstanding all his former Victories, he was in the year of Christ 1072, on the 17th of February, being Tuesday, fought, defeated, kill'd in the Battel of Odhbhen by Conchabhar O Maolseachluinn King of Meath. And lastly this Author tells us, That among all the Irish Antiquaries only Keting places Donochadh O Brien, only Sir James Ware, Diarmuid mhac Mhaoil-na-Moa in the Catalogue of Irish Mo∣narchs. So that all the rest of the Irish Wri∣ters, it seems, account neither of them, and consequently none at all in their days to have been King of Ireland, but hold a meer In∣terregnum then of the Monarchy. But be it so, or no, it matters not to my purpose; being the Instances brought all along in that very long Reign of Donochadh, at least over Moun∣ster, are true; whether Donochadh or Diarmuid, or any other Irish Prince in their time was more than a Provincial King, or less than a Monarch of the whole Island. Toirrghiallach mhae Teidhg, mhic Brien Boraimb (that is in our Language, Terence, the Son
of Teig, the Son of Brien Boraimh) is now Successor to Donachadh, as in the Kingdom of Mounster and Leath mogh, so in the Title of Monarch, says Keting. Nor do I find that any other opposed this Title of his. But one reason hereof might be his ruling peaceably, troubling no man, nor forcing any thing from either Province or man, And there∣fore they took no exception against the Title whether assum'd by himself or given him by others during his short Reign, which was but of twelve years only, as most Antiquaries say; though some extend it to 22 years: the oc∣casion of their difference being, that the for∣mer count the beginning of his Reign from the death of Diarmuid Mhaoil-na-moa in the Battel of Odhbhen; the later take it from the death of Donochadh O Brien at Rome, or at least from his deposition and flight. However, this is unanimously confess'd, that as he lived quietly for his own part during his Reign, so he died naturally in the 77 year of his Age, being the year of Christ 1086. But so did not under his Reign Conchabhor O Maolseachluinn King of Meath For this but lately Victori∣ous Prince was treacherously murthered by his own Nephew Murcho' mhac Floinn: and his head, after burial of it at Cluain-mhac-Noise, carried to the Monarch then residing at Coann-Chora. Who desired to see it, because
he bore this Methian King no good will, for having kill'd (though in Battel) his dear Cousin, his Patron, his supporter and Pro∣tector Diarmuid mhac Donochadh, surna∣med Maol-na-moa, King of Leinster, as we have seen before. But his curiosity cost him dear. For the head being brought him on good Friday; as he was viewing it, a little Mouse slipt out of it into his Bosom, which so affrighted him, especially when he under∣stood how next Sunday the same head was miraculously return'd back to Cluain-mhac-Noise with a gold Ring upon it, that he fell presently into a languishing Disease, that held him after in cruel pain for several years, and ne∣ver was perfectly over till he died. So writes the Author of Cambrensis Euersus. And now Muirchiortach mhac Toirrghialbhaigh mhac Teaidhg, the great Grandchild of Brien Boraimh, and Son to the foresaid Toirrgheallach, suc∣ceeded his Father in the Sovereignty at least of Mounster, Leath Mogh, and greater part of Ireland for 20 years, says Keting. In which Reign, though he record nothing proper to our purpose in this place (and somewhat extraordinary that very same is) yet Gratia∣nus Lucius has enough. This Author, page 82. and 84. gives a very particular account of the great combustions in it. He tells us how upon the death of Toirrghiallach O Brien the
last Monarch, not only this Muirchiortach his Son, but Domhnall, the Son of Ardghar, the Son of Lochlen, King of Tir-Conel contended to some purpose for the Sovereignty of Ire∣land. How the former by fight and spoil sub∣dued the Lagenians, and the later in the same manner the Methians. How Dombnal had in the year 1088. got the start of Muirchiortach by forcing the King and Kingdom of Con∣naght to give him Hostages for their future fidelity: and then immediatly enter'd Moun∣ster, burnt Limmerick, demolish'd Ceann-Chora the chief Royal Seat ever since Brien Boraimh's time, wasted the whole Countrey thereabouts with Fire and Sword, and brought away thence besides an infinite number of Horses and all sorts of Cattel, vast Treasures of Gold, Silver and Plate. How, on the other side, Muirchiortach, besides forcing Dublin three several times, banishing Godred the Da∣nish King, being there himself proclaim'd King at each time, marcht into Ʋlster with the Forces of Mounster, Connaght, Leinster and Meath: harrass'd it most wofully: burnt the Royal Seat of Domhnall there: and was thus reveng'd not once but often on that ro∣vince; marching into it every time with main Forces, and scouring all the Coasts of the whole Island with a very numerous well provided Navy. How Domhnall had withal
so many rebellions of his own Subjects against himself in the very North, nay within Tircn∣nel it self, that, having as often overcome them all, he put out the eyes of some of their petty Kings, and others to death. How after all the foresaid Muirchiortach King of Cashel, or (which is here the same thing) of Moun∣ster, and together with him Flann O Maol∣seachluinn King of Meath, and Ruidhruigh O Conchabhar King of Connaght found them∣selves necessitated not only to give Domhnall a meeting, but even to deliver him Hostages, in the year of Christ 1090. How in the year 1104. Domhnal turn'd to ashes that Countrey in Meath called then Ibh Laoghaire: and in the year 1112, broke into Fingall, prey'd it, plunder'd it all over, and carried away thence, besides their Cattel, a very great deal of costly Rayments; (magnam boum pretiosissimarumque vestium vim illinc retulit, says my Author) How, after so many devasta∣tions of the poor Countrey and much blood spilt betwixt these two Contenders: and af∣ter frequent annual Cessations between 'em, procured by the Primats of Ireland even then when both their Armies stood ready in the Field to fall on: they came at last to the old Division of Leath Cuinn and Leath Mogh: that is, Domhnall to govern absolutely in all the North side of Eisker-Riada, and Muirchi∣ortach
in all the South of it; each stiling him∣self King of Ireland. How, this agreement made, Muirchiortach falling into a heavy Dis∣ease that continued five years, his own Bro∣ther Diarmuid O Brien seiz'd the Kingdom of Mounster: and both he and other Provincial Kings divided among them all Muirchiortach's wealth and possessions while he was yet alive, tho extreamly sick: but he afterwards unex∣pectedly recovering, made so sharp a War on them all, that they were forc'd to quit and restore whatsoever they had so unjustly got. In fine, how piously both Muirchiortach and Diarmuid ended their days, notwith∣standing their almost continual Wars during life and health: the former at Lismore in the 20th year of his Reign, and of Christ 1119. but having first devested himself of all world∣ly power and care by turning Clerk in that holy place: and the later, being 73 years old, in the Menastery of Columb-cille at Doire (now by us called London-derry) 27 of his Reign, which was of Christ 1121. For so many years I find given him by Colganus in this Elogy of him: Donaldus Loghleni ex Ardgaro filio nepos, Rex Hiberniae, Hibernorumque ex∣cellentissimus formae praestantia, generis nobili∣tate, animi indole & in rebus agendis prosperitate postquam multa munera egenis clementer, & potentibus liberaliter elargitus fuerat, in Robo∣reto
Divi Columbae (hoc est in Dorensi Monaste∣rio) decessit anno aetatis suae 73. & principatus in Hibernia 27. Christi nati 1121. Where I must occasionally reflect on my own mistake, in the foregoing 75 page of this little Book, and desire the Reader to account it such. Indeed there I suppos'd that that Dearmach, where Beda says, Columbe-Cille had built his famous Irish Monastery, was the same with Ardmach. But now I see by Colgan's explication of Roboretum D. Columbae that without question that Dear-mach (in Latin Roboretum or Campus Roborum, for Dair or Doir signifies an Oak in the Irish, and Mach or Magh a Field) which Beda meant, was at the place ever since called by the Irish Doire Columb-Cille, as it is of late by the English London-derry, and by no means at Ardmagh. But to pass over as well that errour of my own, as the brief account, immediately be∣fore this reflection on it, given of the pious end those two great Contenders made: for peradventure you will say, and I confess it freely, that neither the one nor the other is to my main purpose here: and therefore to return, and prosecute only that which is my Province: I will now let you see all the glory of the Monarchical (or at least pre∣tended Monarchical) Power of Ireland (which never lasted long, not even from Heber's days,
in any one Family or Sept) removing from Mounster to Cannaght; and from the O Brians there to the O Connors here. Yet leaving still, for my part, the Question undetermined, whether the same Monarchy did not continue for two years longer in Tirconel, after it had ended in Tomond, and so pass'd immediatly not from Muirchiortach O Brian, but from Dombnall mhac Ardghar mhac Loghlin. However, that was, Toirrghiallach mor mhac Ruidhruigh vibh Chonchabhair (i. e. Terence the Great, Son of Roderick descended of Connor) King of Connaght, is now possess'd of the Sove∣reignty of Leath-Cuinn and greater part of Ire∣land, and thereby of the Title of Monarch for 20 years more, says Keting. For so at least his his own Subjects and followers call'd him. I am sure his Reign has furnish'd History with Instances enough on the Subject I treat of. At three several times he enter'd the Pro∣vince  Mounster with a great and Hostile power of men: though the first time having prey'd and spoil'd not only Ard-feanan but Cashel, he was set upon in the Rear by part of the Mounster Army, and lost Aodh O Hei∣din King of Biorradh, and Muirriadhach O Flacthiorta King of Lower Connaght, with a great number of other prime Gentlemen. The second time he invaded it both by Land and Sea: himself marching by Land in the
head of a strong Army, and laying all waste about him till he came to Cork; where a goodly Fleet (says Keting) well provided of Seamen and Souldiers, which he had sent about to destroy all the Coasts, having done their work, met him. And now this impe∣rious Monarch Toirrghiallach mor O Conchab∣hair, glutted with revenge, divides Mounster in two equal parts, the Southern and Northern Mounster, so called. Whereof he commits the Southern to Donochadh mhac Cartha's govern∣ment; the Northern to Conchabbar O Brien: and so returns home triumphantly to Con∣naght, with 30 Hostages of the best in Moun∣ster. But soon after, Cormock mhac Cartha, King of West-mounster, being treacherously kill'd by Toirrghiallach O Brien, his own Son∣in-law and Gossip: and the whole Province of Mounster, that is all the parts and power and Title too of it, seiz'd by him as the lawful King of it: Toirrghiallach mor O Concbabhar the pretended Monarch draws together all the Forces of Connaght, Breithfne, Meath and Leinster; puts himself in the head of them: and marches now again the third time into Mounster. Where, being advanced in so far as Gleann Mhachair, and to a place there called Moinmhoir (in English the Great Moor) Toir∣rghiallach O Brien, the new Mounster King, in the head of 9000 men, the flower of all that
Province, meets him, and fights him; but is so intirely and mightily defeated, that Dal-Gheass, the chief strength of his Army, never before nor after had the like overthrow, as being for the matter all destroyed therein. And the issue was, the banishment of this new unfortunate King to Tir-Eoghuin in Ʋl∣ster; and the division of Mounster the se∣cond time, between Diarmuid mhac Cormuick mhic Cartha and Teadhg O Brien, by the Mo∣narch. Such is the account of this Monarch, and no more, I mean, of his Warlike Actions and Exploits, delivered by Keting, in his Reign. But Gratianus Lucius, in his Cambrensis Euersus says further of him, that he prey'd all the Provinces of Ireland, every one. That he made his own Son Conchabhar actually and really King of the Dublinians, Lagenians and Methians. That with his Land Army he de∣stroy'd Tirconel, and with his Navy consisting of 190 Ships wasted Tir-Oen, and with both reduced both these warlike Countreys of the North. That nevertheless, before the end of his Reign, his Glory was obscur'd and power humbled by him who came next to succeed in the Monarchy, and who begun early (it seems) to lay the foundation of his own fu∣ture greatness by making War on this very Toirrghiallach mor O Conchabhar himself, the
Monarch, and forcing Hostages from him in the year of Christ 1150. that is full six years before this Monarch's death. And that, how∣ever, he continued in the whole his Reign over Connaght 50 years, and according to all the Irish Annals and Historians, over Ireland 20. Though (says Gratianus) according to a more exact severe discussion of the truth, if the date of his Monarchy be taken from the death of his Predecessor Mairchiortach O Brien to his own, he must have reigned over Ireland 34 years in all: or at least 28, if it be continued only till the foresaid Hostages were forc'd from him. But I range again. For as well this cal∣culation of his years or Reign, as his religious preparation for death, and his burial, and rest, close by the high Altar of St. Cieran in the Ca∣thedral Church of Cluan-mhac-Noise is forein to my purpose here. And therefore I return again. Muirchiortach, commonly call'd Mac Logh∣lenn, (but immediate Son to Niall, and by him Nephew to that Domhnal whom we have so lately seen to have so long contended for the Sovereignty of Ireland, and therefore sti∣ld by Colganus King of Ireland) upon the death of Toirghiallach mor O Conchabhar assumes that Title of the Irish Monarchy, which he had so venturously and early prepar'd for while Toir∣rghiallach was yet alive, and in health. Of him, at least of any warlike action either of
his, or indeed of any others in his Reign, tho Keting has not a word, save only those very few that on an other occasion I have given before, page 73. viz. that Mairchiortach mhac Neill the Monarch (that succeeded Toirghial∣lach mor O Conchabhar) was in the 18th year of his Reign, kill'd by Fearnibh, Fearrmhaighe and O Brian: yet the diligence and accurateness of Gra∣tianus Lucius makes abundant compensation. For this Author p. 86. says of the present Muir∣chiartach, first in general, That his humour having been wholly Martial, and his fortune answerable, he over-run all the Provinces of Ireland in a continual course of Victories, ob∣tained partly by Battels, and partly by the sole terrour of his Name. That he subdued them all, and forced them every one to give him Hostages. That therefore at least He, without any contradiction, may be admitted next after Maolseachluinn II. for the undoubt∣ed King of all Ireland. And then, after let∣ting us know that this Prince's great Vertues were much eclipsed by the Precipitancy of his anger: and that whom prosperity had rais'd to such a heighth, adversity at last did throw down as low even to the very earth: he particularly recounts how Eochadh King of Ʋlster, not only refus'd to pay any more Tri∣bute or other dues to him, but even without any other provocation made War upon him.
That he being thereupon enraged enters the Territories of Eochadh, routs his Forces, burns his Lands, takes his Vassals, and puts them in Fetters; Eochadh himself by good luck escaping. That after this, yea notwithstand∣ing a reconciliation made between them by the intercession, and upon the Engagement of the Primat of Ardmagh and Donochadh King of Oirghllae for performance of Cove∣nants on both sides, and Eochadh's conse∣quential pardon and reception to grace; which to assure him Muirchiortach took the most solemn Oath he could (for such it was ac∣counted then in that Kingdom) on the Staff of Jesus (what this was, S. Bernard tells in the Life of Malachias:) yet ere long, whether out of the former cause, or any other new one en∣raging him, he had Eochadh's eyes pull'd out of his head: and three of his Nobles (duos Olingsios, & Cathasachi O Flahry nepotem) most cruelly put to death; without any re∣gard to the engagement of the Sureties. And, to conclude, that Donochadh O Cearrbhaoil the foresaid King of Oirghillae, one of the Sure∣ties, taking to heart so heinous a breach of Faith, Oath, Covenants, and assurance given by himself; and therefore resolving to be re∣veng'd, draws to his association the People of Vibhruinne and Comhaicne; marches with an Army of 9000 men into Cineal-Eoghain (o∣therwise
call'd by them Tir-Eoghain, but by us Tir-oen) where the Monarch then resided; surprizes him unprovided; fights the few tu∣multuary Forces led forth by him, routs them, and kills him in that Field, a man ever before Victorious in all his Encounters whatsoever. Yet such was his end in the 10th of his reign, Anno Christi 1166, says Gratianus Lucius; though Keting says he was kill'd in the eigh∣teenth of his Reign, by Fearrnibh Fearr∣mhaighe and O Brien, as I have noted before. But as their difference in computing the years of the Reign is not material; the one begin∣ning it when this Muirchiortach mhac Neill had forc'd his predecessor Toirrghiallach mor O Conchabhar to give him Hostages, and the other when Toirrghiallach died: so neither is it material to know whether any such persons call'd Fearrnibh Fearrmhaighe and O Brien were, or were not in that Battel to kill him. What is to our present purpose, you have it very particularly delivered by the one, and not gainsaid by the other. And yet upon reflection I must confess I find that I have not delivered all the mate∣rial things written by Gratianus Lucius in this Reign of Muirchiortach mhac Neill. He fur∣ther writes (page 87.) that in the Year 1156. even the very first year of it, presently after Toirrghiallach mor O Conchabhar's death,
his Son and Heir and King of Connaght Ruidh∣ruigh O Conchabhar did receive twelve Hosta∣ges from Muirchiortach O Brien; even that very Mounster King so lately before deprived and banish'd to Tir-Eoghain by the said Toirrghial∣lach (Father to this Ruidhruigh) as we have seen already. That in the Year 1157. he rush'd into Muirchiortach mhac Neill the Mo∣narch's own peculiar Countrey Tir-Eoghain, burnt the fruitful Peninsula there, call'd Inis-Eoghain, destroy'd all the delicate Gardens, Or∣chards, Plantations; wasted the whole Region to Cianachty. That after this he turn'd his Arms on Mounster; Where having first setled the foresaid Muirchiortach O Brien in possession of North-Mounster, he forc'd Hostages from Diarmuid mhac Cormuic mhic Cartha King of South-Mounster, to remain with him till Muir∣chiortach mhac Neill the Monarch did relieve the said Diarmuid. That Anno 1158. he en∣ter'd Leinster in like hostile manner with great Force: marcht through it to Leiglin: being encamp'd there had Hostages brought him from Ossory and Luighis: and, in the close of all, loaded Mac Craih O Morrdha the little King of Luighis with Irons. That in the next place he made Inroads into Teabhan, driving away thence from the Kerins an ex∣ceeding great prey of Cows: and with his Fleet afflicted all the Coasts of Tir-Eoghain mightily.
That in the Year 1161. falling violently on Meath, he both compelled the Countreys call'd Vibh Falain and Vibh Faoilghe to give him pledges, and then plac'd Governours in them, viz. Faolan O Faoelain in the one, and Mlaghlin O Conchabhair in the other. That after all, he made his Conditions of peace with the Mo∣narch, deliver'd him four Hostages; receiv'd from him in gift the entire Province of Con∣naght, with the one half of Meath, and from Diarmuid O Maolseachluinn a hundred ounces of Gold for that half. So that by this time, I think the Reader has no reason to complain of want of Instances to purpose out of this Reign of Muirchiortach mhac Neill: Who, as we have seen, was the saddest of them all himself, as having by his own Vassals been set upon unprovided, fought, overcome, and kill'd,. In the last place Ruaruidh O Conchabhar King of Connaght, e'n that very same Rua∣ruidh, who contended for so many years be∣fore with Muirchiortach mhac Neill, and sub∣mitted to him at last, appears now his Suc∣cessor on this long tottering Theatre of Irish Monarchs. Keting delivers a very imperfect account of him, saying, That besides Can∣naght he had only the Kings of Breithfne and Oirghillac to acknowledg his Sovereignty; and giving scarce any thing else happen'd in his Reign, but what relates to Diarmuid na Ngall
the Leinster Kings Rape, and to the Brittons invited in by this Diarmuid; nothing I am sure of those warlike Actions and great Contests of this Monarch with other Irish Princes. But this defect in Keting is else∣where abundantly supply'd, I mean by Gra∣tianus Lucius in his Cambrensis Eversus. In this Author, grounding himself on the Annals of Inis Faile, you may read that this Ruaruidh not only bore the Title of King of Ireland, but was so indeed. But, without any perad∣venture the Relation given by him, shews this last Irish Monarch's fatal Reign to have been fruitful enough of those (and they the very last of those) Instances I purpos'd to recount. Immediately on the death of his Predecessor (kill'd by Eochadh) he march'd his Connaght Army to Assa Ruah, subdued all Tirconel, and received their Hostages. From thence both with his own Connacians, and the Legions of Breithfne, Teamhfna, and Meath, led on by Ti∣ghernan O Ruairk King of Breithfne and Diar∣muid O Maolseachluinn King of Meath, he march'd to Dublin, enter'd it, was entertain'd in it by the Danes, Easterlings, and other the Inhabitants of that City and Territories be∣longing to it, with all demonstrations of ho∣nour: was proclaim'd their King: and they presented by him according to the custom then with a royal Gift of 4000 Beeves. From
hence, but joyning first all the Militia of those Citizens to his former Legions, he goes directly so accompanied to Droghedagh (the Irish call it Droighid Ath) is received there by Donochad O Cearbheoil King of Oirghiallae, has Hostages whom he pleas'd of that Coun∣trey put into his power, and then causes a present of 2000 Beeves more to be in his name given that King. From thence return∣ing back to Leinster, he advances to Findorf, gives Battel there to Mac Murcho King of Leinster, defcats him, pursues him, forces him at last to submit and give Hostages, then a∣bridges him of his jurisdiction, leaves him only Cionsallach, and bids him be content with that, or he should lose that too. From thence he made his progress to Mac Gille Phadruic, the King of Ossory; who delivering Pledges was royally treated and presented by him. And now he enters Mounster; has the submissions of all the Province: bestows North-Mounster on Muirchiortach O Brien, his own Bro∣ther by a Mother: commands pledges from Di∣armuid mhac Cartha King of South-mounster: and so passes on in triumph to Connaght his own home, having well nigh surrounded the whole Island in this very first year of his Reign. After which circuit (and either in the same year of our Lord 1166, as Gratianus insinuates it to have been: or, at furthest in the next, as the Annals of Ireland in Cambden expresly say) it
was, that Diamuid mhac Mhurrchadh, (alias Mhurchu, and Diarmuid na Nghall) having committed the famous Rape (if it was a Rape) on Tighernan O Roirk King of Breithfn's Wife, the same Tighernan to be reveng'd on Diar∣muid, by the Monarch's Authority head∣ing both his own Breithne Forces with those of Meath, and most of Leinster too, march'd into Ibh-Cionsallach; made Diarmuid fly beyond Seas; destroy'd his Castle at Ferns; divided his said Countrey of Cionsallach between Mac Gille Phadrick King of Ossory and one Mur∣chadh the Son of Murchadh; and then re∣turn'd with seventeen Hostages for the Mo∣narch. And now this revenge or justice on Diarmuid being executed, the Monarch him∣self An. 1167. attended on by all the Kings and Nobles of Mounster, Leinster, Meath, Breithsne, Comhaicne, Orghiall, and Ʋlidia, or Ʋlla (which I take to have been then but a part of the now large Province of Ʋlster) with all their Troops, consisting of Nine and thirty thousand Foot, and one and twenty thousand Horse, march'd to Ardmach. From thence, of one side with those great Land Forces, and from Doire (now by us call'd London-derry) on the other, where his Fleet of a hundred and ninety Sail had landed, he attacks Tir-Eoghain so furiously on every side, that after the stubborn Forces of that Coun∣trey,
being first retired into their Woody Fast∣nesses, had not only in vain attempted to fall by Night on his Royal Camp, but in∣stead thereof by a great mistake had fallen fouly on one another in the dark, they found it necessary on the fourth day to submit and deliver him Hostages. This Expedition being ended so, he breaks up his Camp, dismisses his great Army, the several Troops and Le∣gions to their respective Countreys, returns himself by the way of Assa Ruagh to Con∣naght with the two Mounster Kings in his Company, entertains them nobly at his own Palace there, and at their departure presents them richly. But he had not rested above one week at home, when he had intelligence brought him of Diarmuid mhac Mhurchadh the Leinster King's being landed in Cionnsallach with forein Auxiliarics, possess'd already of Wexford, Master besides of a great part of Leinster, and a terrour to all the rest. Those call'd the Annals of Ireland, in Cambden, which yet began no earlier than four years before this Monarch Ruiruidgs O Cenchabhar's Reign, say these forein Aaxiliaries landed An 1168. But the right Irish Annals that record their landing in the former year 1167. are sol∣lowed by Gratianus Lucius, and him I follow. However presently on the news, Ruaruidh O Conchabhar the Monarch heading his Conacian
Troops, and joyning in his way the Militia of Meath and Dublin, marches to Findorch, finds out, fights and defeats Diarmuid. An atonement between them follows; Diarmuid giving the Monarch seven Hostages for his future fidelity, and paying a hundred ounces in Gold to Tighernan O Ruairck for the injury done him by the Rape. And yet Diarmuid by new Tumults the very next Year giving new jealousies, the Monarch marches against him the second time, and fights and foils him again. Though after all he was wrought upon to accept this second time of Diar∣muid's submission, promises, and base Son (for Diarmuid had none at this time re∣maining that was Legitimat) as a new ad∣dition to the former Hostages. In the same Year 168. Ludos Taltinos dedit, says Lucius. That is, he gave and held with great so∣lemnity the publick famous ancient Games at Tailtean. What these were, and who or∣dain'd them first, and upon what occasion you may peradventure know in the next Section. At present it may suffice to know they were much like the Olympick Games of Greece. But whatever this Aonach of Tail∣teann, as the Irish call it, be thought to have been, Lucius proceeds and tells us, that in the same Year also Muirchiortach O Brien King of North-mounster was murder'd by the South-mounster
men. That the Monarch made his Brother Domhnal O Brien King to succeed him: put him in full possession: fined the Desmonians in 3120 Beeves for killing his Brother: and made them effectually pay this Fine. The same year likewise he fined the Methians in 800 Beeves, and the men of De∣alfna heavily, for the killing of O Finolan one of their Lords. In the Year 1169. Domhnal Breagach, for being Author of Diarmuid the Prince of Meath's death, he punish'd with the loss of that Estate which the said Domhnal by so wicked an Act of murder aim'd to inherit. But this Monarch did confiscate it so, as he reserv'd West-meath to himself and the Co∣nacians; bestowing at the same time East∣meath on the foresaid Tighernan O Ruairk and his people of Breithfne. Anno 1175. Domh∣nal O Brien King of North-mounster, pull'd out the eyes both of Diarmuid mhic Teaidhg, and Mahoom mhic Toirrgiallaidgh vihh Bhrian, yea and murder'd the Son of Conchabhar O Brien of Corcumruadh. To punish this Tyranny, Rotherick or Roderick (for so the English Wri∣ters name this Ruadhruigh the present Mo∣narch) enters Tomond, makes Domhnal fly, and because he could not find him, lays his whole Countrey waste. In the same Year 1175. he defeated in Ormund (the Irish call it Ir-mhoun, that is, East Mounster) both the
Welsh, English, and Irish Troops led by Stroug∣bow; kill'd 1700 of them in the place, and forc'd that Earl (how valiant and fortunate soever till then) to give over his present de∣sign, and retire in great disorder to Waten∣ford. After this, but yet in the same Year still, Ruadhruigh considering not only the defection of many of the Princes from him, but their variance among themselves, and (which was most dangerous of all) his own Sons turn'd unruly and rebellious: and therefore consider∣ing also that himself alone was not able any longer to bear up against so many Enemies both Domestick and Foreign, Irish and Brittish, well nigh already environing him round: he now at last descends to Capitulations of Peaco with the King of England. The sum of them, says Lucius, the Irish Annals deliver in words importing mostly this sense: that Cathal (alias Catholicus) O Dubhay Archbishop of Tuam return'd out of England with the Peace concluded by him there with Henry II. on these conditions, viz. That Rotherick should enjoy still the authority and Title of King over the Irish; and the Provincial Kings their respective dignities and power, but with their former dependance on and subje∣ction to him the said Ruadruigh O. Rotherick. But whatever those Capitulations were, which
you may see more particularly and fully in Roger Hoveden (ad An. 1175. pag. 312.) the troubles of Ruadhruidh were but little abated by them. In the Year 1177. one of his own Sons, by name Murchadh, out of some unreasonable pique turn'd most unna∣turally Traytor to him: sided with the com∣mon Enemy: and was the very Guide to Miles Cogan and his English Troops in their entring Connaght, or at least from their com∣ing to Roscommon till they were soon after fought, and beat, and forc'd back out of that whole Province by Ruaruidh himself. Who thereupon seiz'd the said Murchadh; and though his own Son put out his eyes for his rebellious unnatural Treachery (and justly enough without any peradventure:) as at the same time, for some other heinous transgres∣sion he confin'd prisoner to the small Island in Loch-Cuam his own other (yea his eldest) Son Conchabhar; whom notwithstanding O Flatherty and other Favourers of this young Prince, rescued by plain force within a twelve∣month from that restraint, and set at liberty. To conclude, partly the forein Invaders, but chiefly his own Children brought this last Irish Monarch's hoary hairs with grief to the Grave. Even his own eldest Son, the fore∣said Conchabhar in the year 1186. first de∣priv'd him of his very Kingdom of Connaght:
then by sundry other indignities forc'd him to fly away to Mounster: and last of all, after he had been recall'd by the Connaght Nobili∣ty, compell'd him again to seek refuge in Tir-Chonaill. And here it was that this now af∣flicted man indeed, though in his youth and manly years too for some time the Darling of Fortune, found his long wish'd-for death among the Chanon Regulars in the Year of Christ 1198. having first by habit and pro∣fession made himself a member of that Reli∣gious Order. He continued seventeen years possess'd, at least in part and in Title, of his Monarchy over the Irish. For so many years their Antiquaries allow his Reign over Ireland: though from the beginning of it to his death, were efflux'd full two and forty years. Thus you have in substance the account (and a very particular full one indeed it is) given by Gratianus Lucius of this very last Mi∣lesian Monarch and his Reign over Ireland. Wherein, if I be not extreamly mistaken, you have withal (though among other mat∣ters, which I have for some use that may be made of them hereafter mentioned) Instan∣ces enough answerable both in quality and number to those alledged before out of any of the former Reigns of Irish Monarchs since Maolseachluinn II. for demonstrating what I intended by them all. Certainly these and
those jointly taken are sufficient demonstra∣tions, that the Monarchs, Princes and other great ones of that Nation receiv'd no corre∣ction from the great Hand that from above scourg'd them so grievously, so often, and so long. Nor can it be denied, that the later part of the same Instances, (I mean that large part of them which hap'ned between Maol∣seachluinn II. Reign, and Ruadhruigh O Con∣chabhair's death) are most evident convicti∣ons of the little, nay the evil use, in order to any reformation of their fatal Feuds, they made of the hundred and thirty years free∣dom from foreign Enemies after the last ex∣pulsion or subjection of the Danes; though a large term of time questionless allow'd them by the extraordinary mercy of God to con∣sider, at least then, more wisely of the matter, and not only relent from their former unnatural courses of persecuting and spoiling, and killing, and murdering one another, but heartily repent what themselves and their Parents and their Grandsires had done in that kind, exaspera∣ting him continually to hasten on 'em that final doom of theirs which he had so long suspended. Neither is it any further to be doubted, that both the former and later part equally of the same Instances are sufficient proofs that those passages of Jeremy the Pro∣phet, which I have given before, (page 153.)
however in his time, and as spoken by him, describing only the stubbornness of his own Jewish Countrymen, might nevertheless be most justly applied by Keting (the pious Re∣flecter on these matters) to the Milesian race in Ireland at this time of theirs, after that nothing at all, neither adversity nor prospe∣rity, nor war nor peace, nor bondage nor li∣berty could reclaim them. Verily to me those Instances are more than sufficient proofs, That this wilful Generation of Christians did at this time in the language of the holy Pro∣phet, harden their faces harder than a Rock, and, e'en refuse to return. Nay whatever any body else may think, certainly it seems further to me, that such was the Judgment God himself gave of them. For (if I may be allowed once more to speak my sense in a symbolical or Metaphorical Scripture phrase, and apply to them what another Prophet said many Ages before on another Subject and of another Kingdom, but is applicable enough to them) at this very time, The Watchman and holy one from Heaven (Dan. 4.) pronounced the long suspended Sentence, the fatal Decree, the final Doom, here on Earth, against this lofty-headed large-spread Tree of the Mile∣sian Stock in Ireland. At this time he com∣manded this Eternal Decree to be forthwith put in execution. At this time he call'd up∣on
the new Ministers of his Wrath, and bid 'em to cut down this Tree, chop off its boughs, shake off all its leaves, disperse its fruit, make the beasts fly that were under it, and the birds of the air from perching any more on its branches; though withal bidding them to leave the spring of the roots thereof still in the ground. And I am sure, that to speak plain without Simili∣tude or Metaphor, what happened since the sixth year of Ruadhruigh O Conchabhar's Mo∣narchical Reign hath manifestly shewn that from thence, i. e. from that year, which was of Christ's Incarnation 1172. We must date the last and heaviest doom of Heaven de∣clared against that People as to their Being in this World; Never more to have a King or State of their own; Never more to be a Free People on Earth, so as not to be under a fo∣rein Yoke. And I believe you will think the same when you consider that since that Epocha or Date they and their posterity after them have already seen five hundred Years and Eight of this their heavy Doom continued. Tho after all, upon after-thoughts, I think it more wise to suspend than be positive in any judgment of the future; especially considering the example of Spain, recovered after seven hundred years subjection to the Moors.
SECT. V. Five things considered: 1. Other Nations have at some times no less bloodily engaged in mortal intestin Feuds, one against an other. Instances in the Romans, Germans, Florentines, Ita∣lians at large, Spaniards, French, Saxons, Normans. 2. Irish Princes renown'd for other excellent Qualifications than those only of Martial Courage and Conduct. For Example, under Paganism, the Monarchs Ol∣lamh Fodhla, Feilim Rachtmhor, Conair Mor mhac Eidrisgceoil, Conn Ceadcha∣thatch, and Cormac mhac Airt; (where also you will meet with a very singular tho only incidental story of Connor the first Pro∣vincial King of the North of Ireland.) Ʋnder Christianity, and for those Excellencies most peculiar to Christianity, first the Monarchs Maolchoba, Flaithiortach, Niall Frassach, &c. next, those Provincial Kings, Feilim mhac Criomthain, Aillill Anmhana, Cor∣mack the Bishop and King of Mounster, &c; and lastly the Lesser Kings, Damhin mhac Damhinghoirt, Ferradhach mhac Dua∣chadh, Maolbressel mhac Cearnaigh, &c. 3. Several Princes, even after the Danish
Wars, that, notwithstanding whatever Natio∣nal Feuds, effectually proved themselves en∣dued even with those excellent political Vertues necessary for good Governours as such. The first and great Instance Brian Boraimh; then Muirchiortach, &c. Ecclesiastical Synods of the whole Nation held under the two or three last of these: and Monasteries every where in all the Provinces, about the same time, erected anew. 4. Some, however few, yet very emi∣nent, yea wonder-working Saints among their Church-men, especially Maolmoadh and Lau∣rase (in our Language, Malachi and Lau∣rence:) the one Archbishop of Ardmagh, the other of Dublin, succeeding close one another in the very last Age of the Milesians Reign over Ireland. 5. The Decree of the holy Watch∣man, is nevertheless immutable. 30. BUT before I enter on this great Con∣version of the State of Ireland, several matters yet remaining of another nature than those discours'd of lately must interpose. The first is, That by any thing said in ei∣ther of the two last Sections, my meaning was not to make those bloody Feuds, or consequents of them, so peculiar to the Mile∣sian Race or Irish Nation, as if no other People or Nation esteem'd either Christian or Civil had been at any time so guilty in that kind
as they. I was far from any such thought. And indeed how could I be otherwise? For, without any stress laid upon the Poets Ex∣pression, Ad generum Cereris sine caede & sanguine pauci Descendunt Reges. Nay without any assistance from either Pa∣gan Thebe, or Christian Bizantium, or any other Countrey so remote: the Histo∣ries of all Nations much nearer us, particu∣larly those of Rome, Germany, Italy, Florence, Spain, France, and very singularly those of the Saxon Heptarchy and Barons Wars, and Lan∣caster and York Divisions here at home in Eng∣land, must evince the contrary. Even for that very chief Mistriss of Civility first, and then Chistianity, at least in most parts of Europe, that seven hill'd Rome, that eternal City in Va∣lentinian's language, without any peradven∣venture, the Foundation of Her cemented by Romulus with the blood of his Brother Re∣mus: the Rebellion against Tarquin: the Fa∣ctions of the Plebeians: the oppressions by and killing of the Decemviri: the Tyranny of Tri∣buns: the Tables of Sylla and Marius: with the Rivers of blood flowing from their Swords: the Conspiracy of Catilin: the Civil Wars of Caesar and Pompey following: and
then the total change of their Commonwealth into a Principacity, compass'd not only by plain lawless rebellious Force, but by destru∣ction of so many Myriads of men: and now thirty Emperors murdered at several times: and now also at one time, that is under Gallienus, at least Nine and Twenty Tyrants in several parts of the Empire set up for themselves, must evince the contrary. And so for Ger∣many in later times the bloody contentions there so long continued, until at last they re∣solv'd into the prudent means of declaring an Heir apparent Successour and Caesar in the Emperors Life-time: and the violent deaths of Rudolphus, Albertus, Henry VII. Frede∣rick III. Lewis of Bavier, Charles, Nephew to the said Henry, Gunther, every one of them dispatch'd, as Bodin Method. Histor. pag. 450. says) either by Conspiracy or Poison, must evince the contrary. So for Italy the Guelphs and Gibellins, and (besides many o∣ther Instances) the prodigiously bloody re∣volutions of the Florentin Republic for 331 years, till after the slaughter, extermination and total extinction of one of the sides, it was in the memory of our Fathers, at least of our Grandfathers, by the prudence of Cosmus Me∣dices reduced under the authority of a single Person, must evince the same truth. So
for Spain, Alphonsus III. by putting out the eyes of all his Brethren, save one that was kill'd. Alfonsus IV. with the like cruelty us'd by his own Brother aymirus: Peter the Legitimat Son of Alphonsus XI. depos'd and kill'd by his Bastard Brother Henry: Garzias by Sanctius: then Sanctius by Vellidus: and, after so many retaliations, all Spain under King Roderic betray'd to the Moors by a natu∣ral Spaniard, a Subject to that King, Count Julian (Prince of Celtiberia, as Bodin calls him) yea seven hundred thousand Spaniards kill'd in the short space of fourteen months next following that hideous treachery, must evince mightily the self-same truth. So for France, those horrible Feuds, Combustions, Devasta∣tions, cruelties, inhumanities, barbarous sa∣criledges of the late Civil Wars there, conti∣nued 40 years against four Kings (whereof you may read at large in D'Avila) and the Holy Ligue, and both Henry III. and Henry IV. one after another, so vilely murder'd by those devoted Assassins of Hell, Jacques Clement and Ravilliac, evince it still. Lastly, and to come nearer home, tho in an earlier time, even so for England, 1. Those eight and twenty Saxon Kings of the Heptarchy, part by one another kill'd, part by their own Subjects murder'd, besides many other depos'd, and forc'd to fly away for their lives. For, as Matthew of
Westminster (l. 1. c. 3.) writes, of the very Northumbrian Kings alone, four were mur∣der'd, and three more deposed, within the little time of one and forty years only. And there∣fore it was, that Charles the Great of France, when the news of the last of them, by name Ethelbert, being murdered, came to his hear∣ing, not only resolv'd to stop the presents he was before on sending to England, nor only to do the English in lieu of sending them gifts all the mischiefs he could; but said to Alcuinus an English man (his own Instructor in Rhe∣torick, Logick and Astronomy) that indeed That was a perfidious and perverse Nation, a murderer of their Lords, and worse than Pagans. Nay therefore also it was, that many of the Bishops and Nobles fled out of this Northum∣brian Kingdom, and no man dared for 30 years next following venture on being their King; but all men declined it, and so left them a prey to the Irish, Scts and Danes, who by the just judgment of God over-run them and destroy'd them at last, on that very oc∣casion principally. 2. Since the Norman Con∣quest, besides the horrible rebellion of Henry the 2d's own Children against him, and many other particulars which I pass over, not only all the calamities, miseries, cruelties, un∣speakable evils of the Barons Wars on both sides, under King John, Henry III. and Ed∣ward
II. nor only the deposition and murder too of this poor Edward, even his own Wife Queen Eleanor, and his own very Sothe Prince of Wales having both of them con∣curr'd in the deposing him and usurping his Crown: but the most prodigiously mortal dis∣sentions of Lancaster and York began with the rebellion against, deposition and murder of Richard the II. and so bloodily prosecuted for thirty years under Henry VI. and Edw. IV. that besides eleven main Battels fought with infinite slaughter of English men on ei∣ther side; nay even twenty thousand men kill'd (besides the wounded) in one of them, which Polydore calls the Battel of Touton, a Vil∣lage of Yorkshire: the excellent Historian Phi∣lip Comines tells us of 80 of the Blood Royal destroyed in them: and among this number Henry VI. a most vertuous, innocent, holy King most barbarously murder'd. To say nothing of Richard the Third, that Usurping Tyrant, so justly dispatch'd in the Battel of Bosworth, by the Earl of Richmond, who there∣upon succeeded King, by the name of Hen∣ry VII. and by marrying the Daughter of Ed∣ward IV. and thereby most happily uniting in himself and his Queen and Issue the right of the two Houses, ended those fatal dissentions of Lancaster and York. Dissentions indeed so fa∣tal to England, that besides all her best blood
at home, as we have seen, by their long con∣tinuance from the year of Christ 1393. to the year 1486. lost Her not only the Kingdom of France, but even the more ancient Inheritance of our Kings in the Dukedoms of Normandy, Aquitane, and whatever else belong'd to the English Crown on that side of the Sea; only the Town of Calais, with its little Appen∣dages excepted. Were it necessary, Buchanan could furnish, out of the neighbouring Kingdom of Scot∣land, a very large addition of more examples to the purpose of this place. But more than enough has been already said to conclude that notwithstanding any thing or expression in either of the two former Sections, my mean∣ing could not be to make those bloody Feuds in Ireland, or consequents of them, so pecu∣liar to the Milesian Race or Irish Nation, as if no other People on Earth had been at any time guilty of the like or as horrid. The truth is, I mean'd only to say, That in re∣spect of their long duration & perpetual return from time to time for almost five and twenty hundred years compleat, and their excessive degree at very many times within that long Succession of Ages, especially considering the small extent of Ireland, those cruel bloody Feuds were both National and peculiar to that People only. Which, I think, is true,
notwithstanding that other Nations, either much greater, or much lesser, might have been in some few Instances of time as high, nay peradventure much more horrible trans∣gressors in the very same kind than those an∣tient Milesians were at any one time since their Conquest of Ireland from Tuath-Dee-Danan. 33. The second point is, to do those ancient Milesians the right, as to acknowledg (what their Histories have at large) That amidst all the Feuds and fury of their Arms, how bloody or how lasting soever, they had several both Monarchs, and (after the Pentarchy was set up) lesser Kings, yea some of those too in their time of Paganism, and many more as well of those as these after Christianity esta∣blish'd, that were of great renown among them for other excellent Qualifications be∣coming their dignity, than those only of Mar∣tial Vertue and Fortitude. In time of Paganism, they had their (XXII) Monarch Ollamh Fodhla, so called from his great Knowledg: that very name given him importing in Irish (as Gratianus Lu∣cius hath observ'd) a great master in Sciences, and Teacher of all Knowledg to his People. It was he that divided the Lands of Ireland into Hundreds, call'd by them Triochae-chead; and placed a Lord over each Hundred, and over each Town of the Hundred a Bai∣liff,
an Applotter of Duties, and receiver of Strangers, to provide Entertainment for them. They had their (XCI) Monarch Conair mor mhac Eidirsgceoil, so great a Justiciar, so zea∣lous a Prosecutor of all Malefactors, that al∣though with great pains, industry, hazard to himself; yet he forc'd at last all kind of Rob∣bers, Thieves, Vagabonds and Idlers to fly the whole Kingdom: and after this, during his Reign, the Cattel throughout all parts and Provinces wandred safely in the Fields with∣out any Keeper. Besides, the magnificent Hospitality of this Monarch is wonderfully celebrated in that Nation. Add hereunto this farther happiness of his Reign, That in it the weather was so mild from mid-harvest to mid∣spring, that both Kine and Sheep and other Beasts lay continually abroad in the open air without feeling one sharp breath of wind; the Sea covered the very shores at Imbher∣cholptha (then so called; after Droichid ath; by us now corruptly Droghedae or Tredath) with a most prodigious ejection of all sorts of Fish: and the fruit-bearing Trees were so la∣den that they hung down their branches to the very earth. They had their (CIV) Monarch Conn, surnamed Ceadchatach, whose Reign, not∣withstanding that prodigious number of Bat∣tels sought by him, as we have seen before,
was so wonderfully abounding in all earthly blessings throughout Ireland, that when the Writers of after-Ages were minded to express any time of extraordinary abundance or plenty, they said it was the Reign of Conn Ceadchatach, or Conair Mor, return'd again on Earth. Now doubtless, it could not be o∣therwise than morally impossible, that, con∣sidering all his Battels, there should be so much plenty in every part of the Kingdom, had not he, as well as Conair Mor before him, been as good a Governour as he was a great Warrior. And yet, on this occasion, let me tell you, that neither the one nor other excellency could save him from being murther'd. Where∣of, because of the extraordinary contrivance and manner of it, I take that notice here, which I find in Gratianus Lucius; though o∣therwise it may seem forein to this place; and Keting has not a syllable how, or where, or whether at all this Monarch died either of a natural or violent death, But thus in short it happen'd. In the 35th year of his Reign, which was of Christ 157. being retired, with∣out Guards, or much attendance; at a place then called Tuaihamrois, the King of Ʋlster, by name Tibraid Tirigh, employed 50 young striplings, clad like Maiden Ladies, to dispatch him: and they did it, says Lucius. For it is only to him we are beholden as for many o∣ther
particulars, so for this very singular one indeed. And, if I may conjecture, it was, or at least might well be thought the pattern, whence Maolseachluinn I. when he was yet but King of Meath, derived his own stratagem whereby he destroyed the Danish Tyrant Tur∣ghesius. They had their (IVC) Monarch Fear∣rhadhach Fachiuach, a Prince of so much Truth in hs words, and such integrity in his Life and Actions, that from thence he was sur∣named Fachtuach, signifying in Irish Truth and Integrit, says the same Author Lucius. And it is observable, what both he and Keting write of one Moran, chief Justice under this King, that he had a ring or hoop of such Ver∣tue, that when it was put about the Neck of any Judg or any Witness whatsoever, at the time the one was to give Sentence, or the other to depose upon Oath, if either did swerve a title from the right, then presently it clasp'd, and pinch'd and wrung them so close, that to avoid present death by strang∣ling, they retracted openly before all the Spe∣ctators what they had so wickedly done a∣miss. Whence proceeded that Proverbial wish among the Irish, O That he had Moran's Ring about his Neck! when they suspect the truth or integrity of any person. But to proceed with their Kings.
They had their (CII) Monarch Felim surnamed Rachtmhor from his being a Great Maker of excellent wholsome Laws, Among which he establish'd with all firmness that of Retaliation: kept to it most inviolably; and by that means preserv'd the people in peace, quiet, plenty, and security during his Time. They had their (CIX) Monarch Cormock mhac Airt, who (says Lucius) in making good Laws for the Commonwealth, and ob∣serving them, exceeded by much all his Pre∣decessors. He wrote a Book of the Institution of a Prince to his Son Cairbre. He had the Psalter of Taragh composed. In this he gives an account at large, 1. of all the noble Irish Families, their propagation, and relation by blood one to another. 2. Of the limits not only of every Province of Ireland, but of every Countrey both great and small in each of them. 3. Of the Duties, Rents, Tributes paid usually out of each Province to the Monarch or King of Ireland. 4. Of the Duties paid unto the Provincial Kings by the Lords their Vassals. 5. And finally of the Rents accrewing to every such Lord from his Tenants any where in the Kingdom. The Book also which they call in Irish Sa∣nasan Chormaic (and we in English may call the Etymological Dictionary of Cormock) is by most ascribed to him; though by some to
Cormock O Cuillenan the holy King and Arch∣shop of Mounster. I pass over his Martial Spi∣rit, his Fortune and success in Arms. Tho it was he, that when by the surprisal, force and rebellious usurpation of Ferghussa Dubh∣deadach King of Ʋlster, he had been first dis∣possess'd of his Royal Mansion of Teamhuir (alias Tarach) and then affronted with the burning of his Beard, as well by the com∣mand or direction, as by the servant of the same Ʋlster King Fearghussa (for so Gratianus Lucius calls this Northern King; tho Keting names him Giolla, as I have done before:) and then after this affront, had been banish'd into Connaght; yet within a twelve month, ac∣companied with 30 great Lords, 50 other Chieftains, and fifty thousand men, gave Bat∣tel at Criombreag to this Usurper, kill'd him, destroy'd his Army, and for the rest of his Ʋlster adherents, banish'd them for ever to the Isle of Man. Yea it was he, that after this Field, was further yet Conqueror of all his other Enemies in 36 Battels more: and there∣by gave perfect peace to the whole Kingdom for the remainder of his long reign, which last∣ed in the whole forty years. And further also, it was he that with the Sword of Justice took revenge on the more than savage cruelty of Dunling (the Son of Eudeus) that murdered those 30 celebrated Virgins living collegial∣ly
as in the Temple of Vesta at Cluain-fear in Teamhuir; all of them of such Royal ex∣traction and quality, that each had 30 Vir∣gins more in retinue; which made in all Nine Hundred. For that unparallel'd Savageness of Dunling, this Monarch destroy'd the twelve Tyrants of Leinster, who either by approba∣tion of it, or defence of him, were guilty of it. Lastly, It was he, that (whether on this occasion or no, I know not. But this I know that Lucius writes, how it was he, that) even to a farthing's worth made the Province of Leinster pay the old Boarian Fine impos'd upon them by Tuathal Teachmhor. Which this Author says consisted (not of 3000, but) of 15000 Cows, and so many Hogs, Mantles, Silver Chains, Cauldrons of Brass, or Coppers, that is 15000 of each, and each Cauldron as large as that in the Monarch's Kitchin at Tarach, which boil'd together at one boyling twelve Beeves and twelve Hogs. Add further yet, as part of this heavy Leinster Fine, says Lucius, 30 either white or red Cows, with their Calves of the same colour; 30 brass Collars for those Cows to keep them quiet in their stabling, and 30 other brazen ties for their feet also to keep them gentle at their milking. Where nevertheless I must take notice, that Lucius in this Account does much vary from Keting: and that, whatever may be thought
of all other particulars of it, surely the num∣ber of 15000 Cauldrons (or Coppers, as we call them now) of that capacity, seems to me somewhat incredible. But leaving this to the Readers indifferency: what is more proper here may be read in the same Author Lucius, where he tells us next of this Mo∣narchs port and magnificence in House-keep∣ing: which, though very great indeed, is however (I think) credible enough. He had eleven hundred and fifty Waiters that serv'd him ordinarily at Table in his great Hall at Tarach. And this Hall was by himself built of purpose to answer in its capacity the entertainment and attendance of a great King. It was 300 Foot long, 30 Cubits high, and 50 Cubits broad, with fourteen Doors opening into it. And the daily service of Plate, the Flagous and Cups of Gold, Sil∣ver, and precious stone, at his Table there, consisted of a hundred and fifty pieces in all. What is besides delivered of this Monarch is, That (which among the truly wise must be more valuable than any worldly magnifi∣cence or secular glory whatsoever.) He was to all mankind very just: and in his later days through the mercy of God, very pious also & religious towards him. That so strange∣ly powerful on a sudden were his inward
illuminations, That in plain terms he now refus'd his Druids any more to wor∣ship their Idol Gods. That soon after he o∣penly professed he would no more worship any but the only true God of the Universe, the Immortal and Invisible King of Ages, as the great Apostle calls him. And finally that those Priests of the Devil, by their Necromantical adjurations and ministery of damned Spirits raised from Hell, God permitting it, wrought his destruction by choaking him, as I have said before. For in such manner and for such a cause died this great and happy King of Ire∣land, An. Christi 266. But whether he may, or may not therefore, be rank'd among the true Christian Martyrs? I leave others to judge. And the same question might peradventure be rationally put (though not, I confess, with the same advantage of the circumstance of violence from an external cause) con∣cerning Connor the first Provincial King of Ʋlster, made by the Monarch Eochuidh Fei∣lioch himself the Author of the Pentarchy, a∣bout 400 years before the Birth of Christ. This Connor's Druyd, or Magitian, which you please to call him, having it seems the spirit of Prophecy (as you see in the Book of Judges that Baldam, though otherwise a Hea∣then wicked Idolater, had the like) on a day
speaking his Raptures to Connor, and among other things, delivering much of the Son of God that was to come down from Heaven to save mankind, and was nevertheless to suffer the most cruel death of the Cross, from his own beloved Countrymen the Jews whom he came to save before any others: Connor (says Ke∣ting) on the hearing of all became so affected first with the stupendious mercy of God to Sinners: and then presently so transported against the ungrateful Jews, that, being in a great Wood at the time of this Discourse, he drew his Sword, fell a slashing and cutting the Trees about him on every side with the greatest fury could be: imagining he had be∣fore him still those cruel men that put our Sa∣viour to death: and continued so long in this passionate action of transport, till by over∣heating himself and the opening thereby of some old wounds he had in his shull, he died. What the Reader may answer to the fore∣said Quere in relation to either of these two Kings, I know not. But think nevertheless what St. John Chrysostom would have answer'd it very consequently, at least in reference to the former, had the case been debated by him, when he wrote his Three Books de Pro∣videntia Dei, to Stargirius, a holy Monk, that notwithstanding his holiness, was through the
permission of God, either possess'd, or ob∣sess'd, or both, by the power of the Devil. It was also in the time of Ireland's Paga∣nism, that Niall the Great, surnamed Naoi∣ghiollach (in Latin Noui-obses, in English Niall of the Nine Hostages, because says Colgan, in his Trias Taumatorge, from Ʋlster, Connaght, Mounster, Leinster, the Britons, Picts, Dal-Rheu∣dans, and Morini a People of France, in all nine Nations, he had Hostages) did reign the CXX. or CXIX. Monarch of the Irish. Of whose great cruelty in his judgment given against Eo∣chuidh King of Leinster, because I have so par∣ticularly spoken before: I will not conceal now what I have since observ'd in Gratianus Lucius of the extraordinary favour of God unto him. For such we must undoubtedly acknowledg it to have been: seeing it was no less than a heavenly illustration of his mind with the beams of Christianity to that de∣gree, as turn'd him wholly to a new man of perfect holiness. Nor yet less than that a∣bove a hundred years after his death, his Body on the opening of his Shrine, or Tomb (which I take to have been on Cruach Phadruig in Connaght, whither the Army brought his Body from France) was found entire without any corruption. Nay nor a jot less than that a Christian Bishop, namely St. Cernachus, infected with the Leprosie was per∣fectly
cured by visiting and lying down in that very Shrine of this Great Niall Naoighial∣lach. So writeth Gratianus Lucius, quoting for his Author, Colgan. And so I have done with those few of the Kings of Ireland in the time of Paganism, that besides many more of that very time and their Catalogue, have been for several great Excellencies, other than those of warlike bravery or success, re∣nown'd in that Nation. 34. But after Christianity had been among the people of Ireland universally preach'd and e∣stablish'd, yea and all along from time to time in the succeeding Ages, not even those very Ages following the horrible desolations by the Danish Wars excepted, they had question∣less (notwithstanding all their intestin Feuds) many more both Monarchs, Provincial Kings, and other lesser Kings too, famous in their ge∣neration as well for other great Vertues, espe∣cially those peculiar to Religion, as for those of Martial fortitude and Valour. Yet because I perceive this little Book to swell insensibly beyond my design: I pass over much of that which otherwise I would have willingly men∣tion'd in this place. And therefore what I can briefly on the present Subject observe, is, First in general, the wonderful Devotion, Zeal, Religious Liberality of the first Christian Monarchs, Provincial Kings, and other great
Lords of Ireland, who upon their first conver∣sion not only parted so readily with the whole Tenths of their Estates real and personal, nay and of their Subjects also, both men and women, by the dedication of all, in a pecu∣liar way to God, as hath been said before, but were so fervently Zealous, even to a de∣gree of excess, in this kind, that (as both Keting and Lucius relate it) if St. Patrick would have receiv'd what they offer'd more, their Successors should have scarce been left the grazing of four Beasts to bestow on the Church. Secondly in particular, the great number of those Princes, one after another in the suc∣cession of so many Ages, that notwithstand∣ing all the bloody Feuds and warlike humor of their Nation, withdrew themselves in time from sin, yea from all the pleasures, vanity, pomp, earthly glory of their condition, and by contemning the world for the sake of God, made themselves greater than the World. A large list of them you may find partly in Keting, but more amply and exactly in Lucius. And they were those that stripping them∣selves naked to follow Christ, and shutting themselves up in Cloysters made choice of the better part with Mary at the feet of out Lord. Such were the Monarchs, 1. Mahoba,
who by the prayers of Columbe-Cille reco∣vering from death to life, thereupon without delay, Anno 610. renounc'd the World, en∣ter'd a Monastery, profess'd himself a Monk, and was after, in regard of his holiness, made Bishop of Kildare. 2. Flaithiortach, who like∣wise (though without any such inducement as Maolchoba had) in perfect health, vigour, streingth, deliberately chose to dispoil himself of all earthly greatness, Goods, Employments, and exchange them all for a poor monastick Weed in the Monastery of Ardmagh, for a penitential course of life within the walls of that enclosure; and for a Christian happy death, which he found in that same place, after nine years more had been over in his holy exercises there. 3. Niall Frassach, that not only quitted the Crown and Power, but the very, Soil of Ireland, by retiring to the Scottish Isle of Hy; and there in Columb Cille's Monastery, devoting himself wholly to works of Christian repentance, after eight years continual preparation by them for his passage to immortality, had it in the year 773. of our Saviour's Incarnation. 4. Muirchiortach (great Grandchild to Brion Buraimh, and one of Ketings Monarchs of Ireland) who, having resign'd his Royal Authority, and, together with it, whatever else he possess'd or loved on earth, put on the habit of a pooor religi∣ous
man at Lismore, where without looking back, he ended happily his days. 5. Domhnal mhac rdghair, who (according to Colgan, as we have seen before) was also King of Ireland, though in his declining years, yet amidst his prosperity retiring to the Abbey of Doire Cholumb-Cilie; employing the re∣mainder of his life there in exercises of piety; holiness, and mortification; and lamenting the sins of his former days; prepared for, encountred, and receiv'd death with a serene countenance, full of hopes of a glorious Im∣mortality. But whether he took upon him the outward profession of a Monk in those exercises there, or did not, I can say nothing on either side. Nor is it very material to know: seeing the inward habit of his Soul yielded fruits worthy of true repentance and the severest outward profession of it. 6. Rua∣ruidh O Conchabhair, the very last Irish Mo∣narch, we have shewn likewise before, to have made a religious life, under the Habit and in a Cloister of Augustinian Chanon Re∣gulars, his last refuge in this World from so many vicissitudes of Fortune. There it was he became so truly wise indeed as to prepare only for that other World; which, being planted far above all the glory of the Sun, and all the Circles of time, expects only Souls ei∣ther never tainted with sin at any time, or
by perfect repentance, at least before death throughly purified from its deadly sting. And such indeed, for making choice either sooner or later of the better part with Mary, were those now enumerated Monarchs of Ireland. And yet I know not why I might not add to their number Maolseachluinn I. and Brian Boraimh. For albeit they never had been ei∣ther profess'd Monks, Anchorites, or Clerks, nor divested of their Authority Royal, nor at all outwardly retired from the cares of the Publick, or management of their own dome∣stick affairs, or comfort of their Wives and Children: yet their piety of life was such as purchas'd for them after death the reputation of holy men. Yea S. Cairbre Bishop of Cluan∣mhac-Noise, when the former died Anno 860. being in extasy, beheld his Soul ascending to glory, says Lucius. And the later has been inserted not only by John Wilson in his Mar∣tyrologe, but by Henry Fitz, Simons in his Ca∣talogue of the Saints of Ireland: both these Au∣thors having in this particular followed Ma∣rianus Scotus. Of the Provincial Kings a far greater num∣ber, and some of them very early, that is in their very youth, made the same prudential, wise, divine choice. Aillill Anmbanna King of Connaght led so wonderfully strict a life, according to the exactest Rules of Christiani∣ty,
that upon his death it pleased God to shew his Soul to Columb-Cille ascending to Heaven, Anno 544. Cormac King of South Leinster, about the Year of Christ 567. quit∣ting voluntarily his Kingdom went to Beann∣chuir, profess'd himself there a Monk, conti∣nued in the same place leading a life truly answerable to his profession, till death trans∣lated him to happiness Anno 567. which the Irish Church believing has placed him in her Calendar of Saints. Aodh Dubh King of Lein∣ster, forsaking in the same manner both his Kingdom and whatever else he might enjoy on earth, took the Monastical habit and Vows upon him; lived accordingly some years in the Monastery of Kildare an under∣ling; was after made Abbot, then Bishop of the same Cloister and See; deceased Anno Christi 638. and in fine was record∣ed in the Register of Saints. Ceallach mhac Reghal, King of Connaght, made the like exchange of a Kingdom for a Cloister: died in the Year of our Lord 703. and is invoked particularly at Lochkinne as their tutelary Pa∣tron. Ardghal mhac Cathail King of Con∣naght, the very same; only that to be further off from all noise of the World, he retired out of Ireland to the Monastery of Columb-Cille in the Island of Hy: where, in the se∣venth year of his peregrination, which
was of Christ 786, he ended his mortal course. Before him a little, that is Anno Christi 739. flourished the good King of Ʋlster, Fiacha mhac Aodh Roin, surnamed In Droiched from his continual care of building Bridges every∣where throughout his Kingdom to make the ways more passable: for Droiched in their Tongue signities a Bridge. He was even to ad∣miration vertuously just and equitable to all persons whatsoever Only one Cow taken away by stealth within his Dominion, and because peradventure (says Gratianus Lucius) the Author of this stealth had not been with due severity punish'd, he inflicted the re∣mainder on his own person, by going a Pil∣grimage to Beannchuir. In his Reign and Year of Christ 743. (not as Cambrensis has it, binnio an∣te Topog. dist. 2. c. 10. adventum Anglorum, two Years only, but 424 Years before the first landing of Fitz Stephens in Ireland. So far is Cambrensis out in his rela∣tion of the very time of this matter) it hap∣pening that a prodigious Whale with three golden Teeth stianded at Carlingford, within his jurisdiction; each Tooth weighing fifty ounces of Gold: he gave one of them to the chief workman-builder of the foresaid Bridges; the other two he dedicated to the making of Shrines in the Monastery of Beannchuir for those
holy relicks there, on which the Countrey people did use to take their most solemn Oaths for ending all Controversies arisen. Felim mhac Criomthain, alias in Latin Feidlimidius, that most famous King (though not of Ire∣land, wherein also Cambrensis, as in most his other Relations concerning Ireland, has most grosly err'd, but) of Mounster, having pro∣sperously reigned 27 years, and within that time what by harrassing, what by fighting Leath-Cuinn, humbled them mightily, at last resign'd his Crown: retired from all secular Employments, all earthly joys, pleasures, va∣nities: withdrew to a Wilderness: turn'd a poor Hermit there: continued so the rest of his life, devoting himself wholly to God, till death call'd him away, under the Mo∣narchy of Niall Caille, in the Year of Christ 845. For then it was that he depart∣ed hence, with the Opinion both of a great Saint, and of as excellent a Writer too as that Age might have, says Lucius. The Irish Book, call'd an Leabhar Irsi (or, as Keting expounds it, the Book of their Annals) has in short this Elogy of him: Optimus, Spiens & Anachoreta Scotorum quievit. Con∣temporary to him was Fionachta-Luibhne King of Connaght, who in the same manner exchang'd his Royal Robe for an Hermits
Coat: and all the attendance, wealth, delights, pomp, gayety of a Palace, for the laonliness, poverty, silence, obscurity of an uncouth, naked solitude: to prepare himself for the last day of his life; which he ended there Anno 846. Next to this Fionachta, in or∣der of time, the King of Leinster, Dunling mhac Muireadhach retired both from his King∣dom and all worldly things else into the Mo∣nastery of Kildare, professing Monk, and con∣tinuing there in the exercises first of an Un∣derling, then of an Abbot, till in the Year 867. he finish'd happily his course. And after him, Domhnal, son to the Monarch of Ireland Aodh Fionnliach, devoted himself to the service of God, in the habit and profes∣sion of a most godly mortified Ecclesiastick. In which condition he received without any fear at all the King of terrours, Death, in the Year of our Saviour 911. Him, although at a great distance of time, followed Rua∣ruidh O Conchabhair King of Connaght (I mean the Father of Toirghialiach mor O Con∣chabhair Monarch of Ireland) who in the 20th year after that O Flaithiortach had put out his eyes, enter'd the Order of Canon-Regulars, and among them rendred his Soul to his Redeemer An. 1118. And so did the King of the Dublinian Danes, and Leinster Irish, Domhnal O Brien, son to Muirchiortach O
Brien King of Ireland, renounce his Kingdom, profess Clerk at Lismore, and accordingly there continue a life of pennance to his death, which happened Anno Dom. 1135. Lastly, the religious Devotion of Cathal Crud∣dhearg King of Connaght (Lucius calls him in Latin Cathaldus à rubro Carpo) is very much celebrated amongst his Countrymen in all their Histories. He, after the death of his Wife, gave up his Kingdom, profess'd Cistercian Monk in the Monastery built by himself at a place in Connaght call'd the Hill of Victory, and in the Year of Christ 1224. breath'd out his last in the same religious Cloister. The great liberality of this Provin∣cial King to the Church, and particularly the large extent of Lands bestowed for ever by him upon that Cistercian Abbey de Colle Victo∣riae, when he built it, may perhaps be else∣where in this Treatise reflected on. At pre∣sent, and because I have now done with all the most singular patterns of Piety record∣ed among the Provincial Kings of that Na∣tion; I proceed to those of the most celebrated memory, in that respect, among their Lesser Kings. Such were Damhin mhac Dambin∣ghoirt, King of Orghillae, departed this life Anno Dom. 560. and Ferrhadhach mhac Duacha, parted in the Year 582. whose Souls are said
by the Irish Writers to have been shew'd to Co∣lumb-Cille ascending to Heaven absque poenis purgatoriis. Such was Brian Boraimh's Ancestor in the seventh degree of ascent, by name Toir∣rghiallach, by Title or Dignity King of Dal-Gheass, or rather indeed (says Keting) of North-Mounster, who in the Year 690. or there∣abouts, after he had bestow'd all the Islands in his Kingdom on poor strangers, to be inha∣bitd and cultivated by them, put on a Monks Cowl at Lismore: and for his daily employ∣ment either polish'd stones for the building of Churches there, or mended High-ways. So that he was never idle, but discharging continually with his own hands the part some∣time of a Stone-cutter: at other times that of a poor ordinary Mason, or meanest Day-la∣bourer. Such Maol-bressal mhac Cearnaigh King of Mogh dornuigh; who, after quitting the World, professing Monk, and living in that profession many years like a Saint, was kill'd at last by the Danes, Anno 847. Such Maolduin King of Oiligh, son to Aodgh Ord∣nigh the Monarch, that forsook all whatever was desireable on earth, took the same course of a profess'd religious Life in a Monastery for many years, never look'd back, never took his hand off the Plough till death seiz'd him in the Year of Christ 865. Such also were Maolbride King of Cineal-Gonail, and
Domhnal King of Cineal-Laoghaire, who tram∣pling underfoot all worldly temptations, as∣sumed the Monastic habit, retired into Cloi∣ster'd Cells, and for the remainder of their lives, which was of many years, continued their station there, practising only the methods of dying to themselves and living to Christ, till the blessed hour came when he call'd them to himself, the former Anno 897. the later Anno 882. And after them Donochadh (the son of Ce∣allach, and Son-in-law to Donochadh mhac Floinn the Monarch) King of Ossory is next recorded as a man of exceeding piety and godliness, though never so profess'd Monk, nor at all retir'd in outward appearance from the duties of his secular Employment. His care of the poor was such that in his time every house in Ossory had three several Bags for daily Collections of Victuals to feed them. One that receiv'd the tenth part of every persons meal: none at all of the Family, no not even of the servants, excepted. Another design'd for the portion of Saint Michael the Archangel, as they call'd it. And a third was under the peculiar charge of the good Wife, to see all the scraps gathered into it. Besides he was himself exceeding bountiful to them. And then his devotion at Church, frequenta∣tion of the Sacrament, watch over his own senses, delight in all divine things, continual
exercise in all good works, made his memory pleasant and fragrant, and sweet and precious after his death. The debt of Nature, that open'd for him the passage into a blessed immortality, he paid in his Father-in-law's Reign over Ireland, that is, between the Years 918. when this Monarch Donochadh mhac Floinn be gun his reign, and the year 942. when he ended it. I might on this occasion peradventure call to mind what Keting has of Scanlan mor mhic Cinfoala, a former King of Ossory, his grateful devout liberality in applotting and enjoyning three pence a smoak throughout his Countrey, to be paid yearly for ever to Columb-Cille's Abbey there at a place call'd Durramh. And I might withal remember how great, how beneficial, yea how wonder∣ful even to this very Scanlan himself the in∣ducement he had to this Devotion was. For it was no less than his miraculous delivery from the very extreamest rigours of a most cruel imprisonment, and twelve chains of Iron loading him, and no drink at all al∣low'd him to quench his thirst, when at Co∣lum-Cille's instance for him in prayer to God, he was on a sudden by an Angel of glory from Heaven rescued, the Prison at midnight en∣lightned, his chains unloosed, his Keepers thrown down, the Gates open'd, he led forth, and then presently as it were in another in∣stant
of time, both conducted and presented to his Wonder-working Patron Columb-Cille that expected him at that very hour. But as I have partly before touch'd upon the extra∣ordinary Obligation laid by this miraculous favour on Scanlan: so let it suffice here to have only mention'd so much of his grateful acknowledgment thereof. And yet perhaps it may not be amiss to let the Reader know, what Lucius on the fore∣said occasion hath observ'd of the Kings of Ossory in general, or indeed rather of the Irish Historians in relation to them, viz. That these Writers do seem all of them to have some pe∣culiar esteem for the Kings of Ossory above any other of the Lesser Kings of Ireland. For when they give a Catalogue of those Pro∣vincial Kings of the Pentarchy, that is of those of South-Mounster, North-Mounster, Connaght, Leinster, and Ʋlster, that were contemporary to the Monarchs whose Reigns, Lives, Acts they principally write: it may be seen in all their Books that then also they give a parti∣cular account of the Kings of Ossory; though on that occasion they take no kind of notice of any other of all the Lesser Kings of Ire∣land. What the reason hereof may be, I can∣not divine▪ if not that peradventure they va∣lued (as Lucius says) these Ossory Kings not upon the extent of their Dominion, which
yet was not contemptible, but on their bra∣very and Martial courage like that of Eume∣nes (in Plutarch) who when he had but one Castle remaining in his possession, would not otherwise capitulate with Antigonus but upon equal terms of honour: as not esteeming any man better than himself whiles he had a Wea∣pon in his hand. But be this conjecture as you please, I return back to the Subject I was on be∣fore. I now give the only two remaining of those Lesser Kings, that are celebrated for their prudent piety in their abandoning all they had on earth, taking up their Cross and following Christ in the poverty, habit and mortifications of a religious Life. These were Maolmordha Huadomhnail King of Cionsallach, who paid his tribute to Nature Anno 1022. and Vadah O Conchanain King of Huadiarma∣da, above a hundred years after; for he ended his days Anno 1167. Nor have I any other to add to them, but only Conchabhar O Cealla, surnamed of the Battles, King of Mannech in Connaght: whose Christian vertues are wonderfully admired by all the Irish Historians. Though he was a man that not only till the last continued in his station of a Prince and Governour of his People, but a very notable Warriour too, as you see that surname of his imports, cui cog∣nomento
à Proeliis, says Lucius. In short, they write of him, 1. That he maintain'd in Clothes and Diet 30 Clerks, Monks, and poor Women: founded twelve Churches in Moanmaigha, endow'd them with Lands, ren∣der'd them exempt from all publick Duties: built the Cathedral Church of St. Brandan at Cluainfert, and the other of St. Kieran at Cluain-mhac-Noise; gave these two Cathedrals large possessions; furnish'd them with Eccle∣siastical Books, Chalices, costly Palls, Vest∣ments, and all other necessaries for the holy Ministery. 2. That he tyth'd his whole Estate three several times: bestowed the Tenth of it on the Churches; the Ninth on the poor, and the Eighth part on the Clerks and others that came for assistance and relief to his House. 3. That after all being warr'd upon by Con∣chabhar Moinmhuigh (son to Ruaruidgh the last Irish Monarch) by the Mac Teigs also, and other great Lords associated against him: and an agreement made between both sides to put the quarrel to the issue of a pitch'd Battel, with this caution and mutual promise, that neither should come unto it nor fight in it with Armour, i. e. with breast, or back, or Ha∣bergion, or any coat of Maile: and he for his part most religiously out of meer conscience of his word, keeping to that caution; but they on the other side, without any regard of theirs,
having dealt perfidiously by covering them∣selves with Armour under their Cassocks: the issue was the slaughtering of a great number of his Army, the routing of the rest, and kil∣ling of him among others in the Field; which they call the Field or Battel of Srugheal, fought in the year of our Saviour Christ, 1180. 4. That upon the news, thosE 360 Pensioners above mention'd of his, though not living together in one place, but far and wide distant in their several Habitations, yet in all the hast they could, arriving all of them on the third day where his Body was; and there, upon the sight of it, first giving way to Nature by venting their extream grief in abundance of tears, groans, and lamentations for him, but more especially because he that maintain'd so many Ministers for God, had not so much as any one of them, or any other such to assoil him or comfort him in the last hour: then taking his head (for it was cut off) and sow∣ing it to his body: and this done, laying themselves on their knees, they prai'd, &c. crying to God mightily, and with wonderful Faith beseech'd him to return back the Soul of their dear Benefactor into his Body, while he prepar'd himself by repentance and reconci∣liation, and the Sacraments of Christ for a more quiet, and hopeful departure. 5. Lastly, That their prayers were so efficacious, and
the mercy of God so extraordinarily propitious to Conchabhar, that he revived presently, con∣fess'd his sins, received the holy Viaticum; but then, as he told them, chose rather to die than live any longer. Adding withal, that the true cause why God would have him defeated and kill'd in that Battle was, that he had not in∣continently punish'd some wickedness com∣mitted by his Brother. Which yet he had not forgiven, but only delai'd to judg: as having never once heard of it before that very morn∣ing when he was preparing for Battel, and consequently his Soul taken up wholly with other cares. Whereby, says Gratianus Lucius, relating this matter at large, and quoting O Duvegan for it, we may guess at the condition of those Governors that wilfully and delibe∣rately not only delay the punishment of so many horrible crimes they see daily commit∣ted even against all Justice and Religion; but resolve never to punish them. Ne enim injuria quis dixerit eum saevire in bonos qui parcit-malis. But if you be of an other judgment, as to this Maxim I mean, That he is cruel to the good who spares the wicked: or if peradventure you boggle at the miraculous part either of this Relation of Conchabhar O Cealla's death, or of the former enumeration of such Irish Christian Monarchs, Provincial and other Lesser Kings who have been famous in their time for piety:
you may pass it over, and leave it to the de∣votion and credulity of other men that have not the same apprehensions, doubts or scru∣ples, as they have not the same soul with you. I am sure that laying all such matters aside, there is among those great Examples of Vir∣tue, enough still remaining to edifie any good Christian, or any sober man alive. Though I must tell you withal, that as no Writer holds himself accountable either for the verity or falsity of any other matters of Fact whatsoever written by him out of an∣cient History: so much less for those of Mi∣racles. And yet further I must acknowledg, that I know not whether any man writing purposely of a Nation or People that both firmly do believe such miraculous works to have been wrought by God among their Predecessors, and would perhaps hold it a very invidious malevolent diminution of their glory for such a man to pass them over wholly in silence, it were just or prudential in him to do so. However I have avoided the two extreams. I have not been wholly silent as to such matters: nor have I given but a very few of them. Besides, I do not interpose a syllable of my own judgment. Though I would nevertheless be as free either to assent or dissent, or even to suspend as any other upon sufficient ground. But enough of this:
and, together with it, of all I intended to give in the second Point. 35. The third is an Appendix to what has been hitherto said of the personal piety of those Princes. For I am now to give in order what was done partly by some of the very same partly by other Irish Kings, Princes, Lords, as well to reform the Commonwealth, regulate the Church, restore Learning to the Nation, as to promote Christian religious piety among all their Subjects no less than in themselves. And all this, I mean acted by them after the ge∣neral calamity of the Danish Wars: yea and acted by them notwithstanding their own so frequent relapses at this very time into their old Feuds again. Brian Boraimh, so often mention'd, but never enough praised, must be the first Instance in this place. He set all men free from the exactions of the Danes. All the spoils gained by him from the Danes, he bestow'd on others. All the Lands and Territories of the Kingdom he restor'd to the ancient Proprietors and lawful Heirs; not retaining to himself or any Relations one foot of Land belonging to others. He conferr'd on each Temporal Lord great Priviledges and Immunities, according to his degree. He restored to each Bishop his own Diocess, to each Priest his Church throughout Ireland. He founded, built, endow'd many Churches,
Schools, Colledges: and with Royal munifi∣cence, care, solicitude gave a new beginning again to the destroy'd Universities. He be∣stow'd on every person that would learn, money to bear his charges competently. He built at his own proper cost the Cathedral of Cill-da-Luagh, the Church of Inis Cealtrach, and re-edified the Steeple of Tuaim-Ghreine. He built many Bridges, made many Causeys, mended many High ways before not passable. He erected many new Forts, strengthened the old ones with new Bulwarks, and in parti∣cular fortified Cashel the usual mansion of the Mounster Kings. He re-edified all the Royal Houses or Palaces in Mounster, that before his time had been either utterly ruin'd or wholly neglected, in particular thirteen of them. His Government was so rigid that under it a young Woman travail'd all alone from To∣ruidh to Cliodhna, the length of Ireland, with a gold Ring hanging on the top of a Wand in her hand, without meeting any that at∣tempted to rob or ravish her. Besides he en∣ter'd not on the Sovereignty by murdering or killing his Predecessor, as so many others did, who nevertheless were not tax'd with Usurpation, because of their descent from the Royal Line: and yet Brian was undoubtedly of the Line from Heber. Moreover, he was gloriously magnificent in his Port. No man
could carry Arms in his Court, where ever it chanc'd to be, except only Dal-Gheass that were his own peculiar Guards. All the Pro∣vinces of Ireland every one, and some lesser Countreys too, besides the Danes inhabiting Dublin and Limmeric, lay under a considerable Boraimh, or Tax which they paid yearly for the maintenance of his House at Ceann-Chora, viz. Connaght 800 Beeves, and so many Hogs. Tirchonail 500 Mantles and 500 Beeves. Tir-Eoghuin 600 Beeves, 600 Hogs, and 60 Tun of Iron. Clanna Ruidhruidh in Ʋlster 150 Beeves, and so many Hogs. Oirghilluibh 800 Beeves. Leinster 300 Beeves, 300 Hogs, and 300 Tuns of Iron. Ossory 60 Beeves, 60 Hogs, and 60 Tuns of Iron. Danes of Dublin 300 Pipes or Buts of Wine. Danes of Limmerick a Tun of Claret for every day in the Year, (what Mounster paid, I do not find.) In short, his Hospitality at Ceann-Chora, in every degree was such, that excepting the Monarchs Cormock mhac Airt, and Conair mor mhac Ei∣drisgceoil, no other King of Ireland ever did an near it. Maolseachluinn II. in his Second Reign, e∣specially towards the middle of it, when he gave himself to Devotion and thoughts of an other life, did as well in good Government and care of the Publick, as in Piety shew himself both a great and good King. He re∣edified
many Schools, repair'd many Churches, maintain'd 300 Scholars out of his own Re∣venue, laid the foundation of S. Mary Abbey in Dublin, built and endow'd it, An. 1039. Ʋnderstand this according to Ketings Computa∣tion, that gives Clantar Clantar Battel, fought on the 16th of April 1036. but not according to Gratianus Lucius or others that deliver it fought earlier by 20 years, viz. Anno. 1014. the very first Abbey we read of built in Ireland since the universal destruction by the Danes. For the Monarch Toirghiallach mhac Teaidhg mhic Brian Boraimh, that he was not only a good man, but excellent King you may read in Lucius very convincing Arguments: 1. That during his twelve years Reign, there was none oppos'd his person, nor any that call'd in que∣stion his Title, none drew Sword nor lift up an armed Hand against him. 2. That he never enacted one farthing, never any kind of Boraimh or Tax of the Provinces, yet was abundantly furnish'd by them all along with all kind of necessaries to support his Regal dignity. 3. That he made very good, whol∣some convenieent Laws for his People. 4. That Lanfrancus, then Arch-bishop of Canterbury, loved him entirely; remembred him still in his Prayers: did all the good Offices he could to his Friends: calls him tacitly a lover of
Justice: and then expresly adds, Magnam mi∣sericordiam populis Hiberniae tunc divinitus col∣latam, quando omnipotens Deus Terdelacho mag∣nifico Hiberniae Regi jus Regiae potestatis super illam terram concessit, That Almighty God had then shewed great mercy to the people of Ire∣land when he gave the Royal power of that Land to the magnificent King Toirrghiallach. The Letters of Lanfrancus, containing these Elogies of him are quoted by Lucius, page 83. Muirchiortach O Brien, son to the said Toir∣rgiallach, made a much further progress in restoring the Commonwealth, and both en∣dowing and reforming the Church. In the first year of his Reign, which was the year of Christ 1106. he alienated th City of Cashel from the Mounster Kings, and to the honour of God and of St. Patrick bestow'd it for ever (in puram eleemosynam) by way of pure Alms on the Bishops See there, says Ke∣ting. In his Reign also, not only a Parliament of all the Estates in Ireland See Waraeus in his Commeut. de Praesul. Heb. p. 12. in Celsus. was held at Fiadh-mhac-Naoughussa, but (as Gratianus Lucius has it) even three several Sy∣nods, representing the whole Clergy of that Nation were conven'd at three divers places. One of them at Ʋsneach in Meath, conven'd Anno 1106, as Lucius expresly says; telling
us withal, that in this Council Gillaspuic (whom he calls in Latin Gilbertus▪) Abbot of Beannchuir, Bishop of Limmeric, and Legat for the Pope was President: and that in all, it consisted of fifty Bishops; whereof the said President was the first, Celsus (in Irish Ceal∣lach) successor to St. Patrick at Ardmagh the second, and Maolmuire Huadanain Arch-bishop of Mounster the third: besides three hundred Priests and three thousand other Ecclesiasticks present. Another of them was held at the foresaid Fiadh-mhac Naonghussa, then (if I understand Keting aright) when all the Estates were assembled there. And though I cannot say for certain what Year that was, I may nevertheless Waraeus out of the Annals of Hi∣ster says it was held, Anno 1111. assure you that Keting says the Representatives or Mem∣bers of this Synod were only the successor of that Patrick at Ardmagh (for he does not otherwise name him) and Maolmuire O Dunain the Archbishop of Mounster, and eight Bishops more; besides 360 Priests, 140 Deacons, and other Mini∣sters not numbred, that were present. But for the Acts of this Council we need not be inquisitive, since the same Keting has plainly told us they are lost. And so might Lucius, for ought I can see, have told us of those made at Ʋsneach: for it is he, and not Keting, that
has observ'd that Synod. The third, which both of them equally mention, has been a me∣morable one indeed, and the chief Acts of it, preserv'd to Posterity, are at large in Keting. It was held at Rath Bressail, Anno 1110. un∣der the presidency of the foresaid Gillaspuic Bishop of Limmeric as the Pope's Legat. The number of Bishops conven'd, I do not find. But I see clearly enough, their main business was to reduce the number of Bishops in the whole Island: and to assign to each Bishop his own peculiar Diocess, with the meers and bounds thereof, partly (as I sup∣pose) to prevent disputes about Jurisdiction, and partly that the Flock might be the more carefully observ'd. They did both successfully. And for the number they ordered it should be six and twenty in all: twelve of them in Leath Cuinn, and twelve in Leath Mogh, and two in Meath. Of the twelve in Leath-Cuinn, six, were in the Province of Ʋlster, and Ard∣magh one of the six, the rest in Connaght: of the other twelve for Leath-Mogh, seven were appointed for the two divisions of Mounster, and five for Leinster. He of Dublin was not mention'd amongst them, nor indeed at all, as receiving then his consecration from Can∣terbury. But Gleann-da Loch, now united to it, was one of the Five for Leinster. All the other Sees also they named; whereof some
are different from those we know at present. And so did they name, in the very Acts of the same Council, the peculiar Meers of each Bi∣shoprick, all round about every where through∣out the whole Kingdom. The Annals of Inis Fail, as Lucius quotes 'em say this Synod (or rather perhaps the General As∣sembly consisting as well of the Lay Estates, as of Ecclesiastical sitting in the same Place) made better Laws than Ireland ever had before at any time. Among which Keting sets down one special Act for the plenary Exemption of the Church for ever from all Taxes, Impositions, Burthens, Duties, &c. impos'd on 'em by the secular Power. Another also for every Bishop's consecrating at Easter, the Oyl of holy Ʋnction. After which concluding his whole account, of this National Synod, he adds how the Fa∣thers assembled therein, had in the end of all their Acts, bless'd the Observers and curs'd the Transgressors of them, in this form: The blessing of God Almighty, and of S. Peter, and S. Patrick, and of the Representer of S. Peter's Successor, the Legat Giolla-Aspuick Bishop of Limmerick, and of Ceallach S. Patrick's successor, Primat of Ireland, and of Maoil-Josa mhac Ain∣mhire Arch-bishop of Cashel, and of all the Bi∣shops, Gentry and Clergy in this holy Synod of Rath-Breassuill light and remain upon eve∣ry one that shall approve, ratifie and observe
these Ordinances. And, of the other side, their Curses on the Infringers of 'em. Gratianus Lucius (in his Cambr. Evers. page 83.) is of opinion, and his reasons for it can hardly be gainsay'd, that these, which are cal∣led three National Synods, were but one and the self-same Council, continued from time to time, and finish'd in three several Sessions, and Places, viz. One Session at Visneach, another at Fiadha-mhac-Naonghussa, and the Last of 'em at Rath-Bressail. But if you enquire what should bring to this Council such a vast con∣flux of Ecclesiasticks, as (besides all the Bi∣shops, whose duty it was to be there) three hundred Priests and 3000 other Churchmen: I for my part, can guess at no other cause than one of Three, or all Three together. 1. The Novelty, or at least Rarity of a National Synod in that Kingdom. I am sure Keting in all his History has not any Instance of a National Sy∣nod of the Irish Church not even from the be∣ginning of it; before that of Fiadh-mhac-Na∣onghussa. 2. The Fame of so great a Reforma∣tion of the Sacerdotal Order and state Eccle∣siastical, intended by the reducing the number of Bishops, and bounding their Diocesses, might have drawn many to come thither. 3. The Temporal Estates of the whole King∣dom, sitting at the Place and Time, question∣less occasion'd the coming of many more Ec∣clesiasticks to that Council than perhaps o∣therwise would have come.
What I would principally observe by oc∣casion of that Synod at Rath-Bressail is, first, how short this number of 26 Bishops in all Ire∣land comes of that other of 350 Bishops re∣lated before page 56. out of Nennius and Jocelin to have been consecrated by St. Patrick in his time for that Countrey. But it may be said, that was a time of labouring in the conversion of every part of that Kingdom, and its Do∣minions abroad in Scotland and other adja∣cent Islands. To which purpose it was ex∣pedient there should be a very great number of Bishops, according to the greatness of the Harvest, which was all (at least as to Ireland at home) made up in 35 years. Besides, that in 61 or 62 years, the long term of Saint Patrick's life after he had enter'd on that Har∣vest, e'en so many hundred Bishops as are mention'd by the said Authors, might have died in Ireland and the adjacent Islands, tho never the fifth or sixth part of them had lived together in any one time. And yet I must confess, there was in later times, and even but a little before this Council, a most corrupt custom in Ireland, that multiplyed Bishops pro libitu Metropolitani, at the sole Metropoli∣tans pleasure, as we shall see hereafter, and whence that corruption, with many other, proceeded. However, to return to my main purpose. Muirchiortach O Brien King of Ire∣land
(whether alone, or in association with Domhnal the son of Ardghal, enjoying that Title) was so happy as to have by his Royal Authority concurr▪d unto, compass'd, and confirm'd this material point of Reforma∣tion and establishment of the State Ecclesia∣stical. Hs next Successor, Toirrghiallach Mor O Connor, notwithstanding all his Wars did ma∣nifest his care of the Publick both in civil and Ecclesiastical affairs. He built the three chief Bridges of Connaght; among which that of Athlone was. He had the Cathedral of Tuam solemnly consecrated by a number of Bishops call'd thither of purpose. He built a Hospital in the same Town, and endow'd it with Lands. He setled a yearly Pension for a Divinity Professor at Ardmagh. He was so justly severe in punishing Criminals, that having imprison'd his own son for some great Offence, and rejected for a long time the intercession of several both Princes and Pre∣lats, he could hardly at last be induced even by five hundred Priests and eleven Bishops together with the Archbishops of Ardmagh and Cashel appearing before him and inter∣ceding for the Prisoner, to set him at liberty after a twelve months imprisonment. Of his piety, besides what I have said already, these are further proofs given by Lucius I.
That he caus'd the Holy Cross to be carried about Ireland in great veneration. 2. That he bestowed great scopes of Land on the Clergy of Tuam: on the Successor of Saint Coman a Town: and on the Bishop of Cluain∣mhac-Noise a number of Silver Crosses, Gob∣lets, and Chalices. And 3. That by his last Will he bequeath'd to several Churches all the costly furniture of his Houses; all his Gold and silver Plate; all his Jewels; all his Horses and Arms, even his very Bow and Quiver; besides 540 ounces of Gold, and 40 marks of Silver. His immediate Follower in the Sovereignty Muirchiortach mhac Neill was pleas'd himself in person, together with all the Kings and Nobles of the whole Kingdom to be present in the National Synod of that Church held at Ceannannais (we call it now Kells) in Meath, in the first year of his Reign, which was of Christ 1152. This Council begun the 7th of March, being Dominica Laetare Hierusalem, had members of it present seven and twenty Bishops, and as many more Abbots and Priors; the Archbishops of Ardmagh and Ca∣shel, and the Bishop of Dublin, besides sive elect, being of the number of those 27 Bishops. It was in this Council that John Papiron, Cardinal of St. Laurence in Damasco, sent by Pope Eugenius III. presided. In this
Council that he by the Authority of the A∣postles Peter and Paul, and the Apostolical Lord Eugenius condemned Simony, execrated Usury, enjoyn'd the payment of Tithes. In this Council, besides that he deliver'd the 4 Palls to the 4 Archbishops, Ardmagh, Cashel, Tuam, Dublin. Moreover it was in this Coun∣cil that he ordain'd, as it was fit, that Ard∣magh should be Primat over all. And these things being done by him, without further delay he departed, and on the Ninth of the Ca∣lends of May the same Year ship'd for beyond Seas. So Keting writes of him and this Council, out of the Annals of Cluain Eidh∣nioch Fiontain in Lease: where he transcribes the very Latin words of those Annals. Tho according to an other account of his own, Giolla Criost (or Christianus) O Conneric Bi∣shop of Lismore Provincial of all the Monks in Ireland, and Legat in ordinary from the Pope in that Kingdom presided in this Coun∣cil jointly with the said Cardinal. But what is more observable in those Annals is, That as to the 4 Palls most of the Clergy in this Council, and especially those of Dun-da-Leath-Ghlass and Ardmach were dissenting: because they held it enough for Ireland to have two Archbishops, the one at Ardmach, the other in Mounster, as formerly. The rest concern∣ing this Council, and particular names and
surnames of those two and twenty Bishops that according to his account composed it (for he leaves out the five Elect, and all the Abbots and Priors) you may read in him. I think it needless to transcribe them here. And yet I judg it not impertinent on this occasion to mind the Reader of Meredith Hanmer's gross mistake; where, in his History of Ireland, he says 1. That before this time or Council of Ceannannais, the Irish had ne∣ver had any Archbishops. 2. That ever since Austin the Monks time (or his mission to England from Gregory the Great) the Irish Clergy till this time had been subject to the Archbishops of Canterbury. Whereas in truth they had all along from St. Patrick's time, and by his own special appointment too, even two Archbishops: the one stiled of Ardmach; the other of Mounster first, then of Cashel, after he came to have his fixed See there: the one for Leath-Cuinn, and the other of Leath-Mogha. Whereof you may see more at large in Keting; who in his Reign of Laogirius tells the very motive and chief inducement St. Patrick had for making the second chief Archiepiscopal See, and constituting it in Mounster. Nay I have my self read in some of the Saints of Irelands Lives (though I have not them by me now to quote them) mention made of the Archbishop of the Lagenians, and his See
being sometimes Kildare, sometimes Ferns: and so I have of the Archbishop of the Cona∣cians too, if my memory fail me not. But if it do, Sir James Ware in his Commentary de Praesulibus Hiberniae supplies it abundantly, page 174. concerning Mounster: and pag. 243. and 244. concerning Connaght. What Au∣thority or Jurisdiction these Archbishops had in those days of old, is an other question: or whether they had any more than only to be Episcopi primae sedis in their Province? or prio∣rity of place? I can say nothing to it. But in this I can be on rational grounds positive, That none of the Irish Clergy depended on the Archbishops of Canterbury, none of their Bishops received consecration from any of them, until Lanfraneus in William the Conque∣rors time, was the Archbishop of that See. Nor then, nor after neither, but for some little time those only of Dublin, Wexford, Water∣ford and Limmeric. And the reason why these in particular would or did so depend was, That their Townsmen and subordinate pe∣culiar Governors were Danes or Easterlings, now turn'd Christians. And that they sus∣pected the Irish Prelats would not favourably judg or determine of their Elections in be∣half of their own Citizens, blood, or Coun∣treymen to Ecclesiastical Offices; but by rea∣son at least of the former Feuds, if not those
present and remaining still would prefer Irish to them. And therefore, and further yet be∣cause they expected in that behalf impartial dealing and justice, if not favour too, from the See of Canterbury, as being of late brought under the Norman Conquerors, originally their own Countreymen, they procured Li∣cense from the Irish Kings to have their Bi∣shops consecrated by the Archbishops of that See. whereby it happened, that so lately as the Reign of the Monarch Toirrghiallach, Grandchild to Brien Boraimh, in the Year of Christ 1098. the first Bishop of Waterford was consecrated by Anselmus of Canterbury. So says Keting; and much more Lucius; and most of all on this Subject the most eminently famous Primat Ʋsher, who was both con∣cern'd for his own See of Ardmagh, and with∣out question able enough to search into these matters. To him may be added Sir James Ware, pag. 102. 103, and 104. where he tells us of Patric, Donatus O Haingly, Samuel O Haingly and Gregory, four Bishops elected successively by the Oostmans of Dublin, and and consecrated for that See by the Arch∣bishops of Canterbury, Lanfrancus, Anselmus, and Rudolphus; but no more: for the next Bishop of Dublin was consecrated by Ard∣magh.
Having thus reflected on those Errors of Hanmer, I have no more to say in relation to the Council of Ceannannais, but that all the advantage, benefit, glory redounding from it to the Irish Church, ought questionless to be attributed chiefly to the foresaid King and Monarch of Ireland Muirchiortach mhac Neill, that rendred it both much more august by his own Royal presence, and much more effectual by his perfect submission to all its Decrees. A further strong argument of great resolu∣tions taken by many of the Kings, Princes, Nobles, Ecclesiasticks of Ireland to restore ci∣vility, justice, learning; and, above all, Piety and holiness of Life, once more among their Countreymen, was the great number of Mo∣nasteries built and endow'd by them within the very last eighty years of their Milesian Government before the final period of it. Yea and built by them, I mean, notwith∣standing all the disadvantages of that time, especially of that part of it which was taken up by the extraordinary turbulencies hap∣pen'd in Ruaruidh O Connor's Reign. Who, as we have seen before, succeeded this Muir∣chiortach mhac Neill, and was himself never since by any of his Countrey or Nation suc∣ceeded.
In the Province of Ʋlster, Anno 1106 the Monastery of Lisgoual near Loch Erne, and the Abbey of Carrig, whose first Abbot was St. Euodius, were founded by Mac-Noellus Mackenlef King of Ʋlster. Anno 1138. an other for the Canons Regular of St. Austin in Feramanach. The same Year, an other in Louth for the same order by Donogh mhac Ce∣irrbheoil King of Orghillae. And by him, at the request of St. Malachias, the noble Abbey of Mellifont for the Cistercians Anno 1142. The Abbey of Jonmhair Chinne Traigh, alias Newry, by Malachias himself; besides the ce∣lebrated Beannchuir restor'd by him. About this time also, the younger O Domlsnl, as he is call'd, rince of Tirconnel, at the request of St. Dominick by Letters to him, built for his Order a Monastery at Doire Cholum Cille, which had usually a hundred and fifty reli∣gious men. In the Province of Mounster, not only the Abby of O Dorne, in the County of Kierry, the Abbey of Fermoigh in the Coun∣ty of Cork, Anno 1140. and the Abbey of Neny or Magio Anno 1148 or 1151, all three for the Cistercian Order; but eighteen Monasteries founded by Domhnal O Brien the last King of North-Mounster. Among these were the famous Abbey of Holy Cross at Tip∣perary, and St. Peters at Limmeric for the black Nuns of St. Austin, and the Monastery de
Surio, and that call'd Killoulense, or de Albo campo, and the other Kilmoniense, or de Fur∣gio, and lately the Cloister f Corcamua, or of the fruitful Rock. In the Province of Lein∣ster Diarmuid mhac Murcho, (surnamed Na Ngall) the last King of it, founded six Mo∣nasteries: Two of them at Dublin; whereof one was for Nons of the Order (or rather Reformation) of Aroasia; the other for Chanons of Aroasia in an Abbey of Monks in Artois. St. Austin: a third in the County of Kilkenny at Kil∣clehin, a fourth at Atoody in the County of Catherlach: the fifth being a great noble Abbey for the Cistercians (by them named de Valle Salutis) at Baltinglass in the County of Wicklo: and the sixth at Ferns in the County of Wexford. But Mona∣ster-Euin, or de rubra Valle for the same Ci∣stercian Order, was founded by Diarmuid O Daoimuse, alias Dempsy, Lord (or at least one of the Lords) of Ibh Failghe, Anno 1178. Jeripont Abby in the County of Kilkenny, Anno 1181. by Donald Fitz Patric King of Ossory. The Monastery of Lease, or de Lege Dei, An. 1183. by Cuchogrius O Moadhirra. The Monastery of Dune in the County of Wexford, even before the landing of Fitz Ste∣phens there, by Diarmuid O Ryan by consent of the Leinster King, founded for the Chanons
of St. Austin. In the Province of Connaght, be∣fore it was conquered by the English; Cathal O Conchabhair, surnamed Crombhdhearg, founded the Monastery of Benedictin Nuns at Killcreu∣nath, the Monastery of Cnockmoigh, or de Colle Victoriae, for the Cistercians; that of Ballin Tohair for the Chanons of St. Augustin: and not only endow'd but enrich'd them all with large possessions. Add the Monastery of Boyle, about the Year 1151, founded for the Cister∣cian Order. Lastly, in Meath, the King or Prince of it, Murcho O Mleaghluinn founded the Monastery of Bectif (alias de Beatitu∣dine) either Anno 1148. or 1151. for the Cistercians: likewise for the Votresses of Saint Augustin, or he or some other O Mlaghlin, King of that Countrey built the Cloister at Clonard. But the Cloister of Shrouil, in the County of Longford, ad Euium Fluvium, had its beginning, Anno 1152. Such is the account I find mostly in Lucius, and for some part in Keting, of the endea∣vours used in those later times by several Irish Princes and Prelats to repair in some degree the general destruction brought upon their Schools of Learning and Piety, and upon all that was excellent or civil in their Na∣tion, by the long Danish Wars, and their own intestin broils immediately following. Que∣stionless they reputed Monasteries as (and
as indeed they were in that Age among them in Ireland) the best Schools of Learning and Religion: so the best means to civilize a Christian People much over-run with igno∣rance, barbarism, and wildness, and fierceness too of Nature; which two or three hundred years continual War in the very entrals of their Countrey, for the most part with Hea∣then Foreigners, and for the rest with the Natives themselves, one against another, must of necessity have brought with it. The fourth Point is to let you know, that in this very decrepit Age and finl wane of the Irish Monarchy, Heaven was yet so pro∣pitious to them, as to raise among them in the Ecclesiastical State some, (however few) even as wonderfully eminently Saints perad∣venture as were in the primitive Ages of Christianity in that Kingdom. For to say nothing now of those other excellent Bishops of this time, Ceallach or Celsus of Ardmagh, Gillaspuick, alias Gilbertus of Limmrick Mal∣bus of Lismore, and Giolla-Criost (or Christia∣nus) of Clocher, though St. Bernard himself besides what he has of the rest, especially of Malchus, calls this Christian, a good man, full of grace and vertue, inferiour indeed to his Bro∣ther (he means Malachias) in celebrity of Fame, but peradventure not so in sanctity of Life and Zeal of Justice: however, to pass
over I say, all these four excellent Prelats of this time: those I mean at present were e∣specially two other holy Monks, and they extraordinary Bishops too, one after an o∣ther. The former of them was Malachias (in Irish Maolmo, says Keting) or at least my Copy of him, but Malmedoic O Morgain, says Waraeus) a burning and shining Light in∣deed: as Saint Bernard applies to him what our Saviour Christ did say of Saint John Baptist. He was born an Ʋlster man of noble Parents, in the year of our Lord 1094. died in the 54 of his own Age, being the year of our Lord 1148. and therefore lived under some part of Donachadh mhac Brien Boraimh's reign, and the whole Reigns of his three Successors, even till the beginning of Muir∣chiortach mhac Neill's reign, the last Irish Mo∣narch saving one. That is, he lived in a great part of those very times when almost the whole face of the Irish Church was most wofully deformed, ulcer'd, horrible to be seen. In most places all kind of Ecclesiasti∣cal Discipline, all the Canons of the Church trodden under foot: in many other all the very Sacraments of Christ not only neglect∣ed, but of no use at all. Nor must we much wonder at it, if we consider that the very Head of the Ecclesiastical Order in Ireland,
the See of Ardmagb had in those days been as a meer lay Fee or Temporal Inheritance possess'd by strong hand of one powerful Family, even for fifteen Generations succes∣sively, i. e. ever since the expulsion of the Danes, almost two hundred years, out of that Province. That besides, although sometimes there was not one Clerk in this Family, yet they never wanted a Bishop. And thirdly, that before Ceallach (whom we call Celsus, the immediat, but virtuous good Predecessor of Malachias) eight married men, without any Orders, though not without Learning, had been the only Bishops of that Metropoli∣tan See. Hence throughout all Ireland, that dis∣solution of the Churches discipline, enervation of her Censures, evacuation of Religion, whereof we have spoken before, says the Mellifluous D. S. Bernard in the Life of Malachias cap. vii. For what has never been elsewhere, not even since the very beginning of Christianity heard, was now in Ireland to be seen. Bishops without Or∣dination, without reason multiplied at the lust of the Metropolitan. Insomuch that one Bishop∣rick was not content with one Bishop; but almost every Church in it had a peculiar Bishop. And indeed how was it likely to be otherwise? or that under so diseased, so corrupt a Head, the Members could be sound?
To reform these horrible corruptions of the Irish Church, God it seems had in his secret counsels design'd Malachias to be the man. First by his Birth of noble Parents hard by Ardmagh, and his being the only be∣loved Son of such a Family. Then by his contemning in his tender years, even from his childhood at School in that City, what∣ever seem'd worldly or vain: and his giving himself on all occasions, especially in all se∣cret recesses, to prayer. Then by his ac∣coasting, admiring, and delivering himself very early in his Youth to Imarius the holy Anchorie, who had by his own choice many long years before been shut up perpetually, and as it were buried alive in a little Cell that join'd to the Wall of the Cathedral Church. Then by the multitude of other young delicate striplings, that surmounting all considerations of flesh, and bloud, and sense, and what ever seem'd gay or pleasant to the eye, soon after follow'd his example. Then by the holy Spirit's moving not only the good Archbishop Celsus, but Imarius also to force him in a manner to the Order of Dea∣conship before he was 25 years old, and to that of Priesthood, so soon as he was 25 compleat: they (as they might well) supposing that the sanctity of his conversation did abun∣dantly supply the defect of his Canonical Age
for these Orders. Then by the further injun∣ction laid upon him immediately by Celsus, making him notwithstanding his Youth, Vi∣car General of the Diocess. Then by the tenour of his Life and power of his Word piercing like a two edged Sword the very entrails of all that heard him preach, and like a burning Torch enflaming them; as the Son of Syrach speaks of Elias the Prophet's Word. Then by his departing, but with the licence of Celsus and Imarius, for some years to Lismore in Mounster, and putting himself there in a Monastery under the discipline of Malchus the holy miraculous Bishop of that See, who had been himself, though an Irish man by birth, educated in the Abbey of Win∣chester in England. Then by occasion of King Cormack's retirement from his Enemies to the said Monastery: where this afflicted Prince making it his choice to live in a poor narrow cell, feed on bread and a little salt, drink nothing but water, bath his body once every day in cold water to extinguish the re∣bellion of his flesh; do all this by the dire∣ction of Malachias, his only Instructor and comfort, yea and continue it until at last he rather suffer'd than desired himself to be re∣stor'd, his Enemies flying away before his face every where: by this occasion I say the hidden things of Malachias, came to be known,
and his name celebrated among all the Clergy and People and Princes of that Province too. Then by his returning back to his own Province of Ʋlster, upon the commands of Celsus and Imarius: and there presently re∣pairing the old ruins of the famous Beann∣chuir; which till this time lay in rubbish for so many years ever since the destruction of it by the Danes, though not without a Ti∣tular Lay-Abbot (made still by Election of the Lay-Natives) who possess'd all the Re∣venues; nor at this very time neither with-such an Incumbent, and he both a very powerful man, and Uncle also to Malachias himself; but, on the return of Malachias from Mounster, suddenly chang'd, and as it were by a powerful touch of the very finger of God himself so mightily chang'd, that without delay he resign'd both the place and whole Estate belonging to it, yea and his own per∣son also to this holy Nephew's disposition. Then by his refusing the Estate, building nevertheless the place, planting it with some of his own blessed condisciples under Ima∣rius, and in obedience to Celsus and Imarius both, taking upon him now as well the true Office as the title of Abbot of Beannchuir; imi∣tating so in all respects the sanctity of his great Predecessor Congellus, though not e∣qualling his number of Monks. Then by
the glory of Miracles, beginning first to ap∣pear wrought by him, to the astonishment of the beholders, as he was at work with his own hands among the Carpenters that were building this Monastery. Then by the Election made of him in the thirtieth year of his Age for the See of Conner, and his reluctance for a long time; and the perseve∣rance of the other side, and his submission at last to the positive commands of Celsus and Imarius. Then by his entring upon his Epi∣scopal Function there, but withal, his finding presently, as St. Bernard expresly writes, He was not sent to men, but Beasts. That he had never before, not even amongst the most barbarous any where, observ'd the like. No where the People so stubborn as to Manners, so bestial as to Rites, so impious as to Faith, so barbarous as to Laws, so headstrong as to Discipline, so filthy as to Life; Christians by Name, but in very deed Pagans: not paying Tithes, not offering First-fruits, not joyning in lawful Marriages, not con∣fessing their sins. None among them found ei∣ther to receive or to enjoin penance. The Mini∣sters of the Altar few; and yet no work among the Laity for those same few: no opportunity given them to make use of their Ministery among a wicked generation of people: nor they endeavour∣ing it much, if not rather scarce any way at all: for in their Churches the voice neither of a Preacher nor Singer was heard.
Then by his Divine Sermons, Exhortati∣ons, Entreaties, Visits, Prayers, Tears, Mor∣tification, austerity of Life both in publick and private, together with the assistance of his 150 Monks that were never from his side; overcoming though▪ with great labour, yet in a little time all opposition, and working so wonderful either a conversion or Reforma∣tion (which you please to call it) of all that Diocess, that they are all now become a new people, i. e. the People of God now, who had been nothing less before: and every where now to be seen the repairing of Chur∣ches, adorning of Altars; and Choires re∣sounding now the praises of God: and wick∣ed Laws abolish'd, and Christian Institutions receiv'd in their place: the Churches throng∣ing from every side with people greedy of hearing the Word: and Sacraments frequent∣ed, and confession of sins made, and Concu∣binage yielding to lawful marriage. Then by his necessary migration to Moun∣ster, when the King of Ʋlster had on some pretence destroy'd the City of Conner: and by the reception he found there from his former Disciple King Cormac, who came to meet him now, and withal to entertain both him and his 150 Monks of Beannchuir, come along with him out of the North. Then by his building here in Mounster the Abbey of Ibrac (Mona∣sterium
Ibracense, St. Bernard calls it) King Cormac with Royal munificence abundantly furnishing Gold and Silver, and all other ne∣cessaries both to finish the building and main∣tain the Convent after. Then by his living there so exemplarily, mortifiedly, humbly among them, as he had elsewhere perpetually, even from the first day of his Episcopal Charge at Conner, done; taking his turn like an other Monk both in reading and serving in the Refectory at meals; yea in all the very meanest Offices of the Cloister; even that of Cook, to dress their meat in the Kitchin, not excepted. Then by the last sickness of Celsus (who had successively ordain'd him Deacon, Priest, and Bishop) and by the choice made by him of Malachias for his Successor; and his Let∣ters to all the Princes of the Kingdom, espe∣cially the two Mounster Kings, Cormack was one of them, his Kingdom South-Mounster, his name and surname Cormack mhac Cartha; his end by a soul murther committed on him by his own Son in Law. All which, and the revenge of this murder you may see in the former ection, page 183. to see after his death Malachias install'd in the Metropolitical See of Ardmagh. Which for the memory of their great Apo∣stle St. Patrick, who living govern'd it, and dying chose it for his place of rest, was held in such veneration, that
all the people of Ireland, Clergy and Laiety▪ Nobles, Bishops, Princes and Kings were subject in all obedience to the Metropolitan thereof. Then by the Vision about this time (but before any notice had of Ceallach's be∣ing sick) the Vision I say of a Tall, ancient, venerable Woman appearing to Malachias: and, upon his demand what she was, answer∣ing him, she was the Wife of Celsus; but withal delivering him a Pastoral Staff. Then by a real Messenger come from Celsus, as he was yet on his death bed alive, with his real Staff indeed, and by the real delivery thereof by him, as he was commanded by Celsus to this man of God. Then by the unanimous application of all the Kingdon, from all parts, made unto him to accept of this Election: and by his declining it nevertheless a very long time: alledging now his own unwor∣thiness; now his poverty and meanness, and inability to contend with the powerful Fa∣mily that hitherto well nigh two hundred years had possess'd that See; besides, that not even with the death of men their stub∣bornness could be overcome; moreover that to see blood spilt in his behalf, or by his occasion did not become him, or his calling; finally that he was already join'd to an other Spouse, the Church of Conner.
Then (after three years continual relu∣ctance) by the National Synods meeting on purpose, wherein the Pope's Legat Gillaspuic, alias Gilbertus, Bishop of Limmeric, and Mal∣chus Bishop of Lismore were the chief; and by their laying their commands upon him, adding threats withal to excommunicate him, if he resisted any longer; and his own re∣flecting at the same time on the Vision he had formerly had (in Mounster) of the grave Matron, &c. which frighted him above all other considerations: and by his yielding thereupon at last, but on this condition, that if, and whensoever by his means or Mini∣stery, God were pleased to restore peace to that Metropolitan See, it should be lawful for him to ordain an other in it, and return to his former Spouse the poor Bishoprick of Conner. Then by his not entring for the two next years either the Cathedral Church or City it self of Ardmagh, and not medling with the Revenue while the Usurper Mauritius lived; but officiating abroad, and discharging so his duty to the Diocess at large, without any bloodshed or quarrel. Then, upon the death of Mauritius, when the King and Nobles of the Province came to introduce him, and were to that purpose together with him as∣sembled on a Hill near the City, but without
any armed Troops, and intelligence was brought him, that hard by there lay in ambush a strong party of the malignant bloody Ge∣neration ready to fall on and kill them all, not even him nor the King himself excepted: Then, I say, by his withdrawing into a little Church hard by; putting himself to prayer, and presently obtaining of Heaven such a formidable judgment as ended all the danger and all the controversie too in a trice, ay all the hopes of that perverse Generation for ever after. Even on a sudden such a prodi∣gious tempest of Rain, Wind, Lightning, Thunder, which as to the place and persons of the Conspirators, turn'd the day to night, commix'd all the Elements, struck dead their Captain with three other of his principal Associats, hung them up on the boughs of Trees (for so they were found next morning half burnt and stinking) dispers'd all the rest, save only three more left groveling on the ground, half burnt likewise, but some life remaining in them still: and yet no harm done by it, nor feeling of it by the King or of his company though they stood close by that very place, and saw the storm falling on it. Then by his entring now into the Metro∣politan Church, taking the possession of it delivered him by the King, Princes, and other
Nobles of the Land: and after their depar∣ture exposing himself to the continual danger both day and night impending over his head from that bloody sacrilegious Progeny, that breath'd no more now any thing less than mor∣tal revenge in behalf of their Cousin Nigellus, that by usurpation and actual possession suc∣ceeded Mauritius, till he was now compell'd to fly, but retaining nevertheless in his own possession still, by conveying them away in his flight, the chief holy Ensigns of that See, the Staff of Jesus, and Gospel of St. Patrick; which the common people held in such vene∣ration, that the possessor of them, whoever he was, they esteemed the only true Bishop of Ardmagh. Then by his overcoming with the Arms of Faith, and a Christian resolu∣tion to suffer Martyrdom, the arms of Flesh and fury and rage of a great man of the foresaid impious Tribe, who came of purpose to Ardmagh to murder him. For though the King, before his departure, had made this very man not only to give Hostages, but take his corporal Oath, that he would invio∣lably be and keep at peace with Malachias; yet, without regard of either, he soon after in a consult of his own People determines the place, and time and manner to dispatch him: comes thereupon with his Assassines to Ardmagh: and after Evensong had been end∣ed
in the Church sends to Malachius, as desiring on pretence of peace and friendship to speak with him at his own Lodging. But the whole Clergy and People at Church entreat Mala∣achias, beseech him, conjure him with tears and lamentations not to go to his death. And yet Malachias, after some other words of comfort and edification, telling them it became not the Disciple of Christ to fear death, immediately departs, accompanied only with three reli∣gious men resolv'd to die with him: enters the House: sees the Assassins all together in the same Room with that great man their Leader; as they were prepared to assassinate him: and yet coming up a little nearer finds them all every one strangely seized as with some panick fear appalled, astonish'd, mute, as if they had been Planet-struck, as if they were unable to lift up an armed hand against him or any other. Nay their very Chief∣tain, instead of giving them the word, sub∣mitting himself in all humility and obedience: and promising to continue both (as he did sincerely) until his death. Then by the submission likewise of Nigel∣lus, the Pseudo-Bishop, and his yielding up to Malachias the sacred Ensigns, which he had hitherto so wrongfully detain'd; but now together with them delivering also himself in all humility to the disposal of Malachias.
Then by the sudden ceasing of a pestilential Disease at Ardmagh, so soon as Malachias went about the Town in Procession, and pray'd God that in his mercy he would com∣mand his exterminating Angel of Justice to put up his bloody Fauchion and spare the people thence forward. Then by the dreadful Judgments fallen upon the two remaining chiefest, boldest and most blasphemously vi∣rulent detractors of his Name, a Man and Woman of the accursed Race: the man's tongue rotting in his mouth, spitting out Worms almost continually for seven days, and together with them at last his miserable Soul: the Woman turned frantick, crying out fre∣quently that she was a strangling by Mala∣chias, and in that wretched condition yielding up her ghost. Finally, by the universal ter∣ror fallen upon all his Enemies, considering now at last so many Wonders wrought in his behalf; and therefore crying one to an other now, as the Canaanites did of old con∣cerning Israel, Let us fly from the Face of Malachias, for God fighteth for him. Tho too late indeed for that adulterous generation of Vipers, who by this time were all of them every one perish'd: without leaving either Heir or other memory behind them, save only that of their having continued the sacrilegious possession, violation, pollution, destruction of
the Sanctuary of God well nigh 200 years. And such indeed were the means, and such the degrees and order of them, by which the Almighty himself fitted, prepared, carried on, placed at last his beloved Malachias in that full power, which he had from the be∣ginning design'd for him; undoubtedly of purpose to repair those lamentable ruins, re∣form those horible corruptions, enlighten that universal darkness, and breath new life again into the whole Body of the Irish Church, that really for so many Ages before did seem, at least for the greater part of it, utterly dead. But that which appears to me most admi∣rable in this holy man is, that having within three years of his acceptation of the Metro∣political charge of Ardmagh, and but a twelve month after his instalment in the See or the Cathedral it self, humbled, nay brought to nothing all the proud Usurpers, restored the Church, extinguish'd Barbarism, reform d every where throughout the Diocess all de∣grees of People by Christian Disciplin: seeing now all in peace, and remembring his own former purpose, he ordain'd another, by name Gilla-Josa, alias Gelasius, in his own stead Bishop of Ardmagh; gave him possession, and notwithstanding the reluctance of others, without further delay retired to his former Spouse the poor subordinat Church of Con∣ner.
That because he now understood this Bi∣shoprick of Conner had, but in later times, an other Bishoprick, I mean that of Down, united to it; and because himself upon his transla∣tion to Ardmagh had ordained a Bishop in Conner: he would neither intrude upon him, nor yet suffer any longer that Union made by covetousness to continue; but restoring the ancient division, assum'd to himself, i. e. to his own peculiar charge, the poorer and least reform'd of the two the Bishoprick of Down. That here again calling to his assi∣stance and erecting a new Convent of Regu∣lars, he devoted himself among them to his former course of Life, in all poverty and hu∣mility, and rigours of cenobial Discipline, assiduity of Prayer and raptures of Contem∣plation, spending all the time he could spare from his Pastoral charge. What follows next is to let you know, that he was not suffered long the enjoyment of himself in those ascetick exercises. That ere long there was an universal conflux of all sorts of people to him, even from the highest to the very lowest of the Land. That therefore now he finds it necessary, like the Husbandmen in the Gospel, to go forth and sow his seed: and now he disposes with all Authority of all kind of Church affairs: and no man questions him, by what power he did
so: all being persuaded by the signs and pro∣digies wrought by him every where, that as he had the power, so he had the Spirit of God to direct all his actions. That never∣theless himself after some time thought it itting to take a journey to Rome and consult the See Apostolick, as Paul did the Apostles at Hierusalem, after his three years preaching of Christ in Arabia. Besides he considered that the See of Ardmagh had never at any time had the Metropolitical Ornament, which they call Pallium; a word that in the Eccle∣siastical use of it imports the plenitude of ho∣nour, says Bernard; but not the plenitude of power, as they speak at Rome in this Age. Moreover, that his late Predecessor in the Metropolitan Church, I mean Celsus, had by his own authority erected another Metropo∣litical See else where in Ireland, though with dependence and subjection still to the See of Ardmagh as the only Primatial or Patriarchi∣cal See of the Kingdom. That to obtain from the See Apostolick of Rome, as well the honour of the Pall for each of those two Irish Metropolitan Sees, as the confirmation of what Celsus had done in erecting the later of them, was another chief motive of his undertaking such a Journey. That having pass'd through Scotland and England, rested a few days with St. Bernard at Claravallis in
France, arriv'd at Rome, continued there for a month visiting the holy places, and confer∣ring much from time to time with his Holi∣ness, who was very inquisitive of all the concerns of Ireland, the nature of the peo∣ple, &c. and especially what Wonders God had lately done by his Ministery there: he obtain'd indeed the confirmation of that new Metropolitical See erected by Celsus; but was put off the present grant of those Palls desired by him. That the Pope told him, that by reason Gillaspuic (or Gilbertus) being now grown old and infirm, had signified so much, and his desire to he cased of the Legatin care, it was necessary he should undertake it, and in that quality return back and hold a gene∣ral Synod of the whole Nation. Which when he had done, and by general consent and fitting messengers desired the Pallia, they should be granted. And therefore told him also in plain terms, he could by no means yield to his first and most earnest petition of all, though by so many tears solicited by him, viz. that it might be lawful for him to retire pre∣sently to Claravallis, and live and die there with Bernard. That with this answer he is now dismiss'd by the Pope, but as with all delegable power, so with all imaginable kind∣ness and respect, kissing him and putting his own Mitre on his head, his own stole about
his neck, and his own maniple on his arm: which Malachias ever after used in officiating at the Altar. That having return'd by Cla∣ravallis, left there four of his own disciples to be educated in the Monastic Life by Saint Bernard: from thence proceeded on in his Journey, and in his way through Scotland, at the instance of the good King David, by praying over the young Prince Robert his Son and Heir, recovered him instantly from the jaws of death; for he was quite given over by the Physitians: landed soon after at his beloved Beannchuir in the North of Ireland: he put himself immediately on the work of a true Legat indeed. And this for many years, without any intermission, going about all the Provinces, holding frequent Synods, in all the quarters of the Land; restoring vigour to the old Canons of the Church: adding new ones that were of use: reforming all the corruptions, both new and old: preaching e∣very where like an other Helias, or some Angel of Heaven come down on Earth. No Age, no Sex, no condition, no profession could abscond from his Beams, or hinder the operation of them. Whatever Decrees he made, whatever Canons he publish'd were pre∣sently accepted, submitted unto, obey'd, as Oracles without any contradiction at all. Nor had any person, Man or Woman, Prince or
Prelat, or Peasant, or Monarch, the daring heart to resist him in any thing: because they daily saw before their eyes the signs wrought by him. You may read cap. 5. 8. 9. of his Life, written by St. Bernard, a good many of them; though few in respect of those he passes over, as the same holy Author St. Ber∣nard says. And among them you may find the expulsion of Devils, and healing all Dis∣eases, and reviving the Dead to Life, and the striking also of some impious wicked Blas∣phemers with an exemplary death to terrifie others. And all these miraculous works above Nature, done by the God of Nature, at the sole invocation of his Name by Malachias, without any other application, without any charm used by him, than that sometimes of lifting up his eyes to Heaven or a short Prayer, sometimes of a longer continued with fasting and weeping on God twenty four hours to∣gether. Unless peradventure his laying his hand on a desperate man, brought to him bound in cords, by reason of a furious frenzy that possess'd him: or his touching with his finger the tongue of a Young Girl that was mute: or his blessing a Cup of Drink, and sending it to a Woman so long past her Rec∣koning, that all her Neighbours wondred she was not dead: or his sprinkling of water, hallowed by himself, upon a wicked Noble∣man
that lay long Bedrid: or his invoking the name of God on three Apples, and send∣ing them to a Lady in the last agonies of death: be reputed a Diabolical Charm. And yet after all I am of Bernard's opinion, that the first and greatest Miracle wrought by Malachias was himself. From the first day of his conversion to the last of his Life, sine proprio vixit, he lived without property in any kind of thing. Even when he was Bishop he had neither man-servant nor maid-ser∣vant, nor Town, nor Village, nor Land nor one farthing either of Ecclesiastical or Tem∣poral Revenue, no not for allowance to his Episcopal Table. He had not so much as a House of his own. He almost incessantly went about the Parishes preaching the Gospel, and living on the Gospel as our Lord had shew'd him the Example: save only that for most part he preach'd it without putting his Auditory to the charge of entertaining him; but maintain'd himself, and his Religious Train, by the labour of his own hands and theirs. When he found it necessary to take a little rest, he took it in some of the holy places founded by himself in all Countreys of the Kingdom. (For it was he that was the great Restorer of the Monastick Life and Cloi∣sters in Ireland: where, for so many Ages be∣fore, i. e. ever since the Universal desolation
by the Danes, the people generally, though they had heard of the name, yet they never saw any such thing as a Monk, till he begun. A diebus antiquis Monachi quidem nomen audierunt, mona∣chum non viderunt: says Malachias himself. Vit. cap. xi. And wheresoever he rested, how shor tor how long soever his abode was, he conform'd to all their observances, their Habit, their Table, their Diet. Insomuch, that as to the exte∣riour man, he could not be discovered from the meanest Brother of the House. Lastly, in his going about the Parishes or Countreys either to preach or to visit, he never made use of Horse, or Coach or Waggon, he went a foot constantly, as likewise did all his Train, though now both Bishop and Legat. And was not all this, trow you, to be a true Heir indeed, a true Successor to the Apostles? or was it not in Malachias, to be himself the first and last and greatest of his Miracles? O virum Apostolicum, quem tot & talia nobilitant signa Apostolatus sui! Quid ergo mirum, si mira operatus est sic mirabilis ipso! Imo verò non ipse, sed Deus in ipso. Alioquin tu es Deus (inquit) qui facis mirabilia, says Bernard, exclaiming here with admiration of this wonderful man. However, this Life he led for about a dozen years, perpetually going about all the Pro∣vinces, reforming all the abuses, doing good to all mortals, and working those other pro∣digious
signs every where that I have touch'd upon before. At last understanding that Innocent II. was dead: and after him within sixteen months more Celestin II. and Luoius the second too: and that Eugenius III. a Disciple of Saint Bernards, being chosen to succeed them, was come so near as France: he calls a National Synod, holds it, dispatches in the three first days of it what was thought expedient as to Reformation: on the fourth proposes that of sending to the See Apostolick for the Archie∣piscopal Ensigns called Pallia: offers himself to be the Solicitor of it in person: and tho with great difficulty to part with him at all for any time, yet obtains their consent, the rather that the Pope was so near. And now he takes his Journey again through Scotland: where being receiv▪d with all veneration by King David, he founds the last of his Mona∣steries, at a place call'd (stagnum viride) the Green Lake; haviug to that purpose brought with him out of Ireland a sufficient number of Cistercian Monks. And then he goes forward the second time to Claravallis in France; taking that in his way to Rome, whi∣ther the Pope before his arrival on that side of the Sea was returned. And finally now, and from hence, i. e. from Claravallis, but after a few days of sickness, and by a death
answerable in all respects to his life, he is call'd to glory on that very day which himself had both desired and foretold, the day of the Commemoration of all faithful souls depart∣ed; which, as I have noted before, was in the Year of Christ 1148. More particulars, either of his life, or death, or miracles, whoever desires may find them at large in the funeral Sermon preach'd, and Life also most exactly and divinely written of him even by St. Bernard himself. Who, be∣sides many other Abbots, and the whole Ci∣stercian Convent of Claravallis, was present with him at his death; as they all ministred to him all along in his sickness. And it is even this very Bernard, that with his own Eyes beheld the great Miracle which he tells wrought on a Paralitick by touching the hand of Malachias, while after his death he was yet expos'd in publick before Burial. But it is not for the sake of this or any other Miracle wrought by him, that I have dilated so much upon him; but to shew the state of the Church of Ireland in those days out of so good an Author as St. Bernard is. For in that Life of Malachias written by him (besides many other points relating directly to the most healthful use of Confession, salu∣berrimum usum confessionis are Bernards own words, and the Sacrament of extream Uncti∣on,
and the real presence of Christ in the con∣secrated Host, and Prayers for the Dead: all which I pass over as not to the purpose of this Historical Discourse:) it is very observable, That so blessed a Man as Ceallach was, even by the character of a Saint (Sanctus Celsus) given him by Colganus, and so learned withal, as Sir James Ware represents him to have been, did without consulting the See Aposto∣lick of Rome, and did I say by his own au∣thority alone as Primat of Ardmagh, erect a∣nother Metropolitical See in Ireland. That, not even at any time from the beginning, the Irish Church, or Metropolitans thereof, until this time of Malachias either had, or (for ought we know) ever desired the Pallium; but without it exercis'd all plenitude of Ar∣chiepiscopal and Primatial jurisdiction all over Ireland. Besides we may plainly see by whose solicitation at first the Court of Rome was moved in the concern of Palls of Ireland. And that Cardinal John Papiron's bringing them to Ireland, about four years after the death of Malachias, was undoubtedly an effect of those two Journeys made by him out of Ireland to obtain them. Albeit we know not certainly whether it was Malachias that de∣sired so many as were brought by Papiron. Or whether, after his death others did sug∣gest for the reasonableness and expediency
of so many, that in Ireland were chiefly four Partiions, Governments or Provincial King∣doms, of very different natures, manners, in∣terests, Feuds, and Kings too, that would not yield any of them to the other willingly: and by consequence would not be govern'd, not even in Ecclesiastical affairs, but by some of their own, without dependance on any other, except only the Prelat of that See which from the beginning of Christianity had prescribed some right over them all. But enough on this Subject relating to Malachias, the former of those two extraor∣dinary Saints rais'd by God in the decrepit Age of the Irish Monarchy. The later of them was a Leinster man of Noble Descent: his Irish name and sirname Laurace O Tuathil (in English, Laurence Tool:) his Father Muirchiortach O Tuathil, Lord of Imaile and peradventure some other small adjoyning Tracts in the County of Wick∣loe: his Mother, Inghin J. Bhrian, i. e. one of O Brian's Daughters: and he the youngest of all their Children. But for the name of Laurence (a name so unusual in that Countrey then) 'twas given him on this oc∣casion. Being born, his Father sent him to be Christened at Kildare by Donachadh Lord of that Countrey, of purpose to let him know by this Gossipred he was reconciled to him:
for before they had been at some distance: and therefore those that carried the Child were commanded by the Father to Christen him Conchabhar; this being that Nobleman's sur∣name who was to be Godfather. But a per∣son, reputed in that Countrey then, such an other as Merlin had been of old among the Brittans, meeting them in the High-way, charg'd them to call him Laurence: assuring them he would himself that night excuse them to their Lord; and then adding pro∣phetically in Irish Verse; This Child shall be great on Earth and glorious in Heaven: he shall command over great multitudes both of rich and poor, and Laurence shall be his name. When he was but ten years old, his Father delivered him an Hostage to Diarmuid the King of Lein∣ster. In which condition, notwithstanding the innocency of his Age he suffer'd incre∣dible miseries, even to extream want of Rai∣ment and Food, in a desert place among barbarous people, where he had been for two years confined. At the expiration of which, being return'd back in exchange of other Prisoners, though not delivered to the Father himself, but to the Bishop of Gleann-da-Logh: and his Father coming on the twelfth day, not only to see him, but to desire the Bishop to learn of God by Lot which of his children he should dedicate to an Ecclesiastick Life;
and he taking this opportunity and telling his Father, That with his leave he himself would be that Child: the Father surpriz'd with joy, takes him presently by the right hand; and offers him up perpetually to God in that holy place dedicated to St. Keuin, both Cathedral Church and Abbey, the one go∣vern'd by a Bishop, the other by an Abbot. Where Laurence proves in a little time so singular a proficient in all Virtue, that the Abbot dying, the unanimous consent both of the Monks and Nobles of the Countrey Vo∣ted him Abbot, and forc'd him to accept of it in the 25th year of his Age. And now it begun to appear more emi∣nently what spirit he was of. For the more he was honour'd, the more he abased him∣self, the stricter guard he kept on all his senses, and the more intent he was upon his holy ascetick Exercises. Above all, that Vir∣tue which is the bond of perfection; that Vir∣tue which shall never be evacuated, but after Faith and Hope are ended shall remain; that Virtue which, by relieving the afflictions of other mortals, makes the Reliever a God to them, as Pliny speaks in his Panegyrick to Trajan; Charity, I mean, did at this time shew what power she had over the Soul of Laurence. He was no sooner made Abbot, than a general Famine oppressing all that
Countrey four years continually, he no less continually employ'd himself in relieving all that were in want, especially the poorer sort, with corn and cattel, and all the Revenues of his Abbey: Revenues that were very great; yea far surpassing those of the Bishop∣rick. Nor must we admire they should be so. It was one of the most famous ancient Mona∣steries of the Kingdom, founded at first by St. Keuin (as we call him, but the Irish Ceaghin, the Latins Coenginus) a person though illu∣strious for his Royal extraction, yet much more celebrated as well for the admirable austerity of his Life, as for his manifold pro∣digious Miracles; which made him after his death be assumed Patron both of the Town, Abbey, Cathedral Church and whole Diocess of Gleann-da-Loch, where he lived and died. Besides none but Noblemen's children were elected Abbots: and the Noblemen them∣selves of the whole Diocess had by ancient custom their Voices in the election of them as well as the Monks. However the large Revenues of the Abbey as they came short of the necessities of the poor in that long and general Famine: so they did of the charity of Laurence; as may be well concluded out of what follows hereafter. Much about the time this Famine had ended; the Bishop of Gleann-da-Loch dying,
he was chosen to succeed. But notwithstand∣ing all the importunity of the Electors, he declined it, though pretending only his un-Canonical Age. Yet so he could not soon after the Archbishoprick of Dublin. For Gregory the First Archbishop of this See being dead, Laurence by the unanimous consent of the Clergy and People of Dub∣lin, says Waraeus, was elected Commentar. de Praesul. Hiber. Archbishop: and, being at last by continual importuni∣ties drawn to yield, was consecrated at Dub∣lin by Gelasius Primat of Ardmagh and other Bishops, Anno 1162. just fourteen years after the death of Malachias in France. What more Waraeus thought fit to record of him is, That presently after consecration he changed the secular Canons of his Cathedral Church into Regular of the Order of Aroasia, whose habit and rule of Life himself also took upon him now. That about eleven years after he built the Choire and Steeple with an other addi∣tion of three new Chappels to Trinity Church in that City. That in the Year 1179. he went to the General Council held then at Rome under Alexander III. That according to the Author of his Life, he was there made Legat of Ireland by that Pope: soon after return'd back, and exercis'd his Legatin Au∣thority in Ireland. That Ge∣rald L. 2. expugn. Hib. c. 23. Barry, commonly call'd
Cambrensis, seems to intimate, he never had been permitted to return to Ireland; (sed ob privilegia aliqua zelo suae Gentis impetrata) but for some priviledges obtain'd from the Pope in that Council for his Countrey, pre∣judicial to the Royal power of Henry II. was detained a long time partly in England, partly in France; until at last falling sick in his Jour∣ney, he died at Auge in Normandy the 14th of Novemb. 1180. or as others have it 1181. Finally, that in the Year 1225. he was ca∣nonized by Pope Honorius III. and his Re∣licks translated to Trinity Church in Dublin. Which being the brief account given by Wa∣raeus of this great Servant of God; he leaves us for the rest, that is, for the Virtues and Wonders of his Life to the Author of it, pub∣lished by Surius. Out of this nameless Author chiefly, though for some part also out of the Bull of his ca∣nonization, I have selected these few particu∣lars following, that give us a Scheme of the remainder of his Life after he was made Bi∣shop. In which remainder, I must confess I know not what to admire least. I am sure there is enough that shew 1 Cor. 9. 26. him to have run his Race not as uncertainly; to have fought not as one that beateth the air; but like an other Paul, to have chastised his Body, and brought it
to subjection, lest preaching to others he should himself be a Reprobat. E∣nough that evince him to Gal. ver. 24. have crucified his flesh with all its vices and all its concupiscences. Enough that prove him to have truly imi∣tated the good Shepherd of Joan. X. 1. the Gospel, by employing all his care, and Power, and Wealth, and Zeal, and Life also, to the very last, for preservation of the Sheep committed to his keeping. In a word, enough that demonstrate him to have been a familiar of Heaven while he was yet on Earth, and a most stupendious Saint of God both in his life and death, and after his death. He was no sooner outwardly clad at his consecration with the glory of an Archbi∣shops Vesture and the Pontifical habiliments, then he covered himself inwardly next his skin with the severity of a rough cilicium (a course Haircloth) reaching down from his neck to his heels, every-where sowed close to his Limbs, and never put off, never wash∣ed, never changd, never open'd while the pieces of it could hold together; only one certain piece that was turn'd aside thrice a day while he received on his bare flesh the smarting strokes of a knotty disciplin. For so many times at least in twenty four hours,
he was constantly disciplin'd (as they call it) by the hands of a familiar Friend, whom he trusted, after he had first enjoin'd him to se∣crecy all his life. He as soon begun his abstinence from all sorts of flesh throughout the whole Year; which he continued evermore to his death. On Fridays, when he ate, he ate only bread and water: for very often he took neither: and when he did, he commonly temper'd his bread with lye and ashes. In the forty days of Lent he tasted nothing at all but thrice a week the same hard fare of bread and water, and now and then a few Herbs. And all that Quadragesimal season, at the return of it every year, he retired into a most horrid, though holy, Wilderness, Saint Kevin's Rock three miles from Gleann-da loch. A Rock environ'd on every side with dark Woods, besides a deep Lake of one side, enclosing its perpendicular precipice of sixty Cubits high, whence there is not so much as any looking down without horror; and on the other side an other precipice too, though but of thirty Cubits in heighth, and by a Ladder ascendable. Within it is a little Plain, Ver∣dure, Trees, and a Spring. In that side of it, which hangs over the Lake; there is a hollow made by St. Keuin's own hands (for so the Tradition of that Countrey says) that
serv'd him both for an Oratory to pray in, and repository when he would sleep. How∣ever in this hollow and on this Rock did Laurence all alone yearly spend those 40 days and 40 nights of Lent in spiritual Exercises conversing only with God: seeing no crea∣ture but only thrice a weck; and then only his own Nephew Thomas Abbot of Gleann∣da-loch, who alone brought him a meals meat of bread each time he came; for the Rock of it self afforded water, as we have seen al∣ready. By this Nephew also he both re∣ceiv'd the complaints or whatever affairs of the Diocess that needed his determination. And by him he answer'd all, unless the mat∣ter was so extraordinary that it requir'd his own presence out of hand: for then he ap∣pear'd; yet withall retiring presently when he had done, and so continuing his former station and exercises till Easter. As for the rest of the Year when he had any vacation from the publick charge of his own Diocess, or others under him as Metropolitan, he lived with his Chanons in the same CloisterAlbertus Myrae∣us in his Fasti Belg. & Eurgund. says this lister was calld the Mo∣nastery of St. Pa∣trick. built by himself, and annex'd to his Cathedral Church: ate as they did, and in the same Refectory and time with them: kept silence in the
same places and hours they did: went to the same Choire with them at midnight, and sung Mattins as they did there; With this only difference, that after all was over, and the Canons return'd to repose in their Cham∣bers, he singing to himself the whole Psalter of David, always continued alone in the Church at his private Devotions till break of day: sometime standing, sometime kneeling; but in either posture before the holy Rood, and not seldom breaking out into Raptures and Divine Colloquies with him that was crucifi∣ed upon it, our Lord and Saviour Christ. For so it was observed very often by some of the Canons, that unknown to him remained like∣wise in private prayer for some time after the Community was gone. But so soon as it was clear day, he went constantly forth to the Church-yard; where walking a good while▪ he sung to God the commendation of all faithful Souls departed. And such indeed were the divine Exer∣cises of Laurence, 1st, in his Anachoretical Solitude in the Rock of St. Keuin. 2dly, in his ordinary retirement to his own Aroasian Cloister of Dublin: in both as a private man, but familiar of God, cultivating his own Soul, and soaring to Heaven with many wings like a Cherub; especially those of prayer and con∣templation, that seem'd to suspend him al∣ready far above all sublunary things.
But as a Bishop, the Virtues peculiarly be∣longing to the discharge of his Pastoral Duty could not be so easily conceal'd. They were a great many of them too illustrious and con∣spicuous to the eyes of all men. As a Bishop he observ'd in a very excellent manner the Rule of the Apostle both to rich and poor. And first towards the Rich. For though he continued still so abstemious himself, though perpetually so severe a punisher of his own body with fasting and other mortifications too; yet as he was notwithstanding of a most comely personage and noble presence, so his reception of all persons of Quality and Gentle∣men that came to his Episcopal Table was answerably graceful, liberal, splendid in all respects according to their degrees: variety of the best dishes, and choice withal of the most delicate Wines. Besides he sat down himself sometimes to entertain them; though feeding but very little, and that on some grosser Dish; or rather indeed commonly seeming only to feed, that nothing singular might appear in him. Which was the reason too, that although in very deed his drink at these entertainments was no other in sub∣stance than water; yet his Cupbearer had or∣ders to dash it lightly with red, that he might seem to drink Wine. Secondly towards the poor. He never missed a day without seeing
now Threescore, now Forty, and never less than Thirty of them fed in his own pre∣sence; Besides far greater numbers of them maintain'd out of his Revenue constantly for a long time, as we shall presently see. As a Bishop he preach'd Repentance conti∣nually to the people of that opulent City, who were prodigiously immers'd in drunken∣ness, lust, contentions, rapin, blood-shed, and all kind of wickedness. Yea, and as a Prophet too he cead not with Tears to warn 'em of their general destruction at hand, if they did not speedily appease Heaven with unseignd Repentance. As a Bishop, when this general calamity like the breaking in of the Sea came upon them suddenly in one day, in one hour; when the City was taken and sack'd and burn'd by Diarmuid na Ngall their incens'd King and his foreign Auxiliaries; when their strts were all covered with the bodies of the slaughter'd Citizens, and the Gutters ran with blood; when the very Clergy were plunder'd and Churches riled of all that was precious in them: as a good Bishop, I say, it was that Laurence at this time, first beholding with floods of Tears like an other Jeremy the slaughter of his people before his eyes; then taking courage like the good Pastor in the Gospel, thrnst himself upon the bloody swords of the Conquerors, hold∣ing
their Arms, praying their mercy, entreat∣ing them for some, snatching others from their fury to Christian burial who had their Souls yet panting in their Bodies: and when no more could be done by him in any other kind, giving himself wholly now to that ge∣nerous imitation of Tobias. As a Bishop it was that although with great hazard still unto himself, yet he used that Episcopal freedom with the King and his insulting Commanders, that the Clergy were at last permitted their own Habitati∣ons, and the Churches restor'd their Books and Ornaments. As a Bishop, he employ'd in the next place all his compassion and all his Revenue (I mean what was left thereof unseized by the Military men, or undestroy'd by fire) yea and all whatever he could pro∣cure from others to relieve the few Survivors of the slaughter'd Citizens. His very Bowels did yearn over them; especially those whom he had so lately seen to flourish in all kind of Earthly happiness; and now saw without House to lie in, without Cloaths to cover their nakedness, without meat or drink to preserve life, without other comfort than that of miserable Captives under a most deadly Foe. As a Bishop, when an other general Famin had in his days lien heavy on all the Land,
he not only gave daily sustenance for three whole years to five hundred persons, reduced before to the worst of conditions, plain star∣ving; but in several parts of his Diocess provided meat, and drink and cloaths, and all other necessaries for three hundred more. And in the same cruel season of scarcity it was that, Mothers reduced to extream want, laying their chrisom Babes in the night at his door, and in the day also where ever they saw he was to pass, he took care of them all, providing Nurses from them; and, though two hundred in number at one time, sent them to his own Stewards and Bayliss to be kept on his own Land; and, when they were come to years of discretion and some abilities of Body, recommended them about all the Province with the badg of a wooden Cross in their hands. As a Bishop, and a Legat too says the Au∣thor of his Life, he conniv'd at no disorder in the Clergy, no vice, no sin, and least of all at the scandalous one of Incontinency whether in Priest, Deacon, or sub-Deacon. Which fleshly Vice he did so much abominate, especially in them, and found it so necessary to be proceeded against with vigour: that even so great a number as a hundred and forty Priests convict thereof he sent together at one time for Penance and Absolution to Rome; though
he might otherwise have given them both at home by his own Authority. As a Bishop, yea as a Father of his Coun∣trey in general, he spent the little remainder as well of his Revenue as of his health and Life in crossing the Seas now again from Ire∣land to England, from England to France, in both Countreys, following and solliciting peace from Henry II. to ease the common ca∣lamities of his Nation at this time. And now the dissolution of his earthly Ta∣bernacle being at hand, how hecoming a most Christian Bishop, and a most holy Apo∣stolical Legat indeed, not only his very last ex∣emplary Ecclesiastical preparation for it, but his very last answer to the Abbot of Auge on that occasion was? For in his way through France to Normandy, having fallen sick of a Feaver at Ab∣bevil Cambreu∣sis. Vit. apud Sur.: gone forward ne∣vertheless to Auge on the borders of Normandy: when at a distance he saw the Church of our Lady there, prophe∣tically foretold his own departure in that place: then enter'd that Church: pray'd in it a little while: thence gone to his Lodging and Bed: sent for Osbert the religious Abbot of that Monastery: confess'd his sins to him, and receiv'd the holy Viaticum from him: then for prosecuting his business to Henry II.
dispatch'd his Chaplain David, together with his own Nephew, to that King: on their return the fourth day with the joyful news of their success (i. e. of the Peace granted by the same Henry II. to Roderick the Irish King) seem'd transported with it for the sake of his Countrey, how low soever he knew himself brought by his sickness: upon the third day following desired of the said Abbot and his whole Monastery to be as a Member incorporated among them: and this accordingly done, then presently desired further and (pursuant to his desire) in all their pre∣sence receiv'd the last Sacrament, which they call Extreme Ʋnction: having I say pass'd through all these steps, and very last Ecclesia∣stical preparatories for death: when the good Abbot Osbertus, considering him an Archbi∣shop, had according to custom, minded him of making his last Will and Testament: his Answer was in thse few words [Novit Do∣minus mihi ne nummum quidem sub sole relictum esse] The Lord knows that I have not a penny left me under the Sun. Besides, how like the great Bishop of our Souls weeping over Hierusalem, this Bishop of Ireland remembring and lamenting (once more for all) the condition of his own Coun∣trey, brake forth into these Expressions in his own mother Language? Ah foolish and sot∣tish
People! what will you do now? who will bring you back from your strayings? who will apply Balm to your wounds? who will cure you, or take care of you at all? And this Lamenta∣tion which Nature express'd from him, ended, how then at last like an other Austin, he be∣haved himself in the last moments of his Life. For then converting himself wholly and for himself only to God, he ceas'd not with tears, and sighs, and sobs too, repeating conti∣nually while he could open his lips, that Verse of the Psalmist, Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me, because my soul confideth in thee: until about midnight on the 13th of Novem∣ber, Anno 1181. he breath'd out his last to his Redeemer. Now that such a life, and such a death of a man so virtuous all along from his very Youth, whether he be considered either as a Clerk, or Monk, or Abbot of Gleann-da-Loch, or as Archbishop of Dublin, and Chanon of the Aroasian Institute, or as Legat of Ireland, or as a prosperous or afflicted man, should be attested as pleasing to God by prodigious Mi∣racles both in his life and after his death, seems nothing strange to me. The Author of his Life recounts a good many of them wrought in the time of his Life. And the Bull of his canonization (dated at Reate III. Ides Decemb. by Honorius III. Ninth year of
his Pontificat, which was of Christ 1225.) gives a brief sum of all (that had been wrought either in his Life or after his death) by telling us, That besides the Dumb, and Lame, and Lepers, and many others afflicted with sundry other maladies, cur'd of all their evils at the sole invocation of God by him, or in his name, and at his Tomb by others: he was, by the power of God, the wonderful raiser e'en from death to life of seven persons in particular, and among 'em of one who had been full three days dead. Nor can I well deny that this Bull ought to have by much the more credit with many who are not in other matters over-credulous, and ought so to have for these reasons: 1. Because it was pro∣cured and the whole ceremony and process of this canonization sollicited, not only by the Letters of the Archbishop and Chapter of Roan, and of the Abbot and Convent of the foresaid Auge, where the body then rested within the Diocess of Roan, but by those also of many other Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots and religious men: all attesting the sanctity of his Life and glory of Miracles continually wrought after his death at his Tomb. 2. Be∣cause the Inquisition was made partly in France by the Archbishop, Dean and Trea∣surer of Roan, and for the rest in Ireland by the Bishop of Kildare and Prior of Trinity
Church in Dublin. 3. Because within 45 years after his death all was finish'd, and this very Bull issued, and his Festivity with an Octave kept in the most solemn manner could be, both at Auge in France, and at Dublin and elsewhere in Ireland, while the people were yet alive, nay by a world of those very people of all degrees that knew and conversed with him familiarly, and yet invoked him now most devoutly and religiously as Coheir of Christ in glory, and their tutelary Patron un∣der Christ with God the Father. The fifth and last Point is, That notwith∣standing all the sanctity and merits either of those two extraordinary Wonder-working Saints of God, Malachy and Laurence, or of any other holy men whatsoever, that in se∣cret mourned for the iniquities of their People; that cried to God incessantly to spare them; and that in the Language of Ezechiel interpos'd them∣selves Ezech. XXII. 30. a hedg between the wrath of Heaven and their Land, by fasting and praying, and afflicting their own Bodies for the sins of others, yet all would not do. It was now come to that pass with the People of Ireland in general, which had been with the People of Judaea, when God spake to Hie∣remy the Prophet, (c. XV. v. 1.) first as∣suring him, that although Samuel and Moses
stood before his face to intercede for them, yet he would not listen to their prayer; because his soul was against that People: and then command∣ing him to pronounce ejection from before his face, excrmination and flitting out of their Land against them. It was come to that very pass with the Irish now, in which it had been again with the same stubborn stiffnecked Israe∣lites, when he declar'd to the Prophet Eze∣chiel and sware unto him even by his own Life, That if those very three (most perfect servants of his in their generation) Moses, Daniel and Job lived among them: yet by their righteousness they should only save them∣selves; not any other, no not so much as ei∣ther Son or Daughter. For such indeed was the deplorable case of the ancient Milesians of Ireland at this time, the very last period of their Monarchy. And such it was notwith∣standing so many just men, as in particular the Bishops Malchus, and Gilbertus, and Celsus, and Christianus and Gelasius, and Malachi and Laurence, that lived among them and inter∣ceded for them continually to God. Yea, such it was notwithstanding all the Refor∣mation so lately wrought by any of these holy men, among either Ecclesiasticks or Laics any where in the Nation, and all the Councils held, and all the Monasteries built, and Schools erected, and Churches endowed, and what∣ever
else at this time was practis'd to restore both civility and piety to some degree of the ancient Lustre. Nothing at all could any longer slow the execution of the final doom pronounced by the Watcher and holy one of Heaven against the lofty proud Milesian Tree. Nor must we wonder at it, if we reflect upon what is discours'd at large in the former Se∣ction. The Kings, and Princes, and Nobles, and Men at Arms of Ireland, either all this while were not at all themselves reformed: or certainly, and that most frequently too, were again relapsed into their old accursed Feuds, their concussions, violences, rapin, op∣pression, revenge, their spilling of one ano∣thers blood to death: and this even all along, from time to time, until the Executioners of their final Sentence came to part them, and make them for ever slaves on every side to a forein People. What other sins of the Irish Nation might (according to the judgment of man) have incensed God, after so long forbearance, to pour upon 'em so dreadful a judgment, I cannot say. And the reason is, because I find no specification of any other in those Hi∣stories of theirs which I have read. Yet, I will not pass over in silence, what I find to this purpose in Girald of Wales (I mean Cambrensis.) This Author says, that upon
the taking of Dublin, and harrasing of Meath by Diarmuid na-Ngall King of Leinster and his forein Auxiliaries: the Clergy of Ireland as∣sembled in a National Synod at Ardmach, having debated the causes of this Invasion: and after full debate, resolved first in general, that the sins of their Nation had brought this calamity on them: Secondly, in particu∣lar, That their evil custom of buying Christian English Youths, as well from Merchants as Pirats, and making them slaves for ever, had been a special Cause of it: Thirdly, That God was just in subjecting their People to the same condition of slavery under that very Nation which they had so unchristianly used: it was therefore in the last place unanimously decreed, That immediately all English slaves wheresoever throughout the whole Kingdom should be manumised, and set at full Liber∣ty. So says Cambrensis, in his First Book de Expug. Hibern. c. 28. Where he further says, That the People of England, i. e. the Saxons, while their Kingdom flourish'd before the Norman Conquest, had this vitious custom among them generally, That rather than suf∣fer any the least want, they set their children to publick sale, and sent both children and Cousins too over Seas to be sold in Ireland. And then he gives his own judgment on the whole, concluding, It may be probably be∣lieved,
That as God in his Justice had al∣ready punish'd with servitude under a forein Yoak the Saxon Sellers, so the Irish Buyers were justly fallen at this time into the like severity of Gods avenging wrath. But whether also that horrible violation of the Sanctuary of God for fifteen Genera∣tions: and the most hideous corruption of Manners flowing thence, and overflowing well nigh the whole Kingdom: whereof we have seen before so much out of St. Bernard, might not be another special and peradven∣ture more exasprating cause? Or whether the exemplary punishment fallen so suddenly under Malachias upon the whole Race of those nesarious men, that for so long were the chief Authors of that sacriledg and corruption, did, or did not satisfie the Justice of God as to that matter? And whether the Refor∣mation wrought by Malachias in his own days, continued any while after his death? Nay whether so great a number of incontinent Priests, within so little a time of his death, and under the superintendency of so blessed a man as St. Laurence was, might not argue a third or fourth special motive? Or whether at least, it might not evince a very just ground to suspect e'en a very great Apostacy among the Clergy themselves in some places, and by consequence a much greater a-mong thepeople in the same places, from that holy Reform of them by
Malachias? I must confess, I know not what to answer these Queres; as being for one part of them enveloped in the darkness of God's secret determinations: and for the rest, or matter of Fact, observable by man, past over without any mention of it in History. Only this I can with much probability aver, That they are much out, who, grounding themselves on that number of Priests convict of Inconti∣nency by St. Laurence, would thence conclude, this of Incontinency to have been a general Vice infecting the Irish Clergy and People of Ireland at this time, and consequently one of the special causes that brought the heaviest of their judgments, The English Conquest, upon them. 1. Gratianus Lucius (p. 319.) tells us, That Albinus O Moliny, Abbot first of Bal∣tinglass, then Bishop of Ferns (under Hen∣ry II. when Laurence was Archbishop of Dublin, and those Priests convict) in a Mid∣lent Sermon of his, treating at large of the continency of Clerks, and inveighing bit∣terly as to that point, against the wicked Example given by those Welsh and English Ecclesiasticks come to Ireland with Fitz-Steven, Strongbow, &c. declared in very ample manner how extraordinary pure the Cha∣stity of the Irish Clergy had been before they mix'd with those Foreiners, and were cor∣rupted by their Example. 2. Cambrensis
himself, how unfavourable soever he be in other matters to that Nation, is (in his To∣pography, dist. 3. c. xxvii.) a witness beyond exception, as of other great Virtues, so in particular of the Chastity of their Ecclesia∣sticks. Est autem terrae istius Clerus satis Reli∣gione commendabilis: & inter varias quibus pol∣let virtutes, castitatis praerogativa praeeminet at∣que praecellit. The Clergy of that Land, says he, as to Religion are commendable enough: and a∣mong their many Virtues, Chastity has in an ex∣cellent degree the prerogative of all. And then he goes on telling their assiduity in reading and praying, and singing Psalms, and keep∣ing within the precincts of their Churches and Abbeys, and never tasting any thing all day until they had ended Completorium, or Complin, as they call it, the very last of the canonical Hours, in the dusk of the Evening. 'Tis true, he censures their indulging them∣selves at night more freely both in meat and drink. But it is withal no less true, That therefore he wonders at their Chastity: hold∣ing it for a Miracle that Wine and Venus should not meet. And yet after all, I know not what to think of his charging them so grievously in these two particulars. 1. That (inter tot millia vix unum invenies, &c.) among so many Thousands, scarce one might be found that
notwithstanding their continual instance in praying and fasting all day, did not at night enormously exceed in Wine and other drinks. 2d. That albeit their Bishops, as having been generally assumed out of Monasteries, per∣form'd most diligently all the duties of Re∣ligious Monks: for according to the ancient custom they even after their assumption to the Episcopal Order, continued still their a∣bode within the precincts of their Abbeys, wholly given to Prayer and contemplation: yet withal they no less wholly neglected preaching to their people, or inveighing a∣gainst their wickedness, or using the severity of Episcopal disciplin to extirpate their Vices, and plant those Virtues in their stead which became Christian Professors. And indeed, if Cambrensis, as he is often in other matters of Ireland, be not extreamly out, or extreamly byassed, in these particulars, especially the second of them: we may peradventure justly conceive, that here is an other special cause of that very heaviest of Gods judgments im∣pending at this time over the Irish Nation. But whatever may be thought to have ei∣ther been or not been any of the special cau∣ses: and although, as I ought so I do acknow∣ledg, that not even my own supposition all along hitherto, viz. of their mortal Feuds and bloodshed among themselves to have been their
greatest, most special and most peculiar provocation of Heaven, must be obtruded on the Reader as a certainty; but only represented to him as the most probable and pious conjecture that may be grounded as well on the Prophe∣tical predictions of the Irish Saints, as upon the nature and merit of things in themselves, taken as they are recorded so fully and parti∣cularly in Doctor Ketings History: yet I may confidently affirm, they were in general very great and very grievous and enormous sins, without question, either of the Clergy, or People, or their Bishops, or of their Kings, Princes, Nobles and other men of War, or of all together, that brought so heavy, so ever∣lasting a judgment on that Nation as to their Being in this World. For although parti∣cular persons have been sometimes grievously afflicted only for the trial of their Virtue; as Job and Tobias: sometimes only for the ma∣nifestation of the Power and Works of God, without any demerit of theirs, or their Pa∣rents either; as the Blind Man in the Gospel: never has a whole Nation or Kingdom been destroy'd but for the enormity of their sins. Whereof whoever pleases may see proofs at large in Fitz-Herberts Policy and Religion, Part 1. chap. 21. 22. 23, &c. yea Jesus, the son of Syrach, for he may be more easily consulted in every Bible at hand, may give to a sober
man assurance enough, where he says, First (cap. 10. 8.) that the Kingdom is translated from Nation to Nation, because of unjust deal∣ings, injuries, calumnies, and various deceits. Secondly, (c. 40. 10.) that death and blood∣shed, strife, and the sword, oppression, famine, contrition and scourges, were all of them created for the wicked, and for them the deluge was made. Nay, if we consult the Books of Kings, read the Prophets, run over the Books of Josuah, Judges, Deuteronomy, Chronicles, and the rest of the old Testament, examine all the Histories of Christendom: we shall not find any whole Kingdom or Nation destroy'd but for grievous and horrible sins either of the Rulers, or People, or Priests, or all together. Yea, we shall commonly find the very qua∣lity and species of those transgressions men∣tioned that brought the vengeance on them. However, and notwithstanding that further yet we know, that bloodshed is one of those four sins that cry to Heaven Gen. X. 11. for vengeance: the Voice of thy brothers blood cries to me from the earth, said God himself to Cain: and that the very second of the Gen. IX. 6. Laws he gave to Noe was, that whosoever did shed the blood of man, his also should be shed: after all, I dare not affirm positively that either
those very Feuds of the Irish, how unparal∣lel'd soever in blood, or those other transgres∣sions in specie, be they what you please, were the sins that moved God to pronounce this final doom against them; but only in gene∣ral, That their great sins compell'd him to it. And how should I indeed? For, who was the Counsellor Esay XL. 13. Rom. XI. 39. of God? or who knows any thing of the secrets of his Providence, except only those to whom him∣self was pleased to reveal them. Nevertheless I dare acquaint the Reader, that although I give but little credit general∣ly, and sometimes none at all, to the Rela∣tions of Cambrensis, where he seems rather to vent his passion and write a Satyr against that People, than regard either Modesty or Truth; yet I will not call in question what he relates (l. 2. de Expug. Hib. c. 33.) of the Prophetical predictions, made so many Ages before, by the four Prophetical Saints of that Nation, Moling, Brachan, Patrick and Co∣lumb-Cille, and written by themselves (says he) in their own Irish Books extant yet in Ireland, concerning the final Fate of their Countrey∣men the old Milesian Race. viz. That the people of Great Brittain shall not only invade them, but for many Ages continue a sharp, cruel, and yet doubtful War upon
them at home in Ireland: sometimes the one, and sometimes the other side prevailing. That although those Invaders shall be often disturb'd, worsted, weakned, especially (and according to the prophecy of Brachan) by a certain King that shall come from the desert Mountains of Patrick, and on a Sun∣day-night seize a Castle in the Woody parts of Ibh Faohlain, and besides force them al∣most all away out of Ireland: yet they shall continually maintain the Eastern Sea-Coast in their possession. That, in fine, it will be no sooner than a little before the day of judgment, and then it will be, when they shall be throughly and universally victorious over all Ireland; erect Castles every where among the Irish; and reduce the whole Island from Sea to Sea under the English Yoak. And verily those Prophetical predictions, five hundred years since delivered us by Cam∣brensis as he received 'em from the Irish themselves, are the more observable, That by consulting the History of after-Ages from Henry II. of England to the last of Queen Eli∣zabeth, and first of King James, we may see them to a tittle accomplish'd. Unless perad∣venture some will unreasonably boggle at the circumstance of time express'd in these words (Paulò ante diem Judicii) a little before the
day of Judgment. Which yet no man has rea∣son to do. Because we know not how near this great day, which shall end the World, may be to us at this very present. As for that King foretold as coming from the de∣srt Mountains of Patric: there may be occa∣sion and place enough to speak of him again, that is, hereafter, in the Second Part of this Treatise. But whether from this Irish Prophesie, ei∣ther had, as for the substance, not the exact words of it from Cambrensis, for he pretends not to give to us the exact words: or had perhaps, at least for some part of it, from the Irish themselves resorting to Rome in those days: the famous Italian Prophet of Calabria, Joachimus Abbot of Flore, did foretell in his time the utter destruction, and eternal desolation that Joachimus Ab. post Tract. super cap. X. Isaiae. Part 1. de Oneri∣bus sexti Temporis. was to come upon the Irish Nation, I cannot say. This I know 1. That in all his predictions, all along in his several Commentaries on Jeremy, Esay, the Apocalyps, &c. he pretends to divine Reve∣lation. 2. That he lived several years after the Writings of Cambrensis on Ireland had been publick. For Cambrensis dedicated one part of them to Henry II. himself, who died in the Year of Christ 1189. and the rest to his Son Richard when yet but Earl of Poicton.
And Joachim was in Sicily with Richard now King of England, and Philip Polydore Virgil. in Ricardo primo. King of France, both win∣tring there with their Fleets, An. 1190. in their way to the Invasion of the holy Land. Nay, I have my self read his submission of his Works to the See Apostolick, dated by himself ten years after; which was the Year 1200. of our Sa∣viours Incarnation. 3. That being ask'd, what the success of this great expedition to the holy Land against Saladine should be? his Answer was, it should prove unsuccessful, and that the time of recovering Hierusalem was not yet come. 4. That this prediction of his was punctually true: as appear'd ere long. 5. That his Prophecy of the old Irish Nation is in these genuin words you read in the Mar∣gin. Ex rigori∣bus horribilis hye∣mis, & glacialis flatibus Aquilonis, parit Hibernia Incolas furibundos. Sed si sequentium temporum terrores praenoscerent, & in∣ternos impetus cogitarene: à facie spiritus Domini fer∣reum pectus averterent, & se à sempiternis opprobriis li∣berarent. Sed ex quo invicem vertitur furor aspideus, & involvit tam Clerum quam populum par insultus: non vi∣deo quod superna Clementia ulterius differat, quin in os exactissimum judicium acuat, & in stuporem perpetuae desolationis impellat.—Omnes istos populos Cathedra Dubliniensis astringit. Sed Darensium enormis iniquit as totum defaedat ordinem charitatis. Et ideo à planta in∣quit pedis usque ad verticem capitis non est in eis sanitas (Isaiae 1.) temporalibus molestiis repercussis. Joachimus Ab. supra. which I English thus,
as well I can, or can guess at their sense. Of the colds of horrible Winter, and winds of the icy North, Ireland brings forth outragious Inha∣bitants. But if they had foreknown the terrors of following times, and thought of their intest in rage; they would turn away their iron breast from the face of Gods anger, and free themselves from everlasting reproaches. But since their fury of Asps is turn'd against one another, and the same violence involves as well the Clergy as the People: I do not see that the Clemency of Heaven may (or will) delay to sharpen the most rigorous judgment against them, and force them on to the astonishment of perpetual desolation. And this is all that Abbot Joachim prophesied of that People. Which indeed I had the curiosity to see in his own Works and words: because I heard it by chance some twenty years ago much spoken of by a Gentleman that read it. Nor has this Prophet a word more of Ire∣land, but only those other few that in the same place immediately follow; which yet, I must confess, I do not understand; though perhaps I might afar off guess at their mean∣ing, did not the Latin word defaedat, or Eng∣lish of it, make no reasonable construction at all where it is placed. All these People (says he, speaking of Episcopal Diocesses) the See of Dublin joyns fast together. But the iniquity of the Kildarians (defaedat) makes clean the
whole order of Charity. And therefore (says Esay) from the sole of the foot to the top of the head, there is no health in them, being struck anew with their temporal evils. 6. That albeit his Book asserting a Quaternity (a∣gainst Petrus Lombardus the Master of the Sentences and Bishop of Paris, who taught the undivided Unity of one Thing or Essence in the Trinity of Persons) was condemned in the Council of Lateran under Innocent III. yet so was neither himself (as who had sub∣mitted all his Doctrine to the Apostolick See) nor any part of his prophetical Books, wherein this Prophecy of Ireland is. 7. And lastly, That notwithstanding he be not so particular in many circumstances; as for Ex∣ample in those either of the Nation of the Invaders, or of the Defence made by the In∣vaded, or of that King foreseen coming from the Desert Mountains of Patrick, or of the time when the English should be throughly vi∣ctorious, [Paulo ante diem Judicii] A little before the day of Judgment: yet, as to the main he is no less positive than the Irish pro∣phetical Saints themselves were, by foretel∣ling the eternal desolation of that People: and that with as much assurance as any could who by special Revelation had been made privy to the immutable Decree of the Watcher and Holy one of Heaven pronounc'd
against them. Which Decree of Heaven (for such it was undoubtedly) on what occasion, by what means, degrees, methods, and for how many Ages it was a putting in execu∣tion before the final accomplishment or final effect of it had been atchieved, will be the subject of the Second Part of this little Trea∣tise; but after I have given here one Section more that relates wholly to that ancient People alone, as they were yet a free Nation.
SECT. VI. Gathelus. Milesius. Briotan of the posterity of Nemedus. New History of Galfridus consi∣dered. Ithius employ'd, &c. Irish Lan∣guage common, &c. Milesians in their An∣tiquity yield somewhat to the Israelites. Sco∣tia, lately so called. Errors in page 18. and 19. Battel 'twixt Coilus and Fergus a meer story. Again Geoffrey of Monmouth. The late Histories of Scotland examin'd. A true account of Reuds, and the Dal-Reu∣dini. Descent of Charles II. of Great Brit∣tain from 81. Irish Monarchs. Joannes Scotus Erigena. The Southern Towers, and Wall, &c. First Invasion of the Danes on Ireland, as recorded by the French. Han∣mer's History of Ireland in very many points reproved. Battel of Degsestan. Both Cam∣brensis and Cambden out. Again Cam∣brensis refuted. Aonach Tailtionn. Ʋnpa∣rallel'd Hospitality of the Ancient Irish. Be∣ginning and Appropriation of Meath by Tua∣thal Teachtmhor, and his four Pallaces. Idolatrous Fires at Tleaghtghae and Vis∣neach. Error in the 229 page. Costly Pro∣gress
of the Kings of Cashel. Antiquity and Kings of Dublin. Of Clanna Ruaruidh. Golden Mines and abundance of Treasure in Ireland. The Irish Cloister at Reins∣burg in Germany. Marianus Scotus. Sa∣xon Abby at Maio in Connaght. Last Par∣liament held by the Milesian Race. Pro∣phecy of Malachias. History of the Staff of Jesus. Monastery of Beannchuir. Gallus and Columbanus. Whether an Interreg∣num? Of Ainmhire and Dohnall two Irish Monarchs, and Gildas Badonicus? Reynerus the Lvi. King of Denmark dying prisoner in Ireland. Kings of the Heruli, and Princes of Biscay descended of the Irish. FOR although, according to my first de∣sign, and order of these Discourses, and sequel of things in them all along hitherto, I might now conveniently enough enter up∣on that Second Part: yet, upon after∣thoughts, I judg'd it not amiss to interpose here this one Section more, though it be no other than a Miscellany, partly of Reflecti∣ons on some things touch'd before, and part∣ly of Additions to them. 42. Wherefore to begin; and because I have in my very first entry on these Historical Dis∣courses of Ireland, (pag. 5.) alledged Camb∣den, acknowledging that the Irish fetch the
beginning of their Histories from the most pro∣found and remote Records of Antiquity; so that in comparison of them, the Ancientness of all other Nations is but Novelty, and as it were a mat∣ter of yesterday: and also because in men∣tioning (page 11) Clanna Gaodhel, or po∣sterity of Gathelus, I have said that from him all the Clanna Mileadh, or children and posterity of Milesius descended long before either Milesius himself or his predecessors came into Spain: and further, because it may be of some use elsewhere in this very Se∣ction: take here in short out of D. Keting, an account as well of some memorable passages of those most profound remote Records of Anti∣quity concerning both Gathelus himself and his Father Niull, and the travels of their po∣sterity for some Ages before any of them ar∣rived in Spain: as of the descent of Milesius through twenty Generations from Gathelus, and 25 in all from Noe. Viz. That Niull, a younger son to Fea∣nusa Farsa King of Scythia, and a most learn∣ed man, especially in all or most of the Lan∣guages that not very many Ages before con∣founded the Builders on the Plain of Sen∣naar, having travail'd into Egypt, had for his admired Excellencies not only a large Coun∣trey there, by name Capacyront bestow'd on him for ever by the Pharaoh that govern'd
Egypt then (viz. Pharaoh surnamed Cingeris, from whose name all the following Kings of Egypt were call'd Pharaoh's, as the Empe∣rours of Rome from Julius Cesar were call'd Cesars) but also one of this Pharaohs own Daughters to Wife, by name or rather surname Scota, because married to Niull a Scythian. That of this young Princess he begot a Son whom he named Gaodhel (the Latins call him Gathelus) and orhers surna∣med Glas. That by that time Gaodhel Glas had come to be a man, the children▪ of Israel who had lived some Ages before in Egypt were grievously oppressed by the Egyptians, and therefore Moses the great Captain of the Isae∣lites led them to the Banks of the red Sea to shun the power of Pharaoh surnamed Intius that pursued them. That their Camp in this place being near Capacyront, the Scythian Prince Niull thought himself concern'd to accoast Moyses, and learn of him the whole story of their Nati∣on and cause of their Flight, and whither they tended, and what they expected, &c. That having received of Moyses very ample satisfa∣ction to all his demands, he offered this great Captain of Gods Army whatever was in his power to serve him, but particularly great store of Provisions, Corn, Cattel, &c: and Moyses took this offer so well, that al∣though he made no use of it, yet he invi∣ted Niull to go along with him to the Wil∣derness,
promising him a plentiful share in the favours of God to his people, when they came to their journeys end. That upon Niulls demurr to this invitation, and going home to his own House, he found his Son Ga∣thelus mortally stung in the Neck by a Serpent: and this made him return presently back with him to Moyses; who laying his Wonder work∣ing Rod upon the wounded place cured him instantly, without any sign remaining but only a little greeness on the skin where the Serpent stung, &c. That as some of the Irish Chronicles tell, Geodhell had his surname of Glas from this green scar on his Neck, which perpetually re∣mained of the same colour; Glas in Irish, accord∣ing to one meaning of the word, importing green; tho, as others hold, he had it from the Chain of Honour bestowed upon him, and clasp'd and lock'd upon his Arm by Moyses at the same time; for by an other signification of that word Glas, it imports the very same with Flease, i. e. Chain, from which in that Language they call a Noble Chain-bearer Fleascgach Voasl: or yet as some do say, he had it from his Har∣oss and Armour that were all of greenish colour. That however or whatever the cause of this surname was, there is no debate, nor doubt nor question among the Irish Historians about the extraordinary blessing of Moyses given at the same time by him to Gathelus, viz. That
where ever any of his posterity should settle, the Countrey should be free from all veno∣mous creatures. Which says Keting is the rea∣son that not only Ireland, but Creet also where some of his posterity did settle, is free from such creatures, and that the Relations in St. Patric's Life, of his banishing away out of Ireland all Serpents and other poisonous Ani∣mals, must be understood not of those that were really but metaphorically such. He means evil Spirits, or Devils that till St. Pa∣tric's time had in a special extraordinary manner poison'd and possefs;d that whole Countrey with Magick, Sorcery, Witchcraft, and all kind of Diabolical illusions, But be this Opinion or metaphorical inter∣pretation of Keting as he please, what I am to pursue here is matter of Fact and History out of him without any interpretation. And therefore I am to tell you now, that besides this extraordinary blessing to Gaodhel, Moyses had so much regard of Niull, that he sent a thousand men with him to seize Pharaohs Fleet, put him in possession thereof, and bid him stay a ship-board till he had seen what God would do suddenly to Pharaoh who pur∣sued them. That after Niul had the very next day seen both Pharaoh and all his Egyp∣tian Host of Horse and Foot covered under those Waves that immediately before afford∣ed
the Israelites a dry passage, his fear was over, and therefore he return'd home to his former dwelling in the same Countrey of Egypt: where he remain'd in peace till he died, and his posterity after him till the fourth Generation, i. e. till the days of Sruth his great Grandchild. For Sruth was the son of Easruth, and Easruth of Gaodhel, and Gaodhel of Niull; which in all make four Generations. That in this fourth Generation the Egyptians pick∣ing several quarrels with them, forc'd them away out of Egypt. Which banish∣ment of them, Walsingham in his Ypodigma Neu∣striae ad an. 1185.—pag. 452. in giving an account of John, Third Son to Henry II. being sent by him to Ire∣land, describes occasionally as you see in this pas∣sage. Joannes siius Regis, a Patre militaribus armis ac∣cinctus in Hiberniam est transmissus. Hibernia post Brit∣tanniam omnium Insularum est optima. Quae quamvis Britanniae dviitiis cedat; latitudine, salubritate, serenitate praestat. Quae sicut versus Aquilonem brevior est, it a ver∣sus meridiem trans illius fines protenditur. Haec autem proprie patria Scotorum est. Nam sicut legitur, Aegyptiis in mori Rubo submersis, illi qui superfuerunt, expulrunt à se quedam Nobilem Sciticum, qui degebat apud eos, ne dominium super eos invaderet. Expulsus ille cum fa∣milia pervenit ad Hispaniam, ubi & habitavit per annos multos, & progenies ipsius fameliae suae multipli∣cata est nimis. Inde venerunt Hiberniam post annos mille, duobus additis, à transitu filiorum Israel per mar Rubrum. Et de Hibernia pars eorum egressa, tertiam in Britannia Brittonibus & Pictis gentem addiderunt. Pars eorum quae remansit in Hibernia Hiberni vocabantur, & adbuc eadem utuntur lingua.
That Sruth, the foresaid great Grand∣child of Gaodhel, being their Leader, arrived with his banish'd Company in Creet, where he paid his last tribute to Nature, and some of his Company took up for themselves and Issue their Habitation. That Eibhir Scot, his eldest Son, leading the rest of them out of Creet, arriv'd ere long in Scythia, though not very welcom to the posterity of Neanuill son to Feanusa Farsa. That in the fifth Ge∣neration of Eibher Scot, one of his descendants, Taith mhic Daghnon kill'd his own kinsman the King of that Countrey, by name Refloir, the son of Rifill, of the progeny of Neanuill: and thereupon he and the whole Race of Gaodhel Glas, as many as had come thither, or been born there, were forc'd to fly under the leading of Adhnon and Eibher the two sons of Adhnamhuin mhic Bedhanmhuin, mhic Eibher Scuit, mhic Sruth, mic Easruth, mhic Gaoidhel. That being come to the Caspian Sea, they shipp'd, but soon after landed in an Island there, tarried in it a whole year to refresh themselves, and in the mean time buried Adhnon one of their Leaders: and his Funeral being over and a twelvemonth of their abode in this place expired, they put again to Sea in three ships, each freighted with sixty persons, and a Woman for every third man (or rather perhaps for every
three men.) That after some time being wea∣ry of their Habitation a ship board, they land∣ed again, and quitting their ships cross'd many Countreys by Land from this Caspian Sea to the Pontic. That here they shipp'd the third time, but ere long meeting with an Island by name Caronia, they put in and re∣main'd in it fifteen months; where Eibher mhac Taith, and Lamghlas mhac Adhnoin died. That from hence departing under the Con∣duct of four Chiefins, whereof Caichair the Magician or Druyd was one, they arrived at the North end of the Riphean Mountains: where the same Caichear prophetically told them Hereby you are to correct what is otherwise said by a mistak page 13. l. . and 8. as if this prediction had been made by Cai∣cheir to Milesius himself and but some years before; whereas indeed it was made to his Predecessors many Ags before he was born., that neither that place nor any other was design'd for their lasting abode or Habi∣tation till they came to the Western Island which we now call Ireland: and that not themselves, but their posterity after them should come to it. That hence a∣gain, but under the Com∣mand of Eibher Gluinfhiann they removed to Gothia, where they conti∣tinued a hundred and fifty years, even to the eighth Generation from Eibher, to Bra∣tha, For Bratha, who led them hence first
of all to Spain, was the son of Deaghatha, son of Earchadha, son of Elloit, son of Nu∣adhath, son of Neinuill, son of Eibhric, son of Eibher Gluinfhionn, and consequently was the eighth Generation from this Eibher Gluinfhionn. That all the Travels of the Progeny of Gaodhel were first from Egypt to Creet: from thence to Scythia: from thence to Gothia: from thence to South-Spain, whether the fore∣said Bratha led them: and back again, in the person of Galamh (alias Mileadh Espain, or Milesius the Spaniard) great Grandchild of this Bratha, to Scythia (as before we have seen page 12.) and thence also again to E∣gypt, and so to Thracia, and once more to Gothia, and thence to Spain, till at last the sons of this Galamh or Mileadh ventur'd for Ireland, where they set up their prophesied Rest and long abode ever since to this pre∣sent day. Finally, that Galamh, alias ileadh, in Latin Milesius (who married the Daughter of Pharaoh Nectonibus king of Egypt, and her name also or at least surname Scota, for the same or like reason to that which gave so long before to their great Ancestor Niull's Wife Daughter to Pharaoh Cingeris the self∣same denomination:) That I say this Ga∣lamh, was the nineteenth Generation from
Gaodhel Glas, and the four and Twentieth from Noah the Builder of the Ark: as ap∣pears by his Pedigree thus: Mileadh son of Bile, son to Breoghuin, son to Bratha, son to Deagatha, son to Earchadha, son to Alloid, son to Nuadhadh, son to Neanuill, son to Eibhric or Eibherglas, son to Eibher Gluin∣fhionn, son to Laimhfhionn, son to Adhnoin son to Taidh, son to Ogamhuin, son to Bea∣omhuinn, son to Eibher Scot, son to Sruth, son to Easruth, son to Gaodhel Glas, son to Niull, son to Feianusa Farsa, son to Baath, son to Magog, son to Japhet, son to Noah, or (as the Irish call him) Naoih. 43. And this, in substance, is the account which Keting has of these matters. Though I confess there may be read in him a great deal more of that Scythian King Feinusa Far∣sa (Father of Niull and Grandfather of Gaodhel Glas,) particularly of his great Learn∣ing: and the most celebrated School kept in those days on the Plain of Sennaar: and of his having studied the Sciences and Lan∣guages full twenty years in that place: and of his having then employ'd another most skilful man by name Gaodhel, (but his sur∣name was Ethoir) to compose, or at least to refine, adorn, and render copious that Lan∣guage which ever since from his name is call'd Gaodhelc, or Gaodhlec, I mean the Irish
Language. And so likewise it may be found in D. Keting, how it was in remembrance and honour of this Gathelus or Gaothel E∣thoir, the Author, or at least Refiner of the Irish Tongue; that Feinusa Farsa's fore∣said Brother Niull in Egypt gave his first-born Child the self-same denomination or name of Gaodhel (alias Gathelus) tho sufficiently distinguish'd after by the addition of his sur∣name Glas. But enough of these profound remote Antiquities, as Cambden calls 'em. And yet I am confident they may be far more easily believed by some and pass'd over by others, than oppos'd, at least disprov'd by any; yea notwithstanding the names of Ca∣pacyront in Egypt, and Caronia in the Pontick Sea, and the Fleet of Pharaoh, in the red Sea, seized by a thousand of the unarmed Israelits, See Josephus 3. Book of An∣tiqu. c. 6. Where he tells us expres∣ly, that all the Is∣raelites were dis∣armed when Pharaoh pursued them; though after that his six hundred Chariots and fifty thousand Horse and two hundred thousand armed Faotmen were drown'd in the Red Sea, and the Tide had thrown up their Arms on the other Bank where the Israelites were saely arrived, they armed themselves sufficiently. and put under the Com∣mand of Niull. That I may say nothing at all, or scru∣ple or boggle either at the
two Scotas, Daughters to those two Kings of Aegypt, as already you have seen, or at the two Scythian Kings of the same name Refloir, and both kill'd by the Progeny of Gaodhel Glas; the first of them by Taith mhac Dagh∣non; and the second, at least two hundred years after by Milesius himself, as may be re∣membred out of the 12th page before. But leaving the judgment hereof to the Reader: 44. I proceed to my next Reflection, which must be on page 8 and 9. There you are told, How the children or posterity of Ne∣medus, (the Irish call'em Clanna Neimheadh) to avoid a dreadful and continual pestilence of many years, departing in a thousand Vessels, great and small, under the Con∣duct of three Chieftains, Simeon Breac, Ib∣aath, and Briotan, the other two sailing to Greece, Briotan with his adherents landed in the North of that Countrey, which we now call Scotland, and with his and their poste∣rity remaining there, gave the denomination of Brittain to this whole Island (which is now called Great Brittain) as holy Cormac, the King of Mounster and Bishop of Cashel, in his Psalter of Cashael, together with all the Chronologers of Ireland affirm. You are also told that surely in this particular these Irish Chronologers have at least much more probability of their side, than any late Au∣thors
have, that derive that name (of Brit∣tain) from Brutus, or his Romantick Hi∣story in Galfridus, or in any other. Last∣ly, you find this Question immediately fol∣lows, For if from Brutus, besides other rea∣sons, why not Brutannia rather than Bri∣tannia. Though in this whole passage I follow'd my Author Keting; and particularly for this Question put in the last place, or at least for the reason involv'd therein, I might also have alledg'd Polydor. Histor. Ang. l. 1. Polydore Virgil, who makes use of the same reason a∣gainst the derivation of Britannia from Bru∣tus: yet having since consulted the learned Cambden's most accurat search into these mat∣ters; though he has not a word of the Irish History of Briotan, nor seems ever to have heard thereof: I find nevertheless there may be very probable answers given out of him to that question put by me after Polydore and Keting. And therefore I now decline it, tho not the History it self of that Scythic Briotan's giving the denomination of Brittain to this whole Island, otherwise (and whether be∣fore or after his time first of all, it matters not) called Albion. As for Abraham Wheloc's Sa∣xon Annotations on Bedes Ecclesiastical Hi∣story (l. . c. 1. pag. 25.) where it is ob∣served
that this Island was called Brutaine and Brutannia from the name of Brutus: I am not moved thereby, because the Saxons had that name from the Britons themselves, and the Britons though they write it Bru∣taine, with u, yet pronounce it Brittain with an i. as I am told, by men skilful in their Tongue, they commonly do in other words written with u. pronounce i. However I am content to acknowledg here, that in putting the foresaid question, I suppos'd more than I ought, and that I pass'd over in silence for a worse, the far better and more probable reasons, nay the convincing reasons indeed. What these are, you may see at large in Bu∣chanan, and before him, sufficiently enough, for some part of them, in Polydore: who, both the one and the other, demonstrate the whole story of Brutus to be a meer Fiction; though Henry of Huntingdon, and the Au∣thor of Polychronicon (otherwise reputed good Historians) thought fit to recommend to all posterity the Fable, out of Gffrey of Mon∣mouth, as an undoubted Truth. However we are told (I am sure by Geffrey, for I have him by me) That rutus was son to Silvius, the son of Ascanius, whom undoubted Mo∣numents of Antiquity assure us to have been son to Aeneas, and Founder of Alba on Tiber, and Third King of the Latius. That this very Brutus at the Age of sixteen having by
chance in hunting the Deer, kill'd his said Father King Ascanius, and being therefore banish'd Italy went to Greece. That here assembling together seven thousand Trojans descended from those who had been brought prisoners thither when Troy was burn'd, and heading them, he made War on Pandrasus, the King of Greece, defeated his Armies, forc'd his Towns and took himself Prisoner, and kept him so till by mutual agreement Ignoge the Princess, Daughter to this King, was given him to Wife, and for a Portion with her be∣sides a great mass of Gold and Silver, a strong Fleet of three hundred and four and twenty sail, well provided of all kind of ne∣cessaries. That now putting to Sea with his Trojans and so great a Fleet, to seek his For∣tune elsewhere, and coming to a desert Island by name Largecia, the Oracle of Diana there admonish'd him to steer his course for Albion. That in his way thither besides destroying a Fleet of Pirats that set on him at Sea, and spoiling all Mauritania in Afric from end to end, landing in France, he first overthrew in Battel Groffarius the Pictish King of Aquitain, plunder'd his Towns, over-run his whole Countrey: and the again in a second mighty Battel defeated both the same Groffa∣rius and all the other eleven Kings of France with their Forces. That having perform'd
these Wonders there, he set sail for Albion, which was inhabited then by Giants. [These were a prodigious Race of See Buchanan l. 2. page 43. (Im∣pres. Amsterd, anno 1643.) where he gives an ac∣count of this, no less ill-contrived than Monstrous Fable, added by some later Author than Geoffrey of Monmouth, as if Geoffrey himself had not store enough of indeed very stu∣pendious Lyes. Monsters, some of them twelve Cubits high, and all of them, or at least their Predecessours before 'em, begot by Incubi, i. e. Fayery Devils, on the thirty Daugh∣ters of Dioclesian King of Syria and his Wife Labana, who the first night of their marriage kill'd their thirty Husbands: and for that cause being forc'd to Sea by their said Father, in a ship with∣out Mariners or Pilot, after long wandring and hovering, arrived at last in Albion, a meer Desart then. Where it seems notwithstanding they were provided for by those wicked Aery Daemons that lay with them and procreated of them this horrible Race of Giants.] That upon his landing here, at a place called Totnes, where all the Giants were in a body to hinder his descent, he fought them, overthrew them, pursued 'em all over the Island, destroyed them utterly every where. That having done so, he di∣vided the whole Countrey among his Follow∣ers; gave them the name of Britons, and to
it that of Brittain, from his own name both: then begot Children, especially three, by name Locrinus, Albanactus, and Camber: then built the famous City of new Troy (since called London by corruption of the word Luds Town, be∣cause one of his posterity, King Lud not only re∣pair'd it but strengthened it with a Wall and Towers and Bulwarks:) and then, last of all, before his death, making three Royal Divi∣sions of Brittain, and erecting each into a Kingdom, bestow'd the first of them, toge∣ther with the supreme sovereignty of the o∣ther two in some cases, on his eldest son Lo∣crinus, called then from his name Loegria (by us now England:) the second on his second son Albanactus, from whose name 'twas cal∣led Albania, though Scotland after: and on his third son Camber the third of those Divi∣sions, termed likewise from his name Cam∣bria, comprehending at that time not only the Countrey now called Wales, but whatever is on that side of the Severn. That by these brave Princes and their issue after 'em the Noble Cities of York, Edenburg, Carlisle, Can∣terbury, Winchester, Shaftsbury, Bath, Leicester, the Tower of London, Westchester, and Caer-Leon upon Ʋsk, were from the foundations built and finish'd, and the Brittish Nation and Kingdom most gloriously maintained at home and enlarg'd abroad even in the very
Continent, well-nigh all over Europe. That not only Ebrancus (the V. King of Great Brit∣tain after Brutus, and Builder of York) with a numerous Fleet invaded France, ransack'd it all over, and return'd home triumphantly with the richest spoils thereof: nor only his twenty sons (which he had by twenty seve∣ral Wives) conquer'd all Germany under the command of one of themselves called Assara∣cus, and possess'd it a long time after: but Belinus and Brennus, sons to Dunvallo Mulmu∣tius (the Nineteenth King, as Belinus him∣self was the XX.) made an absolute Con∣quest, first of all the Kingdom of Gaul, now called France, and soon after of all Italy; not Rome it self excepted, which they took and burnt to ashes. That Cassibellanus (the Lxv. of the Brittish Monarchs,) when Julius Caesar invaded them, at two several times, fought him, defeated him both times, and the se∣cond time made him fly to France in such de∣spair that he never more return'd. That in like manner Claudius the Roman Emperour, though come in person with a mighty power of Legions and Auxiliaries into Brittain, found it his safest way to run away in two great Battels, from the victorious Army of Guide∣rius and Arviragus (the Lxvii. and Lxviii. Brittish Monarchs one after another): in so much that Claudius was content at last
'een fairly to capitulate for Peace with Arvira∣gus, by sending to Rome for his own Daugh∣ter Gennissa, and giving her in marriage to him, nay and leaving him too the Govern∣ment wholly of all these Provincial Islands; for so Geoffrey calls them in this place. That Severus, how great soever both a Souldier and Emperour he was, found it a desperate busi∣ness to fight in Great Brittain against the Brit∣tons, when he saw himself receiving his death's wound from Fulgenius in that Battel, whence he was carried dead and buried in York. That under Vortigern their Lxxxvi. Monarch, Hengistus the Saxon, invited in by him, landed the second time in Great Brit∣tain, with an Army of three hundred thou∣sand Heathen Foreigners: and yet Aurelius Ambrosius (the next Brittish King after Vorti∣gern) fought him in the head of all his for∣midable Forces, and in a plain Field over∣threw both him and them all, nay pursued them in their Flight till he reduced them to nothing, and the whole Island of Brittain to its native liberty from any Foreign Yoak. Nor had his Victories a period here, but o∣ver-run Ireland also; where he took Priso∣ner, in a great Battel, the Monarch of that Countrey, Gillomar; and then brought away Choream Gigantum, the Giants Monument of stones, from the Plains of Kildare in that
Kingdom, which he set up on Salisbury Plains in England. That Arthur, who was likewise, save one, the next King of Great Brittain (for he was son to Ʋter Pendragon that Reign'd immediately before him) sub∣dued all England, Scotland, Ireland▪ the Isles of Orkney, Denmark, Norway, Gothland, a∣long to Livonia, France, and as many King∣doms in all as made up XXX. Yea more∣over, i. e. after so many great and mighty. Conquests, and besides the killing too of Monsters and Giants, fought even Flollo and Lucius the two Lieutenant Generals of the Roman Emperour Leo, kill'd them both in France, and the later of them (I mean Lu∣cius) in the head of a dreadful Army con∣sisting of four hundred thousand men; all which he overthrew and ruin'd. That al∣though by occasion of some unhappy quar∣rels among the Britons themselves under Ca∣tericus their Lxxxxvi. King, a bad man, the Saxons to be reveng'd on them▪ wrought King Gurmundus the late African Conqueror of Ireland, to come from thence into Great Britain with an Army of a hundred sixty six thousand Heathen Africans, and burn, spoil and destroy the better parts thereof, and after put and leave the Saxons in possession of all he could; which was that whole Countrey then called Loegria, now England, as distin∣guish'd
both from Scotland and Wales: mean∣ing by Wales the ancient Kingdom of Cam∣bria which comprehended all beyond the Sa∣vern: and that notwithstanding the Saxons had by such means got possession of all Loegria, and held it for several years, they were beat out again so soon as the Britons agreed a∣mongst themselves, meeting at Westchester and chusing there Caduallo for their King; who bravely recovered the whole Island eve∣ry way round even to the four Seas, and kept both Picts and Scots, and such of the Saxons as were left alive or permitted to stay in perfect obedience to the British Crown du∣ring his own Reign, which lasted forty years in all: and that so did Cadwallador after him during his. In short, that as the progeny of Frute continued free, independent, successful, glorious in the first period of their Monarchy under sixty six Kings of their own, during at least a thousand years and forty, from the landing of Brute till the Invasion of Julius Caesar: and as for the next period, which took up five hundred and nine years more, till the landing of Hengistus the Saxon, albeit the Roman power and glory did sometimes lessen, sometime ecclipse theirs: yet they pre∣served still their freedom, and Laws, and Government under twenty other Kings of their British Nation, successively reigning o∣ver
them, and paying only a slight acknow∣ledgment of some little tribute to the Roman Emperours; nay and this same but now and then, very seldom: so in the third or last pe∣riod of it; containing somewhat above two hundred and fifty years, from the said land∣ing of Hengistus to the twelfth year of Cad∣wallador, they upon the Romans quitting them, not only restor'd themselves, under Aurelius and Arthur, by their own sole valour, to the ancient glory of their Dominion; but, maugre all the opposition of the Confederated Saxons, Picts and Scots, now and then rebelling against them, enjoyed it under the succession of se∣ven Brittish Kings more, from Arthur to Cad∣wallador; yea Malgo▪ the fourth of this very last number, when the six foreign Provincial Countreys (as Geoffrey calls them) viz. Ire∣land, Island, the Orcades, Norway, Denmark, and Gothia, had rebell'd anew, was so for∣tunately brave, as by dint of Sword to have reduced them all again to their old subjection under Great Brittains Empire. Add moreover, that Cadwallador himself, albeit the last of this Trojan Race wielding the Spter of Great Brutus, enjoyed the same Glorious Power that his Predecessours had before him over the whole extent of this Noble Island. That the total change and ut∣ter downfal of the Brittish Government, hap∣pening
after in his days, proceeded only from an absolute Decree of Heaven and mighty An∣ger of God incensed against the Brittons for their sins; but neither in the whole nor in part, from any Power of the Saxons or other Enemies or men upon Earth. That the immediate visible means, which God made use of to destroy them irrecovera∣bly were 1. A most bloody fatal Division (after some years of this Cadwallador's reign) happening among them, yea continuing so long and to such a degree, that between both sides all the fruitful Fields were laid waste; no man caring to till the ground. 2. The consequence of this waste, a cruel Famine over all the Land. 3. A Plague so prodigi∣ously raging, that the number of the Living was not sufficient to bury the Dead. That the Almighty's hand lying so heavy on them by so dreadful a Pestilence, was it alone that forc'd Cadwallador in the twelfth year of his Reign to retire for some time in∣to Little Britanny in France. That after ten years more when this Epidemical Plague had been wholly over, and Cadwallador prepared to ship his Army and return, a voice of Thun∣der by Angelical Ministery spake to him from Heaven, commanding him aloud to desist from his Enterprize, and telling him in plain terms, it was decreed above unalterably, The Race
of Brutus should bear no more sway in Great Brittain till the time were come which Mer∣lin had prophecied of to King Arthur. And, to conclude all, That in pure obedience to this Voice of God, it was that Cadwallador, giving over his designed return, and instead thereof going to Rome, and soon after dying there (upon the 12th of the Calends of May, in the Year of our Lord 689) left his Coun∣trey a prey to the Saxons, who till then could never subdue it, nor prevail against the Brit∣tons; but were themselves always over∣thrown, and forc'd all along e'n by so many Brittish Kings in succession from Aurelius and Arthur to Caduallo, either to fly the Land, or submit to their mercy. All which in substance, and much more at large we are told by Geoffrey Galfridus Monumetensis in his Latin History de Ori∣gine & Gestis Britannorum, printed at Paris by Ascen∣sius Badius, Anno 1517. But the fourth Book of this Romantick story i wholly taken up with the deceitful Propecies of Merlin, though Prophecles much augmented (says Neubrigensis) by ad∣ditions of Geoffrey's own inventive Brain, which he foisted in as Merlin's. Nor has been ashamed to endea∣vour to make us believe that Merlin was a great and wonderful and true Prophet indeed; yea notwithstanding that Merlin's own Mother confessed him to be the Son of an Incubus Devil. See Galfridus himself, l. 3. c. 3.
of Monmouth in his seven Books of History, and out of him by others. Only (besides my summing up the number of Kings, and fix∣ing the period of times, and contracting the whole story, and digesting it into this order and Method) give me leave to except the parti∣cular of Dioclesian the Syrian King's thirty Daughters, and the Incubi Devils, with their Gigantic procreation. For this I had from Buchanan's relation of it (l. 2. Rer. Scot.) as added by some others to supply a defect of so much in the new History of Galfridus. 45. But as William of Newbery (commonly called in Latin, Neubrigensis) this Geoffrey's own Contemporary in England, has (in Proe∣mio Histor.) five hundred years since reflected with much freedom and tartness on the Va∣nity, incredibility, and falsity of his History in general, and more particularly on that part of it which represents King Arthur such a wonderful Heroe: so has in later times Po∣lydore Virgil first, and after him George Bucha∣nan ruin'd the very foundation of the whole Fabrick; I mean, the very Being or Existence of Brute himself at any time on Earth. And certainly, in my opinion, the reasons of Po∣lydore seem convincing enough to any un∣byass'd man. For, says he l. 2. Histor. An∣glic.) neither Titus Livius, nor Dionysius Ha∣licarnasseus, nor any of those other Authors
that most diligently write of Roman Antiqui∣ties have one syllable of this Brutus. Nor could any thing concerning so much as ei∣ther his Name or Existence be fetch'd from the ancient Annals of Great Brittain: seeing that five hundred years, or thereabouts, be∣fore this new History of Galfridus had been contriv'd, Gildas (I mean the true, and not the supposititious one) complain'd, that if ever the ancient Britons his Countrey-men, had any such or other Annals at all, they were undoubtedly either perish'd in the War at home, or carried away so far abroad as no news could be had of them. Besides, the particular of the taking of Rome by Belinus and Brennus quite over-throws all both Fa∣brick and foundation of this New History, if we compute the times set down in it, and compare them with those in the Greek and Roman Chronicles. For in this New Histo∣ry not only Brute is said to have conquer'd Albion about the tenth year after his Father Silvius had been kill'd, which was the year of the World 4100; but the two Brothers Belinus and Brennus (sons to Molmutius the XX. King, and they the XXI. Generation from Brute) are said to have taken Rome a∣bout four hundred years after the same Brute had conquer'd this Island. And yet accord∣ing to the Epitome or account of times both
in Eusebius and all other as well Greek as La∣tin Histories, Rome was taken by Brennus and his Gauls even after full seven hundred years and ten had been over from the foresaid year wherein Brute is said by the new History to have enter'd Albion. So that by this new History Brennus must have taken Rome three hundred and ten years before it was really ta∣ken at all. Then which, I think, nothing can be desired more convincing to ruin both the Fabrick and foundation of this Romance of Brute. And so in effect has Polydors thought before me. But if you would have more, yea many more unanswerable arguments on this Subject: you may consult George Buchanan where he has them at large, L. 2. Histor. Scot. For, as it ought to be no part of my purpose here to compare or confront so many, or indeed any of those vain particulars in the new Hi∣story of Brute, either with the Commenta∣ries of Caesar, or Annals and History of Taci∣tus, or his Life of Agricola, or Venerable Bedes Ecclesiastical History of the English, or the Saxon Chronology publish'd by Wheloc, or the most ancient Monuments of the Irish, or any other sacred or profane of so many other Kingdoms of Europe, or with Reason it self: so it is neither any part of it, to di∣late or give those manifold arguments of
Buchanan, though they be directly home a∣gainst the very foundation of the same new History, or the Being or Existence at any time of Brute. It sufficeth me in this place to have given the reasons of Polydore against it. My purpose here being no other, than (in rela∣tion to the above passage in my eighth and ninth page) to conclude out of all, That the Irish Cronologers and Historians have at least much more probability on their side in asserting unanimously that their true Briotan who de∣scended of Nemedus, and planted a Colony in the North part of this great Island so early, was he that gave the whole Island the denomination of Brittain from his own name, than they on the other side have, who, if the arguments hitherto be conclusive, tell us in effect, that a false and forged Brutus, one that never was in Being should have gi∣ven it. And indeed, the Authority of the Irish Monuments in the Psalter of Cashel, an au∣thentick Book of Irish Histories, written above eight hundred years since by so great and knowing and holy a man as Cormack; who was at the same time both King and Bishop of Mounster: and the further derivation of the more remote Antiquities inserted in it from that other Book much more ancient yet,
which above one thousand two hundred years since, in the composing or collecting of it out of all the former Chronicles of that Na∣tion, from the very first Plantations of it, had been, in the Parliament or National Assem∣bly of all the Estates at Tarach under Laogi∣rius the Monarch, supervised and agreed up∣on by the choicest Committee they could ap∣point of three Antiquaries, three Kings and three Bishops, whereof S. Patrick himself was one; over-ballances by much the credit of Geof∣frey of Menmouth in his new History of Brutus, written by him no earlier than Henry II. Reign, and opposed, nay quite run down by his own Contemporaries so soon as it came out. Which notwithstanding, and whatever else I have given any where in this Reflection, on my own foresaid eighth and ninth page, I de∣sire may be understood by the Reader, as I intended it, i. e. without any prejudice or diminution of the great and known both An∣tiquity and bravery of the Brittish Nation, whencesoever they have truly derived the name of Brittons for themselves, or that of Brittain for their Countrey. Of the former, I mean their Antiquity, Julius Caesar is a witness beyond exception, where he speaks in his Commenta∣ries (L. v.) of the inland people of Brittain, as if they had been Aborigenes, without any derivation from elsewhere abroad; quos na∣tos
in Insula, memoria proditum dicunt, says he. Of the later, both Tacitus and Beda, Wri∣ters no less unexceptionable, have recorded to Posterity very considerable Instances. The one, in his Annals and History, and Agricola's Life, telling their fierce Fights, and some∣times their successes too against the Roman Generals, in their own Countrey Great Brit∣tain. The other, in his Ecclesiastical History of England, acknowledging several great Vi∣ctories had by them both in the same Island their own Countrey over his Countreymen the Saxons that invaded them; nay, particu∣larly telling us (in the 16th chap. of his First Book) of two very special Victories, the first under the leading of Aurelius Ambrosius, the second in Black more about that place, where Scarborough Castle is now, called by Polidore in his History Mons Badonicus: adding withal, that after the first overthrow given by them, although sometimes worsted, yet they con∣tinued the War with great resolution, worsting also not seldom their Foes, until at last they hem'd them in about the said Hill or Mountain Badonicus, and made a mighty slaughter of them there. Which happened, says Bede in the forty fourth year after the first landing of the Saxons. Above all, the De∣fence made by the Reliques of them in Wales, after their Kingdom had been utterly de∣stroy'd
upon Cadwallador's withdrawing to France, yea made and continued by them for seven hundred years, and their fighting so long for their Liberty, against the Saxons first, and Normans after, till they obtain'd honou∣rable Conditions at last from Edward I. are sufficient arguments of their Martial Spi∣rit and brave Souls, however Fortune frown'd upon them. And as I ought to be so ingenuous in ac∣knowledging what I have now done concern∣ing that Nation in general: so likewise, in reference to Jeffry himself, I will be so just as to acknowledg what he says of the hand of God that lay so heavy upon them at last, even to their utter destruction, by the mor∣tal Feuds and cruel Famine, and most de∣structive of all the Pestilence that follow'd. For besides this one particular of those three heavy scourges from God, which I must con∣fess are attested by V. Bede himself (l. 1. cap. 12, & 14.) there is little else of truth to be acknowledg'd in the whole Summary given before, of that Romantick History of Galfri∣dus. Tho Richard White of Basingstoke has in our days written and printed a Latin History of his own, pursuing in most particulars the good Example given by him: and to make it the more known, has prefix'd unto it an Epistle Dedicatory to Albertus Arch-Duke of Austria, &c.
45. In my 13. page I spake somewhat of the causes moving the eight sons of Milesius, af∣ter his death, to think seriously of invading Ireland. But I might have added, How their consultation about this matter was held in Breoghuin's Tower in Gallicia. How it was from thence they employ'd Ith (or Ithius) their Uncle on the Father's side (as being son to Breoghuin their great Grandfather) in a ship well provided, and man'd with a hun∣dred and fifty stout Soldiers, to discover the state of Ireland. How Ith having landed in Mounster, and there understood that Cearma∣da's three sons, who as three Kings ruled Ire∣land alternatively, were together at Oileach Neidh in the North, but at some difference among themselves about the Jewels of their Ancestors, went thither by Land, accompa∣nied with a hundred of his men; the ship failing about with the rest to meet him there. How being come to Oileach, and honourably received by the sons of Cearmada, and, be∣cause he was a stranger and consequently in∣different in their dispute, being chosen Arbi∣trator of it, he decided their quarrel to all their satisfaction: first by dividing the Jewels equally betwixt them: and then exhorting them to mutual love and peace: adding withal very much in praise of their delightsom plentiful Countrey. How when he had taken
leave of them to return to his ship for Spain, the eldest of the Three reflecting on the high praises he gave the Land, and fearing his design should be to bring others to invade them, breaks his jealousie to the other two, and with their consent and some armed Troops pursues Ith, overtakes him, fights him, routs his men, wounds himself deadly, and leaves him in that condition of a dead man grovel∣ing on the Earth at a place called from that Fight and his Name Magh Ith. How the few survivers of his men headed by his own son carried away his body a shipboard, where he died of his wounds; but they neverthe∣less arrived in Spain, and coming to their Cousins the eighth Brothers, exposed it be∣fore them all, of purpose to excite and hasten their revenge. And in the last place, how that although as well these as those, i. e. all the Milesians in general, and their Cousins and adherents made this killing, or this mur∣der, (which you please to call it) commit∣ted on the said Ithius and his men, the pre∣tence of their Invasion and War, and con∣sequently of the justice of their quarrel, and following Conquest of that Countrey by them: yet the whole History makes it plain, That 'twas no other indeed but a meer pretence: being Ithius went thither as a meer Spy to discover the Countrey: and that they were
resolved to invade it upon their return, whe∣ter he had or had not met with any injury or pretence of injury there. All which I note of purpose here: because it may be use∣fully in the second Part of this Treatise, on another occasion, related to again. 46. In the mean while, and in this very place, the Reader will give me leave to observe a thing that may prevent some question or some admiration about the sons of Cearma∣da chusing Ithius their Arbitrator. For it may be peradventure ask'd, how they under∣stood one another? or what Language did he or they speak their sntiments in? or was it by Interpreters they Discours'd? &c. But the Irish Historians prevent such demands by telling us, that all the several Invasions of Ireland (only the first plantation of it by Ciocal, which properly was no Invasion, ex∣cepted) whether by Partholan, or Neimhedh, or Feaa-bolg, or Tuath-D-Danan, were by Scy∣thians, descended from Japhet, who for their Language had the Irish Tongue (Gaodhlec, as 'tis called originally by it self) common to them all, no less than the Milesians them∣selves and all other Gathelians whatsoever had the same very speech their Mother Tongue though with some difference in the Dialect. So that only those I called once the Aborigenes of Ireland, I mean the progeny of
Ciocal and his followers descended from the accursed Cham, and come out of Africk, had another peculiar Language of their own. 57. Though I have page 15. said, the An∣tiquity of the Milesian Irish to be no-where parallel'd, if not peradventure among the Chineses only, &c. I hope no man will un∣derstand me so, as to think I would not have still excepted the Children of Israel, had I feared that any would entertain such a thought of my meaning as would need the exception. I am sure none could justly do so, that pleas'd to consider what I said be∣fore, page 5. viz. That the Milesians had not before two hundred eighty three years after Moses's passing the Red Sea landed in Ireland. For until then, whatever they were called, it is plain they could not be called Irish, be∣cause this name they derived from that I∣sland where they never lived before this time. And 'tis no less plain that before this time the Children of Israel had, as a free and brave and conquering Nation, inhabited Palestin, at least two hundred and forty years: had also lived forty years in the Wilderness: and before that too, had been a great numerous people in Egypt, where they lived in all, from the descent of Jacob out of Canaan thither, till their departure under Moses, through the Red Sea, two hundred and fifteen years, (as Jose∣phus
expresly tells in his Antiq. L. iii. c. vi.) though under great bondage for some part thereof. And therefore to them or their an∣cientness I could not intend to compare that of the Milesians, nor as now become Irish, no nor as Gathelians neither. For Gathelus him∣self the original stock of all the Gathelians, and consequently of the Milestans, being these were only a branch of those, was but a youth in Egypt with his Father Niull when Moses cross'd the Red Sea, as we have lately seen at large. 48. Yet in the 18th Page, I must confess there is an Errour committed, by saying that the six sons of Muredus (alias, in Irish, Mui∣riach) King of Ʋlster went to Scotland under the Monarchy of Laogirius (or Laoghaire) King of Ireland. But I have corrected it, page 93. where you read, it was in the Twen∣tieth year of this Monarch's Successor and son Lugha, they invaded Scotland. 49. Whether Niall Naoihghiallach did, or did not order Albania to be call'd Scotia, as Keting says he did (whereof see the same 18th page:) you are nevertheless to know, that the most eminent Antiquary Primt. Ʋsher hath suffici∣ently evinc'd (de Primord. page 784.) That as neither Dalrieda nor Argathelia (alias Ar∣gyle) though the proper Seat of the Scots inhabiting Brittain until the year 840. so
neither the whole Countrey of Albania, even after that year, had ever been called Scotia by any Writer, until about the year of Christ 1100. when both Nations, I mean the Picts and Scots, were come by degrees to make one people. And that Marianus Scotus, who flou∣rish'd at that time was one of the very first Authors that call'd it by this name of Scotia. Where you are further to observe, that according to this most learned Primat's account of the confinement of the foresaid Scots to their ancient Dominions of Dalria∣da and Argyle, it was the year of Christ 840. before they had inlarged themselves by o∣verthrowing and subduing the whole King∣dom of the Picts. Which is a hundred years later than my account of this matter out of Cambden, in my said 18. Page. 50. Page 19. where I supposed, that the Nine several Countreys or Nations forc'd to de∣liver every one of them Hostages to Niall the Great (otherwise, and from the nine se∣veral sorts of Hostages, surnam'd in Irish Naoighiallach, in Latin Noui-Obses) were only the five Provinces of Ireland, and the di∣stinct Dominions of the Dal-Rheudans, Picts, and other Inhabitants of that Countrey we now call Scotland: there I follow'd Keting. But after having lighted on the Author of Cambrensis Eversus, and found in him That
the great Irish Antiquary Joannes Colganus in his Trias Taumatur∣ga, Gratianus Lu∣cius, page 299. page 447. num 56. had otherwise count∣ed those nine Countreys and Nations: I thought fit, as occasion was offered page 221. to count or give them as he did, viz. Mounster, Leinster, Connaght, Ʋlster, the Brit∣tons, Picts, Dal-Rheudans, Saxons, and Mo∣rini (a People of France towards Calice and Picardy.) For the word Saxons is in the said later page omitted through the Printers fault. And yet I cannot but acknowledg, that if Niall the Great had any Hostages from the Saxons, he must either have taken 'em at Sea, or from the Coasts of Germany, the Higher or Lower, but by no means from Great Brittain. Because Niall was kill'd in France, anno Dom. 405. as the foresaid Au∣thor of Cambr. Euers. Gratianus Lucius him∣self does write in the short Account he gives of this Monarchs Reign: and the Saxons were not come into Great Brittain before the year of Christ 440. (as Polydore Virgil, in his Reign of Vortigern says) that is forty four years after the said Niall the Great Naoi∣ghiallach had left behind him all his Hostages, and ended all his Greatness in this World.
51. With the Battel, or loss, or name of Coilus, as King of Great Brittain, mention'd by me page 19. though I took it from Ke∣ting, and quoted Buchanan, as he does, and find by reading Buchanan himself, that Keting has rightly quoted him; yet now I am not my self otherwise affected with it than to reject it utterly. And my reason is, not only Buchanans fixing the time of that Battel, fought, as he says, between Coilus King of the Brittons and Fergus I. King of the Scots, eight or nine hundred years before this very Fer∣gus came from Ireland: nor only Buchanan's borrowing this whole story out of Hector Boethius, whom Humphry Lloyd calls hominem impurissimum, a most impure Author, and Lu∣cius, Scriptorem corruptissimum, a most corrupt Writer, nay one who in the far greater part of his History scarce delivers any truth at all: but the very name of Coilus here, deriving its original from the fertil invention of Geof∣frey of Monmouth's new History of Brutus. For it is only in this Romance we find the first mention of any Coilus among the Kings of Great Brittain. And there indeed, I must confess, we have not only one, but three Monarchs of this Island bearing that name. The first of them being the fortieth King, in order of time; the second, being the seven∣tieth second King; and the last, whom he names
Coel. being the seventy ninth, according to Geoffrey's disposition of them and my account out of him. But I must withal acknowledg, that he has not a word nor a syllable either of the first or last of these Three, save only the bare names of Coilus and Coel, hudled in among so many other mostly too bare names of other pretended Brittish Kings. Neither has he any more of the very Second Coilus than that he was the son of King Marius, and the Father of King Lucius the First Christian King of Great Brittain: and that having in his youth been bred at Rome, he continued after, e'en all along his Reign, both devoted to the Roman State, and in Peace with all his Neighbours. And there∣fore the rest of the story in Buchanan, either of this or any other Coilus, must be a later additional Invention: and, in reference to the real true Records of Antiquity, as ill contrived as might be; though answerably enough to the foundation laid for such a su∣perstructure of the new History of Brute and his Descendants. But since we are occasionally return'd again to this famed Work of Galfridus Monume∣tensis, whereof you have elsewhere so lately had from my own reading it over a pretty just Summary; give me leave here to let you see out of others as just a censure of it. Give
me leave to tell you, that Alanus Copus has compared it with Ovids Metamorphosis and Lucians Tales. That William Neubrigensis has spent even three whole Leaves (in Prooem. Hist.) to demonstrate by instance of particu∣lars, how it is wholly compos'd of the most improbable, incredible, and ungrounded Lyes that ever were invented. That Cambden also in his Britannia relates to others, who stick not to say, it is all patch'd up of untunable discords and jarring absurdities; yea, com∣pos'd of such Milesian Fables, such intolerable meer inventions of the Authors own brain, that the Roman Church at last thought fit to enroll it in the Index of Prohibited Books. Yea that Cambrensis himself, though a Britton by birth and blood, and as desirous of the glory of his Countrey-men as any could be, gives it nevertheless the Character of a fabulous Hi∣story; as you may see in his Description of Wales, cap. 7. Nay that in his Itinerary of Wales, l. 1. c. 5. he tells us that, and the occasion and manner how, the Devils were seen leaping and skipping and dancing on it. However, and though it be manifest, that as well these Censures, as the Summary afore∣said, are sufficient, even each of them apart, to ruin the story of Coilus and Fergus in Bu∣chanan, which derives originally from Gal∣fridus,
and ultimately relies on his invention: I shall nevertheless give now another Argu∣ment, shewing more peculiarly, how little Faith ought to be given him in his Catalogue of Brittish Kings, and consequently none at all to his naming of Coilus among them. In his Seventh Book, Chap. V. where he so confidently relates the mighty Battel fought and overthrow given by King Arthur in France to those four hundred thousand Ro∣mans, and their Auxiliaries, mentioned before, part Europeans, part Asians, and the rest Af∣fricans, under many Kings come to assist the Roman Emperour against Arthur: he has also the brazen brow to invent not only those three names of the Emperour himself and his two Lieutenant Generals, which we have seen before; but many more of the Auxiliary Kings: viz. Epistrephus King of Greece, Mu∣stemphar King of Parthia, Aliafatina King of Spain, Hirtacus King of Affric, Boetus King of the Medes, Sextorius King of Libya, Teucer King of Phrygia, Xerxes King of the Itureans, Pandrasus King of Egypt, Misipsa King of Babylon, Politetes Duke of Bithynia, Teucer Duke of Phrygia, Evander of Syria, Ethion of Boetia, (sure it should be Beotia) Hippoli∣tus of Creet, &c. whereas indeed there were no such names or men, and most of these Countreys named by him in the last place,
were but Provinces then under the Roman or Constantinopolitan Empire, and no Kings nor Dukes, but only Presidents ruling them un∣der the Emperour. Wherefore, if he could so boldly invent such a list of Kings abroad in the World, for the sixth Age of Christia∣nity, wherein he could be so easily disproved by a thousand arguments: we have no reason to think that for home and those early Ages of the World, wherein he could not be dis∣proved by any Records, he did otherwise than meerly forge his Catalogue of Brittish Kings. And these are the Reasons that mo∣ved me to this Reflection upon that story of Coilus and Fergus in Buchanan, as related out of him in my foresaid 19th page. And the same reasons, or at least a sufficient part of them, makes me likewise not insist now upon the name of Notium, which you have seen before (page 13.) given to Breoghuin's Tower in Gallicia. It was (I doubt not) borrowed by Keting from Hector Boethius, who says in express terms, that place was called first Bri∣gantia, but after Notium, and last of all Com∣postella. I know there is a Promontory in Dsmond the South of Mounster, which is by Cambden in his Map of Ireland, called Notium; but whether from any of that name in North Spain, or elsewhere I know not.
54. But what is more material to be noted occasioually in this place, is Buchanans account of Fergus: and the rather because he seems to give it from the Scottish Historians in ge∣neral. He says, that this very Fergus (pre∣tended by him to have been the over-thrower of Coilus, and by Hector Boethius to have also been the son of Ferchardus King of Ireland) was the Founder of the Scottish Kingdom in Albania, and first of all the Kings of the Scots inhabiting Great Brittain. That he came to Albania (or Scotland) about the time of Alexander the Great's taking Babylon, al∣most 331. years before the Birth of Christ. And that within twenty four years more, having reign'd in all so long, in his return from Ireland (whither he had gone back from Scotland to quiet some disturbances there) he perish'd at Sea in a Tempest, near that Rock in the North of Ireland, which, from his wrack hard by, is ever since call'd in Latin Rupes Fergusii, (in Irish Carrig-Fhearuis, by us Knock-Fergus.) So says Buchanan: and so said before him Hector Boethius and some others of his Countreymen Historians: both he and they either seeming to know no∣thing at all of those Annals and Books whence only the real true History of their Antiquities could be known: or else wittingly and wil∣lingly to have taken up a fabulous story, of
purpose to establish a glorious succession of a hundred and seven Kings of the same Nation reigning one after another from that Fer∣gus I. to James VI. even for above 1900 years. Whatever the cause might be, the one or the other, or perhaps (which is likely e∣nough) both together: it is plain out of the antient Annals and other Histories of Ireland (which are indeed the only Fountain of all such truly real Scottish Antiquities, as concern at least the Irish Invaders and time of their Invasion of any part of Great Brittain) that Buchanan, and those follow'd by him have created the said Fergus I. King of the Scots in Albania, even 819 years before he landed from Ireland in Brittain. For those Irish Mo∣numents fix on the year of Christ 498. the time of Fergus Mor (as they call him, son to Ercho, Nephew to Eochadh Muinreamhar) and of his five Brothers with him invading the North of Brittain. And Tigernacus, who commonly delivers in Latin what was done abroad, as what was done at home in Irish, has of the present subject this following pas∣sage: Fergus Mor mhac Ercha, id est Fergu∣sius Magnus Erci filius, cum Gente Dalrieta partem Britanniae tenuit, & ibi mortus est, &c. That is, Fergus Mor the son of Erch with his people of Dal-Riada, possess'd himself of part of Brittain, and died there about the first year
of the Popedom of Symmachus. Which was the year of Christ 498. as Primat Ʋsher has rightly observed. Besides, the old Irish Book containing the Synchronism, or (if I may so speak) the contemporariness, not only of the Monarchs and Provincial Kings of Ireland, but of the Kings in Albania too, expresly relates how it was in the twentieth year after the Batl of Ocha, that the six sons of Ercho, viz. the two Enguses, the two Loarns, (some Copies have Coarns) and the two Ferguses (whereof one was this Fergus the Great) pass'd over into Albania. I say nothing how Nennius translated into Irish among O Duncgans Miscellanies, says, it was in the sixth Age of the World    the Dal-Riadans had conquer'd part of the Countrey of the Picts, and the Saxons enter'd on other parts of Great Brit∣tain. Nor do I insist on O Duucgan him∣self, though he most minutely prosecutes this Adventure of Ercho's Children, telling the Families issued from them in Scotland (which he calls Albain) what Lordships or Lands each of them was possess'd of there, and what Forces by Land or Sea they usually raised. But what I am particularly to observe is, that of all hands among the Irish Annalists and Historians it is without any contradicti∣on
admitted, That this Fergus the Great, son to Ercho, is the same with Fergusius I. King of the Scots, though in Boethius, Major, Bucha∣nan, &c. called in Latin the son of Ferchardus. That the foresaid Battel of Ocha, wherein the Irish Monarch Oillioll Molt perish'd, was fought in the year of Christ 478. And that from this year to the year 498. there is no man but sees the just interval must be those twenty years on expiration whereof the foresaid Book of Syncronisin relates the passing of Fergus Mor to Brittain. And the issue of all must be, that certainly as to this particular, either all the ancient Irish Annals and Mo∣numents, besides the late Histories of Keting and Lucius are extraordinary false: or Bucha∣nan and Hector Boethius, and all other Scottish Authors follow'd by them are extreamly out. Even so far out as to have at least inverted the whole succssion, descent, line and ge∣nealogie of their Kings, by giving us a Ca∣talogue with the Lives and Reigns of two or three and forty Kings as descended Lineally from Fergusius I. before he had been existent on Earth. For Congallus is the Xliiii. King in Buchanan, &c. and yet the eighteenth year of this very Congallus, according to Buchanans computation, must have been the year of our Lord 498. in which all the Irish Records place the landing of Fergus Mor in Scotland, tho
the very first of the Catalogue in him and other Historians follow'd by him. Moreover, and which yet is no less considerable than any of the former Arguments, we may take no∣tice that Buchanan and his Authors make Reuda the sixth King of those in his Cata∣logue, descended from Fergus. Then which nothing can be more plain against all the Irish Antiquities. To say nothing of V. Bede in his Eccles. Hist. l. 1. cap. 1. whom you may consult at leasure. But for the Irish Chronicles, I am sure they tell us particular∣ly, that the Monarch of Ireland Conaire mhac Mogha Lauae had three sons, call'd the Three Carbry's viz. Cairbre Muisck, from whom the Tract of Musckry, and Cairbre Baisckin, from whom the Land of Corca bhaiskin, both in Mounster, has denomination, and Cairbre Riada, alias Riadhfada. That this last of the Three was the first Irish Conqueror of the Countrey in Albania, which bore his name, being called in Irish Dal-Riada (in English the Part of Riada) and by Latin Writers Dal-rieta, Dal-Reuda; and the Inhabitants Dal-Reudini, as Bede calls 'em. And that his foresaid Father, the Irish Monarch Conaire mhac Mogha Lauae, having reign'd in Ireland eight years, was kill'd in the year of the World 5364. being the year of Christ 165. Whence it must follow that his said son Cairbre, sur∣named
Riada in Irish, though by V. Bede and others called Reuda, must have invaded the Picts, and possess'd himself of that part of their Countrey named from him, at least three hundred years before the time of Per∣gus the Great, who, as we have seen before, invaded not Albania till the year of Christ 498. So wide, in this very particular of Reuda, is the Irish account and History from the Scottish in Buchanan. How to reconcile the difference in either particular, being it is so great, and concerns so great a succession of Kings, and Ages too for at least 819 years, I leave to such as shall please to concern themselves in it, more than my purpose in this place requires I should my self. But let them withal take these further Animadversions to thought. 1. That the Father of this Fergusius the Great, however you call him, Erck, Ercho, Ercha, or either (as Buchanan has it) Ferchardus, or any other name whatsoever, was never King of Ireland; as no more was Fergus M him∣self, notwithstanding Buchanan's intimation to the contrary, but only a Brother to Muir∣chiortach the Irish Monarch that reign'd over all Ireland from the year of Christ 503, to the year 527. wherein he was murder'd. 2. That Joannes Major himself, though a Scotchman, has, (in his little History of Great Brittain, cap. X.)
reflected on that Vulgar Errour in the Annals of Scotland, where they place Fergusius I. be∣fore Reuda's time, 3. That Hollingshed (in his English Translation of Hector Boethius) professes himself to be of Opinion, That very many of those Kings, related by the Scottish Histories to have reigned successively one after another in Scotland, were such as neither successively, nor in Scotland, but to∣gether at the same time reigned part of them in Ireland, and part in other adjacent lesser Islands. 4. That Gratianus Lucius (in his Camb. Evers. page 93.) adds moreover, Him∣self to think not improbably, that the Scot∣tish Authors borrowed a great number of their Kings, from those indeed that were Pictish Kings. Where, to ground this Opi∣nion of his, he produces an old Irish Trans∣lation of Ninnius; I mean as to the Cata∣logue of Pictish Kings in that ancient Author: and fixes in particular on eighteen of them by name, among which is one Gregory, albeit Gregory be the Lxxiii. King of Scots in Bucha∣nan's Catalogue, and that King too in whom Buchanan glories so much as to record him to posterity by the Title of Gregory the Great, which he says was deservedly given him by his own People. 5. That although, in Bu∣chanan's account, this very Gregory began his Regn an. Christi 870. and finish'd it by his
death anno 892. and consequently was not only King of Scots, but of Scotland, being the Pictish Kingdom there (at least as 'tis commonly suppos'd) had been utterly de∣stroy'd, full thirty years before the very first of his Reign: yet if his being either King of Scotland or King of Scots be no truer than Buchanan's Relation of his invading Ire∣land, fighting a great Battel victoriously there against the two Protectors or Tutors of the young King Duncanus a Minor, and then visiting this young King at Dublin where he resided, and then appointing new Tutors for him, and last of all taking with him to Scot∣land threescore Irish Hostages out of the se∣veral Provinces of Ireland: I dare say there was never any such thing, or Person or Prince as Gregory King of Scots. For besides what I have given before (page 23 & 24.) to disprove this great fiction of Gregory the Great, either conquering or at all invading Ireland: 'tis clear out of all the Irish Antiquities recording the Danish Wars, that not the Irish, nor any Irish King, Minor or not Minor, did possess Dublin at that time, but the Danes. And in∣deed, to confirm this truth, the Annals of Ʋlster tell us, that in the year of our Lord 871. two great Danish Captains, viz. Ainlaph and Juor came from Albania to Ath-Cliath (alias Dublin) with two hundred sail, and an
exceeding great Prey of English, and Brittons, and Picts. whom they brought Captives to Ire∣land. So that Dublin most certainly was, in the Reign of that Gregory of Scotland, not under any Monarch or other Irish King, as no more was it in a hundred and fifty years fol∣lowing, but in the power of the Danes, who were at least the first Re-builders of it much a∣bout the same time that Buchanan supposes it to have been the Metropolitan City of Ireland; tho it came not to be so till Henry the Second's Reign. For he indeed was the first King or Lord of Ireland that ever kept his Court there, and by appointing it the Residence of his Vice-Roys gave it in a little time so great splendor, that the Forger seeing it so in his own time, thought fit in much earlier times to place his forged Irish Monarch (of Gregory of Scotlands story) Duncanus in it as in the Royal Mansion of the Kings of Ireland. Whereas to the contrary, nothing is more known in the Irish Histories, than that the City of Ta∣rach full twenty miles from Dublin, was the Royal Seat of the Kings of Ireland, till its de∣struction by the first Danish War, and in the same days Dublin at best but a very mean place respectively. 6. That nevertheless, as I am apt enough to believe, that, allowing Cambden the liberty of an hyperbolical expression, he has upon sufficient grounds told us, that the Earls of Argile derive their Race from the an∣cient
Princes and Potentates of Argile, by an in∣finite descent of Ancestors: so I am verily per∣suaded that by how much the Genealogy of Kings must be more narrowly sifted than that of any Subjects, by so much Gratianus Lucius has upon surer grounds exactly derived in a direct Line the descent of James the sixth of Scotland, and first of Great Brittain, not only through so many Kings his Predecessors of Scotland from the ancient Kings of Argile, up along to Fergus I. nor only from those before that very Fergus, through fourteen Generations up to Reuda: but even before this Reuda, through fifty three Generations, whereof Twenty four were Monarchs of Ire∣land, up along to Herimon, the first sole ab∣solute Monarch of the Milesian blood in that Kingdom, even so long since as Three thousand years, wanting only seven. Nay, I am likewise persuaded, that he has also very exactly in two other Lines, carried up the de∣scent of the same King James, through thirty one other Monarchs of Ireland to the said Herimon: as also in a fourth and fifth Line through four and twenty more of the Irish Monarchs (and here I mean twenty four more wholly different from all those fifty six already given of Herimons Race.) up along to Heber; who being the stock in these two last Lines, makes the 25th King of Ireland in this number ascending upwards: for so he
was (during his short life) in a joynt So∣vereignty, with his foresaid Brother Herimon. 7. That undoubtedly this derivation of King James through so many Lines for three thou∣sand years, and from the Loins of eighty one Irish Monarchs, besides all the truly real both Kings of Scotland, and Kings of Scots or Dal-Riada and Argathelia in Scotland, given us at large by Gratianus Lucius (in his Camb. Evers. page 242. 243, and 244.) as it is by many degrees a much more ancient, so it is a much more glorious derivation of the Royal Pedigree, than either Buchanan, or Boethius, or Major, or indeed any other Scottish Histo∣rian, nay or even any Scottish Herald what∣soever among those called English Scots, was capable to make even so much as in any man∣ner, well or ill, as being wholly ignorant of the Irish Antiquities, which they could nei∣ther understand nor read, if they had had 'em. And these are the Animadversions I desire them take to thought who shall either per∣suade themselves they can reconcile the diffe∣rence 'twixt the Scottish and Irish Histories concerning Fergus, or except against me for laying it open, how justly soever the story of Him and Coilus, given by me (page 20) out of Buchanan, has put a necessity on me to do so here.
There is a passage in my 21 page, that says, The Romans built Towers and Bulwarks all along the Southern Coast of Brittain, at conve∣nient distances, against the landing of the Irish on that side out of their plundering Fleets. Herein also I followed my Author Keting, if I under∣stand him rightly. But having since consulted Cambden, I found that either Keting had mi∣staken the matter, or I him. For the truth is, that albeit in relation to the Caledonians, or Picts, and Scots inhabiting, or those dri∣ven at that time to the Countreys lying North of Grahams Dyke, the foresaid Towers or Castles, must be acknowledg'd built in the South; yet in relation to the whole Island of Great Brittain, or to us now in England, they were not so. Which, and whatever else concerning either that Dyke or Wall of the Romans, that you may the more fully understand, take this following Extract out of Cambden, according to Hol∣lands translation of him. Camden in his Scotia. and Ster∣ling Sheriffdom. Julius Agricola observing the narrow land or Streight by which Dunbritton Frith and Edenborough Frith are held from commixing, fortined this space between with Garrisons. So as all the part this side was then in possession of the Romans; the Enemies remov'd, and as it were driven into another Island. In
so much as Tacitus judg'd right truly, there was no other limit of Brittain to be sought for. Neither verily in the time ensuing did either the valour of Armies, or Glory of the Roman name, which scarcely could be stayed, set out the Marches of the Empire, in this part of the World, further: although with inroads they otherwhiles molested and endammaged them. But after this glo∣rious Expedition of Agricola, when him∣self was called back, Brittain (as says Ta∣citus) became For▪ let: neither was the possession kept still this far. For the Cale∣donian rittons drave the Romans back as far as to the River Tine. In so much as Hadrian, who came into Brittain in person, and re∣form'd many things in it, went no farther forward; but gave Commandment, that the God Terminus, who was wont to give ground to none, should retire backwards out of this place like as in the East, on this side Euphrates he did. Hence it is that St. Augustin (de Civ. Dei. l. 4. c. 29.) wrote in this wise: God Terminus, who gave not place to Jupiter, yielded to the will of Hadria∣nus, yielded to the rashness of Julian, yielded to the necessity of Jovian. In so much as Hadrian had enough to do to make a Wall of Turf between the River of Tine and Esk, well near an hundred miles South∣ward
on this side Edenborough Frith. But his adopted son Titus Aelius Hadrianus An∣toninus Pius, under the conduct of Lollius Ʋrbicus, whom he had sent hither his Lieutenant, repell'd the Northern Enemies back again beyond Bodotria, or Edenborough Forth; and that by raising another Wall of Turf, namely besides that of Hadrianus, as Capitolinus writeth. [Which other Wall that it was reared in this very place, where∣of I now speak, and not by Severus, as 'tis commonly thought, Cambden produces no other argument than twoancient Inscripti∣ons digged up therein.] But when the Nor∣thern Nations, (viz. Picts and Scots) in the Reign of Commodus, having pass'd over this other Wall, made much waste and great spoil in the Countrey, Severus the Emperour repair'd the Wall of Hadrian. Howbeit, afterwards the Romans brought eftsoons the Countrey lying between under their subjection. For Nemus hath record∣ed, that Carausius under Dioclesian streng∣thened the Wall of Edenborough Frith an other time, and fortified it with seven Castles. Lastly, the Romans, when Theo∣dosius the younger was Emperour, fensed this Wall under the conduct of Gallio of Ravenna. Now (says Bede) they made a Turf Wall, rearing it not so much with
stone as with Turfs (as having no cunning Artificer for so great a piece of Work) and the same to no use, between two Friths or arms of the Sea, for many miles in length: that where the fence of Water was wanting, there by the help of a Wall they might defend their borders from the invasion of Enemies. Of which work, that is to say, a very broad and high Wall, a man may see to this day most certain and and evident remains. This Wall began, as the Scots now say, at the River Aven, which goes into Edenborough Frith, and ended at Dunbritton. But Bede says. it be∣gins at a place call'd Pen-wael (in the Brit∣tish Tongue Pengual, in English Penwalton, in Scottish Ceual, but all deriving no doubt from the Latin word Vallum, and all im∣porting the Head of the Wall) two miles from Abercurving; and endeth, as the com∣mon sort think, at Kirk-Patrick (the native soil, as some write, of St. Patrick the A∣postle of Ireland) near unto Cluyd; accord∣ing to Bede, Alcluid, after Nennius, Pen-al∣cloyt, which do seem all one. Now this Wall is commonly called Grahams Dyke, either of Graham a warlike Scot, whose Va∣lour was especially seen when the breach was made through it, or else of the Hill Grampie, at the foot whereof it stood.
The Author of Rota Temporum calls it the Wall of Abercorneth, that is of the mouth of the River Where in Bede's time there was a famous Monastery standing as he hath recorded. Corneth, on English ground, but near unto that Frith or Arm of the Sea, which in those days severed the Lands of the English and Picts. Hitherto Camb∣den. But I must confess Venerable Bede is in some things or some part more particular on this Subject. For he tells us (l. 1. c. 5. Eccl. Histor. Anglor.) That Severus having come to the Empire, anno Christi 189. the Xiiii. Empe∣rour after Augustus, and entred Great Brit∣tain himself in person; thought fit, in pro∣secution of the War, and for defence of the Roman Province there from the Caledonian E∣nemies, to make a great strong Wall of Soads and Stakes, or piles of Timber with frequent Towers upon it and a broad Ditch by it all along from Sea to Sea (where nevertheless observe Paulus Orosi∣us says this Wall was carried cross the Land for one hundred and thir∣ty miles. And the same has Ado Viennensis. But George Buchanan, l. 3. says, 'tis an error in the number, and that instead of a hundred thirty two, it should be only thirty two. that Bede determines nothing of the place.) And in the xii. Chapter of that same first Book, he tells us at large of two other Walls,
even long after that time of Severus, built from Sea to Sea. The one, which is that here described by Cambden, built of Soads and Stakes by the Brittons themselves, when the first supply of Romans, come to beat back those Northern Foes, having done so, were upon their return home. The other, some time after, of stone, eight foot broad and twelve foot high, built at both the publick and private charge, by the joint concurrence of the Brittons and last Roman Legion come to defend them. Besides in the same Chap∣ter he tells us of the Towers built on the South of the Western Sea (or that of Dun-Britton) at convenient distances, to defend the Brittons from the plundering Fleets of the Barbarians. But for any Wall or Fence either of stone or Earth made under Theodosius the Younger, Bede has not a word; but rather plainly shews the contrary Chap. 13, where he tells in plain terms, that Aelius to whom the Britons made their application for new supplies again, refused to send them any: and that as for that later Wall and those Castles of stone, how strongly soever built, they were soon scaled, and forc'd by the Irish and Picts, and the miserable Britons quite o∣ver-run by both a new, even from all quar∣ters of these very Fortifications of Lime and Stone.
46. You find in the 25th Page, that I make the first Danish Invasion of Ireland to have been anno Christi 820. For so Keting has it in the Reign of Aodh Ordnighe; and him I follow'd there. But here I must fix it earlier by eight years. My warrant is from the Annals of France contracted by Eginhar∣dus, wherein you may read, that, in the Year of our Lord 812. [Classis Danorum Hiberniam aggressa, à Scotis praelio superatur] the Danish Fleet invading Ireland, was by the Scots (for so they call'd the Irish then) de∣feated in a Battel. And Aymoinus, where he relates, in the Reign of Charles the Great, that then [Classis Normannorum Hiberniam, Scotorum Insulam aggressa, commisso praelio cum Scotis, innumerabilis multitudo Normannorum extincta est, & turpiter fugiendo domum reversa est.] the Norman Fleet having attack'd Ireland, the Island of the Scots, and given them Battel, and an innumerable multitude of the Nor∣mans being kill'd in that Fight, was forc'd at last to run away shamefully, and return home. See Gratianus Lucius in his Cambrens. Evers. page 13. 47. I have insinuated page 57. that they were the Irish who gave a beginning abroad even to the Schools at Oxford. And now I add, that as Polidore Virgil says, King Alfred, having in the year of Christ 895. by his
Royal Authority approved of Oxford for a place of general studies, sent Joannes Sco∣tus Erigena thither, ut omnium primus ibi bo∣nas literas doceret, the very first publick Pro∣fessor and Teacher of good Letters there, says Pitsius page 162, who further gives this En∣comium to Erigena, that in Learning or knowledg of the Learned Arts, he had scarce his match throughout the World in that Age, [qui in omni meliori doctrina vix sui similem quenquam in illa Aetate per terrarum orbem ha∣buerit.] Now it is clearly demonstrable both out of History, and the surname Erigena, that this very Joannes Scotus Erigena was an Irish man, and that not only by Education and breeding, as Harpsfield grants he was, but by extraction and birth. The proofs at large may be seen in Lucius, page 148. where he quotes Nicolaus I. the Pope, Anastasius, Malmsbury, Hoveden, Westmonasteriensis, Ʋsher, and last of all Edward Matthews (de Scrip∣tor. Angl. Bened. page 166.) who particularly notes, That this Joannes Scotus, was in Latin surnamed Erigena, because of his birth in E∣ri; For so Ireland has been always call'd by the Natives to this very day, and was then by others too. Erigena therefore being the same with Hibernigena, you may con∣clude that if Angligena, and Francigena, im∣port the one an English man, the other a
French man born: so must Erigena an Irish man by birth. Nor is any thing said here of Erigena in any wise inconsistent with Camb∣den's relation out of the old Annals of the Abbey of Winchester. Wherein, after telling how King Alfred had recall'd the Muses to Oxford, and built three Colledges there, one for Grammarians, another for Philosophers, and a third for Divines; 'tis further said, that in the year of Christs Incarnation 806, be∣ing the second year of St. Grimbald's coming in∣to England, the first Regents and Professors in the Divinity Colledg were St. Naoth an Abbot, and holy Cambden trans∣lated by Hol. page 378. Grimald a right excellent Professour of the most sweet written Word of holy Scrip∣ture. All this might be true, and yet Erigena be and continue still the first Professour of the Learned Arts and good Letters at Ox∣ford. Where I relate (page 34.) the famous Battel fought at Clantarff by the brave Brian Boraimh, I Hanmer, pag. 91. pass by Hanmers relation of it. Even as I have all along pass'd by many ther of his stories concerning Ireland. As for Example, 1. That of Gurguntius, the son of Belinus, King of Great Brittain, to have met at Sea about the Isle of Orkney, as
he return'd from the Conquest of Denmark, a Fleet of sixty Sail of Spaniards, with Men and Women, commanded by the Governour of Baiona, seeking some Countrey to inhabit, or live in, and to have assign'd them Ire∣land, &c. 2. That other yet more ridiculous one out of Harding (and Mewinus a Brit∣tish Chronieler quoted by Harding) Harding lived in the Reigns of Henry V. Hen∣ry VI. and Ed∣ward IV. How Gathelus and Scota came to these Nor∣thern parts, anno Christi 75. 3. That of Fredelenus King of Denmark, in the Reign of Augustus Caesar, to have invaded Ireland, and taken Dublin, though not by force, but by the help of Swallows firing the City with fire tied to their wings: though himself was presently forc'd by the Kig of Leinster to de∣part and run away to his Fleet. 4. That of Frotho III. King of Denmark when our Sa∣viour was born, to have made all Ireland tri∣butary, and been Monarch thereof. As also that other in him (out of Saxo Grammaticus and Albertus Krantzius) concerning Fro∣tho IV. (thirty years after the former) his having sent the Giants, and the huge Mon∣ster Startucerus to invade the same King∣dom. 5. That, of King Arthur of Great Brittain, and Gillomar King Hanmer, page 50, 51, and 52. of Ireland, Mark King of
Cornwall, Sir Tristram, and La Bel Isod, &c. though, besides the Books of Houth, he quotes also Florilegus, and Fabian, Caxton, Holing∣hed, Flemming, and Harding for'em. 6. That of his genealogy of Fionn mhac Cuuail, and his making this Fionn, and his Associats both, to have been Giants and of Danish birth: whereof I have spoken before, page and therefore need not say any more in this place. 7. That of his three vast Armies of Foreig∣ners invading Ireland by combination in seve∣ral Provinces at one time: and this to have been the time of Constantine the Great's Em∣pire at Rome. The first, of thirty thousand, landed at Derry in Ʋlster, and their Navy fired, and themselves too in one Battel slain by Conn Ceadchathach, one of the Princes of that Province, as he calls him. The second, of a greater number, landed at Skerries not far from Dublin; but destroy'd in one other Battel by Diarmuid Lambdhearg King of Lein∣ster, who (says he) kill'd six and thirty thou∣sand of them on the spot. The third, and it much more numerous yet, landed in Moun∣ster, and utterly destroy'd at Fentra: when the Forces of all Ireland encountring them, slew seven score thousand of them in that one Field. 8. That (where ever he had it; for he tells not where) of the Battel of Garistown and Arcath (or, as the Irish call it, Ardchath)
fought, as he says, in the reign of Cairbre Lif∣for, Monarch of Ireland, by the seven Kings of that Nation and their Army 65000 Horse and Foot, against the Danish Bownies (who had been formerly entertain'd by those Princes to defend their Coasts, but now rebell'd) being 28700, hardy resolute Warriours: and fought well-nigh a whole day with equal Fortune so mortally, that Horses were up to their bellies in blood: until at last Fortune favouring the righteous Cause of the Princes, they put these rebellious forein Bownies to a total rout, and edg of the Sword all of them, although it cost their side also very dear, even the lives of four of their Kings, and nineteen thousand seven hundred and sixty others. All these Relations, though given as true ones by Hanmer at large, I have pass'd by. First, because of their manifest repugnancy to all the Irish Chronicles. Nay, because there is not one word or syllable of any of them in Doctor Ketings Irish Chronicle, which yet is an ample Summary of all the Authentick or esteemed Chronicles and Histories of that Na∣tion, at least of such as relate to their Mo∣narchs. And because all reason tells us, that the Irish Antiquaries, who give in a manner the most minute particulars of all the Inva∣sions and Fights in that Countrey, either a∣mongst their own Princes, or against Forei∣ners
and Battels lost, and Victories obtain'd at any time under any of the several Mo∣narchs of Ireland for much above two thou∣sand years until the English Conquest, an. 1152. would never have omitted at least these migh∣ty Victories told us by Hanmer, which, if true, would much more have made for the glory of their Nation, than many or most (or per∣haps any) of those other so exactly, and minutely too not a few of them, related in their Chronicles. Secondly, because of all these following particulars, than which no∣thing is more clear and uncontested in all the Irish Chronicles or Histories, that are not known Romances. 49. For they particularly and unanimously tell us in the first place, what in effect I have said before, viz. that Gathelus himself (other∣wise by them, and in their Languages named Gacidheal, and surnamed Glas, from whom ori∣ginally the whole both Milesian and other Ga∣thelian Irish descended, and are therefore joint∣ly calld in Irish Clanna Gaoidheal, i. e. the children of Gathelus) not only never came to Ireland, nay nor into Spain neither, but was no where on Earth living some hundreds of years before Mileadh (or Milesius) was born. That under Pharaoh Cingeris he was born in Egypt, though begotten by Niall Brother to the King of Scythia. That his Father Niull was both
contemporary and acquainted with Moses, and offered to do him service & kindness too when the Children of Israel were upon the banks of the Red Sea to cross it over: Niull being then by Pharaoh's gift possessor and Lord of a large Countrey near that place where the Israe∣lites encamp'd at that time. That as the Fa∣ther Niull, so the Son Gaodheal (or Gathelus) and children after him, continued in Egypt until Pharaoh Intius banish'd the whole Race of them away, and forc'd them to seek their Adventures elsewhere under the conduct of Sruth the son of Easruth, son to the said Ga∣thelus, or Gaodheal Glas. That Mileadh (or Milesius) whose posterity long after invaded, conquered and possess'd Ireland, was the nineteenh Generation from the said Gathelus: and Pharaoh Nectanibus, being the XVth Pha∣raoh after Cingeris who had been drown'd in the Red Sea, was the King of Egypt, who gave his Daughter to Milesius in marriage. That al∣though it be from the said Gaodheal Glas, the Milesian Race in Ireland, and Race also of their Cosins that came with them out of Spain, and those and these only of all the Irish, be properly called Gaoidhil or Clanna Gaoid∣heal, i. e. the children or descendants of Ga∣thelus; yet tste Irish Language is not from him called Gaodhealc; but from an other Ga∣thelus or Gaodheal former to him: another I mean, who either compos'd, or at least re∣fin'd
and distinguish'd it into those five seve∣ral different idioms, or dialects for Poetry, Law, Genealogy, &c. so hard to be under∣stood all of them by any one man, that they would require the whole Age of a man to at∣tain unto them. Lastly, that the posterity of the later Gaodheal, I mean Gaodheal Glas, and of his Wife Scota, (at least so called) viz. the Milesian Race & their Cosins, had been posses∣sors of Ireland near 1320 years before the birth Christ. In which account, or period of time, even Cambrensis himself and Polichronicon a∣gree, as we have seen before page 6. And therefore that story of Hanmer, derived from Harding and Meuin, telling us of Gathelus and Scotas coming to these Northern parts, or landing in Ireland anno Christi 75. must be one of the most ridiculous stories in the world. They were dead well nigh two thousand years before: and in their life-time never left E∣gypt, for ought that may be known of them. In the next place they tell us, that Barto∣lanus, whom they call Partholan, enter'd, planted, and possess'd Ireland, anno Mun∣di 1956. that is, about 300 years after the Flood. Argument enough, that Hanmer knew nothing of the Irish History, when he joyn'd together Bartolanus and the Milesian off spring, as being of a company, and entring Ireland at the same time: for this also he does. And yet we have seen before, that the Milesians
came not to Ireland before the year of the World 2736. that is 731 years after Bartola∣nus had setled there. 50. Besides, they tell us particularly and unanimously that as we have often seen al∣ready in that year of the World 2736. and before Christ 1308 years, those Iherians the sons of Milesius landed and conquer'd Ireland. How then could they be conducted thither, and assign'd that Countrey for their Habita∣tion by Gurguntius King of Great Brittain. He was not in being then, nor in many Ages af∣ter. I am sure he was not King of Great Brittain, by Hanmer's own relation, until the year of the World 3580. Nor was he Con∣ductor of those Iberians to Ireland, nor did they swear allegiance to him until the year of the World 3592, and before the birth of Christ 376, according to Campions account. That is full 858 years after they had con∣quer'd that Kingdom. And therefore I need not quarrel either Campion or Hanmer, about their relating those Iberians or Spaniards, be∣fore their passing to Ireland to have dwell'd in Gascoign or towards Baiona, or within the ju∣risdiction of that so great and Capital a City then, though it be not true. Nor need I expostu∣late with them about their affirming that Gur∣guntius had the Sovereign Rule of that Coun∣trey and City, and consequently of these very
Milesians when they dwelt thereabouts, before their adventuring to Ireland. Enough is said already to ruin this whole story: And by con∣sequence, enough to overthrow all the sup∣ports of that pretended subjection of Ireland to Gurguntius. But if I mind you once more that Polichronicon, nay Cambrensis himself (who is the Ringleader as in many other, so particularly in this matter to Campion, Hanmer, and other late Authors) confesses the landing of those Iberians in Ireland, full 1800 years before the mission of St. Patrick to Ireland by Celestinus in the year of Christ 431. then I doubt whether I have not said more than e∣nough on the Subject. I am sure that by this very computation or confession of Cambrensis, and their own account of the year before Christ, wherein Hanmer and Campion say, Gurguntius met those Iberians at Sea: this year before Christ, and this meeting of Gur∣guntius at Sea must be later by a whole thou∣sand years of the World, than that assign'd by Cambrensis for the conquest made on Ireland by the same Iberians, Moreover, the Irish Antiquaries no less particu∣larly tell us, that Criossan Niad Nar was Monarch of Ireland Keting. when our Saviour was born, That this divine Generation happened in the 12th year of his Reign, and his Reign lasted
in all but four years more. That Conchabhar Abhraruadh was King before him for one year only: but before him, Lughadh Sriabhndearg had continued Monarch six and twenty years compleat. That this same Lughadh married the King of Denmarks Daughter: and before his Reign immediately an Interregnum of five years had been, which followed upon the murder of Conair Mor mhic Eidirsceoil: and before this Interregnum, the same Conair Mor had reigned full seventy years in great pro∣sperity. That, after the foresaid▪ Crioffan Niadnair, those who immediately succeeded in the Sovereign power of Ireland were Fear∣rhadlach for twenty years; then Fiacha Fionn for three; and after him Fiocha Fionnolladh for twenty seven years more. That these & those, in all seven Monarchs, were every one of them kill'd in such and such manner, and by such and such men of their own very Nation. That after the seventh of them had been slaughtered by the Athaghtuachi, or Countrey Boors and Plebeians, in their General con∣spiracy against all the Royal and noble Blood; the same Athatchtuachi set up for King of Ire∣land one Cairbre, surnamed Ceannchait, or Cait∣cheann from his Cats face, an Irish man indeed by birth, but by descent originally, that is in the Ninth generation before, come out of Denmark, as one of the King of Denmark's sons, who had
accompanied Lauradh Loinnsioch returning with Anxiliaries from France to recover his inheritance the Monarchy of Ireland; which Lauradh did, Anno 3727. according to the computation followed by Gratianus Lucius. Lastly, that this Usurper Cairbre Caitcheann was at the end of five years kill'd, and all his rebellious rout of Peasants, and their parta∣kers, overthrown by the Nobles, headed then by the rightful Heir of the Monarchy Tuathal Teachtmhor, who thereupon was received as such, being now the C. Monarch of the Milesian Race. And all these matters, toge∣ther with so many other particular appen∣dants on them, within the Reigns of those eight or nine Monarchs: which Reigns com∣priz'd the whole Reign and Life too, nay much more time before and after than the whole Reign, or Life either, of Augustus in the Roman Empire: the Irish Antiquaries give us most exactly at large. And yet not a syl∣lable of Fredelenus, nor of either of the Fro∣tho's; no nor indeed of any other forein King, or Prince, or Adventurer, so much as invading Ireland, within or near that time, though they wanted not occasion in Lughad's Reign, and in Caibre Ceannchaits (as we have seen) to re∣flect on such matters, if any such had really been.
The same, or like argument, though but a Negative one, yet founded on the general silence of all the Irish Annals, Chronicles, Hi∣stories, in the greatest concern of their Na∣tion, must be to every indifferent person a clear proof and conviction enough against the vain relations of Hanmer and Campion, &c. borrowed by them out of Cambrensis, as by him from Geffrey of Monmouth. I mean at present only those Fables of their great Brittish Heroe King Arthur's forcing the Irish Kings to pay him Tribute: and their appearing at his great Court and City of Caer Leon upon Ʋsk: and the Irish Monarch that (as they idly fain) was contemporary and tributary to him, to have been called Gillemer. In any of the Irish Annals, Chronicles, Histories, there is not a syllable of any part of these matters; no not so much as of Arthur's attempting once at any time on Ireland, or picking or having any quarrel with any of the Kings or Lords there. Nay Keting does quote Speed himself, though a late English Auhor, asserting in effect the whole to be a meer fiction, and that Ireland was neither subject nor tri∣butary to Arthur. And the Keting in his Preface. same Keting is positive here∣in, that there was never any King of Ireland by name Gillemer. Besides, that Muirchiortach Mor mhac
Ercha was not only Monarch of Ireland when Arthur was King of Great Brittain, but in peace and amity all his life with him. Where it may be added, that if Arthur was created King of Great rittain in the 18th year of his age, and was kill'd Anno 542. as Bu∣chanan says he was: then Buchanan, l. 5. Rer. Scot. in Go∣ran. Rege XLV. certainly the said Muirchior∣tarch Mor, and his two next Successours, immediately following one a∣nother, Tuathal Maolgharbh and Diarmuid mhac Cearbheoil, were those three Kings or Monarchs of Ireland that by succession were contemporary to the whole Reign of Arthur, which if Buchanan be judg, consisted of 24 years. And yet there was no quarrel at all by any of them with Arthur, much less subje∣ction to him. Also it may be added, That as Keting says, Fergusius the First of Scotland was Brother to the foresaid Muirchiortach King of Ireland. And consequently, that the Subjects of Muirchiortach were great Con∣querors in the Northern parts of Great Brit∣tain at that very time. Yea that, as Buchanan himself, in the Reign of Goranus (the XLV. King of Scotland in his Computation and Hi∣story) relates it, The great Battel of Humber, wherein Arthur was not only defeated but mortally wounded; nay in effect lost both Kingdom and life, was fought against him
by an Army of Irish Scots, however in confe∣deracy and conjunction with the Picts and some Brittons led in the same Field by Modroc∣dus against him. Out of all which may be seen how unlikely the stories of King Arthur in Polychronicon, Hanmer, Campion, &c. which relate to Ireland, are. How improbable that must be of West∣monasteriensis, in his years of Christ 497. and 592. which attributing the Monarchical power of Ireland to one Gillamurius (alias Gilli∣mer) one that was never heard of in Ireland, represents him notwithstanding as taken there by King Arthur: and thereupon the rest of the Irish Princes e'en plainly forc'd to yield themselves all and do homage to Arthur. How vain also is that of Cambrensis, to the same purpose written before, telling us, It is read, that the famous King of the Brittons Ar∣thur had the Kings of Ireland his Tributaries, and that some of them waited on him in his great Court of Caer Leon. But above all the can∣dor and ingenuity of honest Galfridus, the first forger of these among so many other Fables, appears in grain; however Cambrensis had not the confidence either to quote him for it, or to mention at all Gillamurius, though a part of it. And yet notwithstanding any thing hither∣to either in this place, or elsewhere said, I
doubt not the posterity of the ancient Brit∣tons have just reason if not to glory of King Arthurs Trophies, at least to be sorry for his untimely Death, and heartily wish, their An∣cestours had not deserv'd to see their bloom∣ing hopes in him, so suddenly vanish. Though at the same time, I must ingenuously con∣fess, there are but too too many reasons able to suspend any judicious knowing man's be∣lief of what even Buchanan himself has in our own days transmitted to Posterity, for authentick Truths of this famous Kings re∣nowned, glorious performances, viz. That he had continually been for many years, but most particularly and gloriously in twelve great Battels, victorious over the Saxons. That he took at last even York and London from them: and, after this again overthrew them in very Essex and Kent, where they were strongest and placed their last reserve. That he forc'd the remainders of them either to fly the Kingdom, or submit to his pleasure. In a word, That he restored his whole Coun∣trey, and perfect peace unto it. And that this happy effect of his pious and victorious Armes continued until the ambition, anger, and, which you please to call it, either trea∣cherous rebellion, or just indignation and re∣sentment of his Nephew Modroedus for being put by the right of Succession, gave too great
a turn to his fortunate successes; chiefly by the Scottish, i. e. Irish Army's falling from him, and their conjunction with Modroedus against him. For this also I must here particularly note, that during their confederacy and side∣ing with him, which had early begun and al∣ways continued from the very beginning of his Wars until this unlucky difference about the succession, and second unlucky Battel of Humber that followed thereupon, he also continued perpetually successful. But so soon as they joyn'd against him, fortune deserted him, and, together with him, his Countrey. But whether so, or no? or whether indeed any of those other particulars related of K. Arthur by Buchanan himself as true History, be or be not such as he would have us believe: I think enough return'd in answer to Hanmer and Campion's making the Kings of Ireland Tributary to King Arthur of Great Brit∣tain However, because I believe it not very for∣rein nor much beside the matter, I do on this occasion add, That Polidore Virgil found so little satisfaction to his mind, nay so great certainty of untruth in the relations written of this so much celebrated King Arthur, that although in his History (l. 3) he sums up in brief (that is in seven or eight lines) all the Wonders of them: yet as he calls them, so
he reputes them, no other than Vulgar stories Which to have been his inward sentiment of those relations, may be further seen by his telling us, That although King Arthur died in the very flower of his youth; yet because of his exceeding great strength of body, and no less vigorous heroick bravery of Soul, Posterity has reported almost the very same Wonders of him, which in our own time are among the Italians Romantickly sung of Rowland Nephew to Charles the Great. And this, without so much as mentioning any years at all of his Reign, is all that Po∣lidore has of this great Brittish Heroe. Save only that he was the son of King Ʋter-pen∣dragon. That if he had lived a while (i. e. his just age) longer, he had at last restored his perishing Countrey. And, that but a few years before the Reign of Henry VIII. there was in Glastenbury Cloyster a very magnifi∣cent Tomb, erected to his memory: of pur∣pose that after Ages might be thereby per∣suaded, he had been a Prince adorned with all whatever ought be reputed most excellent∣ly great and stupendious: and that this Tomb, as if it had been erected soon after his death, had certainly been design'd a memorial of his glory; whereas indeed the Cloister it self, wherein it stood, was not in being then. So this Author Polydore Virgil.
And yet after all, I cannot but acknowledg. that so great a concurrence of other Authors, together with the general vogue of King Ar∣thur, even all along to our time in these Na∣tions of England, Scotland, and Ireland, espe∣cially considering that all sides are agreed a∣bout his having existed or been, and been also about the year of Christ five hundred King of Great Brittain, must argue of neces∣sity some great extraordinary exploits of his against the Saxons. Nor truly do I see, how otherwise Polydore himself cou'd say, That if he had lived longer a while, he had enfran∣chiz'd his Countrey. Neither is it a valuable argument to the contrary, at least if we be∣lieve the judicious impartial Cambden, That the Saxon Chronologie or other Saxon Authors have nothing of him and his brave atchieve∣ments against them. I am sure I have my self read in Cambden this very day to this purpose, That he has observ'd, the Saxon Writers defective in this particular, viz. That they pass over in silence what was bravely done against their own Nation, and only care the recording what redounded to their glory, or concern'd their own People. The conclu∣sion of all is, That the Romantick stories made of King Arthur, by idle Wits in part, and part by others, who as they were equally ambitious to magnifie their Nation, and ig∣norant
or heedless, how easily they might be disprov'd out of the known undoubted Histo∣ries of the times, brought his true deeds into question so far, that no man knows which, or what to believe of them. 51. To ruin the Romantick Fable indeed of Hanmer's three incredible Armies In my 26 page my memory fail'd me, when relying upon it, as having not had the Hio∣ry of Hanmer by me then, or at hand, I suppos'd those truly incre∣dible and false numbers of men, related by him, to have been really poured into Ire∣land by the Danes in the first true War made by them on that Countrey. Whereas indeed, upon review of Hanmer himself, I found he rela∣ted those very in∣credible Numbers, as landed there long before, that is, when truly there was neither Invasion, nor any kind of Number, either of Danes or any other forein Enemies troubling that Kingdom. invading Ireland by combination at the same time, and this the very time when Constantine the Great was Emperour of Rome, Cairbre Laoffachair Monarch of Ireland, and Conn Cead∣chathach, one of the Princes of Ʋlster, &c, the Irish A∣nalists are unanimous in fur∣nishing us abundantly with particulars. Out of them it is clear and manifest, that Conn Ceadehathach was not one of the Princes of Ʋlster, as Hanmer says he was, but Monarch of Ireland. That he came to the Monarchy in
the year of the World 5324. of Christ 122, and continued Monarch thirty five years, till he was murthered by Assassines, employ'd on that Errand by Tibraid Tiriogh King of Ʋlster; which happened at least a hundred and twen∣ty years before Constantine the Great was Em∣perour of Rome. That as he was called or surnamed in Irish Ceadchatach, in Latin Cen∣timachus, from the hundred Battels which he had fought: so he fought not any of them, or other soever against any Foreiner, but all against his own Countrey-men the native Irish: nor in all his Reign, as neither indeed for some Ages before and after it, did any Foreigners invade the Irish. That although Cairbre Lissechaire was Monarch of that King∣dom; begun his Reign Anno Mundi 5456, Christi 267. and continued it twenty seven years; and so perhaps might have been con∣temporary, for some part of his Reign, with Constantine the Great of Rome: yet during his Reign there was no other Battel fought in Ireland but the Battel of Gowra. I am sure none at all mention'd by Keting; who yet makes it the chief business of his History to mention the Battels fought in the Reign of every Monarch. That the Battel of Gowra was occasion'd by a difference happening and continuing some years betwixt the family or Sept of Baoiskin, whereof Fionn mhac Cuuail was
one, and the Sept of Morna, meer Irish of the Milesian Conquest both; and both contending for the command of the standing Militia of the Countrey: and Caibre Lioffechair the Mo∣narch favouring one side, and others of great power the other; the contention at last came to a Battel, called from the place where it was fought the Battel of Gowra, where this Mo∣narch was kill'd by one Kirbe. Which is all the account Keting has of it; but without mention of any other Fight, in this Monarchs Reign. Though by his telling us the quar∣rel, and the Parties that fought, you see they were no Danes, nor Danish Bowny's, but meer Irish Bowny's: and these neither of one side; but some of one and some of the other, the quarrel requiring it should be so. These are the particulars (and many more I might add) which together with the gene∣ral reason before them given moved me to pass by so many ill-contrived stories as I have mention'd here, besides many other out of Hanmer. But for his relation of the Battel of Clantarff: being it is not only almost in every particular so contrary to all the Irish Chronicles, but indeed as to the White Danish Knight, and his injur'd Bed, and Sword and Scabbard, and thirty thousand Danes landed with him, &c. a meer Romantick story: there needs no more be said of it. Nor am I mo∣ved
at all by Hanmers quoting the Book of Houth for himself both in this Relation and several other. 1. Because (for many reasons needless to be given here) I take not the Book of Houth, as neither indeed any English or other Foreign Author, to be of any credit in such matters of Irish Antiquity as preceded the English Conquest in Ireland, if otherwise in themselves either improbable, or contradict∣ing the whole current of the genuine Mo∣numents of that Nation, extant still, and written in their own Language. That is to say, in a Language, which neither the Authors of the Book of Houth, nor other English Wri∣ters, nor any Foreiner whatsoever could un∣derstand without the help of a very skilful perfect Scholar in it, even such a one, as a∣mong ten thousand Irish Natives cannot be found at present, nor could for many Ages past. 2. Because, having never seen that Book of Houth, I cannot rely on Hanmers quotation of it; as whom I have manifestly found in several places to make too bold with several other Authors. For having these Au∣thors at hand, perused and compared them with his quotations of them, I have reason to persuade my self, that either he never read 'em, or (which must be worse) wilfully im∣pos'd upon them against his own knowledg.
53. Where I distinguish (page 95.) the pre∣sent Scottish Nation into Irish and English Scots: you are to suppose that very many among these must of necessity be Descendants partly of the more ancient Britons, who some∣times inhabited the Northern Parts of Great Brittain, and partly too of the Pictish Nation. For the Irish that conquer'd both' were not so numerous then as to plant the one half, nay nor a third part of all those Countreys now comprehended under the name of Scot∣land; though they became Lords of all by that Battel wherein they destroy'd utterly the Pictish Kingdom. So that you may conclude, the present English Scots (as they are common∣ly call'd, but not those other who go by the name of Scoti Albini George Bu-l. 2. Rer. Scotic. page 54. tells us, That in the be∣ginning, as well the colonies sent by the Irish to the North of Great Brit∣tain, as those that sent them, went by the common name of all their Nation, to wit that of Scoti, or Scots. But soon after, to distinguish the one from the other, those in Ireland were called Scoti Jerni, that is Irish Scots, and these in Brittain, Scoti Albini, i. e. Albanian Scots. So says he. And the distinction is proper and sig∣nificant enough. But that other, which the Irish make, even to this day in their own Language, 'twixt an Irish and an English Scot, is no less observable. For the former they call Albanach Gaodhleach, denoting both the Countrey of his Birth Albania, and the Stock of his Ex∣trnction Gathelus; but the latter they call Albanach Gallda, i. e. a Saxon or English Albanian.) are a mix'd People, descended part from Britons & Picts, and part from Saxons
and Normans, whether any be remaining still of Danish posterity there, I cannot tell, nor is it necessary in this place I should. What may be of more advantage for understanding somewhat better those affairs of Scotland is, I doubt not, this following passage out of Cambden, After that the Scots were come into Brittain, and had joyn'd themselves un∣to the Picts, albeit they never ceas'd to vex the Brittons with skirmishes and inroads, yet grew they not presently into any great State, but kept a long time in that corner where they first arrived, not daring, as Beda writes, for the space of 127 years to come forth into the Field against the Princes of Northumberland. Until at one and the same time they had made such a slaughter of the Picts, that few or none of them were left alive: and withal the Kingdom of Nor∣thumberland, what with civil Dissentions, what with Invasions of the Danes, sore sha∣ken and weakned, fell at once to the ground. For then all the Northern Tract of Brittain became subject to them, and took their name, together with that hithermore Coun∣trey on this side Cluyd and Edenborough Frith. For that it also was a parcel of the Kingdom of Northumberland, and possess'd by the English Saxons, no man gainsayeth. And hereof it is that all they which inhabit the East part of Scotland, and be called Lowland-men, as one
would say of the Lower-Country, are the very off-sping of the English Saxons, and do speak English. But they that dwell in the West Coast, named Highland-men, as it were of the upper Countrey, be meer Scots, and speak Irish, as I have said before; and none are so deadly Enemies, as they be unto the Lowland men, which use the English Tongue as we do. Hitherto Cambden, (in his Britannia, Tit. Scots. pag. 126. Holl. Translat.) But as well to give the true reason why, as to particularize more exactly that period of time during which the genuine Scots had ceas'd from acts of hostility against the Sa∣xons, I add out of V. Bede (in his Eccles. Hi∣stor. of England. l. 2. c. ult.) That Anno Dom. 603. Edan, King of those Scots that inhabited Brittain at that time, moved by the success of the Northumbrian King Ethel∣frid against the Britons, drew to the Field [cum immenso exercitu] with an exceeding great Army against him, but was overcome, and fled with a few. That in the most fa∣mous place, call'd Degsestan, i. e. the stone of Degsa, almost his whole Army was slain. That nevertheless, in the same Fight, Theo∣baldus, Brother to this Ethelfride, with all the Force headed by him, was in like man∣ner kill'd. And that from that time for∣ward to this very day (says Bede, meaning the day when he writ this) none of all the
Scottish Kings had been so daring, as to give Battel to the English Nation. Which being the words of Bede truly rendred in English: and the years of his Age being 59. when he ended all his Works (and consequently this History) as himself says: and seeing also that he was born Anno Dom. 677. it follows, That so long at least as 136 years after Degsestan Fight, the Scots engag'd not a∣gainst the English. But whether after this term expir'd, they attack'd them again be∣fore they had ruin'd the Pictish Kingdom, and at the same time seiz'd so great a part of the Northumbrian, I know not. 54. What you might have perus'd already page 129▪ as derived either from Cambrensis, or Cambden, or both, viz. of the original erup∣tion of the great Ʋlster Lake, call'd in Irish Loch Erne, and cause thereof, is abundantly refuted by Gratianus Lucius, in his Book en∣titled Cambrensis Eversus, page 132, and 133. Which having not seen before my own fore∣said 127▪ page had been wrought off the Press, makes me give now this other, which as it is much fuller, so I doubt not a much better and truer account, in every respect of that matter. The Relation of Cambrensis (To∣pograp. Hib. d. 2▪ c. 9.) may be rendred thus in English. There is in Ʋlster a Lake of vast extension, thirty miles long, and fifteen broad; unto which, as they say, a wonder∣ful
chance gave beginning. In that Coun∣trey, which is now the Lake, there was in very ancient times a most vitious Nation, but chiefly and incorrigibly above all other People of Ireland, given over to that sin we call Bestiality. And there was amongst them a Prophetical saying, That so soon as a certain Well of that Countrey were at any time left uncovered (for out of re∣verence to it, proceeding from barbarous superstition, it had both a covering and sig∣nature, or lock) it should presently over∣flow so prodigiously as to drown the whole Countrey thereabouts. Which accordingly happen'd on this occasion. One of the Countrey Women having open'd it to bring Water home, it chanc'd that before she had throughly done, she heard her Child a little distance off crying: and going in haste to still him, she forgot to cover the Well. Whereupon it overflow'd on a sudden so strangely, that not only the Woman her self and her Child with her, but all the People universally and all the very Cattel too of the whole Countrey for very many miles, were, as by a particular and Provin∣cial Deluge, covered, overwhelmed, pe∣rished utterly in the Waters. As if the Au∣thor of Nature had judg'd that Land un∣worthy of Inhabitants, which had been con∣scious of such enormous turpitude against
Nature. And indeed that such had been the original of this Lake, it is no improbable argument, that the Fishermen upon it do manifestly in fair serene weather see, under them in the Water, Church Turrets, which according to the fashion of those in that Land are not only narrow and high, but round withal; and that they often shew them to passengers wasted over this Lake, who are strangely astonished at the sight and cause. You are also to note, That the River which abundantly flows out of the same Lake, being one of the nine Principal Rivers of Ireland, namely the Ban, did even from the beginning (that is, ever since the time of Bartholanus) though in a much smaller stream, flow from the foresaid Well all along that Countrey, other Waters fal∣ling into it still as it went farther off. Hi∣therto Gerald of Wales. But to this Rela∣tion of his, it will not be amiss to add what Cambden says applying it, and interpreting and making this nameless Pool to be the famous Loch Erne of so many miles in length and breadth, and the People destroy'd to have been some Hebridians got thither. Beyond Cavan (says he) Cambden's Ire∣land in Hollands Translation of it, page 106. West & North, Fermanach presenteth it self, where sometimes the Erdini dwelt▪
a Countrey full of Woods, and very bog∣gish. In the midst whereof is that famous and greatest Meere of all Ireland, Loch Erne, stretching out forty miles, bordered about with shady Woods, and passing full of in∣habited Islands, whereof some contain a hundred, two hundred, three hundred acres of ground: having besides such store of Pikes, Truots, and Salmons, that the Fisher∣men complain oftner of too great plenty of Fishes, and of the breaking of their Nets, than they do for want of draught. This Lake spreadeth not from East to West (as it is describ'd in the common Maps) but, as I have heard those say who have taken a long and good survey thereof, first at Bel Tarbet, which is a little Town farthest North of any in this County of Cavan, it stretch∣eth from South to North fourteen miles in length, and four in breadth. Anon it draw∣eth in narrow, to the bigness of a good River, for six miles,, in the Channel where∣of standeth Iniskellin, the principal Calste in this Tract, which in the year 1593. was defended by the Rebels, and by Dowdal a most valiant Captain won. Then, coming Westward, it enlargeth it self most of all, twenty miles long, and ten broad, as far as to Belek: near unto which is a great down∣fal of Water, and as they term it, that
most renowned Salmon's Leapue. Á com∣mon speech among the Inhabitants thereby, is That this Lake was once firm ground, pas∣sing well husbanded with Tillage, and re∣plenish'd with Inhabitants; but suddenly for their abominable buggery committed with Beasts, overflown with Waters, and turn'd to a Lake. Though Almighty God (says Giraldus) Creator of Nature, judg'd this Land, privy to so filthy Acts against Nature, unworthy to hold not only the first Inhabitants, but any other for the time to come. Howbeit this wickedness the Irish Annals lay upon certain Islanders out of the Hebrides, who being fled out of their own Countrey, lurked there. So he. Against these Relations, the one of Giraldus Cambrensis, and the other of Cambden; though the later, as to the original of this Lake, is wholly grounded on the former, Gratianus Lucius opposes many Reasons. 1. That all the Irish Annals and Histories, who treat of Loch Ern, attribute the original of it, not to the overflowing of any Well or River, but to a meer eruption of Waters out of the very entrails of the Earth, without any kind of mention of Bestiality or other sin of the Inha∣bitants which might at all any way deserve it. 2. That this Eruption happened in the Reign
of Fiacha Lauranne But Keting says it happen'd un∣der the Reign of Tighermhais (a∣lias Tighterm∣huir) forty six years before Fiacha La∣bhraina came to be King. King of Ireland, immediately after the great Victory got by Him over the remainders of the Nation call'd Fir-bholg, who till then had kept and inha∣bited that Tract of ground where this Lake did so burst forth on a sudden: and consequently, That it happen'd before the year of the World 3751. because, according to to the Irish Chronology, Fiacha Laurainne came to the Crown of Ireland by killing his Predecessor Eochuidh Fuibherghlas, in the year of the World 3727. and held it twenty years more, or rather to the year of the World 3751. when himself was likewise kill'd by Eochuidh Mumho that succeeded him in the Sovereign∣ty. 3. That such, and so early to have been the original of this Lake, without either be∣stiality, or Well, or other enormous or mira∣culous cause mention'd by any Irish Records or Books, Amhirgin the son of Amhalgadh mhic Mholruana had delivered in the Etymo∣logical Book which he not only compos'd of all the chief places, Countreys, Tracts of Ireland, but rehears'd before Diarmuid O Ce∣arbheoil the Monarch, and other Princes and Peers of the Nation assembled together at Tarach, about the year of Christ 500: adding
withal in the same Book, that some former Historians were of opinion, This Lake had a long time, yea many Ages after the begin∣ning, taken its denomination of Erne a Maid servant to the famous Meabh Chruachain, Queen of Connaght, drown'd therein. Which Meabh Chruachain was Daughter to Eochuidh Feilioch the Monarch, Author of the Pentarchy, who ended both his Reign and life in the year of the World 5069. that is, according to the account follow'd by Lucius, a hundred and thirty one years before the Incarnation of our Lord. 4. That hence appears not only the falsity of the Relation it self, but the Igno∣rance of the Relatour Cambrensis (in the Histo∣ry of Ireland) where he says, That Church-Towers were seen in that Lake he describes to have had so prodigious an original: insinu∣ating hereby, as if Loch Ern had its begin∣ning after the plantation of Christianity in that Kingdom. Whereas we have now seen it was broke out even 1427. before the very birth of Christ, which was in the year of the World 5199. Besides, it is most certain, that those high, round, narrow Towers of stone, built cylinder-wise, whereof Cambrensis speaks, were never known or built in Ireland (as indeed no more were any Castles, Houses, or even Churches of stone, at least in the North of Ireland) before the year of Christ 838.
when the Heathen Danes possessing a great part of that Countrey, built them in several places, to serve themselves as Watch-Towers against the Natives. Though ere long, the Danes being expuls'd, the Christian Irish turn'd. them to another and much better (because a holy) use, that is to Steeple-Houses or Bell-Fries, to hang Bells in for calling the People to Church. From which later use made of them, it is, that ever since to this present, they are call'd in Irish Cloctheachs, that is Bell-Fries, or Bell-Houses; Cloc or Clog, sig∣nifying a Bell, and Teach a House in that Lan∣guage. And further yet, my Author Gratianus Lucius adds out of the undoubted Monuments or Lives both of Columb Cille and S. Patrick, that even as early as either of those holy men's time, Loch Erne was the same it is now. For O Donel writes in his Life of Columb Cill l. 1. c. 88. That S. Columb by his special blessing and Prayer to God, obtained not only that fecundity of Fish to the Lake, which ever since it has been blessed with, but that the cataract or Fall of it should be lower than it was be∣fore, whereby the leap of the Salmon became easier. And S. Ewin writes, part 2. c. 110. of S. Patric's Life, that this great Apostle of Ireland, to punish the frowardness of the Lord of the Countrey next adjoyning to the Nor∣thern side of this Lake, curs'd the same side
of it, and so bereav'd it of its former fruitful∣ness, Out of which Narrations or Lives (whatsoever may be said or thought of the Miracles) it is plain enough, that so long before these narrow, high, round Turrets built by the Danes, Loch Erne was the same it is at present. 5. That Ptolomee, who flourish'd about the year of Christ 153. describes Loch Erne in the same manner, and place the mo∣dern Geographers do, calling also the Inha∣bitants of that Tract Erdini. 6. That nothing can be more clear and manifest than Girald and Cambden's contradicting one another, or certainly both truth and experience each of them. For Cambrensis plainly says, that the River of Ban flows out of the Lake, he re∣ports to have had the foresaid prodigious original; and Cambden no less plainly and positively averrs that Lake which had so strange a beginning to be the Lake Erne: and yet all Ireland knows, and Cambden himself in several places, though more perceptibly to the eye in his Map of Ireland, shews that the said River Ban flows, not out of Loch Ern, but out of another, by name Loch Neauch, which is at least threescore miles from the Lake Ern. 7. And lastly, that there are no such Irish Annals known or heard of in Ireland, which impute either that cause or effect of it, where∣of Cambden speaks, to those Hebridians men∣tion'd
by him, or to any other People or Na∣tion whatsoever. So that, out of all we may safely conclude, the whole Relation of the foresaid infamous Original of Loch Erne to be no better than an old Wives Tale. Which after I had lighted by chance on Gratianus, I thought my self the rather obliged to observe here, because I had formerly in writing and printing what you have in my 59 page, either seem'd to be somewhat persuaded by the Authority of Cambden (though only ta∣king up the relation from Cambrensis, and withal telling us, I know not from whom, of Irish Annals in the case) or because at least I had not sufficienly cleared so injurious a Re∣port. 55. And now let me tell you on this occasion, that e'n such another if not yet more injurious, ill grounded, false Report is that which the same Cambrensis is the only first Original Au∣thor of, in his Topography of Ireland (dist. 3. cap. 25.) where he tells us, That the People of Tirconel, a Countrey in the North of Ʋlster, created their King in this barbarous abominable manner. That all being assem∣bled together in one place, a white Beast was brought before them. Unto which he that was chosen to be made King approach∣ing, declared himself publickly before them all to be such another, that is, a meer Beast.
Whereupon the white Beast was cut in pieces, boil'd in Water; and, that done, a bath prepar'd for him of the Broth. Into which entring, and bathing, and then feeding, and all the People too about him feeding in the same manner on the flesh boil'd in it; at last he drinks of that very broth wherein he had already bathed; and this also not by reaching or taking it out of any Cup or other Vessel, nay not so much as out of the palm of his hand, but by stooping and putting down his mouth like a Beast on all sides of the very bathing Cistern or Caul∣dron at large, wherein he had wash'd. Which being over, the whole Rite and Solemnity of his inauguration was ended, and he compleatly install'd in his Kingship of Tirconel. So says Cambrensis, intimating hereby, as if this filthy custom held in that Countrey even in his own time. But Keting has abundantly refuted this no less filthy abominable Fiction; where he shews at large, in the Reign of Brian Boraimh, the known, solemn, decent and significant Rites, yea and places too of Inaugurating every King and Prince in all the Provinces of Ire∣land: and who were the Lords, or which were the Families that bore the chief Offices at the respective Inaugurations. Particularly as to the Prince of Tirconel, namely O Donel,
of whose creation this Fable of Cambrensis must be understood, the same Keting shews that the place both of his Election or Inauguration or Investiture was Cill-mhic-Creunain; and the chief Officers at it were O Fiorghaill, who carried before him and solemnly put into his hand the White Rod, which was his Scepter, and O Gallechuir, who was his Marshal. But Gratianus Lucius (page 316 of his Cambrensis Eversus) takes a little more pains in this particular. He tells in the first place, how, when any was to be created O Donel, all the Estates of the Countrey met together upon a certain Hill. And how, the Assembly being full, one of the greatest Peers amongst them, rising up and standing in the middle of the multitude with a pure white, streight, un∣knotty Rod in his hand, address'd himself to the new Elect in this manner and words, Receive Sir the auspicious Ensign of your Digni∣ty, and remember to imitate in your Life and Government the whiteness, and streightness, and unknottiness of this Rod: to the end no evil Tongue may find cause to asperse the candour of your Actions with blackness, nor any kind of corruption or tye of friendship be able to pervert your Justice. Take therefore upon you in a lucky hour the Go∣vernment of this People, and exercise the Power given you hereby with all freedom and security. And how, these words spoken, he deliver'd
the Rod into the Prince's Hand: and so the whole Solemnity was perclosed. In the next place Lucius desires it may be consider'd, that the whole controversie in this matter with Cambrensis may be in short reduced to these Queries, Whether we ought to believe one Hear-say-mans denial before the affirma∣tion of very many both ear and eye-witnes∣ses? Whether Domestick Writers, especially those whose peculiar employment, calling, charge it is are not more likely to deliver the truth of matters to Posterity, than a meer Foreigner that not only never was in the Countrey he speaks of (as Cambrensis was never in Tirconel) but shews himself in too too many Instances a perfect Enemy even to all that wish it well? And whether we owe belief rather to publick National Records and Monuments, than to the Narration of a private man, which was not more purposely invent∣ed by some Bard or Ballad-monger, than de∣sirously taken up by an invidious Writer? Thirdly to these and after these Questions Lu∣cius in effect answers and reasons thus: That without question the Irish Chroniclers wrote of these matters to discharge the duty of their place; but Girald both in his Topographical and Historical Books of Ireland (such as they be) yielded so far to passion, even that of extream hatred, as made him not only ob∣scure
the Truth, but suppress it even with manifest Lyes and Fictions. That no indiffe∣rent considering Person can believe, that St. Patrick, who accurately surveying this Coun∣trey of Tirconel, converted all the People of it, and together with them instructed so their Prince Conall Gubhan in the austerest prin∣ciples of Christianity, that in a secular habit he lived an Hermits Life, would have per∣mitted such filthy dregs of Pagan superstition to remain, Jocelin, c. 138. had there been any such: and this not only among the baser obscure sort of Plebeians, but among the very most illustrious, the very Princes themselves of the People. That if such obvious and conspicuous turpi∣tude had (which is not credible) escap'd the knowledg of St. Patrick, who lived among 'em threescore years: assuredly it could by no means have escap'd either the notice or reprehension of those many other Saints, who in the succession of so many after-Ages of Christian Religion lived in that very Coun∣trey of Tirconel. That above fifty eminent Saints are upon Record of those descended from the Loins of that Conall Gubhan alone, whereof the greatest part fix'd their dwelling there, and built also there above twenty Mo∣nasteries. That the two Episcopal Sees of Doire and Rapoth were constituted in those
early days in the same most Northern Tract of Ʋlster: wherein as many Bishops and Abbots succeeded one another, so many religious Watchmen must be acknowledg'd to have been viewing far and near about them in such manner, as it was morally impossible so hideous, and withal so publick notorious a blemish, could all along, even for six hundred years compleat, till the time of Cambrensis, escape their animadversion. That betwixt many of the Bishops and Abbots of those two Dioceses, and the Lords (or Princes or Kings, which you please to call 'em) of Tirconel, there was often both very great familiar friendship and near kindred too. That if the reverence of the Princes did awe other Pre∣lates from reprehending this nasty bestial ce∣remony of their creation: undoubtedly, at least among their kinsmen Prelates, some would have been found that out of Nature and for the sake of consanguinity would have admonish'd them, and procured the reforma∣tion of it. That no man can believe, that the Saints Columb-Cille, Bathenus, Lasrenus, Fergnaus, Suibhneus, Adamnanus, and other most holy men, who had both their extra∣ction and birth, and their Education too in all Piety in Tirconel, and been such fearless undaunted tramplers under foot of all Vice and superstition, would not have cut off by the root so hideous, loathsom, brutish a custom,
if any such in their days had been. That in case these great servants of God had wanted power enough to do so: yet surely the more powerful Saints Moelbridius and Malachias, Primats of all Ireland, who derived their extraction from that Countrey of Tirconel; would not have suffer'd the example to con∣tinue. That hesides, it is beyond belief, That the very Princes themselves of Tirconel, whereof so many were famous for Humanity, Liberality, Piety, Religion, would have en∣ter'd on their Princedom by so inauspicious and execrable a Rite. Lastly, that with∣out any peradventure, if they, or their People, had prov'd herein pertinacious, yet so many pious excellent Monarchs of Ireland, as we have before seen, who had supream Authority over them, would not have connived at it. So, in effect, Lucius, against this equally injurious, vain, ridiculous, filthy Fiction, vented first of any Mortal, as the former of Loch Ern, by Girald of Wales. 56. Of Aonach Tailltinn the most celebrated Irish Fair, both for Antiquity and resemblance of the Olympic Games of Greece, exhibited there∣in (which I only mention'd in my foresaid 95 page) the Author was Lugha Lambfhada the Twelfth King of Ireland after Slanius, but Third of the Nation called Fir-bholg, e'en so long since as betwixt two and three hun∣dred years before the Milesians conquer'd that
Kingdom. The occasion this: When the Ninth and last Fir-bholgian King of the Po∣sterity of Dela, by name Eoghan, was kill'd in Battel, and the Kingdom seiz'd by new In∣vaders, the Nation of Tuadedainin, it hap∣pen'd that Tailtinn Daughter to Madhmor King of South-Spain, but Widow and Queen to the said Eoghan, having married Eochadh Garbb a Nobleman of the new Conquerors, bred the foresaid Lugha with great care and kindness in his youth. Wherefore he, when he came to the Crown, retaining thereof a most grateful remembrance, and holding him∣self bound to requite her love in the best manner he could, thought fit to ordain, as accordingly he did, for a perpetual memory of her, one and thirty days in all, viz. the fifteen immediately preceding our first day of August, and the other fifteen next follow∣ing it, to be solemnly kept in all Ages both by a general concourse of the bravest men out of all parts of the Kingdom, at a place in Meath called Tailtinn from her name, and by all sorts of manly Games and Exercises there, as those of Running, Hunting, Wrestling, Leaping, Vaulting, Tilting, &c. and by prizes also given to the Victors. That so lately before the English Conquest, as the year 1168. Ruaruidh O Conchavair the last Irish Monarch held this great Fair of Tailtinn and exhibited those Olympick Games with much
solemnity. For so Gratianus Lucius has told us in his Roman phrase, Ludos Taltinos dedit, as we have seen elsewhere. And the same Author adds, That the Calends or first day of August, though in after-times among Christians, at least those of the Roman Church, dedicated to the Chains of St. Peter, and therefore, in the Roman Calendar, call'd Petri ad Vincula, has nevertheless in all Ages been, as it is at present, in memory of the foresaid King, by all the Irish Nation call'd in their Language Lugh-Nasa, which imports in English the Re∣membrance of Lewis; for Nasa is remembrance, and Lugh, the same with Lewis or Luis. But Keting says that Queen Tailtinn, whom he ho∣nour'd so much, had been his own Wife; though whether in a third Venture, or no, he does not say. 57. There is mention made (page 122 and 213) of the Monarch Ollamh Fodhlas's having ordain'd in every Town a Receiver and Entertainer of Strangers. But the par∣ticulars of that Ordinance and practice of it as I find them in Keting and Lucius being very singular, I thought fit to give here, the ra∣ther because the Character of Gens inhospita, (that is, an inhospitable Nation) is given the Irish by Gerald of Wales (Top. dist. 3. cap. 10.) so much against Truth. And certainly, for what concerns the more ancient times, it will appear out of what here follows of their ex∣traordinary
care to provide entertainment for all Comers, that their Hospitality in those days of yore was unmatchable in Europe. I am sure it was so in any place or Countrey that ever I have read of. The dignity of an Entertainer, says Lucius, no where else used, was among the Irish bestow'd only on those descended of Noble Families. Nor was any capable of it, that was not Lord Proprietary of seven Towns, I mean Feeding Towns, (as Keting says, the Irish call in their Language all towns whatsoever properly such; Bailte Biatha;) each Town consisting of twelve Plow-lands of Irish Measure, which is three or four times twelve of English. He must besides have had seven Ploughs continually going, and withal been Master of seven Herds of Cows, each Herd consisting of a hundred and twenty full. His Mansion House so seated, as to have been accessible by four several ways. A Hog, a Sheep, a Beef, always ready in the Pot, or on the Spit, to the end that every hour without delay, whoever came might be instantly fed. The like number of Beasts ready kill'd and fley'd, to be put to the fire as the former was taken up. Every order and degree of men, according to their qua∣lity, had their Entertainment, both meat and drink, assign'd by Rule, so as the En∣tertainer, if he defrauded any was certain to
be fined for it, by the proportionable lessen∣ing of his immunities and other Priviledges. Sundry sorts of drinks, were serv'd in sundry sorts of Cups. In Glass, Wine: in Brass, Wa∣ter: in Silver, Whey: in white Cups of Ash, Beer: and in brown ones made of Fig-tree, Milk. Hitherto Lucius (in his Camb. Evers. page 130.) Who yet farther adds in the same place, out of Keting, what you will peradventure no less, if not much more won∣der at, the exceeding great number of those Free-cost entertaining Towns, or Houses de∣puted in such Towns by the publick, through∣out Ireland. In Connaght 900. in Ʋlster the like number: in Leinster, 930. in Mounster a 1030. 58. In my 217 page, there is likewise upon a far other occasion some little mention made of the victorious Monarch Tuathal Teatcht∣mhor, though much more elsewhere before in one or two places. However this place is that which as I was reviewing it, has brought to my remembrance what follows here out of Keting. As 1. That before his time, Ire∣land was equally divided into Mounster, Lein∣ster, Connaght, and Ʋlster; each of these Di∣visions meeting at a place, and of the sides of a great stone fix'd in that place, called Visneach, which is in the Countrey that goes now by the name of West Meath. 2. That
when he had after twenty five years war to∣tally subdued the Plebeian Rebels, and restor'd both the Gentry to their Estates, and the true Royal Blood and Heirs to their respective Provincial Kingdoms, he thought fit to take, as he accordingly did, with their consent, from each of those Divisions a considerable Tract of ground, which was the next adjoyn∣ing to Visneach: one East, an other West, a third South and the fourth on the North of it: and appointed all four, under the name of Meath (but as comprehending our Counties now of East and West-Meath) to belong for evermore to the Monarchs own peculiar De∣main, for the maintenance of his Table. 3. That on those four several portions, he built four several Kingly Pallaces, for himself and his Heirs, viz. Tleaghtghae on that of Mounster side; Tailltin House, on Ʋlster's; an other at Tarach, on Leinster's portion; and the fourth on the West of Visneach, taken from Connaght: ordaining withal great So∣lemnities at each of them to be kept on cer∣tain days yearly for ever. At Tlaghtghae the sacred but Idolatrous Fire to be kindled on our All Hallows Eve. All Magitians of the Kingdom to come thither that night, and sacrifice to their Deities in that Fire. All the other Fires throughout the Kingdom to be put out then, and under great penalties not
kindled again, but from or out of this holy Fire of Tlaghtghae. And every house in the Kingdom, as receiving from this new consecrated Fire, and because the ground of Tleaghthae had been formerly the Mounster King's Dominion, to pay him yearly three pence for ever. At Visneach House, or that which he had built hard by and West of it on the ground taken from the Connaght King; he ordained, That each May day for ever, a general Meeting of all the Nobility should be held, (which Meet∣ing they call'd in their Language Morhail Vis∣neach; and it may be English'd, the Magnifi∣cence of Visneach.) That two great Fires should be made at this Meeting, and betwixt them both all beasts sacrific'd to their great God Beile (which Keting conceives to have been the same with Belus) for expiating their sins, appeasing his wrath, and obtaining from him favour for the following year. That the same day and hour, in every District or Territory of the whole Kingdom, two such other Fires should be made for the like pur∣pose, that is for all the respective Inhabi∣tants to resort unto them with their Heathen Priests and sacrifices. In fine, that every Chieftain and person of Quality come to the said great Meeting at Visneach, should present the Connaght King with a Horse and compleat harness for a Horseman, as a Chiefry reserv'd
to him for that ground. Where Keting adds, that from these yearly Paganical Fires at Visneach, and elsewhere, made in those days of Idola∣try, to honour Beall, it is that ever since, even along to this very day, the Irish call the first of May Lae Beall-tine, which imports in En∣glish Beali's Fire day: for in their Tongue Lae is day, and Tine is Fire. At, or near the Palace of Tailltionn, he by a new Ordinance of his own commanded the ancient Fair, called Aonach Tailltinn (whereof we have spoke before) to be kept yearly on Lammas day with much more solemnity and a far greater conflux of people than ever. And there it was that Wedding-matches were usu∣ally treated, agreed upon, concluded betwixt the Parents of young Folks. And by this Monarchs new Law, every couple, mar∣rying there, paid six shillings eight pence (which the Irish then did call Vinghe Airgiod, an ounce of Silver) to the King of Ʋlster, as an acknowledgment of his having former∣ly been Lord of that portion. But for Tarach (alias Teambhuir) where he had built his fourth Royal Palace, I find nothing ordained by him concerning any solemnity or Assembly there. And the reason (I suppose) might be, that even the very greatest and most solemn Assembly of all the Estates in Parliament, ei∣ther to make new Laws, and repeal the old,
or to exercise any other Acts of Supream Ju∣risdiction, had been already both by Law and Custom fix'd in that place, ever since Ollamh Fodhlas's Reign, that is full 1200. years, wanting only seventeen, before Tua∣thal Teachtmhor came to be King. No more do I find any duty or Chiefry payable to the K. of Leinster. Whereof I conceive also the rea∣son might have been, That indeed (as Keting elsewhere, and upon an other occasion than this here, observes) Cairbre Niafearr the very first King of Leinster, had full two hundred and six years before Tuathal Teachtmor's time, pass'd away both his own right, and that of his Successors after him, in the foresaid por∣tion of Land wherein Tarach was built, and for ever made it over by way of sale and bar∣gain, to Connor the first King of Ʋlster and his Successours after him, in lieu of his belo∣ved Daughter by name Feilim Nua Chrothach, or Felicia the Beautiful, whom Cairbre had bought so dear to be his Wife. So dear I say, because that fourth portion from Visneach to the Eastern Sea, being in his time, and until this bargain made, part of Leinster, con∣tain'd three Cantreds of Land of the very best in Ireland, even all the Land which now goes under the name of the County of Meath (I mean East-Meath) along to Droghedagh, besides Fingale, and all the other Lands too
on that side of the River Liffy to Dublin. But if you desire to know what, or how much Land a Cantred means, being I have told but now of three Cantreds in this Fourth portion: Cambrensis, in his Hiber expug. l. 2. c. 18. an∣swers, that as well in the Irish as Brittish Tongue, by a Cantred is meant that propor∣tion or quantity of Land which usually con∣tains a hundred Villages. And whether Ke∣ting disagree in this signification of that word, I know not certainly, because I know not how much Land Cambrensis would assign to a Village, or Villa his Latin term. Of this I am certain, that Keting assigns (according to the Irish account) but thirty Feeding Towns, or Bailite iath as he calls 'm, to a Cantred, every one of them containing twelve Plow∣lands, and every Plowland a hundred and twenty acres of Irish measure, which is com∣monly three or four times greater than the English. And this is both reflection and di∣gression enough occasion'd by the mention made of Tuathal Teachtmhor the Irish Monarch in my foresaid 217. page. 59. My next Reflection is to correct an Er∣ror, which I observe in my 229. page. For there, (and whether through my own mistake or the Printers, I know not) it is said, That Con∣nor, the first Provincial King of Ʋlster, was made so by Eochuidh Feileach the Monarch
and Author of the Pentarchy, about 400 years before the Birth of Christ: whereas indeed it could not be so much, by at least two hundred and eighteen years. Because this Monarch Eochadh Feileach, who made that Connor King of Ʋlster, could not make him King before himself was Monarch; and this he was not before the year of the World 5057. in which he kill'd his Predecessor and possess'd his Throne. Now, according to the Chronology of Lucius, that year of the World was just one hundred forty two years before the Birth of our Lord; because (says he) this Birth hap∣ned in the year of the World 5199. after the deluge 2957. and in the 8th year, as some say, or (as others) in the 12th year of the Monarch of Ireland Criomthain Niadnairs Reign. Now 'tis plain, that from the year 5057, to the year 5099. no more efflux'd but 142 years. 60. The review of my 229. page, and what is given there, of that happy King of Mounster Feilim mhac Criomthain, brings to my thoughts here, a passage in Keting that is very lingu∣lar, both for the Author and matter of it. The Author is holy Bennin as the Irish call him in their Language, whom the Latins call St. Benignus, even that very beloved Disciple of St. Patrick their great Apostle, who was con∣secrated and install'd by him in his own days
and in his own stead, Arch-bishop of Ardmagh. And the matter is the magnificent and costly progress of the Kings of Cashel in former times about Leath Cuinn and Leath Mogh through∣out all Ireland. And, says Keting, it is in the Irish Book call'd Leabhar na Geart (i. e. the Book of Rights or Dues, a Book beginning with these words, Dligh gach Riogh O Riogh Cassil, and a Book written wholly by S. Benignus him∣self 1200 years since) that the particulars of that stately Progress are set down, as here they follow. Bestow'd by him (that is, by the King of Cashel, when he went that Progress) on the King of Cruachain a hundred Swords, a hundred Cups of Plate, a hundred Horses, and a hundred Mantles. Receiv'd from this Cruachain or Connaght King half a years enter∣tainment, and the Rising out (as they call it) of all the Countrey, waiting on him to Tirco∣nail. Bestow'd by him on the King of Cineal Gonuill, twenty Rings, twenty pair of Tables (which they call'd Fithchioll) and twenty Horses. Received a months entertainment, and the rising out of that Countrey, along with him to Tir-oghain. Bestow'd by him on the King of Oileach, fifty Silver Cups, and fifty Swords. Receiv'd a months entertainment, and the waiting of the Countrey on him to Tullenoge. Bestow'd by him on the Lord or Chieftain of Tullenoge thirty Silver Bowls, and
thirty Swords or Lances. Receiv'd twelve days entertainment, and waiting on (as else∣where) to Oirgialluibh. Bestow'd by him on this King (I mean of Oirghialluibh) eight shirts of Mayle, sixty Coats, and sixty Horses. Re∣ceiv'd a months entertainment at Eambaine, with the rising out into Ʋlster against Clanna Ruidhruidh. Bestow'd by him on the King of Tarach 30 shirts of Mayle, thirty Rings, a hundred Horse, and thirty Harpers. Receiv'd there a months entertainment, and the four chief. Families accompanying him thence to Dublin. Bestow'd by him on the King of Dublin ten Women, ten Ships, and ten Horses. Receiv'd a months entertainment, and this Kings Company into Leinster. Bestow'd by him on the Leinster King thirty Cows, thirty Ships, thirty Horses, and thirty young Maids which they termed Cumbhall. Receiv'd two months entertainment, i. e. one months from Ʋpper Leinster, and another from the Lower, which they call Jachter Laighion. Finally, to the Tanist of the same Low-Leinster, thirty Horses, thirty shirts of Mayle, and 30 Swords. And this was the costly splendour of that ge∣neral Progress of the Mounster Kings over Ire∣land in former Ages, when they thought fit to make or undertake it. Which Feidlimidius (alias Felim mhac Criomthain) King of that Province did in his Reign; and this no lon∣ger
since then the 845 year of Christ, for he enter'd upon that Kingdom An. Dom. 818. and retir'd from it to lead an Eremitical Life in the 27th yearafter. What the Original or Rise of it was, or what right a Provincial King of Mounster could pretend to such a Progress, I do not find. Nor do I know what moved Keting to desire the Reader not to account him the Author of the Relation. Or why so con∣trary to his custome elsewhere generally throughout his whole Chronicle, he quotes here the Author. It had been indeed very well, and much to be wish'd, that he had done so all along for his other Relations. But here perhaps he▪ thought fit to do it of purpose to decline the invidious Censure of those of other Provinces, for magnifying so much his own Province of Mounster without so good a war∣rant as Benuin's Book. Whatever his motive was, the Relation it self puts me upon some occasional observations here; which shall be in all three. First Observation; That Dublin must have been a considerable place in the days of Be∣nuinn, seeing it had then, or at least before his time a King, and was a Kingdom of it self, different from that of Leinster. And therefore that however, or whenever it was first after that time destroy'd; yet surely none of those three Norvegian Brethren, Amelacus, Sitaracus, & Juor, was the first Founder, but only the Repairer
and Fortifyer of it a little before the second Danish War. In which persuasion I'am fix'd by considering that in the Chorographical Tables of Ptolomy, who flourish'd under the Emperour T. Aurelius Hadrianus Anto∣ninus Pius, in the year of Christ 153. the Peo∣ple Eblani, and the City Eblana is placed where Dublin has always been. And there∣fore Eblana in Ptolomy is the very self-same Town we now call Dublin; the Latin Writers, Dublinium, and Dublinia; the Welsh Britons, Dinas Dulin; the English Saxons in times past, Duplin: and all from one of the two original Irish names of it. The first of them was Dubh∣linn, which imports a black Depth of Water that was there. And the second not only was, but is still among all sorts of Irish, not as Cam∣bden has it, Bala-Cleigh but Bala-Ath-Cliath, importing not the Town upon Hurdles, but the Town of the Ford of Hurdles. Which neverthe∣less is consistent enough with the Tradition that when Dublin was first built, the foundation was laid upon Hurdles, by reason the place had been deeply moorish. I could here add out of Cambden, not only that Saxo Gramma∣ticus writes, how it was pitifully rent and dis∣membred in the Danish Wars, but also that in the Life of Griffith ap Synan Prince of Wales, 'tis read that Harald of Norway, when he had subdued the greatest part of Ireland, built Deuelin. I could likewise add my own ani∣madversions
on both the one & other passage. viz. That the Irish Chronicles make no men∣tion of any Harald, either conquering any part of Ireland, or building, or so much as repair∣ing Dublin. That neither does the Author of Polichronicon agree in the one or other point deriv'd from that Life. Nay, that according to him Sitaracus or Sitric was the Noruegian Builder of Dublin. And yet I could further add that what Cambden has next out of the foresaid Life may be very true. For after tel∣ling us, his own opinion of the above Harald to be, That he was Harald surnamed Harfa∣ger, i. e. of the Fair Locks or Tresses, who was the first King of Norway, he adds, that his Lineal descent goes thus in that Life. Harald begat a Son named Auloed (alias Abloicus, Aulafus, and Olauus) Auloed begat another Auloed: this had a Son by name Sitric King of Dublin. Sitric begat Auloed, whose Daughter Racuella was Mother to Griffith ap Synan born at Dublin, whilest Tirlough reign'd in Ireland▪ And all these matters, and much more rela∣ting to them, I could dilate upon, were they to my purpose here. But they are not: because my purpose here is only to trace up the anti∣quity of Dublin as far as I can. And this I have done before out of Ptolomy, by shewing that City to have been famous in his time, which was above 1510 years since▪ But how
long before, is a thing wholly buried in obli∣vion for want of Records. And therefore I pass to my Second Observation: Which is, to give the original of those Clanna Ruidhruidgh against whom the King of Oirghillaedh (alias Ʋriel) with his People was bound to wait on the Mounster Kings in their Progress. And this I do because their name is very frequent both in the Irish Histories, and in all the Provinces of Ireland, among the ancient Irish Septs, even at this very time. In short, as their name, turn'd English, must be the Children or descen∣dents of Roderick (for thus we render the Irish name Ruadruidh:) so they had that name, as they lineally derive their descent, not from either of the two Irish Monarchs call'd by that name (though, to pass by the later, who was the very last of all the Milesian Kings of Ire∣land, yet the former of them was so long be∣fore as the LXX. Monarch in order of the same Milesian Race, who came to the Sove∣reignty of Ireland in the year of the World 4907, that is before the birth of Christ 392 years) but much earlier, from Ruadhruidh mhac Sithghe that descended from Ir one of the eight Sons of Milesius. Which Ir being dead before, or at least upon the first par∣tition of Ireland betwixt the two surviving Brothers, Heber and Herimon, and their Co∣sins:
and the foresaid Ruidhruidh mhac Sitghe succeeding in the Lot. of Ir, which was in the North, he establish'd both himself and his po∣sterity there: and in process of time became the great stock of a most numerous warlike stubborn People (and among 'em, Lords, and Princes and Kings too) whereof such as conti∣nued still within that portion of Ir & Northern Division, are by the rest of the Irish call'd Na Faoir Ʋlltaigh, which words import in our Lan∣guage the right Ʋlster men. And not only they that so remain'd within that Ʋlster Lot, but those that issued from them into the other Provinces of Ireland, where many of 'em acquir'd large Territories, have always gone under the name of Clanna Ruidhruidh, and by it are distin∣guish'd still from all other Families descended either from Herimon, or Heber, or Ith, or any else whatsoever of those very first Milesian Con∣querours. Of those of them who had so is∣sued forth into other Provinces, are the pro∣geny of Connall Cearnach in Lease, a Territory of Leinster, and those Septs in Connaght, which go by the peculiar name of Comhaicne Chon∣nacht, besides other Families in Corcaigh Mo∣ruadh and Kiarruigh; parts of Mounster. Third Observation is, That so many rich Presents made in one Progress by a Provincial King, must argue Ireland to have been at least in those days of Paganism whereof Benuinn
writes (for he himself flourish'd about 1200 years since) a Countrey fraught with exceed∣ing great Riches. And verily there are seve∣ral other strong arguments to persuade us, it was so. 1. The golden Mines discover'd there, under the X. Monarch of the Milesian Con∣quest, by name Tighernmhais, and a long time after made use of. In so much, that the Countrey abounding with gold, the next Monarch after him, viz. Munemhon, who died in the year of the World 3872. ordain'd, that all the Gentry should wear golden chains about their Necks. And his next Successor Aller∣ghoid's reign is noted in the Irish Chronicles, for golden Rings therein first used in that Na∣tion. 2. The great number of Silver shields made by the command of Euno Airgtheach, the Xvii. Monarch of the Milesian Conquest, and together with Caroches and Horses bestow'd by him on persons of Worth. He reign'd se∣ven years, and in the year of the world 3882. was kill'd in Battel by his successour, having first derived from those Silver Targets the sur∣name of Airgtheach, which imports Silver'd. 3. The numerous company of Goldsmiths every where in that Kingdom. I am sure that as Keting, (in Tighernmhais's reign) takes spe∣cial notice of his name who was the very first Master Goldsmith in those days: so does Gratianus Lucius enough of latter days, I mean
as to that matter of the great number of Gold∣smiths in 'em among the Irish. For in his 118. p. he observes out of O Duuegan that even S. Patric had in his own private Family of them at work three, namely Essuus, Bidus and Tassachus. He further adds, that scarce in the Irish Histo∣ries may be found an instance of any Chalices, Vials, or Utensils whatsoever dedicated to holy uses at the Altar or in the Church, other than of pure Gold or Silver. Besides, that the very coverings not only of Reliques but of Books, all of Silver and Gold, were so many throughout that Kingdom since it became Christian, as might easily persuade any indifferent man, that of necessity their num∣ber of Goldsmiths must have been very great. 5. The spoils of foreign Countreys, which for so many long Ages the Irish ga∣ther'd home to Ireland, as elsewhere in this Treatise has been said. 5. Their being so excellently seated for Trading, that in those days of old they were mightily frequented by Merchants out of Spain, France, Great Brit∣tain, &c. but without question much more than Great Brittain was. For proof we have the testimony of so knowing and sure a Wri∣ter as Cornelius Tacitus in his Life of Agricola: where speaking of Ireland in reference to Brit∣tain, he has these words, Melius aditus por∣tusque per commercia & negotiatores cogniti, sig∣nifying,
That the Havens and Ports of Ireland were better known by Commerce and Mer∣chants than those of Brittain. 6. The ounce of Gold yearly paid for every Nose in Ireland to the Danish Victors whilst their Dominion lasted there: which also we have seen before out of Keting. 7. The acknowledgment of Gerald of Wales himself, even for his own time, that is, for the time following the horrible desolation of that Countrey by the long and cruel Danish Wars, and the frequent continual plundering of it by the Norvegians and other Easterlings for about a hundred and fifty years at least. Yet Gerald, who in the second or third Age after so much Riches had been car∣ried away thence by those plundering Hea∣thens, was an Eye-witness himself of what remain'd still even in King Hen. II. reign, pro∣fesses that Ireland at this very time abounded with Gold. For Aurum quoque quo abundat Insula are his own words, Expug. Hib. l. 2. c. 15. where, if you joyn with it his seven∣teenth Chapter, you may observe him not only in three several places referring to and exaggerating this very subject of the Irish Gold, but withal supposing in the last of them, that without Irish Commodities & Commerce our Island of Great Brittain could not subsist. Besides, I might peradventure to the same purpose of shewing the plenty of Treasure
among the Irish, and that even but a very little time before the days of Cambrensis (I am sure I might pertinently enough for shew∣ing their liberality and Piety both, extended even to Forein Parts) alleadg out of the Chronicle of St. James's Benedictin Cloister seat∣ed at the West-gate of Reinsburg (alias Ra∣tisbona) in Germany, those vast sums of Gold and Silver, besides the great proportion of other rich Donaries bestow'd by the Mounster King Conchabhar O Brien surnamed Slapparsalach and other Irish Princes upon Dionysius, Chri∣stianus and Gregorius, three successive Irish Abbots of that Cloister, and sent unto them by their own Irish Messengers come of purpose out of Germany, at three several times, and with the Emperour Conrad's Letters com∣mending them that came last. Unto those and these Messengers was delivered so great and Royal a sum by the foresaid King of Mounster, that thereby this Cloister was from the very foundations not only re-built in a little time so magnificently, that for the stateliness of the Work, it surpass'd all other to be seen in those days any where; but more∣over, to maintain it and the Monks therein for ever, purchased both within that very City of Reinsburg, and abroad in the Coun∣trey, in Houses, Lands, Villages, Towns, a mighty great Revenue and perpetual Estate.
And yet after all [supererat ingens copia pecu∣niae Regis Hiberniae] there was remaining still an exceeding great quantity of the King of Ireland's money, says the said Chronicle. For so that Author calls the above Conchabhar O Brien, though only King of Mounster: the time of whose Reign was from the year of Christ 1127. when it began, to the year 1142. when he ended both it and together with it his Life in a Pilgrimage at Kildare. I say nothing of the mighty rich Presents, which he sent, and were carried from him, and pre∣sented in his name to the Emperour Lotharius the II. by some of the noblest Peers of Ireland who had receiv'd the Cross for going to the holy War at that time in Palestine. But there are two particulars, which on this occasion coming to remembrance, I can∣not pass over in silence. The one is concern∣ing Marianus Scotus, a famous man among the Learned, specially Chronologers. For in that Reinsburg Chronicle, which speaks of Gregory, the third of those Irish Abbots now mention'd, we have this account of him. 1. That after the same Gregory, upon the death of his pre∣decessour Christianus, was chosen Abbot to suc∣ceed him in the foresaid Cloister of Reinsburg, and therefore gone to Rome to be consecrated by the Pope, who then was Adrian IV. an English man, at that very time turn'd Monk
in this Cloister egregius Clericus Hiberniensis no∣mine Marianus, &c. an excellent Irish Clerk by name Marianus a most learned man, who a long time at Paris had publickly taught the seven Liberal Arts and other Sciences; and was there Master to this very Adrian who now presided in the Apostolical Chair at Rome when the foresaid Gregory was admitted by him to Audience. 2. That among other que∣stions Adrian enquiring of Gregory concerning Marianus, his old Praeceptor at Paris, Gregory answered him thus, Master Marianus is well, and having forsaken the World lives with us a Monk at Reinsburg. 3. That hereupon the Pope delivered himself in these words: God be thanked, says he, For throughout the Catholick Church, we do not know, under an Abbot, such an other man, so excelling in Wisdom, Prudence, Wit, Eloquence, good manners, humanity, dex∣terity, and other divine gifts, as my Master Ma∣rianus, &c. Hitherto the very words of that Reinsburg Chronicle, done only into English. Which I have therefore given here (out of Camb. Evers. page 164.) because I would re∣store that famous man to his own native Countrey Ireland, notwithstanding his sur∣name of Scotus. What time he flourish'd we may gather hence: being we know that Pope Adrian IV. whose Instructor in the Sciences he was, died in the year of Christ 1159. the
fourth year and tenth month of his Pontifi∣cate. The other particular shews how the Irish had been five hundred years before piously munificent to Foreiners come to lead religious lives with them at home in Ireland: as we have but lately seen they were five hundred years after to those of their own Natives that devoted themselves wholly to the same Life among Foreiners abroad. I must confess there are many more Instances in History to shew the same thing; but this one extracted by Cambden Cambden in his country of Maio. out of V. Bede, (l. 1. Eccles. Histor. cap. 4.) may be suf∣ficient in this place. Colman, an Irish Bishop, found a place in Ireland meet for building a Monastery, named in the Scottish (that is Irish) Tongue Mageo. And he bought a part of it, which was not much, of the Earl whose possession it was, to found a Monastery there∣in: but with this condition annex'd to the sale, that the Monks residing there, should pray for the Soul of him that permitted them to have the place. Now when he had in a very little time, with the help of the said Earl and all the Neighbour Inhabitants built this Cloister, he plac'd the English men there (who were thirty in number) leaving the Scots be∣hind him in the Monastery which he had be∣fore
built in a small Isle on the West of Ire∣land by name Inis-Bofindhe, that is, the Island of the white Cow. And that Cloister which he had built within the Land, is inhabited even at this day by English men. For it is the same which of a small one is grown great, and usually call'd Mageo. And now, having this good while turn'd all to better orders, it contains a notable Covent of Monks, who being assembled there out of the Province of England, according to the Example of the reverend Fathers, under regular disciplin, and a Canonical Abbot, live in great continency and sincerity by the labour of their own hands. Hitherto Bede. And Cambden, where he treats of the County of Maio in Connaght, adds, that if he deceive not himself, that place named Mageo in Bede, is the very same that now we call the Town of Maio, the Head of that Shire. Which to be true, not only the neerness of Inis-Bofindhe, where Colman left the Irish Monks, whom, together with those English, he took along with him from Lindis∣fearn in Great Brittain Ann 664. ac∣cording to the Sa∣xon Chronology, printed with Bede by Wheloc., but the right Irish name of Maio confirms. For in that Lan∣guage 'tis call'd Magheo even at this day. But 'tis high time now to end a digression, which though at first occasion'd by my reflecting on Felim mhac
Criomthain's costly Progress about Ireland, has after by degrees, of it self insensibly spun out to this length. 61. Although you may see for above four leaves together (that is from page 190, to page 199.) very much as well of the great Actions and fortunate successes of the last Irish Mo∣narch, Ruaruidh O Conchabhair, in his youth, as of the total Ecclipse of his glory, yea and piti∣able change of his Royal State in his old days, to the miserable condition of a poor, private, flitting, forlorn Exile, and all proceeding from the unnatural cruelty of his own very Son: nevertheless, amongst those former smiles of Fortune favouring him, had it occurr'd, I had surely mention'd the General Assembly or Par∣liament of all the Estates of Ireland, which he held with great solemnity in the first year of his Reign, being the year of Christ 1166. at a place which Gratianus Lucius (in his Camb, Evers. page 161.) calls in Latin Ath∣boylochia; perhaps that Town which now we call Athboy in Meath, and the Irish in their Language Bale-Ath-Buoy. But which foever, or where soever that Athboylochia was, the Meeting there was so numerous, that, besides the several peculiar Trains of the Provincial Kings and other Princes and great Nobles of Lay-degree, and of three Arch-bishops too of the four, thirteen thousand Horse at one
time were counted at it. Nor was this great, and for ought I have read, very last Parlia∣ment of the Milesians in Ireland, more nume∣rous than it was careful to provide for the Commonwealth, by ordaining, That the for∣mer ancient good Laws, which length of time and corruption of men had brought to disuse, should receive new vigour by a severe observance and execution of them: but espe∣cially, that none should dare infringe the sa∣cred Immunities of the Church. So in effect says my foresaid Author Gratianus. But all would not do. No ordinances of men could prevent the Fate impending from Heaven over their Heads at that very time. For what is decreed by God to fall, must fall some time. And the time of their Fall had its visible beginning the very next year, which was 1167. as I have hinted before, page 194. and you thall see at large in the following Second Part of his little Work. 62. Reflecting upon my account of Malachias (given from page 262 to page 287 inclu∣sively) and considering that I have therein said nothing at all of the famous Prophesie, which goes in his name, of all the Popes of Rome who were to succeed one another from his time forward either to the day of general Judgment, or at least to the final desolation of that seven-Hill'd City: therefore to satisfie
in some degree such as have the curiosity and leasure to read predictions of this kind, I thought it no great enlargement or extrava∣gance, to let them know of that Prophesie what follows here. 1. That all the best account I have found of it hitherto, is from Thomas Mes∣singham's Book entitled Florilegium Insulae SS. printed at Paris an. 1624. who extracted it, as he says, out of Arnoldus Wion l. 2. Ligni Vitae c. 40. pag. 307. 2. That (under this Title, Prophetia S. Malachiae Archiepiscopi Ardmachani, totius{que} Hiberniae Primatis, ac Sedis Apostolicae Legati, de Summis Pontificibus) it begins with a short line of three words only, and so proceeds on in a hundred and eleven short lines more, one after another, which like the first, contain but three words or four at most, commonly but two, and all in Latin. 3. That by so many lines are signified so many Popes, and consequently a hundred and twelve Popes in all that were to succeed in S. Peter's Chair, from the time (as 'tis pretended) of that Prophetie's date, until the consummation. 4. That it names none of them, save only the Last: and for the rest, it leaves us wholly to divine of 'em, and of each a part by the character given of him in the short line answerable only to him by the order of times and succession in the Holy See. 5. That one Alphonsus Giacconius of the Dominican Or∣der,
has paraphras'd on the first threescore and sixteen of those prophetical Lines, in a Wri∣ting distinguish'd into two Columns. Wherein the short Lines of the Prophesie it self, plac'd in order, take up the first Column: the names of the Popes prophesied of, the Second; each Pope directly placed against the Prophesie that foretels him: and the Paraphrases or Expo∣sitions, that interpret the predictions and apply them, take up the last, in the same order and opposition. 6. That as this Interpreter begins with Celestin the II. of that name, ex∣pounding the first Line of him: so he ends with Ʋrban the VII. of whom all the Pro∣phesie is only this, De rore caeli, which ren∣dred in English is, Of the Dew of Heaven, and interpreted almost in as few words by Ciacco∣nius, viz. [Qui fuit Archiepiscopus Rossanensis in Calabria, ubi manna colligitur.] Who was Arch-bishop in Rosanna in Calabria where Man∣na is gathered. 7. That by this one Example we may both partly guess at the nature of the Prophesies, and plainly see what kind of interpretations of them those of Ciacconius are. Whereof every one runs in the same or like manner, endeavouring to verisie the pre∣diction either in the Countrey, or Institu∣tion, or Family, or Gentilitial Ensigns, or some accident happen'd to the Pope fore∣told by it. 8. That as no man has yet ven∣tur'd
on the interpretation of the next eleven prophetical Lines; which must be answerable to the next eleven Popes, that before the now reigning Pope Innocent XI. have since Ʋr∣ban VII. succeeded in the Pontifical Chair: so we can hardly in our days expect any publick interpretation or application of Bellua insati∣abilis to the same present Pope Innocent; tho it be what is answerable to him in those fore∣said Lines and Columns, if we take exact no∣tice of the Succession. 9. That, (which is more my design to give here) all the remain∣ing number of those prophetical short Lines, and consequently of Popes to succeed the pre∣sent, is only twenty six in the whole: a num∣ber of Popes not so very great, but that much less than the ordinary age of a man may see it over, if they should prove no longer lived than many of their Predecessours have; where∣of no fewer than eight in a succession took up in all but twelve years time. 10. That for the better satisfaction of those who may be affected with this kind of reading; and because it will not take up much room, nor require any further dilatation, I give here those very six and twenty genuin Lines, which however briefly (and obscurely too all of 'em, except the last) yet in some prophetical manner tell us of those six and twenty Popes to come in succession after his Holiness that
now steers in a great Tempest the old Fisher-Boat of Peter. 1. Poenitentia gloriosa. 2. Rastrum in Porta. 3. Flores circumdati. 4. De bona religione. 5. Miles in bello. 6. Columna excelsa. 7. Animal rurale. 8. Rosa Umbriae. 9. Ursus Velox. 10. Peregrinus Apostolicus. 11. Aquila rapax. 12. Canis & Coluber. 13. Vir religiosus. 14. De balneis Etruriae. 15. Crux de Cruce. 16. Lumen in caelo. 17. Ignis ardens. 18. Religio depopulata. 19. Fides intrepida. 20. Pastor Angelicus. 21. Pastor & Nauta. 22. Flos Florum. 23. De medietate Lunae. 24. De labore solis. 25. Gloria Olivae. 26. In persecutione extre∣ma S. R. E. sedebit Petrus Romanus, qui pascet oves in multis tribulationibas: qui∣bus transactis Civitas sep∣collis diruetur, & Judex tremendus judicabit popu∣lum suum. Finis. 11. That albeit these Predictions cannot be interpreted before the Popes whom they sig∣nifie are chosen: yet the last of them is very singular, being it names the Pope, and is with∣all both long, and plain and terrible. For thus it runs in English: In the last persecution of the Holy Roman Church, Peter a Roman shall sit, who shall feed the sheep in many tribula∣tions: which being over, the seven-Hill'd City shall be destroy'd, and the dreadful Judg shall judg his People. Though whether we must un∣derstand here the final persecution of Anti∣christ,
and the end of the World, and general Judgment of all Nations in the Valley of Jo∣saphat: or whether only the last particular desolation, judgment and ruin of Rome, and of the Papacy it self, never to recover more in this World, or at least in that place: I can say nothing to it of either side. But no more of this Prophetical Subject. What remains, either of Reflection or Addition, are the few points that follow. I forgot to give them in their due places, ac∣cording to the order of pages hitherto ob∣serv'd: and therefore I give them here. 63. The first relates to that famous Beann∣chuir Abbey in the North of Ireland; whereof I have treated before page 62, &c. For con∣cerning the greatness of it, you have here an illustrious testimony out of a forein Writer, Antony Yepez, in his general Chronicle of the Benedictin Order, ad ann. Christi 565. cap. 2. where speaking of that Irish Monastery, he says in express words, It was one of the greatest our sacred Religion (he means the Benedictin Order) had in all Europe, nay the very greatest of all that were built in the whole Occident, and that no other was comparable to it. But for the austerity of their lives, the sanctity of their conversation, the power of their doctrine and example, their supernatural gifts; and in a word the extraordinary stupendious hand of
God with them in all their undertakings who were profess'd Votaries in that illustrious Cloister, we have no less forein, and much more ancient Writers than Yepez to inform us. And certainly, if we may judg of this mat∣ter, by what such credible Authors have writ∣ten, some eight hundred, and some a thousand years since of the Missionaries of that Abbey, the disciples of St. Congellus (Founder and first Abbot thereof) sent abroad into other parts of Europe by him, for the conversion of Infidels, and reformation of evil Christians: there needs no more to convince us, that Beannchuir was a most perfect Seminary of the most truly vertuous and wonderful Monks on Earth. For Example; of St. Gallus (the Irish call him in their Language Gall) who was one of the twelve, that in one Mission, at one and the same time went thence with Columbanus, who was the thirteenth of them and Prefect of this Mission, thus writeth St. Notkerus Balbulus (in his Martyrologe 17 Cal. Nov.) that he converted the people of Switzer∣land and Suevia from Idolatry: confirm'd his preaching to them with the power of Miracles: and that him the divine goodness made Apostle of the Allemaigns: as by whom that Nation which he had found enveloped in Paganism was enlightned with true Religion, and brought from the dark∣ness of ignorance to the Sun of Justice who is
Christ. So, and much more in short, writeth the said holy Notherus of this great Apostle of the Allemaigus St. Gallus, from whom or whose Monastery, the Town of St. Gall, so famous even at this day, hath been called. As for the particulars as well of his stupendi∣ous austerity, as Miracles above Nature, they may be seen at large in his Life extant in Messingham and Surius, written originally by Walafridus Strabo. But for Columbanus him∣self (a Leinster man born, and but twenty years old when he went to Sea from Beann∣chuir, Head of that Mission) whoever please to read over seriously his Acts, written about a thousand years since by one of his own well-nigh Contemporaries, Abbot Jonas, must needs, I think, be suspended in admiration of a man so prodigious in all respects. I can∣not be otherwise my self, when I observe the whole course of his Life in Ireland, France, Burgundy, Allmaign, and last of all in Italy where he died. Nor verily does e'n Caesar Ba∣roniug himself, after so many other both an∣cient and modern Authors, seem less affected with admiration, where he speaks thus of him (ad an. Christi 612.) It appears (says he) to have proceeded from an extraordi∣nary favour of God, that so great a man, come from Ireland to France, should in the most profligate times illustrate the Church.
A man of such transcendent merits, that if any would in some things equal him to Elias, I should not think he err'd. Whereas in this most holy man, living with his disciples in the Wilderness, besides wonderful abstinence, and the most exact observance of all Mona∣stick Rules, and other his eminent Virtues, may be observ'd so great a zeal of the honour of God, and fortitude of Soul to reprove evil Princes. Who also herein was the more like to Elias, that he wanted not Prsecutors: not even a new Achab, and another Jezabel, as you your self may find by reading his Life. But truly his banishment out of Burgundy by King Theodorick, at the instigation of the wicked Queen Brumchildis (that bane, that Murdress of ten Kings, for she destroy'd so many, some by poison and some by other damnable ways) and his Journey thereupon to Italy, appear'd to be no other than a long continued Triumph for his victory over Kings and their detestable cruelty; yea and a won∣derful Triumph indeed, because accompanied with so many prodigious signs and Wonders wrought by him every where as he went a∣long. So says Baronius, in the foresaid place, wholly without doubt suspended in admira∣tion of what himself does so relate of this stupendious man of God. Whose prophe∣tical Spirit also in foretelling King Lotharius
so positively and precisely, that within three years the two other Kings Theodorick and The∣odobertus should be destroy'd, and he (Lo∣tharius) succeed them by that time, and be Monarch of all France: the same Baronius (ad eund. an.) particularly relates. As also he doth, the quarrel of Bruinchildis to Columba∣nus, and only cause of his banishment, to have been, His exhorting the said King of Au∣strasia Theodorick to marry a Wife, and turn away his Concubines. For she apprehended, that a regnant Queen or (which is the same thing) a lawful Wife would surely at long running turn her out from the management of State-affairs, which Whores could no. And then again our great Annalist the same Baronius (ad an. 615.) returning once more to that heavenly Man, and telling us of his death in Italy (after he had founded there the most renowned Cloister of Bobium, as he had formerly done before his banishment, that of Luxovium in Burgundy) he delivers it with this Elogium of him. This year (says he) that Wonder-working Adorer of God, Columbanus, the terrour and scourge of evil Kings, departed this Life. Which Elogium given by so eminent a Car∣dinal, Historian, because there Ordericus Vita∣lis Angligena, in his Book of Eccle∣siastical History. needs no more be said of Columbanus, I will only add
the testimony of an ancient English Author, whom I suppose to have lived and died in forein parts a Monk of Ʋtica many hundred years since, though lately printed in the Hi∣story of the Normans, published by Andreas du Chesne Anno 1619. They cannot be ignorant (says he) how the blessed Father Columba∣nus, born in Ireland, contemporary to St. Be∣nedict, having left both his Fathers House and Countrey, and together with other most ex∣cellent Monks arrived in France and receiv'd by Childebert King of the French, built in Bur∣gundy the Cloister of Luxovium. Nor how being banisht thence by the most impious Queen Brunichild and gone to Italy, and re∣ceived there by Agilulphus King of Longo∣bards, he founded the Cloister of Bobie. Nor how this wonderful man, labouring amongst the Chief in the Vineyard of Christ, shone most gloriously on Earth with Signs and Pro∣digies. Nor how, as he was taught by the Holy Ghost, he endited and prescrib'd a Rule of Life for the Monachical Order, and was the first Author of it in France. Nor how from his School issued those renowned Monks, that, like stars in the Firmament, appear'd in the Church, all resplendent with holiness and Miracles. Nor finally can they be ignorant how in particular, Eustasius Luxoviensis; A∣gitus Resbacensis, Faro Meldensis, Audomarus
Bononiensis, Philipertus Gemeticensis, with many other most excellently religious both Abbots and Bishops, whose sanctity on Earth not only has been confirm'd by most evident signs from Heaven, but has even mightily propagated the Church of God amongst the Children of men, were all of them Scholars of that very same wonderful Columbanus. And this is the testimony in short given of him by Ordericus Vitalis Angligena. Which together with what you have seen before, though very briefly and almost in general of that singular Mission from the Abbey of Beannchuir, may be sufficient to shew the extraordinary holiness of that place, if we judg of the Tree by the fruit it bears. And the conclusion of all must be, that we have reason to think, that how great soever this Irish Cloister was either for the dimen∣sion of its buildings and ground whereon it stood, or for the number of Monks residing therein, which elsewhere we have seen a∣mounted to three thousand: yet undoubtedly it was far more illustrious for their sanctity and perfection of Life. 64. But before I pass to a new Subject, the Reader will give me leave to observe here, that Antony Yepez, notwithstanding his testi∣mony for the greatness of Beannchuir, has been very much out in accounting it one of his own Benedictin Order. It was the year
of our Lord 494. that St. Benedict himself, in the fourteenth year of his age, retir'd from being at School in Rome to dedicate himself to God in a contemplative Life, as Baronius writes in the same year. But above a hun∣dred years before that time, Ireland was re∣plenish'd with perfect Monks, and Monaste∣ries of St. Patrick's own Institution: being, as we have seen elsewhere out of Henricus Al∣tisiodorensis, it was so before St. Patrick's death, and his death happen'd in the year 493, as Jocelin says. And, if neither by one of those Irish Monks at home who had their imme∣diate institution from St. Patric himself, nor by one of their immediate disciples, yet certain∣ly and at farthest very early after St. Patrick's death, it was that that so much celebrated Irish Abby of Beannchuir was founded by St. Con∣gellus; and consequently no later than the Monastery of Columb-Cille at Dear-magh, be∣ing the same Congellus and he were contem∣poraries. Whence a further consecution is, that Beannchuir must have been founded at least some years before Columb-Cille's depart∣ing from his Monastery at Dearmach in Ireland, on this Mission to convert the Picts in the North of Great Brittain; which departure of his, according to Venerable Bede, was pre∣cisely in the year of Christ 565. Now it is plain, that before the year of Christ 561.
there is not in Baronius no not so much as any mention made of Benedicts sending any of his disciples to the West, no not into France to pro∣pagate his Order. Nay before the year 595. his Order had receiv'd no publick approbation from the Church, not even within Italy it self. As for Great Brittain, 'tis no less clear, that the Benedictin Order was not heard of there till after Austin the Monk's coming thi∣ther from Gregory the Great to convert the Saxons. And yet we know that long before his time the famous Abby of Monks at Bangor, near Westchester, had been founded even by the foresaid self same Irish Abbot St. Congellus, come thither of purpose from his own former Abby, the so much admired Beannchuir in the North of Ireland, to build an other in Brit∣tain by the pattern of it. But as for Ireland, certainly not before all their own rigid austere Monks of St. Patrick's Rule, and Congheall's and Collumb Cille's institution had been utter∣ly destroy'd by the long Danish Wars, nor after neither till about the time of Malachias, that is even five hundred years at least after the foundation of Beannchuir, was any Bene∣dictin Abbey there. So far is Yepez from any just pretence to Beannchuir, or just challenge to it in behalf of his Benedictin Order. Be∣sides, I think nothing can be plainer, than that St. Columbanus, and Gallus with those
other eleven holy Fellow missioners, sent out of the same Beannchuir-Abbey into forein parts to preach the Gospel (as has been said before) were of the same Order that was profess'd in that Cloister, being they were themselves profess'd sons and members of it under the same blessed Abbot Congellus, with whose leave and benediction they departed from it on their miraculous fruitful Mission beyond Seas. And sure I am that Ordericus Vitalis Angligena, in his eighth Book of Eccle∣siastical History, near the end, as Messingham quotes him, denies they were of the Benedi∣ctin or any other Institution than that was peculiar to themselves and those of their own Followers in France, Burgundy, &c. More∣over, I think it no less manifest that if the said illustrious Abbey of Beannchuir in Ireland had been of the Benedictin Order, so must also Bangor in Wales have been: seeing they had both the same Founder, to wit the Bles∣sed Congheall, or (as they call him in Latin) Congellus. And yet to assert this of Bangor in Wales, must be against all reason. Because we know Bangor has been so far from any Roman or Italian Order, that Dinooth the Ab∣bot and other Learned men thereof, were the grand sticklers against submitting to the Ro∣man Pontiff himself, though so good a man and Pontiff both, as Gregory the Great was
known to be. For they were the men pitch'd and relied upon by the Britons to be, and ac∣cordingly were, as to matter of Learning, the chiefest opposers of Austin the First Arch-bi∣shop of Canterbury in the Conferences he had with the Brittish Bishops, to bring them to some acknowledgment of and submission to the Pope. And it is no way probable, that Di∣nooth or his Monks, if they had been of the Benedictin Order, would have so fiercely op∣pos'd his Legat, especially in point of Cano∣nical submission to the Delegant himself, whose only authority was it which gave being and credit to the same Order, by confirming it so lately before in a Roman Council. Much less would their fierceness and resolution in that matter have been so unalterable as to occasion the slaughter of eleven hundred and fifty of their Brethren Monks of the very same Bangor Abbey at one time and place. Whereof you may see the particulars in Venerable Bede, l. 2. Eccl. Histor. c. 2. and in Whelock's Notes upon this Chapter. So that Yepez in making Beannchuir a Benedictin Abbey, knew not what he said, or at least what could be objected a∣gainst him. 65. Why the Staff of Jesus, mention'd in my 273. page, was so called, you may read in Jocelinus, an English Monk that five hundred years since, at the instance of two Irish Bishops,
and Sir John Curcy (whom he calls Prince of Ʋlster, because (as I suppose) he was the first Conqueror of it under the English Crown) digested the Life of St. Patrick out of many former Lives written of Him by several Au∣thors, but written by them in such manner and stile as did not invite Readers. It is therefore this Jocelinus, that in his Life of St. Patrick, cap. 24. gives a pretty large account of that Staff of Jesus. Which is, in substance. That when St. Patrick, after a long abode of many years with St. German Bishop of Altissio∣dorum in France, had with his leave at last departed towards Rome, in his journey thi∣ther he, either by divine instinct or Angelical instruction, diverted to a certain Island in the Tirrhene Sea, of purpose to visit a certain holy Anchoret of great same living there, whose name was Justus. 2. That upon his arrival, after holy salutes and spiritual conference, Justus gave him a Staff, saying, he had re∣ceiv'd it from the very hand of our Lord Jesus Christ himself; but to be given him. 3. That after this, St. Patrick discoursing with other men, who lived in the same Island at some little distance from the Cell of Justus, whereof some appeared brisk and young, others old even to decrepit age: and understanding that those extream old men he saw were the very genuin sons of those other that appear'd
young: and enquiring how that could be? One of the same young men, both to remove his admiration which was great, and to sa∣tisfie his demand, gave him this answer. We (says he) from our childhood, through the mercy of God, have been always given to works of mercy: and our door was open to every Traveller, that for Christ's sake desired either Victuals or Lodging. On a certain Night we received a stranger with a Staff in his hand, and according to our best ability treated him with all necessaries and kindness. Next Morning, upon his departure he blessed us; nor only blessed us, but moreover spake these words unto us, viz. I am Jesus Christ, whom in person you have this Night receiv'd into your House, who so often before have receiv'd me in my servants. And then he delivered the Staff he had in his hand, to the man of God our spiritual Father: commanding him to keep it for a certain Pilgrim, by name Pa∣trick, who after many days should arrive here, and upon him to bestow it. Which command given, he presently ascended into Heaven: and we have ever since remained in the same state of youthful countenance, briskness and vigour of body we were in at that time. But our sons that were but little children then, are now according to their age come to be decrepit, as you see them. 4. That when
St. Patrick had heard all, he gave God thanks: and after a few days longer conversation with Justus, proceeded on his Journey, car∣rying in his hand that holy Staff appointed by God himself to be an instrument for his ser∣vant Patrick to work therewith prodigious things in Ireland, as the Rod of Moses had formerly been for effecting the famed Won∣ders in Egypt: the greatest difference betwixt them being, that this of Jesus brought health and life to the Irish Nation, but that of Moses, death upon the Egyptian. So in effect Joce∣linus, mostly concerning the original of that Staff. Unto which he addeth (cap. 170.) concerning also the powerful Virtue of it, That by lifting it up on high, and threatning with it, St. Patrick, after a long Fast of forty days and forty nights, join'd with continual fervent Prayer, forc'd together out of all parts of Ireland, all venomous Animals whatsoever, to the Mountain call'd in Irish Cruachain Ailge, in the West of Conaght, and from thence precipitated them into the Western Ocean, lying under this Mountain: and this with such a blessed riddance to the whole Island, as to have left or have rendred it ever since incapable of harbouring any creature alive that were Poisonous, though brought into it from other Countreys.
How Keting understands this later point. we have seen before.▪ And for Gerald of Wales, though he acknowledg both the Ver∣tue and name of that Staff, calling it Virtuo∣sissimum baculum Jesu, the most powerful Staff of Jesus; yet he says withal, that the Origin of it is as uncertain as the Virtue is most certain. Adding immediately in the same place, That in his own time, and by his own Countrey men the Brittish Conquerours, that noble Treasure (for so he calls it) was translated from Ardmagh to Dublin. What became of it since, I cannot tell. But this I find in St. Bernards Life of Malachias, that this Staff of Jesus, and the Text of the Gospel that was St. Patrick's own Book, or that used by himself, were the two most pre∣cious Jewels not only of the Church of Ard∣magh, but of any in the whole Kingdom of Ireland. That they were held by all the Irish in the greatest veneration above all other holy Reliques whatsoever; but more especially the Staff, as being that which our Saviour Christ himself had both carried in his own divine hand, fram'd by his own peculiar workman∣ship, and recommended in such a special manner to be given to his Apostolical servant Patrick. I find moreover in David Rooth, the late Roman Catholick Bishop of Ossory's Eluci∣dations upon Jocelin, whatever may be ob∣jected
by Criticks against this History of the Staff of Jesus answer'd. For if their Ex∣ception be against our Saviour's appearing on Earth after his Ascension to Heaven from Mount Olivet: he remits then to St. Am∣brose, where he tells, in his Oration against Auxentius, how, very long after that time our Lord appeared to S. Peter at a Gate in Rome, entring that City. And if it be against any such Wonder-working power in the Staff it self, though by divine Ordinance or conse∣cration of it for such uses: he desires them to consider not only the Rod of Moses in E∣gypt, and brazen Serpent in the Desart, nor only the brazen Statue of our Saviour erected at Cae∣sarea Eusebius l. 7. Hist. c. 18. and Sozomen, l. 5. c. 21. Philippi (otherwise called Paneas) by the Wo∣man in the Gospel, cur'd by our Saviour of an Issue of blood; but also the torn Cloak and poor Staff of the Egyptian Anchoret Senuphius, wherewith Theodosius the Great arming himself, and marching confident∣ly in the head of his Troops against an infinite number of Enemies, who in one terrible Host came to fight him, obtain'd that miraculous Victory over them, which is recorded by Me∣taphrastes, and Glycas (Annal. Part. 4.) and Baronius too (ad an. 388.) Even that very same wonderful Victory, which, the Winds
and Tempests, fighting for him, and  their own Darts upon his Enemies, he ob∣tained against Maximus the Tyrant: and which Claudian the Christian Poet has so di∣vinely celebrated in heroick Verse; part whereof speaks thus to Theodosius himself: O nimium dilecte Deo! cui fundit ab antris Aeolus atratas hyemes, cui militat Aether, Et conjurati veniunt ad Classica venti. Besides, that pious learned Bishop of Ossory desires it be considered, that the former Hi∣story of the Staff of Jesus has no less illustri∣ous, famous, approv'd Authors, than those of the later History of the Staff of Senuphius are. But whether it be, or be not so, my design here is not concern'd. For I have already let the Reader know what is written of, and has been deliver'd all along, and what is believed at present among the Roman Catho∣lick Irish of that religious Relique the Staff of Jesus. What remains either of Reflection or Ad∣dition, are these few Notes that follow. I have indeed forgot to give them in their due place, according to the order of pages ob∣serv'd hitherto in this Section. But that will not hinder the understanding them, where they are given here.
66. The first is a very material Animadversion upon my 146 page. Where, because following the authority of D. Geoffrey Keting, I suppos'd, and accordingly told of an Interregnum in Ire∣land, that by reason of the over-ruling power of the Danes, and their great Com∣mander Turgesius, had succeeded immediately upon the drowning of the Monarch Niall Caille: I must here let the Reader know, that Gratianus Lucius (page 297 and 298.) brings several arguments to evince not only, That there had never been any Interregnum at all of the Irish Monarchy at any time during either of the two Danish Wars; nor consequently Turgesius the Dane had ever succeeded, not even by usurpation, any of the Irish Monarchs; but that Keting was led into Errour in this particular by Gerald of Wales. Among which arguments are these two: 1. That Sir James Ware in his Catalogue of the Kings of Ireland lately publish'd, makes no mention at all of Turgesius. 2. That the Annals of Ireland place both the end of Niall Caille's Reign, and the beginning of Maolseachluinn I. in the year of our Lord 844. But, as to the Interregnum, neither of these arguments, nor any other which I have yet seen, evince more than that the Interregnum was very short, and concluded with one year.
67. The second Note must refer to p. 222, &c. where the Subject treated is the true Christian religious great Vertues indeed of as many Irish Monarchs, or Kings of all Ireland, as I have remembred there. but the addition to them here is only of two more, viz. Ainmirus the son of Sedna, and Donnaldus the son of Aidus. For so they are call'd in Latin by Gratianus Lucius: though in Irish their names and sur∣names are Ainmhire mhac Seadhna, who was the XI. and Domhnall mhac Aodh Slaine, who was the Xviii. Christian King of all Ireland. The former, com to the Sovereignty in the year of Christ 563. but parted from it, and his life too, by a horrible murther committed on him in the fourth year of his Reign, was so Christianly zealous for the purity of Reli∣gion, Rites, Discipline, Church, that he could not abide the least blemish, spot or wrinkle in any of them. In so much, that in the Irish Histories it is specially recorded of him to his great honour, how, when he had observ'd some things amiss in the Rituals, i. e. some Errours crept in, or some deviation from the Rules prescrib'd them, though but so lately before, by their great Apostle St. Patrick: and when about the same time he had heard by fame of the excellent knowledg, integrity, san∣ctity, wisdom of Gildas in Great Brittain; he sent his own Letters to invite him to Ireland,
towards the reforming there whatever had been so amiss. But why Gratianus Lucius here, gives the surname of Badonicus to Gildas (for he calls him Gildas Badonicus) I confess I do not know, nor can conjecture, unless perhaps that Northern Mountainous Countrey (in Yorkshire) now call'd Blackemere in English, but formerly in Latine Mons Badonicus has been the native Countrey of this ancient Fa∣ther. This I know, that in Bibliotheca Patrum he is surnamed Sapiens, or Gildas the Wise. And moreover, that Polydore Virgil (l. 3. Hist. Angl.) writes how Gildas himself has told us his little Book (de excidio Brittannico) that himself was born that very year wherein the Britons had obtain'd against the Saxons the fa∣mous Victory at Mons Badonicus, which was the forty fourth year after the first landing of Hengistus and Horsus, being the year of Christ 492. Unto which if we joyn what the same Polydore had said before (l. 1. Hist. Angl.) of Gildas, viz. That he flourish'd about the year of Christ 580. we may conclude, that cer∣tainly the time set down in the Irish Books for his going to Ireland, as invited thither by the foresaid Monarch Ainmhire mhac Sedhna, agrees full well with this time and age of Gil∣das then. The later of these two Monarchs, namely Domhnal, son to Aodh Slaine, who not only
came with pure hands without blood to the Crown, but after fourteen year's glorious Reign first, and then eighteen months sickness, parted with Crown and life together peacea∣bly on his Bed (which was in that Nation a very singular blessing of God.) This Domhnal I say, besides his other great Vertues, is most deservedly celebrated for a very great Exem∣plar of Christian humility and contempt of himself. He had through human frailty com∣mitted some fault; which, though I do not find express'd or specified what it was; I find notwithstanding the rarest instance of Repen∣tance, submission and humiliation of a King in him, that could be, to procure the forgiveness of it from his own Subject, tho a holy man of that Nation, call'd St. Fechinus. For, after earnest humble entreaties to this man of God for pardon, when he had found him back∣ward still, and hard to relent, he prostrated himself on the ground at his feet, and suffered him to tread on his bare neck. 67. My next additional Note although of a∣nother Subject, tends nevertheless very much to the magnifying of the Ancient Irish, as to that natural heroick Vertue which next to the favour of Heaven preserv'd them for so many Ages a Free Nation; Martial courage and Valour I mean. And therefore this Addition must relate to those pages, where (from 25
to 40.) I treated before, of the Danish Wars in Ireland. However, it is such an addition to the brave performances of the Irish in those Wars, that I know not whether it be not the greatest of them all. I am sure that as it was very great indeed: so the Irish Nation is be∣holden to a Foreiner, namely Adolphus Cypreus, for transmitting the remembrance of it to Posterity, in his Annals of the Bishops of Sles∣wick, a City in Denmark. For these are his own Latin words in the sixth page of that Work: Reynerus Rex Danorum LVI. potentis∣simus, qui tamen ab excitata fortuna, quae ipsi in subjugandis Regnis Sueciae, Russiae, Angliae, Sco∣tiae, Norvegiae, & Hiberniae plurimum favit, ad inclinatam & pene jacentem descivit. Namque ab Hella Hiberniae Rege captus, in carcere expi∣ravit, sub an. 841. In English these: Reyner the LVI. most powerful King of the Danes, who nevertheless from the height of For∣tune that favour'd him so mightily in sub∣duing the Kingdoms of Swedland, Russia, England, Scotland, Norway, Ireland, was thrown down as low. For being taken by Hella King of Ireland, he died there in pri∣son about the year 841. And yet I must observe here with Gratianus Lucius, 1. That Cypreus mistook both the name and quality of him that took Prisoner this great Danish King. 2. That no King of Ireland nor Provincial,
nor even other lesser King in Ireland was ever call'd by the name of Hella: nor was that name of any body at all known among the Irish. 3. That the right Irish name in all likelihood was Oillioll, which because hard of pronuntiation, Foreiners mistook or chang'd it to Hella. 4. That since Christianity plant∣ed in that Countrey, not even any Oillioll was King among 'em, save only the Monarch Oil∣lioll (surnamed) Molt, who was next suc∣cessour to Laoghaire mhac Neill in the year 458. and was killed in Battel An. 478. And lastly therefore, that he must have been some great General of an Army, and his name Oillioll, that took this great Reynerus, and kept him in Pri∣son till he died. 68. Another is of the Fatal Stone, as they call it, and refers to page 378. where I ended my Animadversions on the Scottish Histories con∣cerning Fergus I. Of that famed Stone, Ke∣ting, in his Relations of the People call'd Tu∣ath De Dainainn, gives this account. 1. That this Nation, who were the last possessors of Ire∣land immediately before the Milesian Race, had on their arrival there from Norway brought with them four special Jewels of extraordinary use: namely, a Sword, Lance, Pot, and the En∣chanted Stone, which in Irish they call by one name Liath Fail; by an other, Cloch na Ci∣neamhna, this later importing in English, the
Stone of Destiny, or Fortune. 2. That after the Milesiaus had conquer'd those Tuath-Da-Danan, and consequently got possession of this Stone, and after they had not only plac'd it at Teambhuir (our Tarach) where all their Nobles and people did usually meet to chuse the King of Ireland, but ordain'd that the new Elect should sit thereon: as son as he did so, the Stone under him, by vertue of some Ma∣gical or Diabolical Charm, gave such a migh∣ty loud ecchoing, astonishing sound, that pre∣sently the Election was known thereby far and near. 3. That this Oraculous Vertue of it ceased, as some say, when the Pentarchy was set up in that Kingdom by the Monarch Eo∣chadh Feilioch; or, as others say, about the time of our Saviours birth, when throughout the World all the sallacious Oracles of the Gen∣tiles became mute. 4. That for its name of Cloch na Cineamhne, or Stone of Destiny, or Fatal Stone, the reason was an old Prophesie, deli∣liver'd of it by Tradition, which Hector Boe∣thius rendred thus in Latin Verse: Ni fallat Fatum, Scoti hunc quocum{que} locatum invenient Lapidem, regnare tenentur ibidem. But in Irish Meeter, it is in Keting thus: Ciniodh Scot saor an Fine, man babreag an Faisdine, mar a bhfulghid an Liath Fail, dlighid flaitheas do ghabhail
Importing in both, that where-ever the Seot∣tish Nation did find that Stone, they should have Dominion, Power, and Regal Majesty. 5. That because of this prophetical Prediction, and reputation of it, when Fergus that fa∣mous Invader of the Picts (I mean Fergus Mor mhac Ercho, mhic Eochadh muin reamhair, as the Irish call and genealogize him, from his Father and Grandfather, whom the Scottish Historians call Fergus I.) would be created K. over hisown conquering Nation, the Scots of Pictavia or Albania in Great Brittain, he sent to his Brother Mairchiortach Mor mhac Er∣cha, (then Monarch of Ireland) for this fa∣tal Stone, and had it over into Scotland, of purpose that by sitting on it when he was created King, he might assure the establish∣ment of his Crown, and power of his own People, in his new conquer'd Kingdom. 6. That for many ensuing Ages it remain'd there for a monument (either of Religion or Superstition) being in the same manner, and to the same purpose sate upon by the succeed∣ing Kings of Scotland till Edward I. of Eng∣land in the current of his Victories had it brought away out of the Abbey of Scone to the Abbey of Westminster. Where, ever since, it has been kept, placed under the Royal Chair which the Kings of England usually sit in at their Coronation. 7. That in the memory
of our Fathers, that prophetical Prediction of it and the ancient Scots, which you have but now seen, was fulfill'd in England too, when James VI. of Scotland was crowned King of England at Westminster, and has ever since continued to be more and more verified in the succession of Charles I. of glorious memory, and Charles II. our present most gracious King. For by the line of Maine mhic Cuirek, mhic Luighc, they are descended through a World of Generations of ancient Scots the Milesian Irish, from Heber, who (as has been already noted elsewhere) being the son of Milesius, and in a joint Sovereignty ruling with his Brother Herimon, was three thousand years since King of all Ireland. And this is the ac∣count which Keting (where he treats of Tuath-De-Danainn) gives of that fatal Stone. Save only that he makes no express mention of Charles II. nor could indeed, as who died himself in the Reign of Charles I. But ne∣vertheless he express'd his mind sufficiently, as to the purpose of that Fatal Prediction, by naming his Father and Grandfather both. I am sure his expression of joy in the same place, for their having successively come to be Kings of England, Scotland, France, and Ire∣land, must have involv'd the concomitant wishes of his heart for their posterity after them to attain and continue the same glory
while time shall be. And therein he has me to join, with all my very Soul. 69. The Fifth may be referr'd to page 155. where I treated briefly somewhat of Cormock O Cuillenain that excellent, pious, holy man, who was at the same time both Arch-Bishop and King of Mounster, and continued so for seven years together, that is, even all along till he lost his life in the Battel of Mughna. For to this rare Example of the same man's being both King and Priest, may be added one more of the same Nature; and in the very same Kingdom of Mounster too. Where, as Keting acquaints us, upon the Death of Duibh Lachne next Successour in that Provincial Kingdom to Cormock O Cuilleinan for seven years more, the Princes and Gentry meeting chose another Priest, nay a Monk to be their King, even the Abbot of Inis Catha, by name Flaithhiortach mhac Jonmuinein: who reign∣ed thirteen years over them. And they chose him, notwithstanding he had been the chief Adviser of Cormock O Cuillenain so lately, that is but seven years before, to venture that Bat∣tel against Flann mhac Sionnadh the Monarch, and the Leinster King Cearbhall mhac Muare∣gein, which prov'd so fatal to that good King, and his whole Kingdom of Mounster, and to this very Abbot himself troublesom. For he was taken Prisoner in it, and as such detain'd
some time at Kildare by that Leinster King, un∣til at the intercession of the Abbess of Saint Bridgets Monastery in that Town, he was re∣leased and return'd to his own Abbey of Inis-Catha in Mounster. Whence after some few years, wholly employ'd there in rigid ascetical ex∣ercises, he was call'd upon and e'en compell'd to take the Royal State of a King. So says Keting in his Reign of the said Monarch Flann. Where also he notes occasionally an other great Errour of Hanmer in his Chronicle. For Hanmer (page 88.) says, that both the foresaid Cormock O Cuillenain King of Moun∣ster, (but he makes him King of Ireland) and Cearbhall O Muirreigein King of Leinster were kill'd by the Danes in the year of our Lord 905. Whereas on the contrary, nei∣ther was Cearbhall kill'd in that year, nor that Battel fought of either side by the Danes, but of one side by the Monarch, and of the other by Cormock who perish'd therein. All which is abundantly testified by the Authentick Irish Book of that very Battel, which Book has for Title, Catha Bheala Mughna. Besides, as Ke∣ting observes in the same place, the Danes at∣tempted nothing at all, no not once against the Irish, during the seven years Reign of Cormock O Cuillenain over Mounster. Nay, there was so general a peace over all Ireland for this time, so great plenty of all earthly
blessings, so universal a Reformation of man∣ners, and so much devotion and zeal in all sorts of people for restoring what had been destroy'd by the first Danish Wars and other attempts following it, that nothing was to be seen more frequent now than every where re∣pairing the old, and building new Churches, Colledges, Hospitals, Monasteries. Yea, the numbers of men dedicated only to a religious life was such at this time, that Cormock O Cuillenainn tells in his Psalter of Cashel, that in Muingharid (formerly call'd the City of Deo∣chaine-assain) there was a Monastery with six Churches belonging to it in the same Town, wherein the number of Conventual Monks was 1500. whereof five hundred were learn∣ned Preachers, five hundred Psalmists to serve constantly in the Choire, and four hundred old Fathers applied wholly to Contemplation. Such was the happy state of Ireland in the short Reign of the same Cormock over Mounster; which must have been at or a little before the year of Christ 914. because this year ended the thirty eight years long Reign of the Monarch Flann mhac Sionna, who kill'd in Battel that good King Cormock, as we have seen before. 70. The Sixth being an addition to what has been said before against Hanmer, page 403. gives you to understand, How Dionbhuillach, son to the King of Denmark, invading Ireland
with a mighty Force, landed in the North and march'd his Army so far as Ardmach. How Conchabhar the first Provincial King of Ʋlster, with his own people the Sept of Clanna Ru∣adhruidh (i. e. the Children or Descendants from one Ruadhruidh, whom they call Ruadh∣ruidh Mor) and with them alone, nay with tumultuary small Forces rais'd out of them, found himself necessitated to attack these Danes. How, by the advice of one Geanann Gruadhollas, lest the Irish Youth should be con∣temn'd by the Danish old experienc'd Soldiers, Conchabhar used the stratagem of tying Locks of grey wool in form of beards to their cheeks and chins, whereby having made 'em seem the more considerable to the Enemy, as if they also had been Veterans; and then giving a fu∣rious charge on Dionbhuillach, he defeated utterly all his Danes. How these ascititious woollen beards were call'd in their Language Ʋlladh, and from them it was that ever since the Northern Province of Ireland has been call'd (in the same Irish Language) Ʋlladh, which we in ours call Ʋlster. How that, which we have here observed, having been the issue of Dionbhuillach's Invasion, and the time when it happen'd, as Keting writes, ha∣ving also been the Reign of Eochadh Feilioch the Irish Monarch, and Author of the Pen∣tarchy, who died in the year of the World
5069. that is just a hundred and forty years before the birth of Christ, according to the computation follow'd by Lucius: nothing can be desired clearer to evict Hanmer's little skill in the Irish History, and his manifold Er∣rours in delivering (as you have seen before page 386.) so many other Invasions of the Danes on Ireland and Conquests therein, long before the year of Christ 800. 71. My seventh Note, being likewise an addi∣tion, is to supply what I purposely omitted in my 17th Page. There I mention'd occasio∣nally the Picts arriving in Ireland out of Scy∣thia, so long since as the Reign of Herimon, the first Milesian Monarch of that Kingdom; but little more of 'em, save only their being made Tributary some Ages after in Scotland by the Irish. Indeed when I writ and printed that Page, I did not think of enlarging as I have done since. And therefore partly for haste, and partly for compendiousness, I pass'd then over several particulars, which I had be∣fore me that very time in Keting, and he has at large in the foresaid Reign, concerning those Picts. But seeing I have since, though contrary to my first design, dilated on other matters: I think it not amiss to add some∣what more of that Pictish Nation. And this for two reasons. The first is, because 'tis not only of all hands confess'd, the Picts had been
a warlike ancient People; but Venerable Bede repre∣sents them as most powerful too in the year of Christ 569. In which year, speaking of Co∣lumb Cille's landing in their Country from Ireland to convert 'em, he has these very words, Regnante Pictis Bridio, filio Meilochon, Rege po∣tentissimo, &c. The second: Because both the time of their first appearing in these parts, and their very Original, i. e. what Country-men they were, or whence they came, have conti∣nued for many Ages hitherto, at least of late they are vexatious Questions. As may be seen in Cambden's Britannia; where he has given a Title of the Picts and four pages (in Holland's Translation of him) to resolvethese Questions. Though, after all, he seems to me no nearer the Truth in his conjectural decision of either the one or the other, then Buchanan has before him; nay wider from it as to the later Question, than either Campion or Hanmer, or any other follow'd by them. These, for so much, had the good luck to yield to the Authority of V. Bede. in his Eccles. Histor. l. 1. c. 1. where he expresly tells us to this purpose, 1. That when the ancient Britons had possess'd them∣selves of the Southern Parts of this Noble Island, which derives its name from them, it happen'd that the Nation of Picts departing from Scythia, entring the Ocean, wind-driven to Ireland, landing there, desiring the Inha∣bitants
the Scots to afford 'em Elbow-room for Cohabitation; and being denied this, but nevertheless directed by 'em to the Northern Tract of Great Brittain, and withal promis'd their assistance (if need should be) to conquer it by force: they by this direction and promise encourag'd, put to Sea presently for that same Northern Tract; and landing therein, made it their habitation. 2. That wanting Women, and desiring Wives of the Scots, they had 'em on this condition, That whenever the succes∣sion to the Crown amongst their People should chance to be controverted, the Fe∣male's line Royal should prevail, and the King be chosen thence. Which is even to this day observ'd among the Picts, says Bede, speaking of his own time. 3. That they had a peculiar Language of their own. For (in the same Chapter) he notes particularly, how accord∣ing to the number of the Five Books (of Moses) wherein the Divine Law had been written, Brittain in his time praised God in five divers Languages; viz. those of the Eng∣lish, Britons, Scots, Picts, and Latins; this last made common to them all by their studying the Holy Scriptures. Yet notwithstanding this plain account of the Picts, given by V. Bede, as to their great Antiquity or Time of their first appearance in these Western Islands, and the Countrey,
whence they came to them, being that of Scythia: not only Buchanan, but Cambden by little Criticisms and other weak conjectures would fain persuade us they had only been a part of the ancient Britons retired from the South and power of the Roman Legions in the same Island of Great Brittain, &c. into the more uncouth inaccessible Northern parts thereof. That they were no earlier known by the name of Picts, than the Reign of the Roman Emperours Diocletian and Maximian Herculeus. And that their Language differ'd not in substance but only in a certain kind of Dialect from the Brittish Tongue spoken by the rest of their Countrey-men the other Brittons. But the words of Bede are clearer, and his authority greater than the arguments they bring are able to elude or impeach. Nor indeed can any thing more be desired to end these two vexatious Questions concerning that Pictish Nation, save only the particulars given by Keting out of the most ancient authentick Records of Ireland. These are of such irre∣fragable authority, that I am persuaded, were they known to Cambden, he had never disputed the matter. At least I believe he should not, if he had well consider'd of it. The Irish were the Nation, that, by the confession of all sides, from the beginning press'd longest and hardest of any upon that Northern Countrey inhabi∣ted
by the Picts in Great Brittain. They were the Nation that by degrees conquer'd so many of their Provinces, planted so many Colonies in 'em, establish'd a King of their own over the same Provinces long before the Romans attack'd either. Yea, they were the Nation that utterly subdued at last the whole Pictish Kingdom and extinguish'd in it the very name of Picts. Wherefore it is plain, that as the Irish were most concern'd, so they had the best means of any to know both the time of their first appearance, and Countrey too from whence they came: as the Picts themselves were pleas'd to tell 'em. And seeing it is no less plain, out of what has been said elsewhere in these Discourses, that the Irish Nation in all times had their publick Registers, wherein with the greatest care and certainty could be, all the Concerns of their People both at home and abroad, together with all other matters they thought fit, were recorded: it must fol∣low, that their account of the Pictish Nation, as to those two controverted points, ought in reason to silence any other fancied by men of later days. Now in that Irish ac∣count, besides what you have seen already out of Venerable Bede, there are many more particulars, given at large by Keting out of the Psalter of Cashel, whereof the chief heads are these: 1. That in Thracia this People we
call Picts serving Policornus, the King of that Countrey, in his Wars, for pay, but under a General and other Commanders of their own: it happen'd that their General, whose name was Gud, understanding for certain how the King had design'd to ravish his beautiful Daughter, if he could not otherwise make her his Whore, prevented him by taking away his Life. 2. That thereupon this Gud, flying immedi∣ately with those of his Soldiery who were re∣solv'd to run his fortune, put to Sea where he found convenience, and roam'd up and down till he arriv'd in Gaule: where being well entertain'd by the King of that Kingdom, his Daughter's beauty prov'd the second time his bane, after he had built, or at least began the building of Pictavis, from his People so called; (we call it now Poictiers.) For then observing that this Gaulish King also had the same de∣sign upon her that the Thracian had, he saw there was no abiding there without sacrificing her honour to his Lust. And therefore in all haste, but as privately as he could, he put to Sea again with his own People, where he was toss'd so long till the occasion of all his woe his beautiful Daughter died; and soon after he and his People arriv'd safe in Ireland, at a place call'd in the Irish Tongue Inbher Slaine, or the Mouth of the River Slane in Leinster, which now we call the Haven of Weixford.
3. That one by name Criomthann Sciatbheal, being then Commander of Leinster under He∣rimon the First Milesian Monarch of Ireland, hearing of their landing, came to them: and seeing them brave men, entertain'd 'em wil∣lingly of purpose to assist him in fighting some Brittish Troops, whom the Irish Books call Tuath Fiodhgha, whose Lances and Ar∣rows were poison'd to such degree that who∣ever was wounded by 'em could have no cure but Death. 4. That after this League of Friendship made, one of the Picts, called Tros∣dan, a great Magitian, understanding of the common danger from those poison'd Wea∣pons, advis'd the said Leinster Commander to provide against the day of Battel a 150 white, milch, crumple-horn'd Cows, to be milk'd all together when the Fight began; the Milk put into a Hole prepar'd of purpose hard by, and the wounded men to run presently and bath therein: which being observ'd, the effect prov'd answerable to expectation, and the Brittains were quite overthrown, with the loss of most of their Lives upon the spot. 5. That upon this success, at least not long after it, the Picts looking big, growing unruly, and even aspiring to the Command of that whole Province of Leinster; but the Monarch Herimon, made acquainted with it, drawing together a greater Power then they dared fight,
they were compell'd to accept of his Terms, and hye them away out of hand with his di∣rections and assistance for the Northern parts of Great Brittain. 6. That nevertheless be∣fore their departure they obtain'd of Herimon three Irish Ladies, by name Beanbhreasi, Bean∣bhuais, and Beanbhuaisdhne, who had been the Widows of three of Herimons Commanders, and taken these names from 'em, kill'd in the late War with Tuath-De-Danann: and these were all the Women they could obtain (at least then) though upon that very condition told us by Bede. The first of 'em married to Cathluan the chief Commander now of the Picts: for it seems his Father Gud was before this time departed the World: the other two married to two more of their Nobles. Nor could any of them obtain leave to stay in Ireland, but only six, viz. Trosdan the foresaid Magitian, Soilean, Ʋlpre, Neachtan Nar, Aon∣gus, and Leatan: who had possessions given them for ever by Herimon in the Countrey of Breagh Mhoigh, now call'd by us East and West Meath. 6. That the foresaid Cathluan was the first King of the Picts in Cruithin-Tuath, or Tuath Chruinigh (for by both these compound names indifferently the Irish Books call that Countrey in the North of Brittain which the Picts erected to a Kingdom, and call it so pro∣perly enough, as importing in English the Lordship
Lordship or Dominion of the Picts; the simple word Tuath signifying in Irish a Lordship, and Cruinigh the Picts themselves. 7. That after him in a succession reign'd in the same Coun∣trey (at least in some part of it) and of the same Pictish Nation, Threescore and Ten Kings more, to Constantine the last of 'em. And these being the Heads of those parti∣culars that concern them in the Psalter of Ca∣shel, written by the Holy Cormock O Cuilenain Arch Bishop and King of Mounster eight hun∣dred years since, and by consequence written either immediately before or immediately af∣ter, (I am sure much about) the time of their last fatal overthrow by his Countrey men the Irish and their Issue in Scotland; we need no longer question either the time of that Pictish Nation's first appearance, or the Countrey they came from to the Western parts of Eu∣rope. As neither indeed whence they deriv'd the custom of painting themselves. They might have learn'd this from the Agathyrsi in Thracia, if themselves had it not before: yea, they might be the first that us'd it in Great Brittain; and the Brittons might have only had it from them, for any thing said to the contrary. And they came as early to Ireland and Scotland both as the Reign of Herinton the first Milesian Monarch of Ireland, after he
had kill'd his elder Brother Heber, to whom he was but joyn'd in Sovereignty while Heber lived. Nay, we need not question how long this Pictish Kingdom lasted. For seeing it be∣gan at least as early as Herimon's death, I mean by this account in the Psalter of Cashel; and that, by Primat Ʋshers account, it continued to the year of Christ 840. then we must conclude, that according to Gratianus Lucius's computa∣tion of the years of the World, and years also of all the several Irish Monarchs Reigns, the Pictish Kingdom lasted 2623 years in all. For this Author fixes the death of Herimon in the year of the World 3516. and the Birth of Christ in the year 5199. as Eusebius Caesariensis, one of the Fathers of the first General Council of Nice, did long before him. What more I have to say in reference to the Picts, their Kingdom, or Kings, is, That as I was writing this Reflection, Mr. Langhorn's Introdu∣ction to the History of England being brought me by chance, and looking it over, I observ'd, That altho the ingenious Author gives no more light therein concerning the Countrey whence those Picts came first to Ireland, and thence to Scotland, nor of their Leaders name, nor of the time of their arrival amongst us, than other late Writers, especially Campion and Hanmer did before him, who call that Leader King Roderick,
and say this Roderick came to Ireland from Scandia (alias Scandinavia) which goes under the name of Scythia Germanica, or the German Scythia: yet he gives therein (page 197) a Catalogue of the Brittish Kings, and years of their several Reigns, partly out of John For∣don's M. S. Scoto-Chronicon; and partly out of Hector Boethius, who adds to the 76 Kings in Fordon, five more. So that both numbers, put together, make just the very same number of Pictish Kings, which the Psalter of Cashel has. Though I must confess there is no other agree∣ment in any point between that Psalter & these Authors, either as to the names of those Kings, or years of their Reigns, or total sum of these years. Neither is there in that whole Cata∣logue any Roderick either as first or last, or any at all of them, nor any thing near his name. The very same you may assure your self of Ca∣thluan: whom nevertheless you have seen be∣fore, out of the Psalter of Cashel, to have been the first Pictish King. As for the total sum of the years of their Reign, which by casting it up out of the several Reigns every body may see is 1165. it plainly comes short, by 1452 years, of the former account derivable from the Psalter of Cashel, and Ʋsher & Lucius. Besides it necessarily must suppose the Pictish Kingdom began in Scotland e'en four hundred
years full before any Picts landed in Scotland or came from Scandinavia to Scotland, or Ireland; which does not stand with the time of their coming set down by our new Historians, and last of all by Langhorn himself. As for the names express'd in that Catalogue, all I can say is, that if we give credit to Nennius, a Brittish Author that liv'd (as himself writes) an. Christi 830. under Anaraugh King of Anglesey and Guinech: if besides we suppose his Book rightly translated into Irish in O Duvegans Miscellanies: and if withal we believe, that Gratianus Lucius, quoting both, would not impose upon us, nor I on you or my self: what follows must be, That we give no kind of credit to the foresaid Catalogue drawn out of Fordon and Boethius, not even (I mean) as to those names of the Pictish Kings contain'd therein. For the same Gratianus Lucius, after letting us know (in his Cambr. Evers. page 93.) That himself had a Copy of those Miscellanies, and among 'em the Catalogue of all the Pictish Kings, written by the said Nennius, then presently, though upon another occasion, names five and forty of 'em: and I am sure that of this very number (tho only a part of Nennius's Catalogue) there are at least six and twenty names that have no af∣finity with, no resemblance at all nor imita∣tion of any in the whole Bedoll of Boethius and
Fordon, as I find this given by Langhorn. So much of the Picts. And therefore now to my Eighth Note. Which, as it refers to several places of this Book, particularly to page 5. and all other pages indeed where I suppose the Mi∣lesians either to have possess'd themselves of Ireland as early as the year of the World 2736. or not to have continued longer a free People under their own Laws and Kings then about 2500 years: so it is meerly occasion'd by what I said but now in my Seventh Note concerning the extent of time, which the Pictish Kings must have lasted according to the Chrono∣logy of Lucius and Ʋsher. In short, I must on this occasion tell you here, That as to the Milesian Kingdom's answerable extent of Time, Keting and Lucius agree. Save only, That Keting (as himself professes in his Preface) following that computati∣on of the years of the World, which allows only 4052 years from the Creation to the Incarnation, and consequently in this, com∣ing short 1138 years, of the computation of Eusebius, would needs reform the Irish Regnal (for so they call the Book of their Reigns) by shortning the Reigns of several of their Monarchs, by so many years in all as amount to above four hundred, that is, 491 years, and this of purpose to make the whole
extent of Time and the several Periods from the first Plantation of Ireland by Partholan to the Reign of Ruaruidh O Conchabhar the Last Irish Monarch of the Milesian Race, agree the better with his own foresaid Computation of the years of the World. And Lucius, on the other side, as he follow'd Eusebius's Compu∣tation of the same years of the World, (which is that commonly follow'd by both Greeks and Latins, says Sixtus Se∣nensis Biblioth. S. l. 2. page 46. verb. Adae Genealogia.:) so he held stiffly and throughly to the Irish Regnal as to the years of each Milesian Monarch's Reign. And therefore the difference 'twixt these two Writers, in relation to Ireland, or to any pe∣riod or extent of the periods of Time since its first Plantation, is only that of near five hundred years during the Milesian Monarchy. In all other points, concerning this matter, they both agree. As for Example, That Ire∣land was first planted by Partholan, about three hundred years after the Deluge: that his Po∣sterity continued there three hundred years: and the next Invaders Clanna Neimheadh 217 more: and after them, the Nation call'd Fir-bholg, thirty six: and after these, another Nation, by name Tuath-De-Danann, for 197 years: and then immediately the Milesians
coming in, continued since to the year of Christ 1172. So that Keting and Lucius be∣ing throughly agreed in all these points: their difference about the whole extent (of their several periods) mention'd before, can be no other than that of Keting's voluntary cutting off from the Milesian Reigns about five hundred years. Or rather indeed, e∣specially if we consider how Keting himself confesses he did so, and for what end he did it, even contrary to the Irish Regnall, we may conclude there is no difference at all as to the undoubted extent of all those several Periods of Time; though Keting place the Milesian Epocha in his year of the World 2736. and Lucius the very same Epocha in his year of the World, 3500. For albeit this diversity of placing it argues 1172. years difference between 'em in stating the years of the World: and that Keting chose rather to follow the far more likely computation of Augustinus Torniellius (in his Annales Sacri & Profani Torniel. Sext. M. aetat. ad an. 4052., ab Orbe condito ad eundem Christi passione redemptum, come out a little before Keting's time, (though he makes no mention of them or him) than be led by that of Eusebius who was himself most probably misled by the grand
Errour of the Septuagint Version See Sixtus Se∣nen. Biblioth. S. . 2. page 45. but more at large l. 5. page 440. where he shews that the computation of Eusebius, as to the years only from the Creation to the birth of A∣braham, exceeds the Hebrew true computation in One thousand two hun∣dred thirty six years. Nay, in the former Place, he shews that where∣as from the Crea∣ation to the Flood Moses counts only 1656 years, the Septuagint Inter∣pr. exceed him in 786 years. So that by their supputation to the Flood only, the number of years is 2242. From which diversity, the great contenti∣on arose betwixt the Hebrews and the Greeks in computing the years of the World. So says he, l. 2. pag. 45. verb. Adae Genea∣logia.: yet no difference at all, as to stating strictly the extent of Time or num∣ber of years which the Mi∣lesian or other former Con∣quests or Plantations of Ire∣land had continued, can be deduced thence. Only it argues, that either the one or other was mistaken in the number of the years of the World, or in fixing 'em. Which is enough to be said on this Subject oc∣casionally. And therefore I will only add here what as occasionally comes now to mind. That whether (in my Title-page) by the year of the World, 2736, you un∣derstand the year accounted such according to the com∣putation of Torniellius and Keting, or the other accoun∣ted such by Eusebius and Lucius: I am neither way
my self, nor any thing in this Book concern'd. Though otherwise I would, as to this point, much rather hold with those, than these: re∣taining nevertheless all due veneration to the name of Eusebius, as who had been not only one of the Three hundred and eighteen Nicene Fathers, and Bishop of Caesarea in Palestin, but worthy (as Constantine the Great said of him) to be Bishop of the whole Earth. The Ninth and last Additional Note has no reference (that I can remember) to any thing said before in any of my pages. How∣ever I give it, because I see Gratianus Lucius thought it not unconducing to the honour of the Ancient Irish. For it is in short: That the Warlike Nation of the Heruli who inha∣bited some Northern Islands and other Tracts near Germany, a Nation too well sometimes known to the Roman Provinces harrass'd by them, did glory in their two Kings Dathen and Aordon, as descended from the Irish: and that Suria, born of an Irish Lady descend∣ed from the Kings of Ireland, had the su∣preain Power of Biscay an. 870, as absolute Princess thereof, which she transmitted to a long succession of Descendants from her. Whereof you may see Gratianus Lucius (page 299.) where he quotes Wolfgangus Lassin. de Migrat. Gent. l. 13.
And so (Reader) you have at last an end of all my additional Notes, and consequently of all whatever I thought necessary to say (according to the design and method of this little Tract) of the Ancient Irish, as they were a free Nation about 2500 years under their own Laws and Government. For indeed my design hitherto, as you may easily perceive, was either only, or at least chiefly to represent them as they appear'd in the World before the loss of their freedom, or their subjection to a forein Power. Nor had I any farther (if it be a farther) end in the matter, then That of your understanding throughly, at least suf∣ficiently, who, or what kind of People were the former of those two Nations, whose Po∣sterities I have before (i. e. in the very begin∣ning of the first Section, page 5.) observ'd like the Twins of Rebecca, contending these last five hundred years in the bowels of Ireland. But who the later Nation were: and how, and by what degrees, and means, they not only for many Ages got the better of the former, but subdued them utterly at last in the memory of our Fathers: and what besides happen'd in our own days to the Issue as well of these Con∣querours, as of those conquer'd by 'em in that Country, will be the subject of the Second Part. FINIS.
Additions. 1. AFTER the Fourth Observation on the Catalogue of Kings, add what fol∣lows here, viz. That although it be no part of my business in this Place, to speak in particu∣lar of any of those Kings, other than what I have already of a few of 'em, and that only for thy better understanding the said Cata∣logue: yet because I considered that perad∣venture the Relation of Siorna Saoghall-ach's (See the Catalogue, Numb. 27.) long ex∣tent of Life and Beign, is the only extra∣ordinary of all whatsoever delivered any∣where in the whole Irish History, concerning any of so great a number of Monarchs, or Kings, and Sovereign Princes of Ireland, some Readers will boggle at or scruple the truth thereof, by objecting, How it seems at least im∣probable that he should be a hundred years old when he came to be Monarch; or should reign a hundred and fifty years after; or should be in all two hundred and fifty years of Age when he was kill'd by Roitheachtsigh (alias Roithsigh) mhac Roain: therefore to shew that this Relation of him is not improbable, I give here those arguments that convince my self. And to say nothing of his Surname Saogh∣alach,
which attributed to him alone among all other Irish Kings (whereof notwithstand∣ing some had reigned 60. others 70 years) must import him to have been of extraor∣dinary Long Life, and even a man of Ages: what convinces me, is, 1. That not only the Irish Book of Reigns, besides many other an∣cient Monuments and Historians of that Na∣tion who speak of this Subject (and after them Gratianus Lucius in our own time) have deliver'd it so; but Keting himself (though he be the chiefest of all the Historians of later days, that to reduce the Irish Chronology to an agreement with his own Computation of the years of the World, would consequently needs reduce those hundred and fifty years of Sior∣na's Reign to 21.) confesses they did so. 2. That very good Historians both ancient and modern of other Countreys tell us, how in later Times then Siorna Saoghallach's Reign, there have been many that lived as long, and some longer then he. And yet I'le lay no stress on Xenophon's writing, That a certain Ma∣ritim King lived 800. and his son 600 years. Nor on Ravisius giving the very same, or at least the like Relation of one Impetris King of the Plutinian Islanders, and his Son. Nor on Pliny recording the five hundred years life of Dondonius, a Sclavonian. Nor on Homer or his Followers, speaking Nestors age to have been
300 years. Neither on Hellanicus, a most an∣cient Writer, saying, That in the Province of Aetholia, some lived 200. others 300 years. Nor on Onesicritus neither, though attesting the same age of two and three hundred years even as very ordinary in the Island of Pandora. All these I pass over, because I am not certain of the Age of the World they lived in: that is, whether it was not of earlier Date than Siorna Saoghalach's reign, who was kill'd An. M. 4 69. according to Lucius. My instances are in Ser∣vatius Bishop of Tongres, and Joannes de Tem∣poribus, and Xequipir an Ethiopian, and the Nameless Indian, living in the same Time and Kingdom of Bengala with Xequipir. The first of these four died in the year of Christ 403. af∣ter he had lived 300 years, as Sigebert in his Chronicle, and others write. The second took his denomination or surname de Tempo∣ribus from those 336 years he had lived under many Emperours, whereof one was Charles the Great of whose Life-guard he had some∣times been; and another was Conrad III. in whose Reign he died in France, An. D. 1139. as not only Petrus Messias in the said Conrad's Life; but the Author of Fasciculus Temporum and many more Writers affirm. The third, I mean Xequipir, was yet alive so near our own time as the year of Christ 1536. after having lived till then 300 years. For so Hernandus
Lopez à Castagneda (.8. Chronici) has written of him. The Last, or the Nameless Indian, had in the foresaid year of Christ (1536) come to the year of his own age 335. says Joannes Pe∣trus Maffeius . XI. Histor. Indic. and before him the above Lopez: both the one and the other telling us many more particulars of Xe∣quipir; and Lopez som of this Anonimus Indian; but neither being able to recount, or give us any light to see how many years more either of 'em lived, nor when they died. Of all which you may read more at large in Augustinus Tor∣niellius's Annales Sacri, &c. ad an. M. 1556. n. 4. &. 5. And so I have given the two ar∣guments which convince my self, that from the Relation of Siorna Saoghalach's Life of 250 years, &c. nothing can be derived to make any Reader at all scruple the truth of the Irish History of that Kingdoms Monarchs or Kings. Nor by consequence any thing against the Ca∣talogue of them (which you have in the begin∣ning of this Book) or the long extent of Time which (in all) they reign'd, according to the Title of that Catalogue. 2. After the Last Inference from the same Catalogue; add this here as an other, viz. That notwithstanding any thing said hitherto, as it is confess'd, that the former sixteen of those 23 of the English, or Fourth and Last Conquest of Ireland, never assum'd the Stile or Title of
Kings of Ireland (for Henry VIII. was the First of this Conquest that assum'd it; altho never∣theless all the same former sixteen Kings of England were Sovereign Lords of Ireland too, at least by Title, every one in his turn, since the 17th year of Henry the II's reign over Eng∣land) so it must be confess'd, That properly speaking, none of those Irish Kings who rul'd in Association, with any other, could be cal∣led Monarchs, while their Association lasted. And we see by this Catalogue, that such were in all (at least for some time) 29 among those of the former Three Conquests; whereof One and Twenty were Milesians. Which is the reason that Cambrensis, where he tells us of 181 Monarchs of the Milesians, must be corrected as to that appellation or Title of Monarch, attributed so indistinctly by him to them all: and so must I, wheresoever, in this Former Part of my Prospect, I have in this par∣ticular follow'd him. The Irish Historians, in their own Language, speak more properly, giving 'em all the Title of Kings of Ireland.
Errors in the Matter, where, and where they are corrected. THE First, in Page 4. and 16. concerning Eoghun Mor and Aonghus Ollbhuodhach, but corrected p. 89. and 435. The second p. 67. about Dearmach; corrected p. 181. Third, in p. 18. concerning Muri∣eadhach's Six sons, &c. and corrected p. 93. Fourth, p. 19. about the nine Hostages; corrected p. 359. Errors in Words and Letters, to be corrected by this following Table, wherein the first Number signifies the Page, the second the Line; a, add; d, dele; and r, read. First in the Dedicatory, 2. 7. d. as. Secondly, in the Preface, 7. 18. d. his. 35. 16. r. 1662. p. 39. 31. r. 1604. Thirdly, in the Former Part, 35. 5. d. the Monarch. 71. r. Tighernmhais. 99. 16. d. to. 107. 29. d. of. 137. 6. r. the and again 8. r. the. 180. 14. for Diarmuid r. Dombnall. 221. 7. Taumaturga. 272. 5. for him r. b, and 24. r. or any. 317. 13. d. to. 319. . a. as. 351. 14. r. Monmouth. 354. 13. r. understood. 382. 21. r. Aetius. 385. 26. r. other. 387. 8. r. 51. 389. 19. r. Language, and 29. r. Niull. 395. 7. d. was, and for kill'd, r. died. 413. 9. r. Trouts. 414. 1. r. Leap, and 8. for though r. the. 434. . 26. r. 219. 459. 2. r. Notkerus. 461. 26. r. To, and in the Note . penvt r. Books. Lastly, observe that the Orthography of all the proper Irish Names and Sur∣names of the Kings throughout this whole Book, must be corrected by that in the Catalogue, where any variation appears.
