1926 S115391 99850610 15822
THE BIBLE-BATTELLS. Or The Sacred Art Military. For the rightly wageng of warre according to Holy Writ. Compiled for the vse of all such valiant Worthies, and ver∣tuously Valerous Souldiers; as vp∣on all iust occasions be ready to af∣front the Enemies of God, our King, and Country. By RIC. BERNARD Rector of BATCOMBE SOMERSETSHIRE. IOAB the Generals speech. Be of good Courage, and let vs play the men for our people, and for the Ci∣ties of our God, and let the Lord doe that which seemeth him good. 2 Sam. 10. 12. St PAVLS encouragement. Watch ye, stand fast, quit yourselves like men, and be strong. 1 Cor. 16. 13. Printed for Edward Blackmore, and are to be sold by Iames Boler at the Signe of the flowre de Luce in Paules Church-yard. 1629.
TO THE MOST HIGH AND MIGH∣TY MONARCH CHARLES King of Great Brittaine, France and Ireland, De∣fender of the Faith. Puissant-Prince. STRONG be Your Armes, and victorious Your Armies, the Lord of Hosts be with You, and the mighty God of Iacob▪ Your Refuge.
That foretolde by Christ is now verified: a noise there is of warres, and a ru∣mour of warres: Nation ri∣seth against Nation, and Kingdome against Kingdome: and now, as John saw in the vision, is the Holy Citty trod∣den vnder foote. It must be so for a time. On they goe & haue prevailed: but yet there is hope, if we warre aright. The great Man of warre (as Moses calleth him) hath di∣rected vs in the Bible bat∣tells; vsefull I hope, for these times: but yet I leaue this to Your Majesties Heroicall wisdome to iudge. Into me∣thod
and order I haue col∣lected them: and am bolde in all humility of heart to present them to Your Sacred Person. Your Highnesse the Saints looke vnto for safe∣guard The poore distressed Churches cry aloud for help. Is not their habitation be∣come Aceldama, the field of blood? Many Valorous Cou∣rages doe attend the oppor∣tunity of time; many valiant Martialists expect direction, and all hearken after but on∣ly a word of command. Dis∣consolate Princes craue aide: Religion it selfe saith to her Defender, set forward. The
hearts of the people, readie with purse, I hope, will ap∣peare, as now they pray, ge∣nerally for the Churches safe∣tie. Stand therefore (ô King) in the Forefront of the Lords Battailes; though not in per∣son, yet in the power of Your Might, to suppresse the inso∣lencie of high hearted Ene∣mies. And the strong arme of the Subduer of Hosts be with you, that this great name of Charles the First, amongst our famous Kings, may become renowned by wisdome and piety, Prowesse and Victo∣ry, throughout the Christian
world. This be the prayer of all faithfull Subiects, and e∣ver mine. Your Maiesties humble and and most loyally devoted Subiect and Servant: RICHARD BERNARD.
TO THE MAGNANIM OVSLY HEAR TED READER, to every heroicke spirit, of wor∣thy Resolution, and whosoeuer is generously affected to Milita∣ry Profession, and well deser∣ving the name of a Soul∣dier, and place in so honourable an employment. Wisdome, valour and victo∣rie attend ever their service for God, for Religion, for his Church, for their King and Country. Amen.
Noble Worthies NOW is the time to shew wisdome and courage, for acclamatur v∣bi{que} ad bellū: yet to rush vnadvisedly into Battaile, is not the way for vi∣ctory. I here in my labour doe not so vndertake to prescribe Rules, as to write an History of Holy Warres. Here is a Patterne from Gods people, who fought many set Battailes, and commonly got the day; for God was with them. They stood out
stoutly for him, his worship and service. Their footsteps if you follow, you shall surely speed the better. Let none say that this Treatise will not suite well to these times. For the true diffe∣rences are not many heretofore and now in the vniversall Course Military. But what∣soever the differences be therein my principall aime in the vse of Armes is to bring into the Campe the Practise of Piety. For the ill (though an overtrue saying) hath beene, Rara fides, pietas{que} viris qui castra se∣quuntur. These seeming exiled Vertues I desire to be welcomed amongst you Valiant Wor∣thies;
and Vices sent packing from every true Souldier with detestation. To this purpose tend my endeavours with full cur∣rent. To follow this Streame is to make your Armies strong, and your selues victorious. And here I haue a Sute to you (ô you Sonnes of Valour) In going forth, consider what you be, against whom you fight, and for what. Remem∣ber that Great Brittaine is in∣feriour to no Nation; and that by the prowesse and valour of English and Scots, glorious vi∣ctories haue beene obtained. You cannot you may not forget the valiant acts of Generall No∣rice
in the Low Countries; of the worthily honoured Lord Grey in Ireland, of the never dying Names of Drake, Furbi∣sher, & Hawkins, of the right famous Earle of Essex, of the deservedly eternized Veres, of the invincible▪ spirited Green▪ field, of the noble Cicill, with many others worthy of an ever∣lasting Name: Be couragious still, and cease not to vpholde the renowne of this our Name and Nation. Weigh your Enemies. They prosper you will say; oh that our Sinne & Slacknesse were not the cause. Their successe is but now of late, consider you
the former times; stay and won∣der at our incredible victo∣ries: we may yet hope well, if we would do well for our selues. They are in their height of Pride, and their downefall is neere: Courage then, and expect the issue. Our cause is iust, though God please a while to afflict vs. Set the worth of our Religion be∣fore your eyes: Its the truth of the eternall God. The Scrip∣tures command it; and thereby our consciences bound▪ doe tie vs vnto it. It hath beene con∣firmed by the blood of Martyrs, Reverend Bishops, and god∣lie Divines, learned Law∣yers,
and innumerable others. Our Kings haue established it; good Lawes are inacted for it; peaceably we haue enioyed it: Miraculous deliverances we haue had, since we professed it. And what still maintaines it? Power or Policie of man? No, no such thing; but the hand of the Almightie. Who it was that delivered vs from the in∣tended Invasion; who it was that prevented the hellish Powder-plot, who it was that freed vs from the many Trea∣cheries and Treasons practi∣sed against vs. Remember these things (ô yee true-hearted English)
stand ye (ye Valerous Minds) closse to the cause of God. Fight vnder his Banner against these Enemies of our Faith, our King, and Kingdome: goe on so, and prosper; and the Arme of Iesus strengthen you. Doe not marvaile (Honou∣rable & honoured Martialists) that I, Vnus de multis in¦ter Obscuros, & not de mag∣nis inter Notos, should thus presume to speake vnto you. I hope you will rather consider the worth of the matter, then weigh the defects of the man. Neither let me be blamed, that being by profession Ʋir Pacis, Minister Ecclesiae Anglicanae, should
thus thrust my selfe into Cam∣pum Martis. The Sacred Bi∣ble, my daily studie, gaue mee the grounds; my delight in Hi∣stories of this subiect enlarged my meditations. That I finde in holy Writ. I thinke I may write of: Hoc instituto meo alienum esse non putavi. The Priests of God went out with the Lords Hosts in former times, and that by his appoint∣ment. Iohn the Baptist spake vnto Souldiers; they asked him what they should doe; and he advised them in some things. I haue laboured for your good, bonâ saltem intentione: I pray my endeavour may not be
reckoned minoris pretii, quia ego Minister. The worth of a true Souldier I haue ever ho∣noured; I prize at an high rate a Man os valour▪ and hee well deserues it. I wish ex animo that illustrious eminency may e∣ver attend him, that is by ver∣tue Valiant. I doubt not therefore, but that this Work, from the word (not hitherto published by any) will be favourably accepted of you. That if it make you not Souldiers according to Men, (because perhaps more you know already by practise and experi∣ence) yet am I sre it may make you vertuously valiant, and
good men according to God. And being so, then, though you die here in Battell, you may hereafter liue in blessednesse: Which I heartily wish you may attaine vnto, there to triumph for ever. Yours in his prayer, and at command in all Chri∣stian Services, RICH: BERNARD.
The Contents of every Chapter in this Booke. CHAP. I. OF the excellency of the Historie of the warres in Holy Writ. CHAP. II. Of the warres of God with man. CHAP. III. Of the warres of man with man, and of the lawfulnesse of such warres. CHAP. IV. Of the honourable calling and em∣ployment of a right Souldier.
CHAP. V. Of the iust causes and true grounds of making warre. CHAP. VI. Of necessary warre. CHAP. VII. Of the chiefe Authority moving to warre, and of Kings going out with their Hosts. CHAP. VIII. Of Prest men, and Voluntaries. CHAP. IX. Of the mustering and choice of Soul∣diers. CHAP. X. Of the Armes in olde times, the view of them, and of the exercise before Souldiers goe to warre. CHAP. XII. Of the Generall over the whole Ar∣mie. CHAP. XIII. Of Counsell for Warre.
CHAP. XIV. Of the disciplining of an Armie, and orderly government thereof. CHAP. XV. Of the evills to bee avoided in a Campe, and to be punished. CHAP. XVI. Of a convenient Army, and of ne∣cessaries prepared aforehand to maintaine the same. CHAP. XVII. Of meanes abroad to be vsed before the warre begin. CHAP. XVIII. Of the religious preparation before the Army march. CHAP. XIX. Of laying good grounds aforehand to speede well, and of a peaceable and lawfull proceeding against such an Enemie. CHAP. XX. Of marching forward and encam∣ping.
CHAP. I. Of the excellencie of the Historie of warres in Holy writt. MOst that delight to reade, or almost all, so delighted, do spend their time in peruse∣sing over humane sto∣ries, and do highly extoll the histo∣ries of the warres of Heathen Com∣manders, as of great Alexander, of Iulius Caesar, of Pirrhus the Epirote, of Hanniball the Carthaginean, of Sci∣pio Africanus, and many other praise worthy Cheiftaines in warre: but doe lightly price the Scriptures Hi∣storie of warres, the right art mili∣tarie indeed, which was command∣ed to bee penned by that great man of warre, (as Moses stileth him) theExod: 15. only cheife and highest commander
whose name is the Lord of Hosts. And yet this Sacreed story surpas∣seth al other, and is aboue them to be commended for many things; as first for the vndoubted truth in all and every thing therein delivered. 2. For the antiquitie thereof before all other extant in the whole world. 3. For the great authority thereof, divine and heavenly. 4. For the short and pithy relations. 5. For such admirable things as be therein recorded, not else where to be foūd. If withall the certainetie of such things be considered; as I. The Lords most valiant and re∣ligious General, never to be match∣ed for fame and glorie. Who can compare with Iosua, judged to bee one of the Nyne Worthies? Who can match with some of the Iudges, as Shamgar, who slew 600 men with an Oxe goad, or Sampson, that slew a 1000 with the jaw bone of an Asse? Iudg. 3. 31. Or who can compare with David the King, another of the Nyne Worthies, for wisedome, valour and piety? Or who hath ex∣celled
a third of the nyne worthies, Iudas Machabeus for courage, for magnanimitie of spirit, and vndaun∣tednesse of heart? II The Captaines and worthies as David had, who among the Hea∣then like Adino, that in one battell slew 800 men with his owne hand? Who could breake thorow an whole host of armed men, as did only three of Dauids worthies to fetch some water for David to drinke? Then worthy Acts are recorded in the 2. Sam. cap: 23. and 1. 11. whereto I re∣fer the Reader, as not to be paralleld among the true histories of any Hea∣then or Christian. III The set Battels therein men∣tioned, in number found 37; what one Historie hath the like number in so compendious a relation▪ IV The huge Armies set downe: The Armie which Gedeon fought which was very great, for then aboue 120000 were slaine: The Army of Israel against Beniamin, was 40000: The Army of the Philistins at one time was 30000 Charets, 6000 hors∣men,
and footmen as the sand for multitude; Sauls first hoast, which1 Sa 11. 8. he levied against the Ammonites, was 330000: Amaziah against Edom had 300000: Shishake the King of Ae∣gipt came against Iudah in Rehoboams dayes with 1200 Charetts, 60000, horsemen, and footmen without number, Ieroboam & Abijah brought2 Ch. into the feild at one time 1200000, the one 800000, the other 400000: Zerah the Ethiopian came against Asa with 1000000, and Asa mett him with 580000, so there was that day in the feild fifteene hundred & four∣score thousand men to fight, striving who should overcome, and be victo∣rious: Greater armies I never read nor heard of in any Historie, saue only that of Xerxzes the Persian, and that of Tamberlain, and Baiezett the Turke and Tartar, if the relation of the numbers be true, as we are sure these all be. V. The storie is rare, In respect of the incredible slaughters in thoseIud. 8. 10. dayes in one foughten feild: Gedeon in his warrs did sley of the enemyes
120000; David slew 40000 horse∣men2 Sa 10. 18 in the Syrian hoast, with their2 Ch 3 17. Generall, and the men also of 700: Charetts in one battell; Ieroboam lost 500000 chosen men in his fightings against Abijah: Ahab slew of Benha∣dads1 K 20 29 30. Army 100000, besides 27000 that perished by the fall of a wall, and2 Ch. 28. 6. 8. Pekah King of Israell destroyed in one day of the men of Iudah, 120000 and tooke captiue 200000 priso∣ners. VI. In regard of the most strange and vnheard of victories; some mira∣culous, as when God sett the sword of the enemyes of his people against their owne selues to slaughter and kill one another; as hee did the Mi∣dianits and Amalakits, so the Philisti∣ansIudg. 7. 2 and likewise the Moabites, and Edomites and Ammonites, when they came against Iudah. Some other1 Sa. 14 20 though not such, yet so prosperous by Gods protection and ayding po∣wer2 Ch 20. to overcome, as the like is no where recorded, to omit the victo∣ries of Iosua against Og, against Sihon, against all the Kings of Canaan, the
victories of Iudah, of Ehud, Baruk,Iudg. 1. Iephte, of Saul, of David, Asa, Ahab, Amaziah and others. I will menti∣on but that one levied host of Israell in number 12000 only, which went out against Midian; and slew fiue Kings, burnt all their Citties, andNum. 21. 5 8. 10. 32. 35. 50 Verse 49. goodly Castells with fire, and tooke prisoners 32000 persons; brought away for bootie and spoyle, besides Iewels of gold, chaines, braceletes, rings, earings, and tabletts, 675000 sheepe, 72000 beeues, and 61000 Asses: and yet lost not one man in obteyning this victorie. VII. To these former may be ad∣ded, the great number of the valiant and matchlesse men, not in any Na∣tion vnder heaven to bee found, at one time so many as was there. There came to David to make him King at once 1222, Captaines, and with them in number altogether1 Ch. 12. 28. 32. 34. 339300, all men of warre very many thousands of them commended to be famous, mightie men of valour, expert in warr, able to keepe ranke, and to sett the Battell in aray. Be∣sides
these, there were in valour peere∣lesse, all the 37 worthies of David, with many other mighty men, such2 Sa. 2. 22. 1 Ch. 11, & 12. as could vse both the right, and left hand, for hurling stones and shoting arrowes out of a bowe, yea men of might, fit for warre, that could han∣dle sheild and buckler, whose faces were like the faces of Lyons, and as swift as the Roes vpon the moun∣taines. Afterwards when David was settled, and Ioab commaunded to number the people throughout the 12 Tribes, besides Levy and Benia∣min, there were found 1570000 men that drewe sword: and yet that Na∣tion was not aboue 200 miles long, and 50 miles broad, not neere the halfe of England by much. Yea when the Tribes were divided, and onely Iudah & Beniamin made a kingdome, as much perhapps, as two or three of the lesser shires of England, yet could Abiiah raise vp of chosen men 400000; Asa had an army of 580000 all mighty men of valour; to say no∣thing of Amaziah his host of 300000 nor of the 2600 chiefe of the Fa∣thers2 Ch. 26.
very valiant men, vnder whō was an army of 307500 which made warr with mightie power to helpe2 Ch, 17 King Vzziah against the enemy. In the raigne of Iehosaphat was an host of 1160000 men, mightie men of valour. Of what Nation so little hath been, or can be the like truely spoken? Lastly, the Nation was ever in mi∣litary exercise by reason of continu∣all warres at home or abroad; In the dayes of Iosua, of the Iudges, of Saule and David, after the peaceable dayes of Salomon, Israel & Iudah being divi∣ded, then began warres, and almost perpetuall betweene the two king∣domes, besides the warrs of forraigne Enemyes, the Aegyptians, Moabits, Ammonites, Edomites, Philistims, E∣thiopians, Sirians, Assirians, and Ba∣bylonians, vntill both kingdomes pe∣rished, and were led away captiue: So as this people could not be but good souldiers, for number many, in skill by dayly vse exquisite, in va∣lour incomparable, in braue leaders, cheife Captaines and commanders,
not to bee matched. And therefore why may not much art of Souldiary and military knowledge be collected hence at least in many maine points, as well, yea why not better, then som other humaine writers? Seeing the relations are most true, matter to worke vpon plentifully admini∣stred, the warrant from God, the ex∣amples from the people of God, which being set for examples before them, will put souldiers in minde of the wayes of God, to moue them to seeke helpe and ayd of God, as those did against their enemyes, when we goe out to battell. The II. CHAP. Of the warrs of God with man. WArre is the opposite to peace, and is by the Pro∣phet called evill; beingEsa, 4 5 7 Lev, 26, 25. the fruite of sinne, the punishment for sinne, yea so fearefull, as David
once put to his choice, desired ra∣ther2 Sam: 24. the pestilence, then the sword of an enemy: It bringeth with it for the most part innumerable evills, e∣ven as well to the Conquerours, as to the Conquered. This warr is either of God with man, or of man with man: before I speake of the latter, I thinke it very fit to say something of the former in the first place; that men may consi∣der of another kind of warre, then v∣sually they dream of. God hath warre with man, yea he hath some where sworne; that with some sorts, hee will haue warre from one generation to another, e∣ven for ever; there is no peace toEx 17, 16. Esay 57. 21 Ex. 15, 3. the wicked; God therefore is pleased to be called vir belli a man of warre, the Chaldee expresseth the title thus, the Lord and victour of warres; he cau∣seth warres, and maketh an end of them, at his owne will. Hence it is, that he is sayd to be ar∣med,Rev. 19, 11 Iudg. 5, 8. Psal. 46, 9 Esay 59. 17. and to haue his Ar∣morie, which he openeth, that hee bringeth forth the weapons of his in∣dignation,
the Chariots and horse, the Army and power, that he rideth vpon horses and charets, that he mu∣strethHos. 2. 18. Ier. 50. 25. Esai. 43. 17 Hab. 3. 9. Iudg. . 4. Esay 13. 4. 2 Ch. 25. 8 Esay 46. 10. 11. Ps. 24. 8. his hoast, and marcheth against his enemyes, with assured victory: for he hath power to help himselfe, and to cast downe such as will resist him, his councell doth ever stand; what he purposeth, that he can bring to passe, and he will doe all his plea∣sure: for hee is strong and mightie, even the Lord mighty in battell. Therefore hath hee the title of King of Kings, of King of glory and the Lord of Hoasts, a name given him by Esai and Ieremie, aboue an hundred times, and mentioned in the old Te∣stament aboue 240. times, so did the Lord, in those times, (if I may so say) giue himselfe to warres and thereby vexed the Nation and destroyed2 Ch. 15. 6 them for their sinnes. Now Gods host or army is either more generall or more speciall. The more generall, consists of foure Regi∣ments. The two first fall vpon his e∣nemies covertly, sodainely and at vnawares; but the other openly in
the view of the eye. The first is of good Angells, cal∣ledGen. 32. 2 Luk. 2 13. 2 K. 19 37 2 Ch. 32. 21 for the great numbers, Gods host for their quality heavenly souldiers, of which (such is their power) even one was able to sley, in one night, 185000. and amonge them all the mighty men of valour, leaders, and Captaines, in the campe of the Assi∣rians. The Second Regiment is of bad An∣gels,Ps 78. 49. with which hee plagued the Aegyptians, amonge whom he sentIud. 9. these wicked & evill spirits. By one of these he vexed and set at odds A∣bimilech2 Ch. 29. 23. 1 Sam. 14. 20 and the Sichemites to seeke by a furious and bloudy rage the vt∣ter ruine, and destruction of one a∣nother: And by these it is very like, he wrought the deaths of greatIud. 7. 22. Armies, when they slew one ano∣ther, the Lord setting euery mans sword against his owne fellow, throughout the host. The third is of all other his crea∣tures, except man, this is a very mighty strong and vnresistable Ar∣mie: with these hee goeth forth in
battell; He set the starres in theirExo. 9. 23, 24. 34. 1 Sa. 7. 10. Ios 10, 11. Psal. 11. 6. courses to fight against Sisera: with thunder, lightning, raigne and haile mingled with fire, he set vpon the Egyptians: with great stones from heauen hee slew the Canaanites,Iob 38. 22 23. Amos 4. 9. Hag. 2. 8. Num. 16. 35. 31, 32. 1 Sa. 14, 15 which hailestones he reserueth in his treasury against the time of warre, with blsting windes, with fire, with Earthquakes he consumeth, ouer∣throweth and deuoureth vp his ene∣mies: He shooteth out his arrowes, hot thunderbolts: with these hee smites them through; yea saith the Prophet, with thunder, earthquake, great noyse of storme and tempest,Ps. 18. 14. Esa. 29. 6. & 30 30. Ioel 2. 25. 2 Kin. 17. Deu. 32. 24 with the flame of deuouring fire he will rise vp against them; and shew the lighting downe of his arme, in the indignation of his anger, with scattering and tempest and haile∣stones. Hee commeth foorth with his great hosts, as Ioel calleth them Canker-wormes, locusts, Cater-pil∣pillers, and palmer-wormes: He ar∣meth the teeth of the beasts and Lyons to fight for him, and vseth the poyson of serpents to vexe and
slay his enemies. Hee sendeth outIos 24. 12. Exod. 8. frogges, flyes, and very lice to plague his enemies, and hornets to driue them away before him; so as he wan∣teth no meanes to annoy, no po∣wer to worke the destruction of such as hee shall arme himselfe a∣gainst. The fourth Regiment is of men outIoel 2. 11. Esa. 10. 5. & 13. 4, 5. of his Church; these are his armie or campe, as they be tearmed, as also the weapons of his indignation. These he calleth forth and mustereth them; ouer whom he hath appoin∣ted his generalls, as once oue the Babylonians his Lieutenant and ser∣uantIer. 25. 9. Esa. 45. 1, 2, 3. Nebuchadnezzar, and ouer his host of Medes and Persians his Lieu∣tenant and annoynted Cyrus. These his armies of men hee im∣ployeth diuersly as he pleaseth; Sometimes seuerall Nations of them one against another, as the Babyloni∣ans against the Assyrians, Egyptians, and other Countries: the Medes and Persians against these, the Grecians against them, and the Romans against all: So hee armes the Turke against
the Persians, and so to fight one a∣gainst2 Ch. 15. 6. another: for when Nations rise against Nations, and Cities a∣gainst Cities, Gods hand it is that vexeth them, saith a Prophet. Sometime hee letteth them agree together, euen seuerall Nations and Kings, to gather together against the Church, and then sends an ill spirit among them to fall together by the eares one with another, and vtterly to destroy one another, as the2 Ch. 20. 23. Moabites, Ammonites and Edomites did. Sometime the Armie of one and the same Nation he sets at oddes, and the sword of euery man against his owne fellow, as fell out in the great1 Sam. 14. 20. Iud. 7. 22. host of the Philistims, and those e∣nemies against which Gideon went forth. But this his host he doth not thus onely imploy one against another, their owne selues, but he vseth them against his owne people, as appea∣reth by many examples in sacred sto∣rie; Note this, and heerein consi∣der.
1. That though these enemiesIoel 3. 11. seeme to come of their owne ac∣cord, or are gathered together by ill instruments, such as the vncleane spirits like frogs be in Reu. 16. 14. or by the diuell set on as Gog and Ma∣gog.Reu. 16. 16 Ioel 3. 2. Iud. 4. 7. Reu. 20. 8. yet know wee must, that God also gathereth them toge∣ther, where and whither he will. He did draw Sisera with his Charets and multitude to come forth to the riuer Kishon; Gods hand (though the ene∣mie thinkes not so) is in their con∣duction. 2. The number of the enemie is not at their own will to come forth,Esa. 13. 4. but the Lord numbereth and muste∣reth them, and so knoweth, to a man, how many hee sendeth forth against his people. 3. These enemies of his Church, yet his host, he gathereth together, he numbreth and mustereth them, and bringeth them out against his people, for seuerall ends. Sometime onely to terrifie his people to make them feare before him to humble themselues with fa∣sting
and prayer, which being per∣formed, he will set himselfe against those their enemies, and destroy them, as hee did the three Nations2. Ch. 20. which came against Iehosophat: and as he did the proud Spaniards in their great Armado comming against Queene Elizabeth in the yeere 88. to their owne shame, and the confu∣sion of their conceited inuincible power. Sometime its to giue his people some glorious victory ouer their E∣nemies, to let them see his power, mercy, and preseruation of them, to stirre them vp to a more zealous ser∣uice of him, as he did in the dayes of Asa, when the dreadfull host of Ze∣rah the Ethiopian his tenne hundred2 Ch: 14. thousand came against Iudah, and were vtterly discomfited. Often the Lord hath hardened these enemies hearts against his peo∣ple, that those enemies might be o∣verthrowne;Exo: 14. Num. 21. Ios. 11. 19, 20. so he hardened Pharaoh and his Egyptians to follow after Is∣rael, that he might drowne them in the sea: So delt he with Og, and Si∣hon,
and withall the King of Canaan, that his people might vtterly de∣stroy them. In like sort hee dealt2 Sam 5. & 8. 10. with Dauids enemies who made war with him, but to their owne ruine and ouerthrow, and to the infinite inriching of Dauid and his people the Israelites. But some other time he gathereth these Enemies to this end, that they may indeede afflict and punish his owne people, yea to rule ouer them, making them to serue with rigour, cruelty and great contempt; Thus he sent out the King of Assyria, and gaue him a charge to take the spoyle,Esa. 10. 6. and the prey; yea and to tread them downe like the mire in the streetes. Yet obserue in this hand of God. 1. That the Enemies preuailing a∣gainst the Lords people, as from GodIud. 3. 8. & 4. 2. & 3: 3. 12. Leu. 26. 36 37. himselfe: He selleth them into the enemies hands, he strengthneth the enemies to get the victorie, and if people be weake, fearfull, fly away, be ouercome & spoyled, it is he that
doth it; He turneth backe the wea∣pons of warre in their hand, it is hee that giueth Iacob to the spoyle, andIer. 21: 4. Esa 42: 24. Ier. 21. 5.  Israel to robbers, for hee fighteth sometimes against them with an outstretched hand and a strong arme, in anger, furie, and in great wrath. 2. That all this happeneth for sin; because his people rebell and vexe his spirit, doe euill in his sight, andEsa, 63. 10 Iud. 3. 12. Leu. 26. 14 15, with v, 17, 36, 37. will not obey nor hearken to his commandements. For Idolatry and despising Gods message by his Pro∣phet was Amaziah ouerthrowne in battell: Rehoboam for his Idolatry was spoyled by Shishake King of E∣gypt; for Ioash his Apostacie and his murther of Zacharias was a very great host deliuered by God intoEsai 42. 34. 2 Ch: 25. & 12. 2 Ch: 24. 2 the hands of the Sirians a small com∣pany; For his wickednesse was A∣hab brought low, and at length Iu∣dah led into captiuity by Nebuchad∣nezzar. 3. That although the Enemies be thus the rod of Gods anger, and hisEsai 10. 5. indignation, the very staffe in his hands to punish his people, for their
hypocriticall seruice; but not to de∣stroy them vtterly: yet because the enemies thinke not this, that theyEsai 10. 13. are onely Gods rod and staffe; nor that their power is from him, be∣cause his people haue sinned; but are proud, glorying in their owne wise∣dome and strength, and intend in their hearts to destroy the Lords in∣heritance, he will at length turne his wrath vpon them. For marke what the Lord saith by his Prophet, when the Lord hath performed his whole worke vponVers. 12. 16 17, 24, 27. Mount Sion, and on Ierusalem hee will punish the fruit of the stout heart of the King of Assyria, and the glory of his high lookes: And this is Gods manner of dealing, when he hath humbled his people, then to bring vpon their enemies a day ofIer. 50. 17, 18, 23, & 51. 11. Amos 1. 3, 6 9, 11. 13. vengeance, and a time of recom∣pence as he did vpon the Assyrians first, and next vpon the Babylonians for their mercilesse cruelty against his people. The Lord now afflicteth heauily his Church, her enemies preuaile
mightily, and thinke to deuoure her vp: false friends vndermine her wals, open enemies assault her and tread her vnder foot in many places; but when God hath performed his whole worke, he will take his time to gather them together to their de∣struction, and this he foretelleth vsIoel 3. 2. 11 plainely in Reu. 16. & 19. & 20. In the meane space, let vs humble our selues vnder his mighty hand; bee warned by our former great losses, by our brethens calamities, by the signes from heauen, by the extraor∣dinary stormes and tempests, winter thunder and lightning so often and vnusuall, by plagues and other pu∣nishments fallen vpon vs; and if we turne and repent, then let vs beleeue2 Ch. 20. and wait with patience, yea then hearken what is said, stand still let vs not feare, but behold the saluation of the Lord which he will shew vnto vs, undoubtedly in that day; Amen. And thus for the generall hosts of God, and the armies of his power in heauen and in earth. Now the other more speciall host,
of this Lord God of Hosts is his trai∣ned souldiers, the Armie which hee hath in his Church for defence ther∣of,Exo. 12. 41 51. & 14. 20. & 23. 18. & 14. 2. & 15. 27. Num. 11. 10. & 16. or to send out against their ene∣mies, and his also for their sakes. This Armie was the Israelites com∣ming out of Egypt which are called Gods host and Campe who went vp harnessed; their resting places were called encampings, and their lodging was in Tents; The Lord caused a mu∣ster of them and to be numbered, and found among them to bee 603550. able men to draw sword all that were 20. yeers old and vpward. Hee set them in order in marching, and ap∣pointed them standards and the seue∣rall armies to attend the same. ThisIos. 5. 13. Exo. 13. 21. & 14. 19. Ps. 77. 20. Esa. 63. 12. Deut. 33. 5 Ps. 18. 32. 34. 38. & 144. 1. host was the host of God, Christ their Prince and their Conductor: His Lieutenant generall Moses, who was as a King among them. After Moses he set vp Iosua to be generall, after him Iudges, then Saul, and Da∣vid the King, whom the Lord girded with strength to the battell▪ teaching his hands to warre, and his fingers to fight, so as by hee could by his
armes breake a bow of steele. Thus he trained him vp to fight his battels This Army of his people is called1 Sam. 17. 36. Ios. 5. 15. Esa. 31. 4. Deu 20. 4. 1. Sa. 17. 47 2 Chr. 20. 15. the host of the living God, and the Lords host, with this he taketh part, and for it fighteth as a Lyon; with this he goeth to fight against his ene∣mies; for the battell is not theirs but the Lords; and therfore the Lord was for them, to giue them many glori∣ous and incredible victories ouer their enemies. And as the Lord was glorified in victories by these, so will he assured∣ly be now also for his Church in his owne good time. For albeit the beast must warre with the Saints, and for a time ouercome, Reu. 11. 2. & 13. 7. yet at length shall the lambe with his e∣lect, called, and faithfull preuaile, Reu. 17. 14. He shall ride vpon the white horse with many crownes vpon his head, the armies of heauen also fol∣lowing on white horses, as trium∣phing ouer all their enemies, for heReu. 17. 16. is the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; And thus of the warres of God with man.
The III. Chap. Of the warres of man with man, and of the lawfulnesse of such warres. VVArre is the contenti∣on betweene Princes or States by armes or force of men, vnder order and good gouernment to obtaine victory, and so he conquering and subduing of the Dominions, bodies and goods of one another, to liue the better af∣terwards in peace and honour. ForS. Aug: ad Bonifac. saith a Father, the true seruants of God make warres, that the wickd may be restrained, and good men be releeued. Warre vpon iust cause vndertaken is vndoubtedly lawfull: And this is necessary to be knowne and belee∣ued of all that vndertake warres. For there is nothing more for encourage∣ment,
in any action then to haue conscience satisfied in the lawfulnes thereof. Some, as the Anabaptists, hold it not lawfull for Christians vnder the Gospell to make warre; but such are but dreamers; for 1. God is pleased to he called aExo. 15. 3. man of Warre; now he neuer admit∣teth a title of a thing vnlawfull. 2. He hath giuen commandement to his people sometimes to fight: Numbers 31. 3. 1. Sam. 15. 3. Deut. 2. 24. 3. Hee made lawes for direction to them, when they went to warre, Deut. 20. 10. 15. 4. Holy men of eminent place and graces haue made warre, as didGen. 14. Abraham, Iosua, David, and o∣thers. 5. God would send his spirit vp∣on them to encourage them to the warre, as he did vpon Gideon, Ehud, Sampson, as we may read in the book of Iudges. 6. God raised vp some Prophets to comfort, and set forward his peo∣ple
to warre; thus he mooued De∣borahIud. 4. 2 Ch. 20. 14, 15. to call Barak into the warres: and Iahaziel to encourage Iudah to goe against their enemies. 7. God taught David to play the part of a valiant Capraine and soul∣dier;Ps. 144. 1. & 18, 39, 40. he made his hands to warre, and his fingers to fight, and made his arme strong to draw a bow of steele, as before is shewed; for which David rendered thanks to him: yea David often consulted with God aforehand2 Sa. 5. 19. 23. and had answer from God, with pro∣mise to giue him victoie in▪ battell before he went out, which he would not haue afforded him in an action sinfull and vnlawfull to be done. 8. In Battell, when his people re∣sted vpon him, and cryed to him, he1 Ch. 5. 20. did helpe them and made them Con∣querours. Lastly, war against Gods enemies, and the battle fought against them, is called the Lords battle, and his work2 Ch. 20. Ier. 48 10. which they do, which God so allow∣eth of, as he denounceth a curse a∣gainst them that shall doe it deceit∣fully or negligently.
Thus we see what warrant warre hath from the Lord of Hosts in the old Testament. But they will grant this to be so in that time, for then God shewed himselfe a man of warr, and was as it were delighted with the title of Lord God of hosts so▪ often giuen to him, and seldome hardly once the name of the God of peace. But in the new Testament the caseIam. 5. 4. is otherwise, for hee is but once or twice at most called there the Lord of Hosts, more often the God of peace: wee be now vnder the Lord Iesus the Prince of peace, and doe professe the Gospell, the word of peace, which should mooue all Christians to liue in peace and haue warres, battell, and slaughtering of men. Its very true, that all men shouldPs. 34. 14. seek peace and ensue after it, as a bles∣sing of God: yet iust and necessary warre is not to be condemned, for as a Father saith, it is a part of iustice by warre to defend our Countrey andAmbros de Of. confederates, and such as need ayde from spoylers and oppressors. Nei∣ther
doth the New Testament disal∣low of war so it be iust. 1. Our Prince of peace telleth vs of warrs, and is pleased to be set outMat. 24. Reu, 19. &▪ 17. as a Captaine of an Host riding on horse backe, and subduing his ene∣mies; and making a slaughter of them. Hereby shewing that his Church shall have warrs, and he will take their part and helpe to subdue their enemies, as he hath often done and yet will doe. 2. When the souldiers asked IohnLuk. 3. 14. Baptist what they should doe? hee did not will them to forsake their calling: but admonished to doe vio∣lence to none, to accuse none falsly, and to be content with their wages, as allowing the calling, but refor∣ming the abuse. 3. We find religious souldiers in the new Testament, the religious Centurion, Cornelius a Captaine,Mat. 8. 8 10 Act. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4, 7. and a souldier fearing God that wai∣ted on him. 4. Saint Paul maketh it a fruit of faith, to be valiant in battle; if theHeb. 11. 34 lawfulnesse of warre had been out of
date vnder the Gospell, the Apostle would have left that out, as now no fruit of faith. 5. God hath now appointed Kings to vse the sword: not onelyRom. 13. 4. to punish offenders vnder them; but also to defend their subiects from vi∣olence and wrong at home and a∣broad. 6. The Lord in calling the Gen∣tiles to the Gospell made choise in the first place to begin with one of this calling before another: even a Captaine called Cornelius, to whom he sent his Angell, and after Saint Peter to instruct him, and to make him and his, the first fruits of the Gentiles, so far was he from disestee∣ming of the calling. 7. We must know that the Gospell taketh not away the law of nature to defend our selues by forcible meanes against violent enemies: yea with a good conscience may wee take vp armes when there is no safe∣ty but in armes. And what hindereth Princes and States to recover what is iustly their owne, if otherwise not
to bee gotten but by force of Armes? 8. Hereto adde the practise of all Christian Emperours, Kings, Prin∣ces, and States in all ages vsing vpon iust cause armes. Militare non est delictum, saith Saint Augustine, but abuse it: yea saith Ambrose, a worke it is of righteousnesse when the cause is iust. Therefore from all these sayings and former reasons we may conclude warre, if not abused, to be lawfull.
IV. CHAPTER. Of a right souldiers Honoura∣rable calling and im∣ployment. A Right souldier in his vo∣cation: well qualified, and behauing himselfe worthily like a true souldier indeed, liveth in a course of life worthy Ho∣nour, and his employment in warrlike affaires is very honourable: for, 1. God himselfe is pleased to car∣ry the name of a souldier; God is a man of Warre, saith Moses; andGen. 15. 3. Ios. 5. 14, 15. the Sonne of God professed him∣selfe to be a Captaine of the Lords
host; Now titles which great perso∣nages beare, graceth much that cal∣ling which these titles imply though formerly that vocation had beene never so meane and base in e∣steeme. 2. The most renowned in holy Writ, and in humane stories have attained to great fame and glory by their valiant Acts and eats of armes; as we may see in Iosua, in Gideon, E∣hud, Baruc, Sampson, David, and his Warriours. What speeches are there of the Nine worthies, whereof Iosua, Dauid, Iudas Machabeus are three▪ is it not all for their valour and victo∣ries in battell? By warres the fame and memorie of Iulius Caesar, of great Alexander, of Pirrhus, of The∣mistocles, of Scipio, and Hannibal, of Scanderbag, of Charles the fift remain immortall, with innumerable other both in prophane and diuine storie. 3. VVhence came all those so greatly affected titles now in the world? rose they not from valour, prowess, militarie ployments and exercise of Armes? whence came
Esquire, but by being Armiger of bearing weapons of warre, an armor∣bearer. VVhence came a Knight of old? not by scraping of wealth, and buying the title, but by being Miles a souldier: whence a Noble man E∣ques? but from a generous spirit and being a man at armes. The title of an Earle Comes was a Lieutenant or Prouost Marshall. A Duke, Dux came of leading a Company, a chiefe cap∣taine in the field: yea whence came the highest name of dignity the name of Imperator Emperour, but from honour in the field bestowed vpon him that knew how to rule and command an host of men? And if I may guesse at the name of our yeomen in Latin valecti, what were they but stout men ob valorem electi, chose for their valour and courage to doe their country seruice. 4. Salomon the wisest King that e∣uer2 Ch. 8, 9. was, held such as were men of warre, to be more honourable then to be imployed in seruile work, such as he imployed strangers in, and the people of Canaan the Hittites, Amo∣rites,
Perizzites, Hevites, & Iebusites. These accursed and base people were not worthy to be men of warr, the function was too honourable for for them, as it is for to many admit∣ted now into it, more fit for Stocks, Bridewell, Gaole, Gallies, or the ve∣ry Gallous, then to bee enrolled a∣mong the honorable, and men truly worthy the name of souldiers, if the wotth of a true souldier were well weighed. 5. In old times the best in Nations, as Kings, Princes, Nobles, were men of warre: the best in stature, the pro∣perest and tallest men, as the three1. Sam. 14. 52. sonnes of Ishai; the best that surpas∣sed other in excellencies, in courage, valour and strength, such as Saul chose, were commonly men of war. 6. By the profession of armes ma∣ny have attained from meane condi∣tions, to great honour; Dauid from a shepheard to be a King of Israel, was not Iephte base of birth yet by valour became a Iudge in Israel? Isicrates the Athenian who was Lieutenant to Artaxerxes was hee not a Coblers
sonne? Eumenes one of Alexanders Captaines was a Carters sonne, Servius Tullius, who triumphed three times, was the sonne of a poore ser∣uant, whence he was called Servius. Dioclesian though a bloudy persecu∣tor of Christians, yet a valiant man, who obtained the Empire by his prowesse and valour, and yet but a Scriveners son. Nicholas Pihinnino the great Captaine and Commander of the Armies of the Potentates in I∣talie was but a butchers son, Ochiali of a poore Marriner for his valiant service, became Admirall of the Turkes Nauy, and one of his Coun∣sell. It were too long to relate the number that have risen and have be∣come renowned by warrs. 7. The famouest Nations of the world, the Romans, who subdued Kingdomes, never held any professi∣on worthy so great honor, nor ever rewarded any so much as they did, valiant men, generous-spirits, noble courages, adventuring their liues, & obtaining therby praises to thēselves & glory to their Nation, as their hi∣stories do shew.
That Calling must needs be ho∣nourable which requireth so many honourable parts and praise-worthie endowments requisite to make a man deserving to be admitted into militarie profession, as to be a man of vnderstanding, of sharpe and quicke apprehension; of a stout and vn∣daunted courage, and yet not foole-hardy but prudent and patient; of an able body, yet no lubber of a lus∣kish and sluggish Disposition, but nimble and liuely, to execute design∣ments, and crowning all this with true religion and zeale towards God, with a loyall and faithfull heart to his King and Country. 9. For the honour of this professi∣on, how great volumes are written of men of warres, their valiant deeds & memorable acts haue caused them to be registred to all posterities; by the pen of the learned, which cannot be read, but with both great delight, and great profit, even to make vala∣rous and couragious spirits emulous of their fame and glory. Lastly, what profession procured
more honour to people and Nations, then men of warre haue done? How famous was Greece for her Achilles, Diomedes, Themistocles, Pericles, and others? what praises everlasting did Epirus that little Country obtaine by her peerelesse Pirrhus, and that terrour to the Turks Scanderbeg? Re∣maineth not Macedonia aliue by her great Alexander, Troy, by her valiant Hector, Rome, by Caesar, Pompey, Sci∣pioes Horatii, Fabii, and the rest: La∣caedemon by Simon and Leonidas, Car∣thage by her Hannibal, and so other places by their valiant worthies, well exercised and experienced Cheif∣taines? And in a word who is more worthily honoured in the hearts of all vertuous men, then a man of cou∣rage, so be it he be otherwise well qualified, that by some base conditi∣on he wrong not himself, which true generosity of spirit will vtterly dis∣daine to doe.
V. CHAPTER. Of the iust causes and true grounds of making warre. AS we see the vnderta∣king of warre to be law∣full and honourable, so must it be ever therein vnderstood that it also be just; for the cause as it is either good or evill, so is the warre, so may the issue bee thereafter expected. The warres vndertaken of the Israelites by warrant from God prospered: True it is, that vnjust warres some∣time may haue good successe, for the iniquity of the people against whom
they are vndertaken: and therefore by the event, the iustice of the warre is not to be ever judged; but by the just cause thereof. Now in ancient times warres defensiue and offensiue haue been made vpon these grounds. I. A warre just, by reason, by the instinct of nature, and by custome of all Nations, and by religion it selfe, is that which is vndertaken in defence of our Country, religion, libertie and state. God alloweth to goe to warre a∣gainst an enemie comming vpon vs; vpon this ground was the warres ofNum. 10. 9 Exod. 17. Iudg. 6. & 11. 1 Sam. 14. 47, 48. 2 Ch. 14. 1 K. 20. Iosua against the Amalekites, of Gide∣on against the Midianites, of Iephte a∣gainst the Ammonites; of Saul against the Philistims and others spoyling them, of Asa against Zerah the Ethi∣opian, of Ahab against Benhadad the Syrian, of the Romanes against Han∣niball, and of the ancient Brittaines, here against the Romanes, Saxons, Danes, and Normans. A Heathen could say, lustum est bellum, & pia ar∣ma,iv. 9. quia nulla nisi in armis relinquitur salu: It is both just and godly, when
otherwise we cannot liue safely. II. It is just warre to bring vnder such as rebell, having formerly yeel∣ded subjection; vpon this ground went Chedorlaomer with the ayde ofGen. 14. 2 K. 3. 2 Ch. 25. 2 K. 24. 20. Eze. 17. 15 2 K. 17. 3, 4. 2 Sam. 18. & 20. other Kings against the King of So∣dome, and the rest; so Iehoram against Moab, Amazias against the Edomites; Nebuchadnezzar against Zedekias, whom he had made King, and taken an oath of; Salmaneser against Ho∣shea, which conspired against him. Thus Kings justly make warr against Natiue Rebells, as David did against Absalom, and against Bichri. III. It is just war to helpe friends, Allyes and Associates vnjustly op∣pressed and wronged. Vpon this ground Abraham armed himselfe, and set vpon the foure Kings to recover Lot, whom they had carried awayGen. 14. 1 Sa. 23. 3. & 11. Ios. 10. 6, 7 Captiue: David rescued Keylah from the Philistims, Saul Iabesh Gilead from the Ammonites; and Iosua the Gibeo∣nites from the Amorites, Iudas and Si∣mon1 Mach. 5. 10. 17. lib. de Offic. Bell. Gal. 7. his brother helped the other di∣stressed Iewes. The Romanes made war against the Samnite in the defence of
the Campanians, who had put them∣selues vnder their protection: This St. Ambrose saith is Iustice: CaesarIbucid. 1. gaue succour to his friends in Gergo∣via; for neglect hereof was held a kinde of treason, and it was just cause of reproach to forsake friends, Con∣federates, and such as should be hol∣den in their distresse: God willethPro. 24. 11 vs to see to this, alloweth of it, commanding vs to helpe in such a case. IV. It is lawfull, (if otherwise peaceably it cannot be obtained) to make warre for passage of an armie; to get it by the sword, if passage be hindred. This made Israel to fight with Sihon King of the Amorites, andDeut. 2. 26. 30. Num. 21. 23. 24. 33. Deut. 29. 7 Iud. 11. 30. Ogg the King of Basan, for that they hindred their way to Canaan. This was the cause of the warre by Necho against Iosias, because he rashly went out against him, going against him, going against another Enemie the King of Assyria. For this thing Iudas1 Mach. 5. 48. 51. destroyed the Cittie Ephron, and the Inhabitants thereof, because they could not be intreated to giue him
and his host passage peaceably, but stopped vp his way. V. It was lawfull to the IsraelitesNum 25. 1 17, 18 & 31. 1. 3. for religion sake to avenge the Lord vpon Idolaters, which by wiles and inticements corrupted the people of God. This is warranted by the Lord; vpon this ground Israel sent an army against the Midianites, Iosua and all the Elders held it lawfull vpon such a supposed ground, (had it been true) to make warre against the two TribesIos. 22. 12. 33. Iudges 20. and halfe. Also the Chiefe in a State consenting to punish notorious, of∣fenders, if they cannot get such de∣livered peaceably, by warre may set vpon their maintainers, as Israel did vpon the obstinate Beniamites. VI. Indignities vnjustly offered vnto Ambassadours, or messengers sent from one state to an other is just cause of warre, for this did David set vpon the Ammonites, & handled them Sam. 10. & 12. 30, 31. Liv. 4. Florus Caes. com. Phil. Comm. with great severitie. This wrong the Romanes revenged vpon the Fideni∣ans, Illirians, Ʋians, and Armoricaus. Charles Duke of Burgundy put all the
Castle of Nele to the sword to theSee Dr. Sutcliffe his practice of the law of Armes. sword for killing his messenger. For Ambassadours or Messengers are pri∣viledged by the Lawes of all Nations and suffered to passe safe among the poynts of weapons. VII. Reproches offered and in∣juries done to principall men in a State is just cause of warre: This cau∣sed the warre betweene Ieptah andIudg. 12. 4. Ephramites, who called the Gileadites fugitiues, whereof Ieptah was the head; The taking away of Sampsons wife, being a Iudge in Israel made him seeke revenge vpon the Phili∣stims. The Rhodians abusing the Ro∣manes with insolent termes when they took part with Perseus cost them deare: Frederick Barbarossa besieged and tooke Millan for a scorne offered to him. Gideon for that he was con∣temnedIudg 8. & sleighted of the Elders of Succoth and Penuel after his victorious returne did fall vpon them. For high authority is sacred, and the injurie, reproach or contempt offered there∣to, is not to passe vnpunished. VIII. Vpon the injuries and
wrongs vnjustly offered and spoyle made and subjects carried away, Prin∣ces and States haue cause, by warre to get satisfaction and recouer their right, if otherwise they cannot bee righted: This was Davids warre with the Amalekites to regaine from them their wiues, children, & goods carried1 Sam. 30. 1 Sam. 23. 1, 2, 5. away, and with the Philistims robbing the threshing floores. The Romanes with sharpe warres prosecuted Mi∣thridates, for that by one generall proclamation he had caused divers of their people to bee massacred: They also warred vpon the Sabins for spoyling the Romane Merchants. This was the cause of the Romanes third warre with the Carthaginians; also with the Hetruscians, and other neighbours: for injuries done to sub∣jects: redoundeth to the Prince, which he is to right and to cause re∣stitution to be made; which if rea∣sonably offered, is not to be refused. IX. Breach of Covenant and pro∣mise hath beene cause of warre. Vp∣on1 K. 22. 3. & 21 34. this, did Ahab warre vpon the King of Syria to recover Ramath in
Gilead, which Benhadad had promised before to restore to him: for this cause the Romanes began their warresLiv. 42. with Perseus the King of Macedo∣nia. X. To get peaceable possession of a Crowne justly claymed; as David did the Kingdome of Israel; there∣fore he warred against Ishbosheth and2 Sam. 2. 8 10. & 3. 1. the house of Saul. XI. To revenge olde injuries of∣fered by predecessours, the same be∣ing continued in their posterities; vpon this was the warre performed by Saul, and commanded by God a∣gainstExo. 17. 8. 1 Sa. 15. 3. Deut 25. 17, 18, 19. the Amalekites, for the evill they did to the Children of Israel comming out of Egipt. And least this might seeme to be something hard vnto the present generation against whom Saul was sent, we must know, that the Amalekites continued Ene∣mies to Gods people, the Children living in the stepps of their forefa∣thers from Iosua to the dayes of the Iudges, and to the dayes of Saul; yea Agag whom Saul tooke prisoner had made many a childe fatherlesse, (no
doubt of Israel) els olde SamuelIudg. 3. 13 & 6. 3. & 7. 12. & 10. 12. 1 Sam. 30. 1. would not haue so laid to his charge nor so revenged it vpon him, as he did. They were ever taking part with the Enemies of Israel, as all the cited places in the margin shew. Now to take part with an enemie is just cause of warre: vpon this the Romanes war∣red against Philip of Macedonia, for that he aided the Carthaginians, and joyned league with Hannibal against2 Sam. 8. 3 them. XII. David made war vpon Ha∣dadezer1 Ch. 18. 3 King of Zobah, (and some thinke justly) being jealous of his greatnesse, comming with a great Armie to establish his Dominion and to border so neere vpon him, as at the River Euphrates. It is wisedome for Princes to looke vnto the dange∣rous attempts of high and aspiring spirits, over much seeking to enlarge their power and Dominions. Lastly, warres haue beene justly made by Israel Gods people, at Gods command, to subdue Nations, and to possesse their Kingdomes as they did the Kingdomes of Canaan, and in he∣rited
them. Thus also warred Nebu∣chadnezzar the Babylonian, Cyrus the Persian, Alexander the Grecian, and afterwards the Romanes to sub∣due people vnder them, and they vn∣dertooke it, and prospered: but whe∣ther they had, all of them, and in all those warres, that immediate divine warrant, and did it lawfully, I dare not affirme: and therefore much lesse let any aspiring spirits now take li∣berty to doe so. 1. The Israelites had a word ofDeut. 2. 24. Ios. 14. 6. Gen. 15. 18. 21. Command from God to subdue Si∣hon the Amorite, Ogg of Basan, and all the Kingdomes of Canaan, and a word of encouragement to haue aid, to get them, as they had before a word of promise to inherit the Country. 2. Concerning Nebuchadnezzar and Cyrus, to them was Gods will re∣vealed, and they were foretolde of their successe to set them forward to the subduing of people, and to bring them vnder their Command; It wasDan. 2. 28. 31. 43. foretold Nebuchadnezzar in a dream and
expounded by Daniel to him: andDan. 4. 19. confirmid by Ieremie the Prophet to the Iewes in Iudea, and by Ezechiel in Babylon: whose words came no doubt to the eares of Nabuch: to whom God had given all Kingdomes, people, Nations and tongues. Cyrus the Per∣sianEsai 44. 28. & 45. 1. Esdr. 1. 2. was by name foretold hundreds of yeeres before he was borne, of his rising, rule, and Dominion, of which he had gotten knowledge, and ascri∣bed his successe to be from the Lord God of heauen. This knowledge the2 Ch. 36. 23. might haue from Daniel who lived in Babilon, when Darius and Cyrus reigned that subdued the Babiloni∣ans. How Alexander the Grecian Emperour, and the Roman knew of their power and Dominion assigned to them of God, is not so plainly re∣corded in holy: but it may be, that Daniels prophesie, and his interpre∣tation of Nabuchadnezzars dreame, might goe abroad, and become knowne either by the writing it selfe, or by relation and tradition from one to another: or they might have it from the Oracles of their
owne imagined Gods, but indeed divels, who well knew the Oracles of the true God, and so told the Gre∣cians and Romans such things, as from themselves, promising to them victories, and dominion over Nati∣ons, which the Scriptures of the Prophets had foretold should surely come to passe. Now they finding successe according to the voyce of those counterfeiting Oracles, they ascribed all to the power and gift ofIud. 11. 24 those, Idol gods and Diuels: and so Ireld it lawfull to hold those King∣domes which they could subdue, as t a then did imagine, as appea∣reth by the speech of Iepthah to the King of the Ammonites. Thus wee see vpon what grounds warrs in ancient times have beene made to make them lawfull & iust; which is the first thing to bee consi∣dered o. For as the cause is good or bad, so may wee expect the issue: howsoeuer a good cause will encou∣rage to battle, let the event be, as shall please God. Vniust warres doe worke the Au∣thors
confusion very often; as may be seene in the vniust warre of A∣maleck against Israel, of Sihon andExo. 17. 1 K 20. 2 am. 10. 16. 17, 18. 2 Ch. 14. Iud. 20. Ios. 7. & 8 Og without cause, comming out a∣gainst them, of Benhadad his warre a∣gainst Ahab, of the Syrians a∣gainst David, of Zerah with his ten hundred thousand against Asa; True iris, that iust causes have sometime an euill euent, for the sinnes of the people; and sometimes the vniust may preuaile, as Beniamin & Gileah, in two battells against Israel, for their greater ruine at the length, as it hapned to these Beniamites, and to the Inhabitants of Ai, and Bethel, though before they had made Israel flye before them.
VI. CHAPTER. Of necessary VVars. ITs not enough to look onely to the iustice of the cause in making warre; but also it is toPs. 68. 30. & 140. 2. & 120. 7. be considered how ne∣cessary and conuenient it may be. The evills of warr should make men not to be hastie to goe to warr: Its an evill quality to delight in warre; against such David speaketh and de∣sires God to scatter them, as beingLeu. 26. 25. Reu. 20. 8, 9, & 16, 14 evill men and violent, especially when they make themselues ready to battle against such as be for pace.
The sword is threatned as a punish∣ment, and to shed, bloud is the Di∣uels delight, hee it is that seduceth the Nations to make warre, and hee sendeth out the vncleane spirits, like croaking froggs to gather Kings to battle. Besides these considerations, the calamities and miseries of warrs are vnutterable, who can recount them? Lusts of vnrulie Souldiers raigne, without respect of friends, or foes, many times. The battle of the war∣riour (saith Esa) is with confusedEsa 9. 5. & 14. 17. & 13. 16. 18. noyse, and garment rolled in bloud; and hee telleth the people that the sword hath made the world a wilder∣nesse and destroyed Cities; yea chil∣dren haue beene dashed to peeces, houses spoyled, Temples robbed,Lam. 1. & 2. & 3 & 4. & 5. strong men slaine, and women ra∣uished, and crueltie committed without pitie. The woefull effects of warre are liuely set out in Iere∣mies Lamentation, and in the book of the warres of the Iewes in the last destruction of Ierusalem, who can reade either booke without
teares, except their hearts be of Ada∣mant? Yet a iust warre, if also necessa∣ry, forcing to take armes against an infesting Enemie, is to bee prefer∣red before an vniust peace. That which hath beene vttered concer∣ning the evill of warre is not to dis∣hearten valorous hearts, nor to a∣bate the courage of the valiant, who know that true fortitude is onely seene in perills, and borne patiently without daunt of spirit: but it is onely spoken to prevent rash warre, for Duloe bellum inex∣pertis; as also to aduise such to con∣sider in whose power it is to make warre, that iust causes of warre bee not pretended onely, and am∣bition, desire of Soveraignty, and o∣ther motives finister bee indeed the causes thereof. Offensiue warre vpon iust and necessarie grounds is lawfull both from command from God, and the practises of iust Princes, as wee may obserue in Divine and hu∣mane stories: But Defensiue warre,
magis est iuris naturae & politici offi∣cij: yea and better becommeth the people of the Prince of peace; and indeed, the warres foretold in the Reuelation, which the Church shall haue with the beast, the Dra∣gon, the whore, the false Prophet, and with God and Magog are alto∣getherNote this. defensiue. For its ever said (a point worthy observation) that the beast made warre, the Dragon went out and warred, the spirits of divells went out to gather armies to battle; the beast, the whore, and tenne Kings made warre with the Lambe;Reu. , 7. & 2. 17. & 137▪ & 16. 14. & 17. 14. & 19. 19. & 20. 8, 9. Gog and Magog gather together a∣gainst the Saints, So that the offen∣siue warre is on the enemies side, and the Defensiue warre is altoge∣ther on Christ and his Churches part, by which yet they shall ouer∣come: would God this were consi∣dered of; if the Enemie begin, let vs stand for our Religion and lives with courage, Christ will take our parts and giue vs a glortous victo∣rie in the end. The Lord hath spo∣ken it; if we beleeue his Prophets,
wee shall prosper; and hee that be∣leeueth maketh not hast, if wee ake a right course, let vs stand still, not feare, fight valiantly the Lords battles, for and in the cause of Reli∣gion, seeking to avenge the Lord on those Romish Midianites, and behold then the salvation of the Lord, which hee will shew vnto s n his appointed good time, even so, Amen.
The VII. CHAP. Of the chiefe authority mouing to war; and of Kings going out with their Hosts, very v∣suall in ancient ages, but yet ever arbi∣trary. VPon mature delibe∣ration, and well ad∣uised iudgment, the iustice of warre be∣ing approoued, as also that the same is necessary (least men embroyle them∣selues in needlesse vse of the sword, to their owne ruine) then is to bee
considered in the next place by what authority this warre is to be vnder∣taken; for a necessary and iust warre doth not warrant everie one vpon their owne heads to make warre, though they be able to gather a po∣wer together; but the first moover thereto must be the supreame autho∣ritie in the State, whether it be Mo∣narchicall, Aristocraticall, or any of the rest, by which the people of that stare is governed. The warres which God allowed, and so iust, which he also comman∣ded,Exo. 17. 8. Num. 31. and so necessary were made ever vnder, and by the authority of such as he set ouer his people. Thus the warre against Amalek was comman∣ded by Moses; so was that against Midian; in like manner Israel war∣red under the command of Iosua, af∣ter vnder the Iudges, and then vnder Kings, as vnder Saul, David, and the rest, who did in their owne persons goe into the warres. And this same was vsuall in all for∣mer ages, even from the beginning of warrs mentioned in holy writ,
that Kings themselves went out too. 14. 2 Ch. 12. & 35. 20. 1 Kin. 20. warre, as the foure Kings against the fiue in Gen. 14. Pharao in his owne person pursued Israel, Shishak King of Egypt came with his host against Iudah, and so Pharao Nech went foorth with his owne forces, Benha∣dad the Syrian came himselfe, and with him thirty two Kings into the field. All the Cananitish Kings cameIosua 10. Num 21. themselves with their hosts, so the two mighty Kings Sihon King of the Amorites, and Ogg the King of Ba∣san. And thus did all the Kings of Israel and Iudah: Saul went into the field continually; David was often there in person; so was Ieroboam, Rehoboam, Abiiam, Asa, Iehosophat, Amaziah, and the rest; yea by the appointment of God some were ap∣pointed to order the battell them∣selves, as was Ahab against Benhadads host; This was the custome of great Monarches subduing the world to goe out in person; as may appeare in Salmanezer, and Senacherib the Assy∣rian1. K. 20. 14 2 K. 18. . 3. Kings in Nebuchadnezzar the
Babilonian, in Alexander the Mace∣donian,2 Ch. 36. 6. Ier, 39. 5. in Cyrus, Darius, Zerxes, the Persians, in Iulius Caesar, and other Roman Emperours▪ in Tamberlaine the Tartar, and Baiezet the Grand∣siegneour; in Charles the great, Em∣perour of Germanie. This made Princes famous, their warres to bee maintained, the battells to be fought with more courage even to the vt∣most; and so a more speedy dispatch one way or other to make some end, and to bring peace, the good and bles∣sed conclusion of all iust warrs. Though it seemed expedient vnto Kings in those dayes to goe in per∣son with their Armies; yet no doubt care was had of their safeties, that they should not bee suffered to ex∣pose themselves rashly into the bat∣tle,1 K. 22. 3 2 Ch. 35. 22. 2 Sam. 21 17. 1 Sam. 26. 16. as Ahab did, and Iosias, which cost them both their lives; For the valiant Captaines would expose themselves▪ desperately when they saw their Kings in danger, as Abishai did, who resued Dauid with great hazard to save his life from the stoke of Ishbi-benob the Gyn▪ He are up∣on
it was, that Dauid held Abnr and2 Sam. 18. 3. others about Saul wothy of death, because they had not kept more safe∣ly the King. Faithfull Subiects e∣steeme the life of a good King, more worth then ten thousand of them∣selves; Princes may bee in the field,2 Sam. 21. 17. but its not necessary to goe into the battle, least (as Davids servants said of him) the light be quenched, and1 K. 22. the people be scattered, as vpon A∣habs death. Whether they goe forth, or stay at home (which is free vnto them, and may be done according to their own pleasure) yet is this soveraign autho∣rity that which must first moove to make warre; People may not if they would gather together to warre a∣gainst an open enemy of their owne heads, for God hath punished such attempts as may be seene in the pre∣sumptuous Israelites arming them∣seluesNum. 14. 40. 44, 45. Deut. 1. 1. Mach. 5. 56. 60. 61. 67 without command from au∣thority, and were overthrowne by the enemy. Such was the attempt of one Ioseph and Azarias, who in a vaine-glory to get a name, would
gather troupes to fight against the Heathen, and obeyed not Idas Ma∣chabeus; and therefore were over∣throwne: and so were certain Priests slain, vpon such a vaine vnderta∣king. Among the Romanes those that thus offended, by their lawes were in case of treason. People mustF. ad L. ub. maitst. & L. vine C. vt arm∣rum vsus. therefore have warrant; for other∣wise even to spoyle or kill an enemy is theft, and murther; and the bat∣tle on their parr no better then a fild of bloud; and their doings, but disorder and confusion; except it be to represse a sodain rising of Rebels, or to withstand a violent and sodain comming in of an open enemy. O∣therwise none are to bee acounted publike enemies in warre, but those whom publike authoritie so decla∣reth to be: yea, and if any rise vp in rebellion, if authoritie know it, the Captaines are to await for command, before they gather power against such rebells: as may be manifest in Abishai and the rest, who moo∣ved not the rebellion of Bichri,2 Sam. 20. 1-4. 6, 7. till Dauid, who knew it, gaue com∣mand
to follow him: But when men have such warrant, then let them o∣bey readily, and be as serviccable toIos. 1. 16. to their Leaders, as the Israelites pro∣mised to be to Iosa▪
VIII. CHAPTER. Of Presse-men, and Ʋo∣luntaries. OF such as goe to warr, there are two sorts; such as be comman∣ded, and such as of∣fer themselves. The former wee call pres∣sed;Deut. 33. 5 who without enforcement would not goe, Moses was as King in Isra∣el; and he waited not for Volunta∣ries, but commanded Iosua to chuse out of every Tribe a thousand, to make an Host of twelue thousand to goe against Midian. Saul threatned revenge vpon those that would not
come foorth to warre at his com∣mand;1 Sam. 21. 6, 7. and God did ayde his autho∣rity by striking the people with feare of him. That authority was in David to assemble and gather a power of his Subiects for warre; without which command Princes2 Sam. 20. 4 could not haue waged battells so, as they then did. And the Lords command to Officers to give some leave to depart, argueth their power otherwise, to have reteined them. The other sort are tearmed Volun∣taries,Deu. 20. 5. which are either Natiues or Foreigners. That men may offer them∣selues to the warres, and enter into the profession of a souldier, its not to be doubted. Ehuds souldiers were all Voluntaries at the sound of a Trum∣pet, So were the three sonnes ofIud. 3. 27. & 5. 2. Iesse, and such were Davids worthies which came and offered themselves▪ and so was Ittai the Gittite. Againe, Deborah the Prophetesse praiseth the Voluntaries which came to help Ba∣ruk▪ besides she complaineth of such1 Sam▪ 17. 13. as following their owe private busi∣nesse neglected the wares▪ and with∣all
cursed Meroz for▪ not coming toIud. 5. 14, 15, 18. helpe the Lord. Moreover, that which may bee lawfull by pressing and compulsion, may as well be lawfull for Volunta∣ries, if there bee not very iust cause or impediment to hinder these. It is the iudgement of Churches refor∣med beyond the Sea; among whom some are trained vp for warre, to goe as Voluntaries. We know that Prin∣ces doe helpe their associates volunta∣rily, what hindereth, but that others in their due place, and within their power may also freely offer them∣selves? A lawfull calling may bee as well vndergone freely, as by compul∣sion circumstances and other consi∣derations well weighed aforehand. And to conclude this, how should Princes and States doe, that haue not power to presse, if Voluntaries might not in good conscience offer them∣selves. But here Voluntaries must know, and be resolved of some things. 1. Of the calling of a souldier, that it is lawfull, and that a man may
therein live, and as well receiue wa∣ges▪ as men doe for discharge of their duties in any other lawfull vocation. Be content (saith Iohn Baptist) withLuk. 3. 14. your wages, speaking to souldiers; therefore may they serve for wa∣ges. 2. Of the iustice and lawfulnesse of the warre into which hee thrusts himselfe, seeing hee goeth not by command of supreame authority, for this is another case, when men goe not of their owne pleasure and will; but when any so doth, if the warre be iust, a man may serve with a good conscience of his owne accord: but if it be apparantly vniust, let men be∣ware that they embrew not their hands in bloud, going Voluntaries. If Princes command, the case is alte∣red, for private persons may not sit and iudge of Princes actions, not notoriously vniust as it was when Christian souldiers vvould not draw their swords against Christians vnder Iulian the Apostate; though they served him vvillingly against others. Sauls servants vvould not fall vpon
the innocent Priests of the Lord toLiv. 12. contra Faust. man▪ ca. 7. slay them. But vvhere the fact, as in such cases, is not notorious, a good man (saith Saint Augustine) may serve vnder a sacrilegious Prince: for the vniust command shall bind the Prince, vvhen the duty of obedience shall make the souldier free. 3. They must consider of vvhat religion those be, that doe make the vvarre, and whom they goe to serve vnder: for Iehosophat vva in danger of his life, and reprooued by a Pro∣phet of God for helping Ahab an Idolater, who was an hater of God as all Idolaters be, though they them∣selves thinke better of themselues. 4. They must haue the leaue of such as have soveraigne authority o∣uer them; for a subiect to one, can∣not dispose of his owne person to2. Ch. 19. 2 to the service of an other Prince without leaue: but he may put him∣selfe voluntarily into the service of his owne Soueraigne, whose subiect he is. 5. Voluntaries are to weigh with themselues what special impediments
they haue to vvithhold from going, in respect of some particular calling, requiring their owne person for dis∣charge of the duties thereof: or some charge of a family, vvife and children depending vpon their per∣sonall being necessarily among them; or vvhether apparently their being at home may doe more good to their countrey, then their seruice in vvarre. 6. Their end must be good, Pro lege & grege Christi, as one saith, for defence of religion; & of the Church of God, for releeuing the vniustly oppressed; for maintenance of right, and such like, and withall to learn experience for the good of their country, but not to runne in vnadui∣sedly, out of male contentednesse, nor of an idle humor, nor of foolish vain∣glory, nor of a bloudie disposition, nor of a base mind for prey and boo∣ty; but as a man of valour, for more praise-worthy and better ends. Lastly, that Voluntaries put them∣selues vnder the command of autho∣rity to doe seruice, and to be subiect
to rule and discipline, obseruing or∣der, keeping their places; from which they may not in certaine ca∣ses depart without leave of such Commanders as they have submit∣ted themselves vnto. For though they enter voluntarily; yet being vnder authority, they may not think themselues then free at all times to depart at their pleasure: For if they should, vpon necessarie service, such wandering starres would fall of and such straglers would vtterly faile the expectation of their Comman∣ders. Thus with these considerations▪ men may be Voluntaries, and put themselues into military seruice and authority may admit of them as Da∣vid did of Vriah, of Ittai the Gittite, with his followers▪ And as others haue done, as histories▪ shevv. But here yet the Generall and others with him must be catelous, and weigh what voluntaries they entertaine. I. Beware of such as flye from the Enemy▪ let them be tryed before they be trusted: for we may reade in
stories, that such sometmes have bin sent of the Enemy o doe mischiefe. Two Spaniards fained themselves fu∣gitiuesiiard. to the Venetians with a pur∣pose to kill Alvian their Generall. SoHistory of Scanderbag did certaine Turks with an intent to kill Scanderbag. The Munidians which seemed to forsake Hanibal, and to fall to the Romans in the bat∣tle of Canna, were a great helpe to Hannibal to get the victory in turning against the Romans vpon a sodaine: This wisedome was in the Philistims1. Ch. 12. 19. going to battell against Saul, they would not admit of David and his compnie. II. Not to goe too farr in admit∣ting of friends and associates; but on∣ly to entertaine so many as the Na∣tiues and naturall subiects are able to command and ouerrule; least they take advantage of the Natiues few∣nesse, and haue them in contempt; and trusting to themselues, make good their owne secret designements and revolt from them, as the Gaules did from the Romans, because they saw no strength in the Romane Ar∣my,T cit. 3.
but that which was of strangers. III. Never to hire, or receiue any of a contrary religion, Amaziah the2. Ch. 25. king of Iudah was reprooued for hi∣ring of Idolaters the Israelites to goe with him against Edom, whom hee was commanded to cashiere, for God is not with such as the Lord by his Prophet told him. Before I end this chapter, it mayA quest. be here asked, whether going into warres may spoyle the people of that State against whom they goe to war, seeing many thousands of the people and families there liue harmelesly at home, and desire to be there in peace and so forth? I answer; in a iust andNum. 21. 24, 25, & 31. 10, 11. necessary warre the conquered are in the hands of the Conquerours, lands and goods are then at their disposition, whatsoeuer they haue taken or won is iustly theirs. God allowed Israel to take what they did win then iust wars; therefore2 Sam. . 11, 12. they possessed the kingdome of Si∣n, and of Ogg; they tooke the Mi∣dianites Poners, carryed away infi∣spoyle, and burnt their townes and
Cities with fre. David spoyled the Nations which he subdued. It is ac∣counted by the law of Nations a law∣fullLib. de Offi 3. purchase and the practise of all people in time of warre. For nothing is proper by nature, but either by ancient possession or seisme, or victo∣ry, saith the Heathen Orator; The E∣nemy, & that State can no otherwise be weakened, but first in their Sub∣jects; the hands of all which, though they be not in warre, yet are they in heart and in contributing: but if not, neuerthelesse, they are one body, and therefore must bee content to suffer together till their Head make peace, and satisfie for that, which the iustice of the warre doth require, and for which it vvas begun. But if any be,1. Sam. 15, 6. as were the Kenites among the Ama∣lakites consideration is to bee had of them, as Saul had of these for their preseruation and safetie.
IX. CHAPTER. Of mustering, and the choyse of souldiers. WHen a warre is resolued vpon as both iust, and necessa∣ry thn must souldiers bee leuied, a mu∣ster and view made of them and their armer. The Kings in Israel were somtimes1 Sam. 1▪ 4. Num. 1. 19. & 3, 4, 2. at the muster. Saul gathered his soul∣diers together and numbred them. So did David, 2. Sam. 18. 1. So Moses, numbred Israel.
And there was a principall ScribeIer. 52. 25. of the host which mustered the peo∣ple of the land: for which mustering, there was a command went forth to leuie men and to call them together, as Saul did; and as Dauid appointed1 Sa. 11. 7 2 Sa. 20. 5. Esai. 13. 4. Amasa to doe: to this custome God alludeth in his word when he muste∣red his host. In this, they considered of the num∣ber, which were to go into the wars, sometimes more, sometimes fewer; Moses appointed but 12000 to go a∣gainstNum. 31. 1 Sa. 11. 8. & 15 4. 1 Sa. 18. 1. with cap. 17. 24. 1 K 20. 15. 2 K. 3, 6. 2 Ch. 25 5 2 K. 20. 25, 26. Midian: vvhatsoeuer the num∣ber was, the custome was to num∣ber them: as Saul did his in Bezek, and in Telaim; David in Mahanaim, Ahab in Samaria; Iehoram hee num∣bered his, and Amaziah his Ar∣mie: and thus did also the Hea∣then. Now in sending foorth an Ar∣mie, great care must bee had, what sorts of persons are to bee sent forth. I. Let them bee Natiues and sub∣iects liuing vnder that soueraigne au∣thority that sends them our, though
they bee of seuerall countries, yet subiect to the same power, and it were well that they had something to take to at home, or friends of whom they expect good. For these souldiers are bound by the bond of nature to their King, kinred, and Countrie. These are easie to bee cor∣rected, if they should happen to run away. These wil therefore bee awed in the field, and for feare to be puni∣shed at home, become more obedi∣ent, endure more constant, be more loyall, even when they feele want of necessaries, and haue short pay, then any other will doe, not subjects, or hauing nothing, or no friends that they care for; Israels hosts were of Israel, and when the Tribes were diuided into two kingdomes, either State furnished themselues of their owne subiects most vsually, as may be seene in their battles. II. Consider their yeeres; such as the Lord held fit for warre, were in Israel 20. yeeres old and vpward;Num: 1. 20 & 22. 26. 2 2 Ch: 25. 5 and such did Amaziah take: for younger are hardly growne vp to
strength: and aboue 46. except some old and expert souldier for skill, are not to be admitted, because strength decayeth, as saith a learned experien∣enced souldier. 3. Touching their bodies in Isra∣el were chosen strong men, able to1 Sa. 14. 52 2 Ch. 17. 14. Deut. 20. 8 Iud. 7. 3. goe to warre, men also of valour and courage; so they must be stout and strong of a vigorous and couragious mind, not fearfull; for such were put out of the host by Gods appointment and this did also that valiant Iudas Machabeus; for the fearefull the first1 Mach, 3. 56. in ranke of the damned crew, what good will they doe, but faile in per∣formance,Rev. 21. 8. make others to bee faint-hearted, and so giue the victory to2 Sa. 2. 9. & 23, 24. the enemy. Men of a sharpe coun∣tenance, sinowie armes and legges, promise both strength and courage, and not the great lusks, fleshie lub∣bers, though Pyrrhus and Marius chose men of big and great statures. In Israel such as could runne well, were commended, men swift of foot; actiue and nimble, as was Asahel Ioabs brother, and one of Davids
worthis; This was also a commenda∣tion in Achilles, and in Papirius, who was called for it, the Rinmer. In theCursor. Tribe of Gad were men for strength callen men of might, for courage to1 Ch. 12. 8. have had faces like Lyons, and for footmanship, as swift as the Roes vp∣on the mountaines. IV. For their skill in armes, raw and ignorant men are not to bee put sodainly to seruice: for not a multi∣tude, but art and exercise getteth the victorie: for the ignorant soul∣diers may not onely endanger him∣selfe, but his fellowes too. There∣foreIud 20 16. 1 Ch. 1. 40 & 12 35. 1 Ch 12. 2 ver. 32, 33. the souldiers in Israel were very expert men. In Beniamin were 700. choyse men left-handed, that is, such as were so skilfull, that they durst with their left hands vse their slings against their enemies, and were so excellently cunning, that they would cast stones at an hayre breadth, and not misse. In Asher were choise and mighty men of valour apt for warre 40000: In Sauls time were many which could vse both the right hand and the left in hurling of stones, and
shooting arrowes out of a bow. In Issachar were men of great vnder∣standing, knowing what ought to2 Ch. 12. be done, whose Chiefetaines were 200. In Zabulon such as were expert in warre, and could keepe ranke, 50000. In Dan expert men 28600. also in the three Tribes beyond Ior∣dan skilfull men there were an hun∣dred and twentie thousand. So they then brought no ignorant and raw souldiers into the field: Skill heart∣neth a souldier, and encreaseth his courage, and striketh some feare into the enemie. A small number of skil∣full men, and experienced in armes, will easily rout multitudes of others, as histories and experience doe tell vs. The Romans by their excercised souldiers got so great and so maine victories. Epaminondas by his exerci∣sed Thebanes ouerthrew the Lacede∣moniansLiv: 27. 21 at length; Hannibal at his comming into Italy at first, put to flight 35. thousand with a smal com∣pany of old souldiers. V. Besides all these, it is fit that souldiers should be religious, yea ve∣ry
requisite, because they expose themselues so to the danger of death, vvhich none, but such as be religi∣ous can be prepared for. Besides, they may expect Gods ayde, they may fight with their hands, and pray vvith their hearts, by which meanes, that renowned Machabeus,2 Mach: 15 26, 27. conquered Nicanor, and slew of his enemies 35. thousand. Let not the roaring boyes, the Machavilian A∣theists, the prophane Esaus, the drun∣ken sonnes of Bacchus, the blasphe∣mous swearers, nor the filthy Adul∣terers laugh at this: for God requi∣reth,2 Sa. 23. 3. that all should feare him. Reli∣gion will make men valiant, never any in holy vvrit recorded for religi∣ous, but were indeed valiant, as A∣braham, David, Asa, Iehoidah the high Priest, Iosias the religious king, all valiant men. And how can theySee Doct. Sut. Deae of Exet. his b of warre. pag. 37, 38 mooving the Armie to be reli∣gious. be otherwise but valiant, when they know that God is reconciled to them, death, if it come, will bee to them aduantage. These onely haue faith in God, and so will be couragi∣ous. Who can doubt that these will
adventure life in the field for religi∣on and a iust cause, that dare willing∣ly yeeld their bodies to be burnt for their faith and profession? They ad∣venture their corporall life, but with assurance of a heauenly life after: Wheras all other, (be what they may be) hazard the damnation of their soules, with the death of their bo∣dies; a desperate attempt in carelesse wretches; The religious of consci∣ence will be obedient as Israel pro∣fessedIos. 1. 16, 17. Mat 8. 9. to be to Iosua, and are like the Centurions seruants going & com∣ming at command, and not muti∣nous; they are of a quiet behauiour and temperate; not brablers not drunkards, nor quarrelsome. They will esteeme of and loue a worthy Captaine according to his worth; who must be to them as a father, and2 Ch. 25. 13. See the reading in the marg. they to him as sons; for in Israels lan∣guage, they were called the sons of the band. Their prayers are of more force to preuaile with God to take their parts, and to vanquish an Enemy then all other means beside Israel fought, but Moses did procure the victorie by prayer.
And least any scoffing Ishmael should deride this care of the choyce of religious men, as having no pat∣terne of warlike Chieftaines to fol∣low. let them looke to the mightieExo, 15. 3. man of warre, the Lord of hosts, the king of Kings, and consider what manner of souldiers he did chuse to fight his battles. The Commanders were religious, as Ioshua, the Iudges, Ehud, Gideon, Iepthah, David, and o∣thers. His Armies mustered by the Lord, were called his sanctified ones, set apart by him to military imploy∣ment; They were also mighty ones and strong, Esa. 13. 3. Ioel 2. 5. theyIoel 2. 7. 8, 9. were skilfull to march, and did not breake ranke, keeping way and iust distance, not thrusting one another they cared not for wounds, though the sword pierced them: they were such as were runners, quicke and nimble in execution: and to con∣clude, they, reioyced in the Lords highnes, and in his excellency, Such did the Lord muster and chuse for his host. But it will be obiected, that Iepth∣tah
had in his campe vaine men:Iud 11. 1 Sa. 22. 2. & 30. 22. There gathered to Dauid men in distresse, in debt, discontented per∣sons, e and wicked-men, and sons of Belial, who fought with courage, recovered their losses, and slew the Amalakites. It is very true: but these were some1 Ch: 12. 33. onely among the rest, the Comman∣ders themselves, and other among them were well given. Againe, they had such as pleased to come to them in their distresses; but they did not hyre such as the bastard AbimelechIudg: 9. did, who hyred vaine and light men, a companie fit for such a Cap∣taine. Authoritie that may presse, may find fitter men for their seruice is a good cause, if they looke to prosper, then sonnes of Beliall, Rogues, Loyterers, Pikars, Swearers, Drun∣kards, Bastard breeders, Gaole-birds, Scurfe and Scum of a people, held vnworthy to liue among honest men, very Out-casts of parishes, not to bee admitted indeede vnto the honour of beeing a Souldi∣our,
But some will perhaps say, that of these Routs of outcasts some haue prooued very seruiceable, also many vncleane liuers, prophane swearers, whore-master, and Cup-Captaines haue shewed great courage in wars; And its knowne, that Heathen men Iulius Caesar, Alexander, Hector, A∣chilles, Themistocles, Epaminondas, Pyrrhus, and infinite others haue bin valiant souldiers. First for these latter though Hea∣then,Xenophon in exp. Cyr. 2. Cicero de nat Deo. E∣sai 47. 12, 13. yet morall vertues have beene commended in them, and according to their Pagan profession they were religious; asking counsell of their gods, without which they would not goe to warre, and they hearke∣ned to their Priests, Diviners, South∣sayers, Prognosticators, Astrologers, Chaldeans, and such as were Revea∣lers (as they thought) of the will of their gods. For the rout of outcasts it may be some very few of many have beene seruiceable, but what have all the rest beene? An Heathen could say, That of a Company riotousCleachus n Xenophon exped Cyr 2 and disorderly there is no vse. For the
other that are held so valorous, true it is, that humane fortitude may be in an Abimelech, that murtherer of his brethren, in an Abner, a Ioab, as it was in those forenamed renowned Heathen, yea, in other most lewd and vicious, and most prophanely irreligious, there may be out of pride and ambition, out of a furious heat of heart, out of a resolued foole har∣dy desperatenesse, out of hope of spoyle, out of a vaine desire of get∣ting honour, and out of some such like grounds▪ perhaps out of an in∣flamed spirit of the Battery, shewed a kind of valour. But this is not Christian fortitude, such as was in David, and others ac∣companied euer with other laudable vertues. What desperate compani∣ons were the three seditious Cap∣taines in Ierusalem and their follow∣ers, they prodigally shed the bloud of one another, and like Lyons fought with the Romans: but at length to their owne vtter confusi∣on. And what becommeth of these sorts of such seeming valorous men?
what commonly is their end? How prosper they? to say no more of them but this, let experience speake. Happy were it, that Christian ar∣mies were gathered of religious, or at least of ciuill and morally honest men▪, that the commendations of them might be like Scipio AfricanusPlutarch. his Armie, the meanest of whose souldiers seemed to be a graue Sena∣tour. The souldiers then, as they now be were of two sorts; Footemen and Horsemen. For horsemen in Isreel there were none in the dayes of Iosua, the Iudges, Saul (though he beset out like the Heathen Kings) nor in Davids time, nor Salomon, to wit, horsemen for warre, indeede there is mention of Salomons horsemen and Charrets for magnificence (as it seemeth) but not for warre; as Absoloms CharretsIer. 17 25. & 22. 4 Ios. 11. 6, 9 2 Sam. 8. 4 and Horsemen were, and others also. In Iosua his time they were com∣manded to hough the Heathens hor∣ses, and burne their Charrets with fire, and they did so; and in like man∣ner did David afterwards, least Israel
should trust therein. Yet afterwards in Iehosophats and Ahabs dayes we reade of horses, which they had1 K: 22. 4. 2 K. 10. 2. with them into the field; and in Ie∣hoazas his reigne, mention is made of Chairets and horsemen a few; but of mustering or numbring of them, we read not at all. The Heathen Armies were ever very strong in horsemen and Cha∣rets, and also Charets of yron, Camels they brought with them for burthen it may seeme, and for their Kings to ride vpon, which had chaines of gold about their necks. They would bring in their host manie horses, as 60000.Iudg: 8. 26 2 Ch. 12. at a time; so did Shishake of Egypt; Sisera had 900. yron Charets. The1 Sa: 13. 5. 2 Sa: 10. 18 Philistims came against Israel with 30000 Charets, and 6000 horsemen; Zobah had 40000 horsmen, with ma∣ny Charrets, their horses were not hackney Iades, or meane cart-horses, but horses for warre, and mightieIud: 5. 22. Iob. 39. 19-25. tramping and pransing horses, neigh∣ing terribly, very strong, pawing with their feet, as ful of fiercenes and rage, and such as were trained vp, not to
feare the ratling quiver, the glitte∣ring speare, the sound of the trum∣pet, nor shout of an host of men; but durst goe on in their strength to meet the armed men, and not to turn backe from the sword: They had horses also that were very swift, and strong ones, whose snorting andIer. 4. 13. & 8. 16. neighing might be heard a good way of, the sound whereof seemed to1 Mach. 1. 17. & 8. 3. 34. & 6. 30 make the earth to tremble. The Hea∣then brought also Elephants into their battles, so Antiochus trained such vp for warre: how they vsed them, read the 1. Mach. 6. 34 and 25. The chiefe Charriots and horse∣men of Israel were Eliah and Elisha,2 K 2. 11. & 6. 17. and the hosts of heaven: The Ar∣mies of Israel were commonly foot∣men, these they did muster, and chuse to fight their battles, as is be∣fore declared. In this mustering and choise, due care should be had of publike good without corruption; for the faithfull chusing of fit men for the king and the country is a speciall seruice, a ve∣ry weighty busines, and of great im∣portance.
For Ʋegetius affirmeth,Lib. 1. cap. 7 dere milit. that the strength of the Roman Ar∣my, and the foundation of their Em∣pire was in the first choyse and tryall of their souldiers. They employed in this choyse of men sit for warre; men of knowledge, gravity and honesty; and those that of favor or covetous∣nesse corrupted the right order in musters were punished. For this, one Pedius Blaesus was with reproach put out of the Senat. They were by law forbid, either to admit or dismisse a souldier for mony. In Traian theVal. Max. lib. 6. ca. 3. Emperours dayes, one that made his son vnable to serve in the warres, was banished his country.
CHAPTER. X. Of the Armies in old times, the view of them; and of the exercise before Souldiers goe to Warre. IN the muster as the persons are to be well chosen, so must the arms be well loo∣ked to: what they be now, is well knowne to souldiers. The furniture for souldiers in old
time recorded in the Bible for preser∣vationEz: 23, 24. 1 Sam: 17. 6, 7. 38. 2 Ch. 26. 14. Eze: 38. 4. 2 Ch. 14. 8 of their bodies were these; a Helmet, a Brestplate, a Coate of male, a Gorget, an Habergion, and Greaves, and they had also for de∣fence, Bubklers, Shields; and Tar∣gets. The weapons they vsed were, the sword, which was sometimes two∣edged, girded to them with a girdle to their side, a Dagger vpon theIoel 3. 10. Iudg: 3. 16. 2 Sa: 20. 8. Iudg: 3 16 Psal: 45. 3 Cant: 3. 8. Ioel: 2. 10. Ezech: 39. 9. Ier: 51. 42. Ioel: 2. 8. 2 Sa: 18. 14 thigh, as was sometime a short sword. Also they had Speares, Lances, Hand∣staues, Battle-axes, Darts, Slings, to sling stones in, in which some were so cunning, as they could vse either hand, and strike at an haire breadth. They had their bowes and arrowes which did them great seruice as in former times Archers have done with vs, and by whom this Na∣tion▪ hath beene famous; of the commendation of Archerie, let any that please, reade certaine diseourses of one Sir IOHN SMITH Knight. They had inZach: 9 15 Ier: 50 42. Iudg: 20. 16. stead of Cannons, Battering ramms and Engines cunningly invented
to shoote Arrowes and very great stones. The Armes must bee viewed,1 Ch: 12. 2: pag: 20. 26 Eze: 4. 2. & 21, 22. 2 Ch: 26. 14. 1 am: 17. 39. both for goodnesse, that there bee no defect therein, and also for fitnesse, serviceable for the time, and conuenient for those that are to vse them: for a Sauls armour will not fit a David. Atmes good and fitt must beeEze: 21. 9, 10. Naum 3. 3. Ier: 51. 11. well kept, the sword must bee bright and sharpe: so must the Arrowes, the Speare heads are to glister. For hee is surely a base∣minded Souldiour, that is a Slo∣ven in his Armes. The HeathenLiv: 26. tooke care of this. Scipio Africa∣nus commanded his Souldiours to haue their Armes cleane and fit; so did the Emperour Aurelius giue a charge for this, that the Armes of his souldiers should bee kept cleane and bright. Now hauing fit men, fit andGen: 14. 14 Liv: 26. & 29. & 23. & 34. good Armes, before such yet doe goe into the field they must bee trained vp, so was Abrahams ser∣uants,
he armed his trayned ser∣vants to sit vpon the Enemies, as did Scipio, Titus Sempronius, Cato, and other Romanes. It is greatGen. 14. 14. Lev. 26. & 29, & 23, & 34. Guicciard. li 8. & 11. Dr. Sutclif. pag 85. part. 2. folly to thrust an ignorant multi∣tude into battle. And yet also its not good too much to trust vnto trayned Souldiours at home that ne∣ver were abroad. For the Vene∣tians making themselues too confi∣dent vpon their trayned bands, were ouetthrowne. And evill were the Florentines apaid in tru∣sting to their trained men. For they may be as one saith, and though well instructed, yet never having seene warres, nor been in the field to skir∣mish and fight in good earnest, may faile the souldiours expectation. Ne∣verthelesse it is necessary that soul∣diours be made skilfull in the vse of armes, and exercised in feates of acti∣uitiy, to march, to keep rankes, to vse right their postures, and to be ready at command to doe what they ought doe. And this must be in time of peace, as no doubt the Israelites were, which made you so expert in
time of need. This care had CassiusPacit. 12. the Roman, and Epaminondas the The∣ban. And to say as it is, though there were no enemies to be expected or scared, yet cannot youths be better employed, then in militarie exerci∣ses, and vse of Armes.
XI. CHAP. Of the Officers in VVar. WHen there is a good wise and fit choyse made of the souldi∣diers, as of men of vn¦derstanding, strong active, and honest, and also trained well, then speciall care must be had of appointing such Captaines and Officers for them, as may be worthy of such souldiours, able to command in wisedome, and to rule them well prudently▪ When David had numbred the2 Sa: 18. 1. 2 Ch: 25. 5. people, as likewise Amaziah; they placed Commanders ouer them. Of
which some were ouer thousands▪Num: 31. 14. 48 1 Sa: 8. 12 1 Mach: 3. 5 some ouer hundreds, some ouer fif∣ties, and some but ouer ens. They were called Praefecti, or Principes, the Officers of the host, Chiliarchi over thousands, Centurions ouer hundreds, Pentacoutachi ouer fif∣ties, and Decurions ouer tens: called they were Captaines and Leaders. The chiefe had command ouer many thousands, some ouer 280000, some ouer 30000. All the sorts of them1 Ch: 13▪ 1 2 Ch: 7. 14. 15-18. 1 Ch: 2. 8 15: 20. 21: 32, 33 were choise persons, valiant men, men of might, skilfull in vse of armes, an fit for battle, tryed souldi∣ers in the field, worthy their places. They were wie, valiant, and not of a double heart, not traiterously min∣ded, not disaffecting the State, nor the professed religion. They were such as set God before them, and in the service of warre, offered them∣selves2 Ch: 17: 16 to the Lord, as the learned Translator interpreteth the place, Alacerrimo & promptissimo animo ad bella gerenda eius; with most lustie courages, and most readily bent to fight the Lords battles.
Though all were worthy praise, yet among them some excelled other some, and were more renowned, as2 Sam. 23, were the speciall worthies of David, and that without pride in themselves not contemning others, and without enuy of the lesse famous, for any thing the Scripture speaketh of. These Leaders, Captaines, and Of∣ficers were none of them yong strip∣ling, raw and vnskilfull souldiers: but all knowne men of might, fit for bat∣tle. If a David, a yong man, a youth, a very stripling be advanced to bee Captaine ouer a thousand by Saul, it was extra ordinem indeed, because he was knowne, and had sufficiently1 Sam. 17 59, 56, & 16. 18. & 17. 34. 50. 51. & 18 13, 14. and often shewed himselfe to bee a valiant man, a man of war, prudent in speech, and wise in his actions and behaviour. For he had slaine a Lyon and a Bare, and had ouer∣come the Gyant Goliah before this his advancement. Such youths as he, if any such were, might well bee ad∣mitted to command. Otherwise, A∣drian the Emperour is to be follow∣ed, who expresly forbad beardlesse
youthes to aspire to such a charge: A∣lexanderLamprid. in vit ci. in his expedition against Darius, chose such for his Comman∣ders, as were experenced in his fa∣thers service, and of ripe iudgment. Such as haue not attained to the grace of a manly countenance in such manlike services, cannot procure au∣thority sufficient to command braue spirits. And such as procure their Places without desert, dsire to bee remooued. Caesar being in Africa, dismissed some Colonels and Captains with disgrace, because they had got such places by fauour, and not by iust deserving. Buying and selling of places is base marchandizing, and such as so come in, will surely make poore souldiers pay dearely for it, if they be not prevented. It were a rare worthy Soveraigne authority that for every place in campe, deserts should onely aduance all and every Officer, such as be valiant, loyall, di∣ligent, men of skill, and ayming at publike good, true honour; and not chiefly or onely at profit, or at other courses vnbefitting a right
souldier much lesse a sound Christi∣an. Worth in men advanceth the worke intended, warres by Gods blessing will prosper, souldiers will be more obedient, and the whole host be better governed.
CHAP. XII. Of the Generall over the whole Armie. THough as hath been shewed, that Kings in person vsually did go into the field with their hosts; yet did2 Sa. 2. 8. 1 Ch. 11. 6 2 Sam. 23. 37. 1 Sa. 14. 1. Iud 9. 54. 1 Sa. 16. 21 & 14. 1. 1 Ch. 19. 16. 1 Mach. 7. 8. & 4. 100 they appoint one Chiefe Ruler over all, called the Ge∣nerall, or Captaine over the host, and Chiefe over all the rest who had his armour-bearer, as it seemeth, every great Commander had, as well as Kings, Abimelech had his, Saul his, (in which office was David at the first) Ionathan his, which Armour-bearers
were also valiant men. The Heathen had also such Generals, as Phicol was to Abimelech King of Gerar, Shaphach to Hadadezer, Naa∣man to the King of Syria, Sisera to Iabin, Bacchides to King Demetrius, and so others to other Kings. And when there was no King in Israel, the Lord made Iosua his General to fight his battells, and after him he raised vp Othniel, Ehud, Barak, Gideon, Iep∣thah, and other Iudges. This hath e∣ver beene the constant order, for pre∣servationD. Sutcl ca. 4. pa. 51. of vnitie. None had equall authority with them, though others were of great place, as was Abishai and Ittai vnder David, who divided his host into three parts, one to Ioab, another to Abishai, and the third to Ittai. In Iehosophats time there were then foure that had divided among them into distinct numbers 1160000 a million an hundred and threescore thousand: Sometime we reade how2 Mach. 8. 9. the Heathen ioyned two together, as Antiochus with Nicanor, Gorgias as an adviser and a man of great expe∣ience.
The Generals appointed by God were ever assisted by his spirit, to be∣come wise, valiant, and religious. Kings choose their Generals, some∣time, as nigh of blood; but ever wor∣thy men, as Saul did Abner his vncle1 Ch. 11. 6. one wise and hardie: So David did chuse Ioab his sisters sonne, but it was vpon his desert. For if such be cho∣sen, as be without due desert; valo∣rous spirits in heart disdaine them; whence disorders, contentions, dis∣graces, and ill successe. The Enemie being a wise Commander despiseth the power of such a Leader; So did Caesar even the old Company of theDe bell ci∣vil. Spaniards, because he knew Petreius and Afranius their Commanders to be men of no worth. Braue Gene∣rals, if God be not against them, fur∣ther the victory mightily, like Ma∣rius Coriolanus leading the RomanesLiv. got them the victory over the Volsci∣ans; but after taking the VolsciansPlutarch. part he made them Conquerours o∣ver the Romanes: Its better of the two, that a Lyon lead an armie of Harts, then a fearfull Hart an Host
of Lyons: For Csars invincible soul∣diersllo Cir. 5 were by their cowardly Sabinus their leader overcome. So as Princes had need of worthy Generals well qualified. I. They should be religious, for if this be required of all the souldiers, if possible; much more of the Chiefe∣tayne, the Generall that comman∣deth all. Such God who is to be followed did chuse; such a one was that valiant Iosua, valiant Iudas Ma∣chabeus and others, and they prospe∣red. II. They must be wise, for wis∣dome,Eccles. 10. 10 12: saith Salomon▪ is profitable to direct, and a wise mans words are gracious. A General should be as Da∣vid behaving himselfe so wisely that1 Sa. 18. 13 14, 15. his Enemie may feare him, his friends loue him and honour him. And the Wiseman saith also, that wisedome is better then weapons for warre: for con∣sideration and well foreseeing, and wise managing of an Armie, and fin∣ding out of stratagems may prevaile, where meere force cannot. Pyrrhus the Epirote, and Scanderbag, and Han∣nibal
by wisdome and forecast obtei∣end great victories. Courage and strength hath gotten many a glori∣ous day, but policie hath the prehe∣minence. It was by policie that Prince Edward, King Edward the thirds sonne with 8000. overthrew the French Army of 60000. & by po∣licy Henry 5. prevailed with 15000 a∣gainst all the power and Nobilitie of France likewise; cunning contri∣ving of matters winneth often▪ where strength would faile. So wise should a General be, as that he should not need to be tyed to particular instru∣ctions, but to be able to proceede wisely▪ with large Commission, and to vse it according to present occasi∣ons, and difference in the times, and variety▪ of things falling out for ad∣vantage to him: which he may lose by bridling instructions. David wise and valiant prescribed not to Ioab what to doe, how, when, nor where in particulars: nor did so the Romane Senate to their Generals, they were not limited: see for the commodities herein, and yet the cautions withall,
in Dr. Sutcliffes discourse of warre.Cap. 4. part 4. III. Generalls should be, as religi∣ous and wise, so also very valiant men, such as God chose were valiant, the Angel called Gideon a valiant man, such a one was Dauid; Among the Heathen, the Generals were found to be valiant; Alexander the great performed many valiant Acts against the Persians and Indians; and so did Iulius Caesar against the fierce Nervii, and at the battle of Mumida he shew∣ed himselfe most valiant in leaving his horse, and setting himselfe fore∣most in the front of his foote, to stir vp their courages. Scanderbeg was wise and valiant, so was Pirrhus: for the fearefull soone turne Cowards; and in Cowards is no trust: for they will betray King, Country, Gods Cause, even true Religion, and all, for bodies safety. So hatefull are Co∣wardsRev. 21. 8. and the fearefull as they are the foremost in the ranke of the dam∣ned crue going to Hell. IV. Generals should be courteous and affable to their souldiers, not proud, nor disdainfull, courteous be∣haviour,
in a wise, valiant, and wor∣thy Commander stealeth away the hearts of inferiours, and knits them to him: How did Absalom win all hearts in a manner to him: which I note, for the Courtesie, not for his Craft therein, which a Generall must be farre from; least he proue a Trai∣tour, and find the Reward of such a one. The ffble Courtesie here in∣tended is the gaining of the hearts of souldiers to obey from loue, rather then of feare. Caesar would call vpon his souldiers, and terme them by the name of companions and friends. Disdaine is proper to a dunghill Knight; Mithridates, Cy∣rus, Scipio, yea great Alexander, were very courteous and respectiue to their souldiers, so also was Charles the fifth. V. Generals should be faithfull of their words, to performe what they promise, or what others by their war∣rant doe promise for publick good: this was the valiant worthy, the reli∣gious Iosua, very carefull of, even toIos 6. 22, 23. & 9. 19 the deceitfull Gibeont, as also after∣wards
to Rahab according to theIud. 1. 15. 1 Sam. 30. 15. word of the spies, and their promise vnto her; and in like manner with the man of Luz the spies kept their word: So David performed what he promised vnto an Amalekite. It is much derogatory to the ho∣nour of a General to be found false on his word: Alexander being advised by Parmenio on a time to breake his word, said, if I were Parmenio, I should perhaps doe so, but its not lawfull for Alexander so to doe. The Romane Commanders were most praise-wor∣thy in this. A General to be a trea∣cherous Triphon to a Ionathan is odi∣ous to any noble and valiant heart; and he detesteth to be a fedifragous Hamilcar; the fith of a souldier1 Mach. 12 42. 49. should be inviolable. VI. Generals should be temperate, sober & chast, vertues ever accompanying true graces: we never reade of any of the valiant worthies, such as Iosua, Ehud, Othniel, or Davids worthies to be given to gluttonie, drunkennesse, or to filthy lusts of Adultery and for∣nication; where reade we in Israel or
in Iudah, of valorous spirits to haue beene drunkards, or to haue ravished women or maydes? Indeed this was1 K▪ 20. 16. Lam. 5. 11. 1 K. 16. 9. Ioel 3: 3 Iudeth 13: the course and custome of▪ the Hea∣then; and of some idolatrous Elah, who in his drunkennesse lost his life, as did drunken and lustfull▪ Holofer∣nes; Ioab, though otherwise bad e∣nough, yet we doe not reade of any drunken humour in him, nor to be addicted to filthinesse, nor yet his valiant brethren. Indeede Sampson was something given to lust, but he payed well for it, even contempt, losse of his eyes, imprisonment, and death. This sinne of lust and drun∣kennesse in Captaines and souldiers is heathenish, which yet some Hea∣then haue so detested, as they may rise vp in iudgement▪ against many called, but vnworthily Christians. Great Alexander vsed the wife and daughters of Darius and other beau∣tifull women of Persia very honou∣rably, without any suspicion of vn∣chast behaviour, yea so he hated fil∣thy lusts, that when two souldiers one Damon, and an other Tymothes,
vnder Parmenio had forced mens wiues he commanded them to be put to death as brutish and wilde beasts. Young Scipio the noble Romane, not then aboue 22. yeare olde is praise∣worthy in this also, who comman∣ded (as Plutarch recordeth) that wo∣men taken in warres should not be defiled, and when a beautifull dmo∣sell was at a time presented to him, he did not onely conteine himselfe from violating her chastity, but sent her to the Noble man to whom she was betrothed, with an enlargement of her dowrie: behold these you Commanders. It were too long to enlarge every worthy quality requi∣red in a Generall: briefly therefore for the rest▪ he should be without en∣vie, not an envious Saul to see a Da∣vid doe well, and haue his deserved praises, but rather rejoyce thereat, and be like the noble Mtius Scev∣la, who to match the good service of Coles done for Rome, adventured into the Hetrurian Campe to kill their King in his tent. He should be like Fabritius the Romane besieging
Fideva, who when a Schoole-master perfidiously betrayed his Schollers, Children of the chiefe Citizens, in∣to his hand, refused the advantage thereby to gaine the Citty, and sent the Traytour bound, and caused the boyes to whip him againe into the Citty, by which he wonne the affe∣ction of the Citizens, and wrought them by this act to become Tributa∣ries to the Romanes. He should be watchfull, as the eye of the whole host, and very painfull; Iulius Caesar may be a patterne herein to such as please to reade his Commentaries. Alexander the great to keepe his souldiers from sloath, in the intermis∣sion of warres, exercised them in hun∣ting wild beasts which were of fierce natures, and he himselfe fought with a Lyon very dangerously, a Lacede∣monian Ambassadour beholding the combate. By industry and great paines taking Hanibal and Iugurthe vexed the Romanes. He should be temperate in diet; as was Alexander, for when a Princesse called Ada sent him delicate dishes of meate, he sent
her word againe, he knew not what to doe with them: for his Governour appointed him, said he, for his din∣ner to arise before day, and to march in the night, and for his supper to eate but a little at dinner: a spare di∣et for a King. A braue Commander saith, one should more feare a wan∣ton banquet, then a bloudy battell: For after Alexander gaue himselfe o∣ver to effeminate delicacies, he lost his honour and life. The conque∣ring Romanes so hated belly cheere and voluptuousness, that when Lu∣cius Pius got the Sarmtes by his of∣ten banqueting them, to submit to the Romanes, and he comming to Rome demaunded to triumph, they did not onely deny it him, but in de∣testation of his belly▪ victorie▪ they put him to death, set an Epitaph of reproach vpon his tombe, and set the Sarmates free from them againe as dishonourably wonne to their obe∣dience. The General must be tender∣ly respectiue to the life and health of his souldiers: and a liberall rewarder of the worthy; this was Caesars ex∣cellency,
who said to Mamillus, that he▪ held himselfe in nothing more honoured and happy, then in liberal∣ly rewarding the well deserving, and mercifully pardoning the Enemie: for the one will make souldiers reso∣lute in execution, and the other will allure the enemies to yeeld and not in a desperate obstinacie stand out, as they will doe in feare of a blou∣dy Tyrant, a Turke, a Tartar, and a proud Spaniard.
CHAPTER. XIII. Of Counsell for warre. NO General is so well qualified, though with the best endowments of bodie and minde; but needeth counsell and advise. Counsell and strength is forEsa. 58. 5. warre. Hezekiah a wise King tooke counsell with his Princes and his mighty men to withstand Senacherib and to hinder him, as much as he could: Absolom would proceed by2 Sam. 16. 20. & 17. 7. advise in his rebellion to aske coun∣sell, though God in his wrath con∣founded it, by Davids friend, in his mercie to David. Gedaliah not hea∣ring
truth, nor receiving advise when timely offered was trayterously slain by Ismael; The King of Syria tooke2 K. 8. 1 Mach. 5. 67. Pro. 15. 22. counsell to proceed in warre against Israel. To warre without advise is not good: without counsell, saith Salomon, purposes are disappointed. The Romanes had their Counsel∣lours with their Generals. L. Furius in his warres against the Gaules had fiue, Casar against France ten, Pom∣pey against Pirats had moe. And as good Counsellours were appoynted, so the wise would take their advise: as did Camllus▪ before he fought with the Gaules: Curio in Afrike, Siplo before he set vpon As∣drball. So did Cyrus before he char∣ged Artaxerxes his brother; Zeno∣phon refused not to heare the counsell of a meane souldier. Atonius Piu would doe nothing but first he ad∣vised. And where good advise is heard and wisely followed good suc∣cesse often followeth thereupon: But where one will do all alone, as Charles Duke of Burgundy did, he may soone overthrow his estate as he did: Such
a one was Lautreck who brought hisGuiccard. lib. 19. forces of France to ruine before Na∣ples, because he would hear no coun∣sell nor be advised. The high conceit of himselfe that was in Lewis Sforce to rule all after his owne apprehensi∣on, brought him to a tragicall end, as Guiccardine relateth. Counsellours must yet be first taken heed of, to wit, such as are envious, such as think through pride their owne counsell best, are not easily to be followed; nor those to be Advisers▪ who are Pensioners to the Enemy, as some English were vnder Edw. the 4▪ to Le∣wis of France the 11. such Pensioners are Traytours to their  and Country. Concerning Counsellours, their qualification must consist in these 4 things, number equality, ability, and good honsty. For the first▪ in the mul∣titude of Counsellours is safty, saith Salomon, and purposes are by thm e∣stablished. To be led by one is vnad∣visednesse;Prov. 11. 14 & 15. 22 & 24. 6 many eyes see more then one, though that one be very wise. In the number one may not ouer sway
the rest in superiour power; for then one is all, and the rest are Cyphers to make vp the number, but are not of value, many in name are there, but in effect one is the substance, and they all in him: Therefore in some sort e∣quality is necessary, & freedome with∣out feare to advise for the best. They must be wise men able to giue coun∣sell, from knowledge and experience▪Liv. 44. Aemilius Paulus hated those which would be counselling in that which they vnderstood not. The Counsel∣lours of the Romane State in Iudas1 Mach. 8 Machabeus dayes were many, among whom was neither emulation nor envy, nor any one of them that domi∣neered over another. They were for wisedome & age called Senators, and for loving care of their Country, Fa∣thers. Severus the Emperor had many in Counsell of warre, but all of them ancient experienced Souldiers in Armes: Also if they be schollers, good historians, able to relate their reading in military matters, they may do much good. Whatsoever their number be or their equality, or their skill, its
most meet principally that they be honest, that is, faithfull in their Coun∣sell, fearing God, and detesting trea∣cheryProv. 12. 5. and al falshhood: for the Coun∣sells of the wicked are deceit, neither are flatterers & fearfull to be iudged good Counsellours. Also their hone∣sty must binde them to faithfull se∣crecie; there must be no false brother to discover their Counsell; Such a per∣fidious wretch if espyed, is to be made an example to other with terrour.
CHAPTER. XIV. Of the disciplining of an Ar∣my, and orderly govern∣ment thereof. AN Army gathered, a fit General appoin∣ted, and well deser∣ving Officers cho∣sen, and by good counsell the warre established; yet all is nothing without military disci∣pline: which is the very vinculum belli; The Lord therefore when hee he brought forth his host of the Is∣raelites from Egypt, vnder his Gene∣rall
Moses, he appointed a strict dis∣cipline, which is the strongest Guard to preserve an Army from destructi∣on. Alexander Severus, so called for his strict observing of discipline, so held discipline the preseruation of the Common-wealth, as the letting of it slip, should be losse both to his name and Empire, Scipio Africanus so obserued discipline, as his souldi∣ers seemed Senatours, as Plutarch witnesseth. The cruell Turkes ob∣serve discipline, and that to our ad∣miration,Hist. peregr. by which they haue migh∣tily preuailed against vs Christians, who may be ashamed of our ouer∣much loosenes herein. The well ordering of the host of Israel by the Lord, stood in these things. I. In the making of excellent lawes for good govtrnment: for his lawes were so righteous, as no Nati∣onSucl. 303. 4. Deut. 4. 8. could come neere them, nor had the like: as Moses told them. Good lawes are the foundation of order and discipline, the guide of mens
actions, and preservation of an Ar∣mie, without which there▪ would be nothing but disorder, and so confu∣sion. II. In the execution of theseDeut. 5. 32 Lawes, from which none might turne either to the right hand or the left. The life of all Lawes is to see them observed, and strictly obeyed, for else Lawes be made in vaine. III. In not allowing any privi∣ledge to any one, or any dispensati∣on to any person to transgresse theNum. 20. 12. 24. lawes. Moses the Generall was a strict obseruer therof, and so his Deputy Lieutenant Iosua, and if Moses him∣selfe offended, he tasted of the kings, the Lord of hosts displeasure. Though David for iust causes forbore Ioab his Generall for a time, yet for his breach of lawes he tooke order to haue him punished after his desert. Moses was so iust and strict a Iusticer, that in iust proceedings hee would haue none spared, not the heads ofNum. 25: 4. Exod. 32. 27. 29: the people, nor any to spare his bro∣ther, nor his companion, nor his son.
Saul would haue put Ionathan to death, for not keeping the charge which he imposed vpon the whole host. And the Romans without re∣spect of persons, punished offenders. The Consul Titus Manlius caused his owne sonne, for breaking the law of discipline, though otherwise his act in slaying an vpbraiding enemie, was both honourable, and to the Romans beneficiall to be beheaded. None in a campe may thinke them∣selves free from observing order, no not the Generall, for hee that com∣mandeth others must order well him∣selfe, or his command will grow into contempt. This made Papirius to purpose the death of the Generall of his horse, because hee fought with∣out command, though he returned victorer. Alexander the great would desire of his souldiers the obseruati∣on of no stricter lawes, then himselfe would vndergoe; Adrian the Empe∣rour was singularly prayse-worthy for this, and so was Scipio, Severus, Pyrrhus, with others. IV. In promising rewards to the
obedient, grace and savour to such as kept themselves within bounds, within the lists of good▪ order andNum. 14. 24. 38. gouernment, the promises are set downe at large in many places by Moses, and were faithfully perfor∣med to the well deserving, as to Ca∣leb, to Iosua, to Phineas, and others. This will procure loue to the lawes, make them more remarkeable, and take vp the minds of the well dispo∣sed with a watchfull care, to obey them. For as impartiall execution of lawes terrifieth some; so the reward promised and performed, putteth life and courage into the hearts of other some, to doe worthily.
CHAPTER. XV. Of the evils to be avoided in a campe, and to bee sharpely puni∣shed. THere is nothing dis∣ple sing to God, but sinne, and sinne itDeu. 23▪ 9, is which prevents Gods blessings, and causeth ill successe. Therefore speciall care is to be had, to auoid sinne and evill: as Moses exhorted Israel, & as Aurelianus the Emperour said to his Generall in a military epistle of his, if thou be a Tri∣bune▪ yea, if thou wilt live; keepe
backe the souldiers hands from doing e∣vill▪ I. Evill to be taken beed of is A∣theisme,Lev. 24. 16 10. deriding of God and Reli∣gion, cursing God and blaspheming his nme; this God punished with death; for where God and Religion is contemned, what can prosper? Q. Fabius a Heathen imputed, the calamity which befell the Romans in the ouerthrow of Flanimius, to be the neglect of Religion, and the onely meanes said he, to recouer Gods fauour was to reuerence Reli¦gion▪Liv. 22. & 5. and to haue a care to please God▪ should then a Christian deride God and Religion? what came of Rabsakah and other blasphemers, God did slay in his host, 85000. Iu∣lian the Emperour▪ after he apostated and became Christs enemy, he soon came to destruction, and Iulian his Vncle, who in contempt of Christ and the Sacrament, pssed against the Table before he dyed, hee fell into such a disease, as made his entrall ro, and hee to voyd filth at his mouth.
II. Euill is Idolatry; this greatlyExo. 32. provoketh God to wrath, maketh people naked of his protection, and to leaue them. This ouerthrew Iero∣boam, with his 80000. Valiants in fighting against Iudah. This over∣threw the Armies of Ioash, fighting2 Chro. 25. 7. against the Syrians, & by this was A∣maziahs host beaten, by the Israelits, the ten Tribes. God will not bee with his people that shall have Ido∣laters with them. So the Prophet told Amaziah going against E∣dom. III. Euill is the Abuse of GodsZach. 5. 3. name by horrible swearing, and dam∣ned oathes, the Lord telleth vs that a curse remaineth vpon them, & he threatneth to cut them off, yet some hold themselves no souldiers til they can gracelesly, as a grace to them, thunder out bloudy oathes: common swearing maketh one apt to forsware himselfe, which is a fearfull sinne not left vnreuenged of God in great per∣sons, as in Zedekiah, king of Iudah,2 Ch. 3. 6. giuen captive into the hands of Na∣buchandnezzar, with whom hee had
broken his oath, for this was the po∣wer of Vladislaus vtterly ouerthrown, and hee slaine by the Turkes vnder Amurath the Grand-Signeour: with swearing and forswearing, must be a∣bandoned, execrable cursing of o∣thers, and of themselves. For which many fearfull examples may be pro∣duced, which might cause men to tremble; some have beene possessed with the diuell, by wishing the diuel to take them, some hanged, by vsing this forme of execration, I wish I ight be hanged if I doe this orSee exam: in the Theatre of Gods iudg∣ments. that; some drowned in a Privie, as by a corrupt custome they vsed to wish, some rotting before they dy∣ed, according to their cursing. IV. The ill vse of much gaming, a thing that was not in vse in Gods host; and good it were that it were lesse in vse in our Campe; for God is dishonoured, monyes wasted, and many evills hppen thereupon; our enemy the Spaniard in time of ser∣uice doth banish al vnlawfull games. In the siege of Poytiers the Admirall caused a certaine Ensigne to bee han∣ged
for that he was found playing atHistoria de troubl. de Fra. li. 8. cards, while his company did watch in some perill: Manly exercises should be appointed them, and such as can reade, to get histories of warre and other good bookes to reade and discourse thereof; thus the mind and body will be well employed. It may be some souldiours would be so well exercised, if there were Comman∣ders like Caesar, who read much, and did write his owne warres, or like Pyrrhus the famous Martialist in his time, who wrote many books; and as Hannibal in whose tents were found many books which he studied: braue and generous spirits should be de∣lighted either to reade, or heare read the acts of valiant warriers, and scorn base play, and childish gaming. V. The prophanation of the Sab∣bothRev. 1. 10. the Lords day, as now Saint Iohn calleth it. God punisheth this inNum. 15. 32. 36. the campe of Israel; the valiant Iu∣das Machabeus tooke speciall care to keepe the Sabboth with his host;2 Mach. 8. 27. when Nicanor King Demetrius Ge∣nerall would in contempt of God
fight with Iudas on the Sabboth day there were slaine of his men 35000. and he killed, his head strucke off,Ca, 1. 1. 27. 28. his tongue cut out for his blasphe∣mie, and his right hand which hee had stretched out against the Tem∣ple, with his head sent to IerusalemEccl. hist. Cent. 12. to be hanged vp vpon a Tower. One of the Kings of Denmarke contrary to the dissusions of Divines, would needs ioyne battle with an enemy vpon the day of Pentecost, but hee lost the field, and his life withall. All vaine sports on the Lords day, are to be abandoned in a Christian host. VI. Is Rebellion against lawfull au∣thority: this the Lord punished, yea he extraordinarily plagued Rebells,Num. 16. 31, 11, 32, 33, 41, 2, 49. making the earth to open and swal∣low vp some, and fire to deuoure some others; Rebells can looke for no good end, see it in Absalom, though he had most of Israel to take his part. Let the end of him, Bichri and Zimri, make men take heed of rbelion. VII. Treasonable practises and con∣spiracies, and secret working with
the enemy are to be carefully looked vnto, and to be prevented, and the parties found ou severely to bee pu∣nished,Ier. 40. for good Gedaliah beeing warned, and not making timely in∣quiry was by trayterous Ismael cru∣elly murthered. So one Quintilius Ʋarus for being too slacke to search out the Treachery of one Narmini∣ns, of which he had intelligence, was slaine with all his company. Of such was Nehemiah in danger, but his wise∣dome prevented them; and Iudas Ma∣chabeusNeh. 6. 17. 10. 2 Mach. 13. 21. had a Rodcus among them, a discloser of secrets to the enemy: but he was found out: Cyrus the yon∣ger executed one Orntes which went about to betray him to the ∣my. Marcellus executed many in the City Nla, for treason, having had secret talk and intelligence withLiv. 24. Hannibal. For such worthily deserue death. VIII. Is Mutinie. God punished the murmurings of his people, and their malecontentednesse, such as cause sedition; and stirre vp othersNum. 11. 1, 9, 21. 5, 6 to grow rebellious are to be puni∣shed,
Scipio vpon a mutiny of his souldiours in Spaine, put to death the chiefe moovers, and so pacifiedLiv. 28. Tacit. 1. the rest; so did Tiberius when his did mutinie in Pannouia, but it is hard measure to poore starving souldiers, for comming and demanding their pay in extreame need, to be held mu∣tinous, and that onely for this, Cap∣taines should hang some to make o∣thers willing to dye rather for hun∣ger, then any more to complaine. Oh vnchristian cruelty▪ and mercilesse inhu∣manity. IX. Disobedience to command, and to make attempts vpon the Enemie without warrant, or when a charge is giuen to the contrary, this God suffered not to goe unpunished in the presumptuous Israelites. Manli∣usNum. 14. 41. 45. his dealing with his sonne is be∣fore noted, and Papirius his purpose and intent towards the Generall of his horse. Men vpon their owne heads without command of authori∣ty to fight with the enemy, seldomeLiv. 5. prooue successefull: which the Ro∣mans found at the siege of Vey with
losse of their souldiers: yet Ionathan and his Armour-bearer secretly et vpon the enemy and prospered, and was honoured for it. But such an ex∣ample is extraordinary; as souldiers are not to presume upon their owne heads without command, so being commanded, they might readily o∣bey; els all Military order would decay and die. We may reade in Livie that a Generall of the RomansLiv. 4. slew an Ensigne-bearer, for refusing to advance himselfe forward towards the enemy, as he was commanded; yea the Isaelites held him worthy death that would refuse to obeyIos. 1. 18. the iust commands of their Generall Iosua. X. Is enuy and pride, and words of reproach the fruits thereof, tending to provoke to the breach of peace, this God punished in the Prophe∣tesse Miriam, this envie, pride, andNum. 12. , 9, 10. words of contempt are pestilent e∣vils, and cause much mischiefe. Hence arose the bloudy civill dis∣cord and warre betweene Ieptah and the Ephramites, of whom were slaine
42000. Hence the slaughtering andIud. 12. Iud. 9. killing one another betweene Abi∣melech and the Sichemites, caused by the reproachfull and disdainefull words of Gaal, these things should be prohibited, and sharpely puni∣shed. XI. Is murther and the killing of1: Kin. 2. 30. 31. one another; God gaue a very strait charge against bloud-shed. Ioab the Generall being guiltie must die for it, even at the Altar: God never al∣lowed Asyles for murtherers, and men of bloud, Captaines may not like rash brained and bloudy men, disorderly kill souldiers; hee thatIn l. 18▪ & 19. 3.  rem▪ shall so doe among the Spaniards dy∣eth for it: the Romans put to death such as stroke their fellowes with a sword, if they offered other violence as to throw stones at them, such were displaced with shame; Quarrels and Chalenges thereupon with acceptan∣ces thereof have beene the losse of many liues vnworthily; hereby Princes loose their subiects, the ar∣mie is weaned, the enemy hereby advantaged. Souldiers lives should
be precious one to another, their bloud should be spilt in the publike cause against the enemy, and not in private quarrels, no not if a man put the lye vpon an other; Iehu a right2 K. 9. 12. valiant Captaine, marching furious∣ly, did not quarrell with the Cap∣taines in his companie, when they said it was false which he spake, so putting the lye vpon him, neither held he it such a disgrace, as now men doe iudge. Ieremie said to aIer. 37. 14. Captaine of the Ward, vniustly ac∣cusing him, that it was falshood or a lye, as it is in the Hebrew Text, which he spake. Gedaliah put the lye vpon Iohanan a Captain, a highIer. 40. 16. Note this. and proud spirited man, and valiant too, yet none of these offered to any of them the stabbe, nor did make a quarrell thereof, nor did beastlike more then manlike, rush vpon one another, and kill one another: for these quarrelsome fellowes, and Spa∣dassiues (as one calleth them) are not ever the best men. Drunkennesse, whoring, swearing, and no doubt but hereupon forswearing, are no
matters of disgrace to them, but for∣sooth the tearme lye, by which the father of all lies deludeth them, to make them straine at a gnat, and swallow Camels; to seeme to detest a lye, and yet in their vicious courses to be faithlesse to God, and their owne soules; Away, away with this delusion of Sathan, you that are truely valiant, and right Christian Souldiers, and suffer not your selues to be transported with this conceited disgrace to seeke revenge, and so be guilty of bloud; a crying sin before God. XII. Is carelesse negligence, and slothfulnesse; this is to be punished,Ier: 48. 10. 1 K. 20. 39, 40. the Lord pronounceth a curse vpon him, that doth his worke negligently, and keepeth backe his sword from bloud, when he may slay the Lords enemies. It was death by negligence to let an enemy put into a mans custody to e∣scape: so for a watchman not to giveEze. 33. 6. Liv. 5. warning▪ the watchman which suffe∣red the Gaules to enter into the Ca∣pitol, while he slept, was thrown from the rocke of the Castle, and so puni∣shed
with death for it, the valiant Commander Epaminodas the The∣ban going the round slew the watch∣manPlutarch. whom he found asleepe; by the Roman Law it was death: But this is to be meant in time of most necessary watching, because of the enemy, but no els, God forbid, that the bloud of poore souldiers should be need∣lesly shed. XIII. Is cowardlinesse, when a soul∣dir dare not for feare performe his charge, this is to be punished. Co∣wards God put out of his campe, when he sent his to warre; and so did Machabeus. Appius Clandius did behead those souldiers that throwing downe their armes fled from their ene∣mies; Licrgus made a law among the Spartans, that no man should returneLiv▪ 2. home that turned his backe vpon his e∣nemy. Caesar put certaine Ensignes from their places, because they lost their ground in an encounter with Pompey at Dirrhacium; The Cow∣ard doth not only helpe the enemy, but disheartneth his friends; The Lacedemonian women would deliver
shields to their sonnes, exhorting them going to warre, eyther to bring them againe, or to dye valiant∣ly; There was among them one Damatria who hearing that her son had not fought like a Lacedemonian, when he came lew him; so much did women there detest a cowardly spirit. XIV. Is flying away out of the host to the enemy; this is worthy severe pu∣nishment: such base and traiterous spirits among all the souldiers in Is∣rael I never read of to my remem∣brance; not in all the warres of Iosua, nor of the Iudges, nor of Saul, nor of Dauid; The Romans punished such with death, Caius Matienus comminglru. but home from the army in Spaine, without leaue, was beaten vnder a gib∣bet, & sold for one piece of mony, to sig∣nifie the base esteeme of such a fugi∣tiue; to flye to the enemy is to fur∣ther them very much, by discouering to them the present state of those from whom they run, and therefore is to be very sharpely punished. XV. Is Fornication, Whoredome, and fleshly
filthinesse in any kind, not to be suf∣fered. God for this sinne slew in the campe of Israel in one day 24000.Num 25. Phineas in his zeale for this slew Zimry and Cozbie a Prince and Princesse. Scipio the younger banished women out of his campe. Before is shewed how Alexnder punished this beastly filthinesse in souldiers. This sinne is yet nothing now in the thoughts of unbridled lustfull souldiers; which yet some haue well payed for. The Sicilians enraged against the Gari∣sons of souldiers, for their adulteries,Ni. Gil. Vl. 1. whoredomes, and rapes, in the reigne of Rodolphus the Emperour, tooke armes, and vpon Easter day set vpon them and slew them all. The Emperour Aurelianus caused a souldier for com∣mitting adultery to be tyed by his feet to two trees bent to the earth, which being let goe rent him in peeces, halfe of him hanging on the one, and the other halfe on the other tree. XVI. Discontentednesse with the allotted prouision convenient, and lusting after belly-cheere. This euill the great man of warre, and discipliner of Ar∣mies,
the Lord God of hostes, puni∣shedNum. 11. 4. 20. 33. in his Campe. Nothing lesse befits a souldier then the loue of his belly and ease; some are like summer locusts, which are all belly, and live of spoyle; strong in warme months, but in pinching cold they are gone, pind away, and dy; you haue heard before how basely Lucius Pius was esteemed of by the Romans, for his gaining of the Sarmates to obedience with belly-cheere. XVI. Is theft, filching, rapine, rob∣bery,Ios. 7. 21. and sacriledge: God punished A∣chans theft; yet these are too com∣mon with souldiers now. For many base fellowes fitter for the Gaole, yea the Gallowes then the warres, are no sooner prest, and in the Kings ser∣vice, but are bold to lay hands vpon other mens goods, which they carry away with many a bitter curse, year curse is vpon the theefe and theZach. 5. 3. swearer, who also bringeth a curse vpon others as Achan did; That one theefe caused the overthrow of the Armie; oh, what euill will then a multitude of theeves doe in an host?
Great care must be had of com∣mitting sacriledge, and robbing of Churches, Crassus the Roman forSabellic. li. 4 ca. 3. robbing the Temple of Ierusalem, was soone after ouercome by the Parthians. Cambyses the King of Per∣sia his armie, was destroyed by a tem∣pest, going to rob a Temple. These by Draco the Athenian Lawgiuer was death; So among the Hetrurians, andHerod. l. 1. Vapisc in vita Aurel. Vacceians; The Locrians put out the theeves eyes; Aurelianus the Emperor would not suffer his souldiers to take a pullet or chicken from country peo∣ple, his friends. Tyberius made one ofSuetonius in Tiber. his Guard to be put to death, for ta∣king a Peacocke out of a mans yard▪ Tamberlaine caused a souldier to be slaine for taking a poore womans milke and some cheese, and not paying for it; The Romans vnder MarcusTheat. hist. Scaurus were so disciplined, that they would not pluck the fruit of one tree, as they passed by it, and left it vntou∣ched. Pescenius Niger would haue put to death diuerse souldiers met toge∣ther feasting themselues with that which they had stollen, though tho∣row
intreaty their lives were spared, yet they were punished, and their pu∣nishment was to lye in Tents during the warre without fire, to live onely with bread and water, and to make re∣stitution to the husbandmen; and the reason given of this severitie was, because, such acts did tend to rebelli∣on. Aurelian writes an epistle to Tri∣bunes and souldiers, to keepe their hands from other mens goods. But theft is not onely to be restrai∣ned in souldiers, but also in Captaines and officers which they may many wayes commit. 1. In false musters robbing so the state, by having pay for moe in the roll, then be in service. This abuseGuice. l. 15▪ was the ruine of Francis the first be∣fore Pavy, they that give in false num∣bers by the Lawes in France, sufferLiv. 28. death. The Romans payd every soul∣dier by the poll; so at musters do now the Spaniards. Secondly, in robbing poore souldi∣ers of their pay, Caesar was severe a∣gainstCaesar de bllo Civ. this villany; so as two of his Captaines of horse, Roscillus
and Aeus having defrauded souldi∣ers of their pay, fled to the enemy, as soone as they knew that Caesar had notice thereof. Its an indelible Cha∣racter of infamie, saith one, to defraud a poore souldier of his due. Thirdly, in taking from a souldi∣er that which is his owne, as his wea∣pon,Of Capt abusing poore souldiers, reade Sir Toh: Smiths epistle to the Nobi∣lity of England▪ l 3. 6. qui aliena F. de remilita. or horse, &c. Theophilu the Emperour of the East, banished a Commander out of his Dominion for taking a souldiers good horse perforce from him, for want whereof he was afterwards slaine in battle, and withall bestowed the Comman∣ders possession vpon the souldiours widdow, albeit that Captaine had bestowed the horse vpon the Empe∣rour himselfe, vnwitting to him, till the widow claimed him, as the Em∣perour rode on him. As Captaines and Officers may not wrong souldi∣ers, so souldiers may not rob one ano∣ther. Modestinus iudged him wor∣thy of death that stole his fellowes armes. To conclude, great care must bee had that souldiers doe no spoyle, nor rob such, by whom they
are permitted to passe by peaceably, nor such as bee Merchants and Vi∣ctuallers of the Campe, but such must be suffered to goe and come very se∣curely: The Army of the Prince of Orange besieging Florence, had like to haue beene famished, through the disorder onely of three or foure souldiers which robbed the Mer∣chants and Victuallers, which came and went from the Campe: but those were therefore hanged, and then plenty was brought in. The puni∣shing of this sinne in Tamberlaines Campe made his huge Army of ma∣ny hundred thousands to bee plenti∣fully served. XVII. And last is, the spreading of rumours, raising of false reports, to dishearten an Army is worthy death. This the Lord of hosts pu∣nished with death, and sent theNum. 14. 37. plague vpon them, that brought vpon the land an ill report, which daunted the peoples hearts for going for∣ward: it set them in a rebellion. A false imagination conceiued and ru∣moured in the host of the Syrians▪
(to wit, that Iehram had hyred the Charriots and horses of Pharaoh to come vpon them, when they be∣sidged Samaria, and in a manner had won it) made them flye suddenly,2 K. 7, 6, 7. none pursuing, and to loose the vi∣ctory, ea and what els they had run∣ning away as for their lives. Ru∣mours of falshod are often vttered of the enemy o worke feare, and so to dant mns spirits which rumours therefore are not to be beleeued. These are those sinnfull evills, which principally in an army are to be suppressed and punished, yet in proceeding against offenders, as need must be taken of to much levi∣tie, so also beware of too great seve∣ritie. Luculus vndid himselfe by this and as forsaken of his souldi∣ers, who went to Pompey, to whom they prooued most faithfull and con∣stant. Rigour may rule, but gaining affection by lemency causeth true obedience, yet offenders must not goe vnpunished. For by suppressing disorders, God is honoured, the Army strengthned, the enemies dis∣heartned,
neighbours and friends secured, and so encouraged to abide constant; but vvhere sin doth reigne & disorders suffered, there all things fall out cleane contrary, misery and want will follow, to their ruine and overthrow: God will bee against them, and friends will abandon them as vnvvorthy of aide.
CHAP. XVI. Of a convenient armie, and of necessaries prepared a∣forehand to main∣taine the same. VEgetius exhorteth those that purpose to begin wars care∣fullyLi. 3▪ ca. 3. to weigh and consider their store and charges: And prouision is to be made long before: for in action then to prouide will
be too late. The Kings of Iudah made2 Ch 14 8▪ & 17 2: & 26. in the dayes of peace great preparati∣on for warre, and had souldiers in readinesse to withstand sudden inva∣sis. As may be seene n the reigne of Asa, Iehosophat, Vzzih, and other Kings. It is the saying of one, That Long a praeparatio belli celerm facit vi∣ctoriam, Long preparation by good deliberation maketh qucke dispatch in the execution, and speedily getteth the vitory. In going to warre, first the num∣berNum. 31. 3▪ . Ios. 8. 1. convenient to be employed, is to be considered of: both for horse and foot, for powers both by sea and land. The number is vncertaine; somtimes Moses will appoint but twelve thou∣sand, the least number sent foorth to speed well; sometime Iosua must take all the strong men of warre to fight with the enemy as need is, so must be the number. The heathen in former times had ever mighty hosts, some hundred thousands: the Midianites, PhilistimsIos. 10. & 11. 4. Canaanites, Ethiopians, Holphernes host was an hundred and seventie
thousand, and twelve thousand Ar∣cersIudg. 6. 5. & 7. 2. 2 Chro. 14 Luk. 14. 31 on horsebacke: now according to the power of the Enemy, so must we goe out against him, if we bee a∣ble, as Christ reacheth in his pa∣rable. To subdue enemies it is ever very necessary to have a full army if wee looke for victory: for Touching a handfull or small num∣ber 3 or 4000 these doe rather injury themselves then the enemy, they ra∣ther kindle and nourish warre, then end it; and doe rather hearten the e∣nemy, then strike him with feare: anger him, then hurt him. What got Israel vnadvisedly by sending a small number 2 or 3000 against Ai? It was but losse to themselves, and encou∣ragement to the Enemy. The Lacede∣monians could do no good against the Athnians as long as their numbersThuci. 1. were smal, but did hurt to themselves. But now for a full power, and to vse our best strength to obtaine the victo∣ry many reasons may perswade. 1. God taught Iosua to doe; when his small number was overthrowne,
he commanded him to take all the men of warre.Ios. 8. . Tucid . 2. The heathen Oracle consulted with, by the Lacedemonians, before the Peloponensian warre, to know by what meanes they might best pre∣vaile, gave this answer, that the meanes to overcome was to vse their full strength. 3. Thus ever did Sal and also Da∣vid, and other Kings in Israel and Iu∣dah: when they went against an ene∣my,1 Sam. 11 8. & 15. 4. 2 Sam. 10. 7. they led out mighty forces, Saul against the Amalekies conducted an host of 310000: David sent against the Ammonites all the host of migh∣ty men, which were many thou∣sands. 4. The Romans in their warres sent forth strong Armies against their enemies 50 thousand, or 24 thousand the least, 15000, or 12000, as their stories shew. The benefit of a strong Army is great, it striketh feare where it com∣meth, and if not presently resisted, it enricheth it selfe with spoyles; if it get the victory, it will maintaine
it selfe vpon the enemy, and abide without feare. Caesar maintained his warres in France vpon the French nine yeares; Hannibal his Army vp∣on Italy sixteene yeares; Scipio his host vpon Spaine all the time of his stay; a strong power prevailing gets confederates, to giue ayde and to help with supplyes; yea through feare it gaineth from the enemy, many fal∣ling off from him to the strongest side as the Kings which were servants to Hadarezer did, when Davi over∣came2 Sam. 10, 19. his host. One victory got with a full army is the winning almost of a Country. Caesars victory at Alexia, drew almost all France to him: The French by one victory recovered the Kingdome of Naples. Its necessary therefore to put to our strength in warre, if we hope to prevaile, and not daly with our Enemy, to our owne hurt: but yet we must avoide two evils. 1. Not to presume of our great strength against a weake enemy, as Benhadad the king of Syria, and his1 K. 0 32. Kings with him did, when he
came against Ahab: which great host of his was overthrowne; so was Ze∣rah with his ten hundred thousand.2 Ch. 14. Anno 1588  Mach. 3 16. And how soone was the Armado of Spaine called invincible, scattered and brought to naught here in our coasts? For victory standeth not in the multi∣tude of an host, but strength commeth from heaven. 2. Not vtterly to despaire if we be inforced to fight with a small po∣wer against a proud boasting enemy▪ For in such cases God strangely gi∣veth victory, as shall be declared, Chap. 18. Thus much for the num∣ber. Now when an Army of men, for the number is resolved vpon, necessaries must be provided answe∣rably thereto. I. There must be great store of armes▪ such of Zebuun, Reub God,1 Ch. 12. 33. 37. 2 Ch 26. 14. and Manisses, as came to helpe Da∣vid, were furnished with all instru∣ments of warre for battle. King z∣za provided for his men of warre throughout their hosts weapons of warr, such as were then vsed, spears,
shields, bowes, slings, and other Armes. Gorgius host was strong and well harnessed, as the story relateth. Scipio going into Africke against the1 Mac. 4. 7 Liv. 29. Carthaginians any made exceeding proui∣sion of Armes. II. Provision of victuals, Of thisIud. 20. 10 the Israelites had care, before they warred vpon Gibeah; HolophernesIud. 2. 17, 18. his great host had plenty of victuals, and carriages for all provision; that they might not want, for, indeede hungry bellies can neither fight, nor observe order. Saul by his rash re∣straining of his Armie from taking food, made them to faint, and after through hunger to flye vpon the1 am 14. 24, 30, 32, 33. spoyle, and by eating bloud, to sinne against God, Fames severior est bell, Hunger is more sharpe then the sword. Alasse, how can they have courage, that pine with hunger? How can they stand against an ene∣my, that want strength to goe, vp∣right? Good leaders should take to2 K. 3. 9, 10 heart the distresse of their companie in such a case, as even Idolatrous le∣horam
did. But some are like the1. Sam. 30. 13. Amaleke, who left his poore weak Egyptian servant to helpe himselfe, or to dye for hunger. Alas what ser∣vice can poore hunger-starved soul∣diours doe? or how can they bee made obedient when belly hath noBel. Gal: Liv. 29 eares? Therefore famous Generals have ever seene to this. Caesar would not once moove towards the Enemie, before hee had provi∣sion. Scipio landing in Afrike, had his store-houses filled with provisi∣on. Cyrus in his expedition againstXenoh. ex. Cy 1. his brother had, besides his ordina∣rie Carts, foure hundred Waggons, loaden with victuals, not to be spent, but in time of necessitie. Where pro∣vision is not to prevnt famine, there the host is overcome without dint of the sword: To have victuals, bring store, be moderate from the first day in the vse, give free & safe pa∣sage to Marchants and Victuallers to bring, and make ready payment; what is gotten from the Enemy, store it vp, procure from confede∣rates
fauour o make supply in this kind; and to summon, as a strong Army goeth along the Townes and Villages to bring in victualls and pro∣vision, vnlesse they would be ruina∣ted. III. There must be sufficient mo∣ney to helpe every way all wants; mo∣ney is the sinewes of warre. Holo∣phernes with plenty of food, had veryIudeth 2. 8 2 Mac. 3. 28 much gold and silver. King Antichs opened his treasure, and gaue his soul∣diers pay for a yeare; Souldiers well payed have the better courage; coun∣cell and money prevaile where force cannot effect. By gold Tacius the Captaine of the Sabines got the Capi∣toll of Rome, Asdrubal with money Celtberans from the Romans. Mony may hire souldiers, buy victuals, and supply what is wanting for the mostHow to make pro∣vision for money, reade Dr. Sutchss his booke of war., ca. 2. pa. 18. part; therefoer wise warriers were not in this carelesse, the Carthaginians had in their new Carthage in Spaine a treasure to serve for the wars there. Caesar had for his store in Noviodu∣num, For his warres in France. But though there be store of mony,
yet must the Generall see to it, that poore souldiers be paid, the fraud in Officers must be prevented, and se∣verely punished; money is not to be turned into provand, of which deceitSee Sr. Ih Smith pre∣face to hi booke o this cou∣senage. Liv. 28. & 2 a skilfull Commander hath written at large. Neither should Captaines be paymasters to souldiers, least they be, as they have beene notoriously▪ abu∣sed, Scipio in Spaine paid his souldiers man by man; Porsena Commander of the Hetruscians stood by while every souldier tooke his owne pay, and so were they such that every one had his due; see what evils haue hapned by non-payment, or slacke paying ofPa. 74. ch. 4. part. 9. souldiers in Dr. Sutcliffe his booke.
CHAPTER. XVII. Of meanes abroad to be v∣sed before the warres begin. ON Prince, nor Nation, may presume vpon their owne strength, worth and power; The Kings of olde time making warre, had beside their owne, ayde from o∣there,Gen. 14. 1: 24. and had confederates ioyning with them: Chadelaomer had Kings with him: Abraham also had Aner, Eschal, and Mamre, assistants with
him in his warre. The Kings of Ca∣naan did helpe one another; and the Ammonite procured helpe of the Sy∣rians to fight against David. The Sy∣racusansIos. 10. 3. & 11. 1. 2 Sam. 10. 6: Thucid 5. by the helpe of the Spartans withstood the Athentans. Yea, the Romans themselves sought for helpe of others against Philip of Maced∣nia. But here let not an Amaziah take2 Ch. 25. ayde of Idolatrous Israel, least they be his ruine; nor let a Iehosophat help an2 Ch. 19. 2. Ahab for it pleaseth not God; second∣ly, let not wise men rest vpon the helpe of Confederates, but have ever∣more of their owne, both to resist the enemy, and command ayders▪ as Tullius Hostilius had; for confederates may prooue Cowards and false▪ the Switzers which came to ayde Lewis Forze, sold him at Navarra into the hands of Lewis the twelfth.Gica. Next is to make peace with such as may be iniurious, when we goe to warre with others. Israel in their hot warre against the Philistis, had Peace with the Ammonites.
This is necessary, least while wee set vpon one, we be invaded by ano∣ther,1 Sam. 7. 14 Esa. 37 9. as it happened to Senacherb, who whilest he invaded Iudah, had Tirhkah king of Ethopi, com∣ming foorth to make warre with him. The third thing is, to entertaine intelligence from the Enemies friends and subiects, to gaine them from them, to cause division betweene them. The Romans before they tran∣sported their forces into Africke, they assured themselves of the Kings of Numidia. Before they set vpon Philip of Macedonia, they caused a revolt of many from him The disioyning of the hearts of such as be at one with the e∣nemie, is a great weakning of his po∣wer, and a way more easily to get the victory. To make a rebellion, and to cause civill warres, is the ruining of the E∣nemies state, and a ready passage to attaine our owne purposes; for they that stand for their owne safetie at home, cannot well agree to resist the attempts of forreigne powers. They
may like the seditious Captaines in Ierusalem ioyne together to fight a∣gainst the Romans, but by slaying af∣terwards one another the Enemy shal at length prevaile, and they come to destruction.
CHAPTER. XIX. Of the religious preparation before the Armie march. WHen the Host is prepared and ready to march forward, be∣fore it be mo∣ved in former mer times; a∣mong Gods people these things were observed and done. I. There was a divine exhortation, or as we call it, a sermon appointed by God before they went forth, to bee
preached to them by an ordinaryDeut 20. 2, 3, 4. 2 Ch. 20. 14 & 13. 12. 2 K. 3. 11. Iud. 4. Teacher; sometime they had extra∣ordinary men raised vp to encourage them. The Priests goe into the warrs, and sounded Trumpets, Elesha follo∣wed the Campe of the three Kings, going against Moab. And Deborah a Prophetesse went downe with Ba∣rak. It's no question but Ministers may go into the wars, its necessary to have men of good gifts to preach▪ to souldiers, but they must be good and conscionable to give example, zealous in reprooving, and gratious in pray∣er, that as Moses did, while the other▪ fight they may pray, and helpe for∣wardExo. 17. the victory. If such were in a Campe and reverenced, the Armie would prosper the better. Abiiah ga∣thered2 Ch. 13. 12. courage by having the Lords Priests with him when he set the bat∣le in aray against the Idolater Irob∣am. The prayer and sacrifice of Sa∣muel2. Sam. 7. 9 furthered Israelites against the Philistims. The French had an Arch∣bishop in their host when they fought with King Henry the fifth. The Spa∣iards have their Priests with them,
and doe punish those that in word or deed doe offer them iniury. Why should our Armies goe forth with∣out good Teachers. King Henry the first had with him Priests whom he commaunded to pray whilest hee fought the glorious battle at Agen-Court. II. The people of God in former times humbled themselves, not those onely which were at home, but the host of men which went out into the warres, they fasted, they prayed, and sought the Lord with teares, offering Sacrifices to God, and asked counsell of the Lord before, so did the Isa∣lites going against▪ Bemin. So didIud. 20. 18 23. 26. 1 Sam. 7. 8 they in the dayes of Samuel, whom they intreated to pray earnestly for them. I so did Iehosophat when hee went out against his enemies. In like2 Mach 3. 44, 47, 50 sort did Iudas and his people with him, they fasted, read holy Scriptures, and prayed fervently vnto the Lord for helpe. King Henry the fift before the battle of Agen-court with great devotion made prayers and supplica∣tions with his Priests and people▪ vn∣to
God and prospered. For what is it for vs to pray for those who in the meane space neglect prayer, despise it, and preaching, and give themselves instead of fasting and humbling them∣selves, to swearing, drinking, and whoring, filching, and other villa∣nies, by which they call for venge∣ance against themselves? The Empe∣rour Oho when he was to have a set battle with the Hungarians, proclai∣med a fast, and commanded to call vp∣on the name of God before, that God might goe with them. The Romans before they began warre sacrificed to their gods, and prayed for successe;Liv. 22. 31▪ as is evident in their attempts, against Hannibl, and in their warres against▪ Philip of Macedonia and Antiochus;Xenop: i exped: Cyr: Cc. de nat: deorum 3. Liv. 29. yea they imputed their ill successe to the neglect and contempt of Religion not seeking to appease the wrath of the gods and to winne their favour before. Scipi going against the Car∣thaginians, made a prayer for successe, expressed in Livie, Archidamus brin∣ging his army before Pltea began with sacrifices crave helpe of the
gods. Among the Lacedemonians,Tucid 2. Plutarch. when their King went to ioyne bat∣tle, he first offered sacrifice. Isaac Bassa going against Scanderbeg would not moove forward, before hee had made his prayer to God for successe. All which condemneth the Atheisti∣call Commanders and souldiers which in these dayes dare contemne these religious duties which are to be performed vnto the Lord God of hosts. III. They had a strict charge to keepe themselues then from every thing: and withall to put away wic∣kednesse,Deu. 23. 9. 1 Sa. 7. 3, 4 Ios. 7. especially Idols, and to pu∣nish oule offenders as Iosua▪ did A∣chan, before he went the second time against the Enemy, and to separate I∣dolaters2 Ch. 28. 7, 8. from them, whom God ha¦teth. Salomon telleth vs, that wise∣dome is better then weapons of war, but, saith he, one sinner destroyeth much good; If wisedome ond wea∣pons cannot save where there is but one vile and notorious ill liver, how shall we imagine that they shall pros∣per, where a most there are an whole
host of them? Some are swearers, some beastly drunkards, some filthie whoremasters; and not a few con∣temners of Religion; and many of them the scumme and out casts of Pa∣rishes: How can we expect God to be with them? or for vs, by them without reformation? That worthy Scipio in going to give battle to the Numantines abandoned all Bawdes, Whores, Coufeners, Coggers, Divi∣ners, and Figure-flingers, Should the Heathen cleanse their hosts of such wicked ones, and shall Christians make no conscience hereof? IV. They laboured for faith and confidence in God, Iehosophat pressed2 Ch. 20. 20. & 14. 11. & 13. 18. 1. Ch. 5. 20 this hard vpon the people, when they went forward: Asa had his eyes vp∣on God, and its said the victory was given to Abiiah and his armie, be∣cause they relyed vpon the Lord. This confidence in God delighteth him▪ and they shall prosper that trust in him. To rest vpon any meanes is vaine; though the best is to be vsed, and not neglected; For, though a horse bee
prepared for battle, yet is he a vainePro. 21. 31 thing for safetie, neither is a King sa∣ved by the multitude of an host, norPsa. 33. 17 Psa. 33 16. the mighty delivered by much strength: Ieroboam with his 800 thou∣sand lost the battle. The Persian Xer∣xes, who had his tenne hundred thou∣sand by land, and ten hundred thou∣sand ships by sea▪ an incredible host, yet was vanquished and overthrown. Amurah the Turke, comming with sevenscore thousand against the poore Prince Scanderbeg, was wearyed in warring, dyed in the voyage, and so the army returned with shame; A great King saith Salomon, may comeEccles. 9. 14, 15. against a little City, and not be able to winne it, though few be in it, being governed by the wisedome of a wise man, though but poore. Its folly ther∣fore to relye vpon strength and mul∣titude of men, but vpon God alone in the vse of all lawfull meanes. Neither though their strength was small, and their power weake, did they faint, when they had warrant from God to fight. For the Lords people know, that God can deliver,
and safety is from him. It is nothingPro. 21. 31 2 Ch. 14. 11. 1 Sa. 14. 6. 1 Ch. 25. 8. 3. 18. Lev. 26. 37. Psa 89: 43 1 Sa 13. 5. & 14 13: Iud. 14, 15 Iud 7. 12. & 8. 10. with him to helpe, either with many, or with few which haue no power. He it is that hath power to helpe, or to cast downe, to make to stand in battle, or to flye and runne away. One Sampson shall beat downe a thousand sometime; By two, Ionathan and his Armour-bearer, the Lord can dismay an host of 30 thousand Charets, 6000 horsemen, and innumerable foot. By 300 Gideon that godly valiant man, he can affright a huge multitude of which there were slaine on hundred & twen∣ty thousand with their Kings in one day. By 318. men he gave Abraham and his confederates victory overGen. 14. foure Kings and their Armies, who before were conquerours over five o∣ther Kings and their hosts. By 7000 conducted by a wicked Ahab, he put to flight the host of Benhadad with1 K: 20. Num 2. 5. 49. 32. Kings. By 12000 he made Israel to subdue the Midianites, to ay five Kings, to take prisoners 32000 per∣sons, the prey and spoyle of 72000 beeves, 61000 Asses, and of sheepe 675000, and all his glorious victory
obtained without the losse of oneWarres of the Iewes. man. The Iewes fighting with Cast¦us the Roman, slew of his host 516 horse, and 27. thousand foot, and  but 22 persons of their owne.  least men might thinke these to ell rare and extraordinary, and not th like helpe now from God to be expe∣pected; let such consider of after vi∣ctories given of God. For though some of these were miraculous, yet other some of them were such, as God in after times hath shewed the2 Mach. 8. 20. like. Iudas Machabeus with 8000, destroyed an hundred and twentie thousand; at another time with tenne thousand men he vanquished one ∣sias with sixty thousand chosen foot: and five thousand horse. The like vi∣ctories God by his ayde and provi∣dence hath given to the Heathen. Milciades the Noble Captaine of1 Mac. 4. 28. 29. the Athenians with 11 thousand o∣vercame above an hundred thousand horse and foot, sent by Darius, son of Hisdaspis to invade Grecia, Lernidas with an handfull of Lacedemonians slew twenty thousand Persians. Great
Alexander with an Army of thirtie two thousand, conquered the world, and subdued mighty Opposers. A∣mong Christians incredible victories have beene hotten by the lesser num∣ber; Charles Martell father to King Pippin fought with a very few against foure hundred thousand Saracens, of which hee slew three hundred and seuentie thousand. Zissa that everla∣stingly renowned Bohemian, in ele∣ven set battles, and blind in three of them, went away victorer over all the powers that the Emperour ever made against him. But to speake of our owne, and almost vnmatchable victories in France; King Henry the fift with 15000 men at Agencourt, overcame the whole power of France an army of 52000, and slew one Arch∣bishop, eight Earles, twenty sixe Ba∣rons, fifteene thousand Knights, and above ten thousand others, with the losse of onely sixe hundred on our side, and onely two of great note the Duke of Yorke, and the Earle of Suf∣folke. Great and glorious was the vi∣ctory gotten at Poictyers by Edward
the blake Prince, Edward the third his sonne, who with eight thousand wearied souldiers vanquished King Iohn of France, whom he tooke pri∣soner, and scattered his Armie of 40 thousand, of which tenne thousand were slaine: in which victory were taken prisoners besides the King, Philip his sonne, seventie Earles, fifty Barons, twelve thousand Gentlemen, so they tooke and slew more, then they were themselves. The battle at Cresy was wonderfull; for there were but of English commanded by King Edward himselfe one thousand, one hundred and eightie, yet preuailed they against the French King and the King of Bohemia, who had an host of seventy thousand, in which were slaine the King of Bohemia, eleven Princes, eightie Barons one hundred ane twenty Knights, and thirty thou∣sand common souldiers. So as wee may see how that glorious victories haue beene obtained by handfulls of men in comparison of the conquered. When God will have men to pre∣vaile, neither wisedome, nor counsell
nor vnderstanding can be against his will, no nor power be it never so great; For many are the devicesProv. 19. 21 of man; but the councell of the Lord, that shall stand; as hee hath thought so shall it come to passe, and as he hath purposed, as the ProphetEsay 14. 24 speaketh, so shall it be. Therefore let all the care be to haue God on our side; for if he be with vs who can be powerfull against vs? Surely none. Xenophon that worthyXenoph. exp. Cyr. 3. Philosopher, and noble Captain be∣ing but a heathen when his men were in distresse encouraged them thus, willing them to put confi∣dence in God; for that (saith he) he was able to saue a few out of the hands of many, in what danger so∣ever they were; he can strike feare2 K 7. Iud. 7. 22. 1 Sa. 14 20 2 Cro 20. 23. & 32. 21. suddenly into the hearts of almost Conquerours, and make them run away and none pursuing them, as he did the Syrians; he can set the sword vpon the necke of one ano∣ther, and cause them to kill one a∣nother; as he did the Philistims, Mi∣dianites, and the armies of three
Kings; he can send an Angell to kill an host of mighty men of va∣lour, even an hundred and foure∣score & fiue thousand in one night▪ In a word, he can doe what he will in Heaven and in Earth. Therefore let vs thus prepare to meet him, to make him our Captaine, our Guide and Commander, then shall we ae good successe, and prosper, as others haue done.
CHAP. XIX. Of laying good grounds afore∣hand to speede well, and of a peaceable and a lawfull proceeding against an Enemie. THere is nothing more desired in making war then to prosper in the enterprise: This all wish, and with∣out some hope of his, who would adventure to enter battell? Therefore men should study aboue all other, this point chiefly.
Now to speede well the way is, I. To hearken to Gods voice, and serue him. For, saith the Lord, OhPsal. that my people had hearkened vnto mee, and Israel had walked in my wayes, (marke now what would haue folowed) I should soone haue sub∣dued their Enemies, and turned my hand against their Adversries. II. To haue him with vs, and to2 Cro. 13 12. fight for vs; Abijah said, beholde, God himselfe is with vs for our Cap∣taine: And it was Hezekiah his com∣fort,2 Cro. 32. 8 with vs is the Lord our God to help vs, and to fight our battells;Exo. 14. 14 Feare not, stand still, saith Moses to Israel; and why? For the Lord, saithDeut. 20 4 he, shall fight for you: He goeth with you against your enemies to saue you: when God went out before Da∣vid against the Philistims he smote their host and subdued them. Oh but it will be demanded, How Cro. 14. 23 36. may we haue God with vs, to fight for vs, and giue vs victory? Surely if 1. the warre be of God,  and warrantable: in this warre he2 Cro. 5. 20. helped the Reubenites, and other
Tribes, and cast downe their ene∣mies. 2. That it be taken in hand with good advise, and be establishedPro: 20: 18 by counsell. 3. That such a holy pre∣paration be made, and such duties performed, as before is set downe in the last chapter; for such prospered. 4. That they rest vpon God, trust in him, relye vpon him, and goe out in1 Cro: 5: 20 2 Cro: 14. 11. & 16. 8 & 13. Heb: 11. 33 his name against the enemie; for who ever trusted in God and were confounded? Its said that by faith the valiant subdued Kindomes; So much is ascribed to confidence in God. To this, and for resting vpon God the Scripture ascribeth the happy successe of Asa, of Abijah, of the Reubenites, and other, against their many and mighty Enemies. But if men will needs goe to war, and God not with them, the warre vnjust, the attempt rash, as in the Is∣raelites,Deut: 1. 42 in Amaziah, yea and in losi∣as; the wicked sonnes of Eli in the2 Cro: 25. & 35. host, drunken, whoring, profane Priest, sacrilegious Achan vnpuni∣shed for his sacriledge; and no pious preparation vnto so weighty a work,
wherein so many thousand liues doe lye at the stake; But open propha∣nesse, basting of our owne strength, vaunting of our valour, resting on the Generals wisdome, the courage of Captaines, disesteeme of the Ene∣my, as Benhadad did of Ahabs army; to goe poorely provided with small provision, with a Company of raw and vnexperienced fellowes, but ripe enough in wickednesse, without or∣der, without government, what good successe can be looked for? How can God goe out with such rebels a∣gainst him, seeing he hateth iniqui∣ty, and abhorreth presumptuous Transgrellours. If good grounds be laid as afore∣named, then may an host goe for∣ward with good courage; but yet before the force of Armes and hosti∣lity be shewed, God (who hteth vn∣necessary bloudshed, and abhorreth men of violence) commanded IsraelPs. 5. 6. Deut 20. 10 2 Sam. 10. 18, 19. to offer peace first; for it may be the matter may be ended without bloudshed: The Israelites before they went against  and Beniamin, sent to
haue the sonnes of Belial delivered to them to be punished, if they could haue obtained it. Iephtah before the warre began sent messengers againeIud: 20. 12 13. Iud: 11. and againe to the King of the Am∣monites to prevent bloudshed, if it could haue beene prevented. In ancient time those that first be∣gan warre vsed to speake before they did strike, and shewed the cause of1 Mach: 6, 48. their taking vp armes. Machabeus desired passage through Echron first. Caesar minding to assaile Ariovistus,Lib. de Bel∣lo Gal. 1. sent him a defiance aforehand; the Lord himselfe ineading to punish rebellious mankinde, alludeth to this course, and acquainteth them with his determination, to come against them; and therefore he speaketh as a man of warre, commanding to blow the Cornet in Gibeah, and theHosea 5. 8. Trumpet in Ramah, and to cry a∣loud at Bethaven. Because the AExod. 17. 8 malekites came stealing vpon Israel, to fight with them, the Lord reven∣gedDeut: 25. 17, 18. it severely vpon them, and would haue a booke of remembrance writ∣ten
against them, to haue vvarre with them for ever. Its wisedome to demaund right, and to propound conelusions of peace, with a prepared host. Thus proceeded Israel against Beniamin, & Ieptah against Ammon; for if so, peace take place, it is well, if not, the party wilfull may consider what he cer∣tainely may expect: yet in honestly intending peace, take heede of cir∣cumvention, in dealing with a dis∣honest and subtill Adversary, who vnder shewes of treaties of peace in∣tendeth nothing lesse, as did Scipio with Syphax, and Metellus with iu∣gurth,Liv. 29. and the false hearted SpaniardSalust. with the vpright minded Queene E∣lizabeth. By his treaties hee onely sought to make her secure, and to distrust nothing, till he had sudden∣ly invaded her land; He that eateth with such a divell had neede of a long spoone: while plaine-meaning Abiiah was speaking honestly to Ie∣roboam, he craftily laid an Ambush in the meane space, for to overthrow
him; whence note, that an idola∣trous Politician, is a very Machivili∣an, and not to be trusted. He that vpon policie frameth his religion, and maketh that a cloake, for get∣ting and keeping an earthly state, he is no more to be trusted then a divell.
CHAPTER. XX. Of marching forward and encamping. WHen peaceable meanes cannot prevaile, but that the cause must needes be tryed by the dint of sword, then must be considered and care had of mar∣ching on. The Lord himselfe set an order in going forward▪ and in mar∣ching to his people: first, he him∣selfe went before them in a cloud by day, and a pillar of fire by night, toExo: 13. 21 leade their way: but when the ene∣my with a mighty host was behinde them, then the Lord got himselfe betweene his people and the Egyp∣tians,
to overthrow them; for as a Generall he cared for the safety of his Army which he had brought out ofExo. 14. 19 24. Deu. 20. 9. Num. 2. 34 with verse 2 Num. 2. 17. Ioel 2. 7, 8. Chro: 12. 33. 3. 5. See the margin. Deut. 25. 18. Egypt with a powerful hand. 2. He ap∣pointed that Captains chosen should leade the people. 3. That the peo∣ple should set forward every one af∣ter their families according to the houses of their fathers with the En∣signe thereof, the clod being taken vp. 4. Before they marched the trum pets sounded, and in marching they kept ranke, observing order; the weakest went hindermost. The Heathen also did see to this: They could march every one in his way, not breaking rankes, not thrusting one another, but every one walking in his path; so they kept an equall distance from one another; If they be too nere they are trouble some to themselues that they cannot vse their weapons; if too far asunder they make way for the Enemy to breake in vpon them; disorderly marching may not be endured. Scipio correctedFlor exit▪ Liv. 58. & 34. such as hee espied out of ranke; so did Cato, who would strike them
with his leading staffe, and comman∣ded the Captaines to chastise them. In going on, spies were wont to be sent forth before, to discover the1 Sam: 3. 22, 23. Enemie; This did Saul when he went against David; Iosa sent spies intoIos: 2. 1. 9. the land before him to know how the people were affected. For to heare of feare and terrour in the Ene∣mie is a great heartening to goe for∣ward. This whetted on Godeon to setIud: 7, 10, 1, 13 vpon the Midianites, and much strengthened his heart. This sen∣ding forth or going to learne some∣what from the enemie, was comman∣ded Gideon by God himselfe. So Da∣vid sent out spies to vnderstand what Sa: 26. 4 1 Mach: 5: 38: & 12: 20 Saul did. And Machabeus sent spies into the host of the Enemies, and so did Ionathan. Its wisedome to haue some with the Enemy to discouer his purposes and designements, if it may be, as David had Hushai with Abso∣lom, and men secretly in Ierusalem to bring him newes. Gabrias the Athe∣nianPluta. Apo∣theg: Liv: 122 Captaine said, that he deserved no then me of a Generall, that vn∣derstood not the estate of his Ene∣mies.
Livie reporteth that Hannibal vnderstood what was done in the E∣nemies Campe, as well as they, partly by espialls sent into the Campe, and partly by his owne diligence. God2 K. 6. 9. himselfe sometime by his Prophet did extraordinarily reveale the secret counsel of the Syrian vnto the King of Israel to prevent mischiefes. From God and man Generals are taught to learne, and see, and vnderstand what their Enemies doe. When they march and doe secure themselues from ambushments, and dangerous passages, they must consi∣der2 K 6. 8. well where to encamp; as the Sy∣rian King did warring with Israel. The encamping of Israel by the Lords direction was fouresquare; and the Tabernacle in the midst with PriestsNum: 2. and Levites to attend their office. There were foure standards pitched; the first of Iudah Eastward, the second▪ of Reuben Southward, the third of E∣phraim Westward, and the fourth of Dan Northward. To every of these belonged two Tribes; so as three Tribes was vnder one standard, and
the whole host of all three numbred together; Then were there ensignes, which were pitched also by the stan∣dards, which were the ensignes of their Fathers houses: In marchingNum: 10. 5, 6, 14, 18 22, 25. they kept this order: 1. the East side went forward, and then the South∣side, then the West, and then the North; before all which went the Arke, to search out a resting place for them; and when if set forward, or rested, a holy speech was vttered by Moses either time; this was theNum: 10 33. 36. manner of encamping, and marching in the wildernesse. But they had also another kinde and forme of entronching which was round, as appeareth by the manner of speech according to Innius and Tremelius translation; David is said Sa: 17. 20 to come, ambitu plaustrorum: so as∣they lay it may seeme intrenched round with carts. They had a care to lodge safely by intrenching them∣selues. Gorgias campe was strong2 Mach. 4. . compassed about with expere horse∣men. This Caesar had speciall care of, he would not neglect this worke at
any hand, nor bee deterred by hisBel. Gal. 2. Civ. 1. Liv. 27. enemies, sending to offer battell to hinder the same. Fulvius the Pro∣consul neglecting this was sudden∣ly set vpon by Hannibal, and o∣verthrowne and all his company. So was Lodwike Nassa brother to the Prince of Orange slaine, and mostAnno 1568 of his company, through idlenesse, and want of skill withall, to en∣trench well themselues. In Israel the Generall was ever in the Camp. Saul was alwayes in the Campe; so was Moses, and Iosua, Ioab in the2 Sam: 11 11. 1 Mach. 4. 4. host, and Gorgias in his Campe. Heroicall hearts should disdaine to follow pleasure, though lawfull, when they should be in the field; this contempt of pleasure was in Vriah, one of Dauids Worthies, because the General and the host lay in their Tents. They did encampe in as conveni∣entNum: 21. Exod: 15. 27. & 16. 12. 15 1 Sa: 29.  Iud. 7. 1. places as they could, by wells of water, and tres, as Israelites did, and as did the Philistims by a fountaine;  by the well of Harad; and Timotheus the wicked Heathen, and
Ionathan at the water of Gennesar,1 Mach: 5. 37. & 11. 67. Exod: 18. 6 & 19. 2. 1 Sa: 26. 3. & 28 4. & 31. 1. Nu: 21. 12. & 22. 1. Deut: 10 7 Iudg: 6: 33. & 7. 8. 1 Chro: 11. 15: vpon or by a hill or mountaine, as Moses with Israel did; and Saul vpon Hachilah, and on Mount Gilboah. Also in vallies and plaines, as Israe∣lites did in the valley of Zared, and in the plaines of Moab neere Ior∣dan: and in Iothah a land of rivers of water. The host of Midian pitch∣ed in the valley of Iezreel, and the Philistims in the valley of Rephaim, which a strong host may dare to doe. Wheresoever they encamped, theyIud: 7. 8 2 K: 7, 7 1 Mach. 9: 2 & 4. 20 Iudg: 7, 11 2 K: 7: 8: 10 1 Mach: 4: 23 had their tents to lye in, every one had his tent; not onely Israelites in their owne land, but also the Heathen: so had the Syrians, and Demtrius host vnder Bachides and the lewd Aleimus and others. And in these tents they lay by rankes▪ by which they tyed their horses and Asses, and in which they laid vp their victualls, treasure, and such things as they had; For in them were found golde, silver, rai∣ment, blue, silke, purple and great riches.
Before they remooved there wasIos: 1. 10, 11. & 3: 2, 3, 4 Iud: 7: 19 1 Mach: 12 27. warning given throughout the whole host, and it was tolde them what they should doe. Till they remooved they set diligent watch, and carefully keepe it, especially when they thought an enemie ready to set vp∣on them.
CHAPTER. XXI. Of ordering an host in drawing neere to the Enemie, and what is else to bee done, and considered of be∣fore the comming of the battell. DAvid sending out an Army to subdue his proud rebellious son Absolom, divided the whole host into 3.2 Sa. 18. 2. parts, and set princi∣pall Commanders over the same. Ioab over one, Abishai over the other, and Ittai over the third. So did Iudas di∣vide
his Army into three Companies1 Mach 5. 33. 2 Mach: 8. 21. and sometimes into foure parts. A∣gainst Cendebeus, he divided his men, and set his horse in the midst of the foote; because the Enemies horse were very many. Bachides in his bat∣tell against Iudas, divided his horse into two troupes, and put his slingersCa. 16. 7. and Archers before the host, and in the foreward were all the mighty men, and Bachides himselfe in the right wing. Wise and experienced1 Mach: 9. 11, 12. Commanders, know how to order and embattaile their men. The Ene∣my, the place; the occasion offered are in this matter seriously to bee weighed; Hanuibal ordered his Ar∣my, some time one way, and some∣timeLiv: 30. & 31. & 23. 29. another as reason led him; And so did the Romanes, Caesar and others. Saul set his battaile in aray against the Philistims, but the manner how is not et dovvne.1 Sa  7. 2. 23. Before the joyning of battell fore∣sight and great vvisedome is requi∣red. For 1. here lyeth at stake the pre∣cious liues of men. 2. These  er∣rour may bring great damage. 3. The
due commendarions of all former preparations, deliberations, and wa∣ry proceedings, is here reteined or lost. 4. The victory procureth re∣nowne, and causeth triumph and ioy. 5. But the overthrow bringeth sor∣row, disgrace, and the prisoners taken captiue, to be at their enemies will; the very conceit whereof in some, hath beene so contrary to their minds, as they rather haue desired death then to fall into an enemies hand. This made Saul to kill him∣selfe, which he did (saith Iosephus)In the wars of the Iews because he was a faint-hearted co∣ward. Ziri did burne his pallace o∣ver his owne head. And Razis acted2 Mach: 14. 42. 46. a desperate part vpon this ground. In Numantia, where 4000 souldiers, who held out 4 yeares against many thousand Romanes; yet wearied at length they resolved vpon a strange, and desperate end, which was to ga∣ther all their Armes, monies and goods together, and to set them on fire, and to burie themselues in the flame, that so Scipio might not haue any of them captiues to triumph o∣ver.
This maketh many stout cou∣rages in battell desperate, to fight like Lyons, and will not yeeld till the fatall wound come, and they be deprived of life. Great consideration therefore must be had before a Generall put all to hazard. 1. Of his owne number and strength, and then of his Enemies. 2. Of the quality and condition of his souldiers, whether young and raw, or old and experienced; for its not number, but valour and skill which chiefly prevaileth. 3. Of their fitnesse to fight, if it be after travell, when they be hungry, thirst, andLiv. 44. weary, perhaps against fresh, liuely, and a well prepared Enemie. Aemilius would not charge vponXenph: in exped. Cyr. Perseus in Macedonia, because of his souldiers vnfitnes by travell, though they desired to fight, vntill the next day. Clearchus would not set vpon his enemie, because he perceived his souldiers to bee saint and hungry. Therefore the Romanes before theyLiv: 28, 21 entred battell refreshed well their men with victualls, and rest, as Ves∣patian
did when he encamped a∣boutWarres of the Iewes. Iorpata where in Iosephus was. So Hannibal would haue his men dine well, to lye warme, and take rest before they fought with the Romanes at Trebia; Such common∣ly as haue fought when their Army was wearied with travell for want of est, or faint for food, haue mise∣rably perished. As did Asdrubals ar∣my at Metaurus, and so the GaulesHistoria de troubl. de Fra. l. 13. by the Romanes. Puigallre his men were cut off by La Nove, when he would needes set vpon the Prote∣stants after two dayes and nights continuall march. 4. The Generall is to consier, whether feare pos∣sesse the hearts of his souldiers: ItsLiv: 26. 37. a great hinderance to the victory: Its threatned as a punishment; fain∣ting of heart seized vpon the Canaa∣nites,Ios: 2. 9. 24. and gaue courage and assu∣rance of victory to Iosua. A trem∣bling through feare is a signe of de∣struction. We never reade of Sauls daunt of spirit, and fearfulnesse in1 Sa: 28. 5: all his many battells, but onely be∣fore the last, in which he and his
were overthrowne; then its said, that he was afraid, and his heart greatly trembled. Some feare may possesse the heart of a Commander sometime, but a sodaine and vnwonted feare in a General as Saul, is an ill token, as it was in one of the Kings of Hungary, when he put on his helmet to goe a∣gainst the great Turk: In which bat∣tell he lost his life, and the chiefe Ci∣ty of the Kingdome; A great feare over a whole host at the sight of the Enemy, foretelleth their overthrow, as it happened with the host of Ti∣motheus consisting of 120000 foote and 2500 horse at the sight of Iudas2 Mach: 12 20, 22. with a handfull: and as it hapned to the Army of Sigismund vpon which fell a panick feare, when Zisca was but comming neere. Till feare was removed Caesar would not set forward against Ariovistus and the Germanes. Iudas Machibeus would needs fight, when many of his com∣pany was in feare, and conveyed thē∣selues out of the host, but it cost him his life.1 Mach: 9. 6. 10, 18. Therefore to prevent or remoue
feare the Lord himselfe spake to his Generals, exhorting them not to feare to Moses, to Iosua, to Gideon, yea he sent his Prophet sometime to encou∣rageDeut: 3, 2 Ios: 1: 8. & 10: 8: & 11 6. Iud: 6: 4: 2 Cro: 20: Deut: 20: 3, 4: them; and appointed a sermon or set speech for the Priests to deliver before the host went out. Hence it was that Kings made Orations to their Captaines and Souldiers, and so did other Generals. Histories humane are full of them, and very many spe∣ches are recorded in the Bible, the scope whereof was to remoue feare, & to encourage them to fight. In Ex∣od. 14. 13, 14. is Moses speech. In Deu. 20. 2, 3, 4▪ the priests: in Iud. 3. 28. E∣huds: in chap. 5. 14. Deborahs: in chap. 7. 15, 18. Gideons: in 2 Sam. 10. 12. 1 Chro. 19. 13. Ioabs: in 2 Chro. 20. 15. 17. 20. Iehaziel and Iehosephats; in E∣sai. 7. 4. Esaiahs; in 2 Chro. 32. 7, 8. He∣zekiahs: in 1 Mach 3. 18. 22. & 4. 8. 11. & 2 Mach. 8. 16. & 9. 44. & 11. 7. & 13. 14. & 15. 8▪ 10. Iuas Machabeus his orations: in 1 Mach 9. 44. Ionathans: in ca. 13. 3. Simons. Out of which may be gathered good matter for a Gene∣ral to speake vnto his souldiers.
CHAP. XXII. Of many things to further the successe in the battell. THere are no a few things which may greatly helpe to gain the day, if men must fight: but if thou darest not, then wise∣ly prevent it, or if the enemy will flye, give him leave; King Iohn of France found the mischiefe in for∣cing the blacke Prince to fight; and so Charles the fift lost his armie by intercepting our Henry the fift. Hereupon Themistocles would
permit the Grecians to breake the bridge over Hollespent, which Xerxes caused to be made, least the enemy having a desire not to fight, might want a meanes to retire backe, and so bee forced to fight against their wills, which will make Cowards va∣liant. But if it be resolutely determined vpon to fight. I. Foresee the se∣cret traps layd, and ambushments, which may in the fight sodainely come vpon the souldiers when they1 Mach, 10 79. 80. & 11-68, 60: be fighting. This Ionathan foresaw, and so got the day, though at another time not wary enough, his host was scattered by an Ambush. Hannibal by such a subtletie overthrew the Romans at Trebia, and Thrasament bake, and was hereby much holpen in the battle at Cannas. II. Not to trust too much vpon Associates, least they faile as the Cel∣tiberians did the Scipios in Spaine, and the Albanes, Tullius Hostilius. The Swizers which came in the ayde of Lewis Sforza sold them to his ene∣my Lewis the twelfth: secondly, doe
not trust fugitives from the enemies; for two Spaniards in the warres a∣gainst the Venetians feigned them∣selves fugitives with intent to kill the Generall of the Venetians called Alvia, as before is noted. And 500 Numidian Horsemen at the first en∣counter betweene the Romans and Hannibal, left Hannibal and fled to the Romans, leaped from their hor∣ses, threw away their apparent wea∣pons and humbled themselves at the feet of the Romans, who gaue them credit and entertainment: but these not now mistrusted having weapons secretly, when the Romans were bu∣sie in fight, came vpon them behind vnexpected, and so mightily furthe∣red Hannibal to get the victory at Cannas. Lastly, trust not such as may iustly be suspected, the Lords of the Philistims had learned this, and therefore would at o hand ad∣mit1 Ch. 12. 19. of David, and his companie, to goe into battle with them against Israel. III. To strive for advantages as much as may be, as 1. of the place;
the Syrians imputed much to the K. 20. place, making a great difference be∣tweene the hils and the vallyes; our victory at Newport was much holden by the benefit of the place: second∣ly, of the wind behind them, as it was to Hannibals host at Cannas, but on the faces of the Romans, which being Southeast and somwhat strong carryed the dust into the eyes of the Romans, and so did them much hurt. By the wind God helped The∣odosius against the Tyrant Maximus: thirdly, get advantage of the Sunne, if it be hot, and shining foorth, it is hurtfull to those that have it vponTheod. hist. Ecl. Liv. 35 their faces; it fainted the Gaules figh∣ting with the Romans. Fourthly, take advantage of the discord when it hapneth betweene Commanders and Captains in the Enemies camp. By this the Aequians prevailed a∣gainst the Romans, This overthrewLiv. 4. Thucid 6. Slidan. the Athenian Army in Sicile: this gave the victory to Charles the fift over the Protestants, when the Duke of Saxonie, and the Lans∣grave of Hessen could not agree.
Through dissention of Captaines, the French lost Naples, and Amu∣rathes the Turke got Nicopolis tho∣row the discord of the French and Hungarian Captaines. Fiftly, make advantage of the Army parted, or1 Mach: 4. 1. 4. not the whole met together; This advantage Iudas Machabeus tooke at Gorgius comming out from his campe. So the Romans set vpon As∣dubal to prevent his ioyning with Hannibal in Italy. Sixtly, when the enemy is out of order: seventhly, when he is setting his men in array: Eightly, in the time of encamping, then to let vpon them as many wise Commanders have done; These and such like advantages are to be obser∣ved, taken, and wisely pursued. IV. To vse stratagems, so didIos. 8. 2 K: 3. 22, 23. Iosua; yea the Lord himself wrought so a worke miraculously, as the host of Israel was refreshed thereby, and the enemy strongly deceived, by the sunne-shine vpon the water: by stratagems Hannibal and Scanderbeg preuailed mightily, for inventing whereof they both were very subtle.
But stratagems must bee such as are not to the breach of oath, against godlinesse, against the law of nature and nations. V. To vse meanes to make the e∣nemy secure, that so they may bee surprized vpon a sodaine. Thus those of Iabesh Gilead did with Na∣hash1 Sam. 11. 3. 10. the king of the Ammonites, till Saul came suddenly vpon them, and vtterly discomfited them. VI. To vse good expedition, and suddenly to come vpon an enemy, as Saul did upon Nabash, Iosua, vp∣on1 Sam. 11. los. 10. 9. & 11. 7. 2 Mach: 4: 1, 2. 2 Mach: 13: 1. the five Kings besieging Gibe∣on; and so vpon foure Kings at an other time. By this sodaine rushing vpon Iudas, Gorgius hoped to have prevailed, but was prevented. But Iudas by a sodaine comming before day into the camp of Antiochus Eu∣pater which consisted of an 110. thousand foot, of horse, 5300, Ele∣phants 22, & 30 Charets armed with hookes, he went to the Kings Tent. and with his company slew 4000, men, and the chiefest of the Ele∣phants, and so filled the campe with
feare and tumult, returned with good successe; Hannibal speedy comming from far vpon Flaccus, overthrew him at Herdonea. Sylanus by thisLiv: 26. 27 meanes chiefly vanquished his ene∣mies in Spaine. VII. To be all of one heart, for God, for their King and Country, and the safetie of the whole host, and so of themselves, faithfully endea∣vouring to performe the trust com∣mittedIud. 20. 21. 8, 11. 1 Sa, 11. 7. to them, every one in their place, to the helping of one another for obtaining the victory. The great host of 400000 Israelites were gathe∣red together as one man, and were knit together as one. Israel came out to goe with Saul against Nahash,Ios 2. 9. 2 Sam. 10. with one consent, as one man. The Canaanitish Kings and severall Na∣tions of them could ioyne together as one, with one accord to fight a∣gainst Iosua, Ioab, and Abishai con∣sented to succor one another ar need should require. We never read that the Commanders iy Israel were at odds to hinder the good counsell of one another, but agreed as one man
against their enemies. Of discord and the mischiefes therof, you haue heard before. The Iewes, though their leader Ionathan was traiterou∣sly slaine, taken in a trap, by the false dissembling Tryphon, yet they incou∣raged1 Mac: 12. 50. 2 Mac. 9, 10. one another, and went close together to fight, being of Iudas mind rather to die manfully for their brethren, then to staine their honor. VIII. To have a watchword, as2 Mac 8. 23 & 13, 15. Iudas gave his bands, The helpe of God, and at another time, victory is of God. Lastly, be sure of a place of retrait for the wearied, to refresh themselves Hannibal even in Afrike, neglecting this, was overthrowne by Scipio.
CHAP. XXIII. Of such lets and impediments, as are to bee avoided and preuented, which may ei∣ther overthrow the at∣tempt, or hinder the successe. AS there are ma∣ny furtherances of good enterprises, so there may bee not a few hinde∣rances of the same, which are careful∣ly to be taken heed of and preven∣ted.
I. And chiefly take heed of sin and rebellion against God. This God warned his people of, when they went to warre, when the hostDeu. 23: 9. goeth forth against the enemy, then keepe thee from every evill thing saith the Lord. Such sinnes as be∣foreIer: 10. 2. in Chap. 15, are recorded; as al∣so beware here of all heathenish feares, superstitious observations of dayes luckie and vnluckie, of the fly∣ing and crying of birds, beware of divinations, inchantments and charmes; abhorre Wiards, Figure∣casters, Southsayers, Sorcerers, For∣tune-tellers, Stargazers, Astrologers, Prognosticatours, Interpreters of good and ill successe by casuall acci∣dents: weare no superstitions vani∣ties,Deut: 18. 10, 11, 12. aa conceited hallowed crosses, Amulets, and such like heathenish trumperies. For God hath straitly forbidden all these abhominations; they are the practises of the Heathen Idolaters. All such as vse them, areEsa: 19. 3, 4. & 47: 12, 13 & 8. 9. Eze. 21. 21 abomination to the Lord, saith Mo∣ses: And he hath punished it in the practisers. Saul sought to a Witch;
but did not hee then thriue theDeu. 18. 12. 1 Sa: 28. 3. & 31, 3. 1 Ch. 10. 13. worse? did it not then cost him his life? Pompey by consulting with wi∣zards, made way for his overthrow, for Caesar despising such things, made vse of his enemies superstitious feares and came vpon them at such times; what got Inulia the Apostate, or Richard the third of England, or Iames the third of Scotland, by ta∣king advise of witches and wizards, and following their counsells? Cer∣taine Iewes in Machabeus his host, hoped by some superstitious vani∣ties2 Mac. 12. 4. which they wore vnder their garments secretly, to haue auoyded death: but they were deceived, they died in battle.  In the yeare 1502. when the French went against Geneua some of them had gotten charmed Amulets about their neckes to saue them, but their trust deceiued them, for they were found dead in the field. Scipio though a Heathen man, of whom you haue before heard, hee banished Diviners, and Figure-flin∣gers out of his campe, and when he landed in Africa, it was his hap, as
soone as he came on shore, that he slipt and fell forward on the ground, which his company held to be omi∣nous, and a signe of ill lucke, but he turned it another way, and willed them to be merry, because hee had therby taken possession of the coun∣try. II. Great care must be had, to prevent all discord in the whole host, especially betweene Comman∣ders, and to effect this the spirit of pride, enuie, vaine-glory, boasting, wrath, secret grudge, and whatsoe∣uer else may cause dissention, must be vtterly layd aside: euery one be∣ing ready to heare one another, to be counselled one of another good; and no man to thinke himselfe at this time his owne; but now his coun∣tries; but now the causes for which the warre is vndertaken: not now to doe after his owne will, but what sound reason, true religion, the ho∣nour of his King, the necessitie and fitnesse of time and place, and the authoritie of the Generall vpon de∣liberat: aduise and counsell requi∣reth.
Singular was the praise of vni∣tie1 Mac: 8. 14, 15, 16. among the Romane Senators in the dayes of the Machabees; For though there were 320 which sate in counsell, yet was there neither en∣uy nor nor emulation among them; nor any one in pride overtopping another, but all consulted for the ge∣nerall good, and prospered. But af∣ter through Caesars pride, and the e∣vils that hapned through civill dis∣sention, the Empire grew weake, and at length was overthrowne. Its an old saying, Vi vnita fortior, at partes in plures secta peribit, of which many examples are given before. III. To prevent danger of death to the Generall to have care of his life, for the head cut off, the body is but a trunke. Ahad rashly going into the host to fight was wounded to death, and so the people left the field1 Mach. 7: 43, 44.  and went home; Absolom slaine, the host was scattered; when Nicanor was cut off, presently his host cast a∣way their weapons and fled. On the Generall the life and motion of the Army dependeth. For Davids wor∣thies2 Sa. 18. 3.
had speciall care of his safetle; sometimes not to let him goe into the field, holding him to be worth 10000. of them, and if he did goe in∣to battle and was in danger, rather Sa 21. 16, 17. then he should be slaine, Abishai will step betweene death and him: so pre∣cious was the life of a Generall a∣mong the Romans, that when Q. Pe∣tilis the Consull was slaine in fight against the Ligures, the Senat decreedFront. li. 4: ca. 7.  that the legion in whose front hee was slaine, should haue no annuarie stipend, and there armes should be broken. IV. To beware of conceit of strength with contempt▪ of the ene∣my, such seldome or neuer prosper:1 K. 20. 2 Mac. 11. 4, 11, 12. & 12, 13, 16. this overthrew Benhadad, also Lysias going against Iudas, and this brought the Citizens of Caspis to confusion. Antiochus Epater, though he had a dreadfull Army, yet through light reckoning of his enemies & haugh∣tines of mind in his owne strength, had ill successe. The insolency of Se∣nacherib, Mac. 13, 12, 9, 15, 16. his blasphemy against God, and base esteeme of Hezekah was pu∣nished
by God from heaven. V. Not to bee provoked to fight by any instigation of a subtle enemy, for he surely knoweth his owne ad∣vantages, as Themistocles did; who in∣citedPlutarch de Themist: the Persian by his sons Tutour, called Sicinus, vnder the shew of se∣cret friendship, to come and hemme in the Grecians, as fearefull, readie to run away, which he, which he accep∣ted of vaduisedly, and so was over∣throwne at Salanus. But if a heady, and proud enemy puffed vp vaine∣gloriously will needs ptovoke, as A∣pollonius1 Mac. 10. 69: 82. Demetris his Generall did, Ionathan may wisely encounter him, and humble his pride with his over∣throw, as did also Hannibal proud Flaminius. VI. Not to be circumvented bySee exam: for some of these in Dr: Succl: his hooke of warrs: ca 14. of Stratagem slights and policies of the Enemy, by false rumours of more succours com∣ming to them, by feigned reait, or counterfeit, flying away, by seeming to intend some other course, by feig∣ning sicknes, by pretences of feare, by colour of secret friendship, by treaties of peace, by vaine shewes, by
false fugitiues; by secret intelligen. geneers, and such like, which Scipio and other Romans, and Harnibal also1 Mac. 1. 10. 27. 2 Mac. 14. 22. 1 Mac. 12. 43, 46. & 13. 23. practised: Bachides and Nicanor vsed deceits; and vnder shew of friendship sought to have betraied Iudas, but he was aware of them, and also stood vp∣on his guard: but honest Ionathan was ouertaken by Tryphons subtlety, in feigned loue, and slaine. VII. To take heed of an hyred Is∣mael,Ier. 40: 14. 2 Mac. 13 24. by whom good Gedaliah was cruelly and traiterously murthered: so also beware of hauing any Rhodo∣cus that giueth secret intelligence to the enemy. Lastly, make no delay vpon good resolved grounds to execute design: ments, for nothing is more hurtfull then delayes, when aduantage is of∣fered and necessity calleth on. Iosua made no delay to helpe the Gibeo∣nites, nor Saul Iabesh Gilad. And Da∣vid vpon Bichri his rebellion. held2 Sa. 20▪ 6: B. Gal: 2. 7 delay very dangerous. Csar his ex∣pedition prevented the Belgians in their conspiracy, so did it the French at another time by his speedy com∣ming
among them. On the contrary, the Romans delaying to preuent Hannibals comming into Italy, made them feele the misery of their olly and slacknes▪ 16 yeares together af∣terwards▪ To loose faire aduantages, which are not alwayes offered, may bring great losse to themselues, which being taken might presse downe an Enemy. Delay is a traytor to oportunity: and such as either of purpose, or of carelesnes, or persua∣sions of others, do make delaies, may be blamed much, and iudged some∣time the sale-man of prosperous suc∣cesse, and purchasers of much losse and sorrow. All these things are to be carefully auoided, if we desire to thriue in our attempts.
CHAP. XXIV. Of going foorth▪ and ioy∣ning battle. AT the present going forward to charge the2 Ch: 13, 14. Num. 10. 9 Iud. 7. 2 Chr. 13: 1 Mach. 4. 13. & 5. 31 & 7, 45. 2 Sa. 2. 28, & 20: 22. trumpets did sound. This by God was ap∣pointed the onely in∣strument; and these they vsed in on sets, as did Gideon, Abiiah, Machabeus in the time of the battle; in pursuite of the flying enemies, and in a retreat to call back from pursuing. The Heathen Ro∣mans also vsed trumpets; but some o∣ther Nations, as the Indians vsed Cymbals and Drummes; The Sara∣cens
drums, the Lacedemodians, the flute and trumpet, the Cretans the harpe. Besides the trumpet, they vsed their voyces, as shouting in the ve∣ry sight of the Enemy, and first charge, vttering words sometime, as the host of Gideon did, saying, The1 Sa: 17: 20. & 4, 5: 2 Ch. 13. 15: sword of the Lord and Gideon. They did shout at the rooting of the ene∣my, and when they thought the ene∣my was come into their hands. Thus the Philistims shouted when Samp∣son1 Sa: 17: 5. 2 was brought bound to them: andWarres of the Iewes. Iud: 15. 14 2 Mac: 15, 26. the Romans when they saw Iosephus taken taken and brought prisoner into their sight. In the on-set they also cryed with prayers for helpe vn∣to the Lord, when the Trumpets sounded. When they went towards the Enemy before they came to charge they would sing Psalmes, till they came neere him, as Iehosophat2 Chr. 13. 14. 1 Mac. 4. 13, & 5: 33 2 Ch 20. did, and Iudah with: him, yea the Heathen vsed to goe forward with trumpets and songs. And least this might seeme a mockery of a too ouer religious Iehosophat, who was
foretold that he needed not to fight, and therefore might well sing, or that it might be iudged an act of an addle-headed Nicanor not to be re∣garded,2 Mac: 15. 25. the renownest Lacedemoni∣ans vsed it, the King after a sacrifice offered, commanded all his armie to crowne their heads; and the flutes to sound the measure of Castor, then he the King himselfe, began the Pae∣an, a song proper to Apollo, and soCap. Bing. on Elians Tacticks. pa. 70. went they on, as one keeping mea∣sure in a stayed pace cheerefully, and without astonishment. It is to be observed, that Iosua in all his Battles, gave the first charge, and so did Saul, Dauid, and Ioab his Generall. It was the vse of the Ro∣mans commonly to begin the bat∣tle, as doth appeare in the warres ofHist. of the troub. of France. Caesar in France, and Scipio in Spain, and one noteth it of the Protestants in France, that they alwaies preuailed more, charging first the Enemy, then abiding to be charged: which courseDr. Sctel. his booke pa. 177. ca. 22. as one saith, is the best, if there be a resolution to fight. It argueth in those that begin the more courage;
They may the more easily take the advantages before mentioned, and set vpon he Enemy, where he is weakest; yet this first charging must ever be considered thus, as that the army be able to wage battle with the Enemy, els by first charging, they may iustly be charged with folly, and pay well for their rashnesse.
CHAP. XXV: Of that' which os to be done in fighting. THe people of God in their fighting, had mind of God, so as while they1 Ch 5: 20. 2 Mac. 15. 27. strucke him with hands, they prayed to him in their hearts, and trusted on him, and so procured a blessing vpon their encounter. They had care to vnderstand the mind and pleasure of their Generall, whether manife∣stedIos. 8. 18, 19. by words or signes. Thus those that were in ambush against Ai, ob∣servedIos; 4. 7-8. Iosua his stretching out of his
speare, vnderstood his meaning, and speedily executed his will. For they remembred his instruction, and charge before given to them, beingCa. 6. 10, 11, 16, 20, ever obedient to him, doing as he would haue them, as he himselfe did, what God commanded him. In the2 Mac: 12 50. 2 Sa. 10. 11 fight they encouraged one another, and kept close together, and were ready to helpe one another, as need should require. Here I thinke it not amisse to bring in the words of the Apostle spiritually intended, but fetched from warfare, and the duty of Captaines and souldiers in the bat∣tle against their enemies, which (o∣mitting the Apostles scope) I will handle it after the letter very fitly to this my purpose in hand. The Apo∣stle 1 Cor. 16. 13. setteth down foure1 Cor. 16. 13. duties of souldiers there expres∣sed. I. Is to watch, and this is 1. To obserue and take the advantages gi∣uen by the Enemy, but withall to see to our selves, to beware of mi∣stakes, least we giue them advantage, carefully taking heed to prevent
this, or speedily to amend it, before the Enemy espy it, as wisely and quickly, as once Hannibal did. Secondly, to take heed of the sig∣nall, cryer, trumpet, and the Com∣mander for directions, the mind of the General may not be mistaken, as Lieuienant Yakestey did Generall Vere at the battle at Newport. A good sol∣dier must watch with the eye, attend with the eare, and obey with his whole mind. II. Duty is to stand fast. 1. To the Iustice of the cause, the King and Country. Secondly, to the Ge∣nerall, and to fellow souldiours in the battle. The Athenians took an oath not to leaue their fellowes in the fight. Thirdly, to stand fast in this resolution, rather to dy like men manfully, then to run away fearful∣fully, or to yeeld cowardly, or which is worst of all, to fly to the Enemy, trayterously, Stukely, Yorke, and o∣thers, Traytours, betrayers of our Country haue beene. III. Duty is quit themselues like men: which consisteth in these things.
1. In having the right vse of reason for circumspect carriage for their owne safeties, without amazednesse through base and vaine feare: By this present2 Sam. 21. 16, 17. vse of reason and circumspection did Abishai saue David from Ishbi-beob the Giant. 2. In a quick and prompt alacrity of spirit manifested in a ready discharge of every action, in duety to be performed orderly and in due time and place; detesting sloath and neg∣ligence, and to beware of a confused distraction. Ioel commendeth the warriours which had a liuely cou∣rage,Ioel 2. 8. and were quick in execution of service And Ieremy pronounceth aIer: 48. 10. curse vpon such as doe the worke of the Lord in battell deceitfully or neg∣ligently 3. In a malike vaour, a heart not daunted in a present perill; being like to a vids Worthies, and2 Sam: 23. 1 Ch: 12. 8 like those of the Tribe of Gd men of might, skilful in Armes, and having faces like Lyons; and not hearts like fearefull hares. IV. Duetie is to be strong: This is not only to be vnderstood of the bo∣dy when men are lusty & strong, and
well refreshed, as Hannibals men were, before he fought with Sempra∣nius the Consul at Trebia; but this is meant of the strength of the heart chiefly. Be strong, saith God, to Iosua,Ios: 1. 6. and to shew the meaning he addeth, Be of good courage; which is, not to be conquered in minde; but to hold out to the last. A braue spirit should be like Shammah, fighting til the hand cleaue to the sword; So that though2 Sam: 23. 13, 12. the hand be wearied, yet the heart holdeth out, which may get the day, as it did our men in the battell at Newport. Such Souldiers and Captaines as these are worth treasure, they that thus discharge their duty, are no mercenary and base fellowes, commonly false and faith∣lesse; A few of the other are worth an host of these, that make pay booty, and spoile their onelie ends.
CHAP. XXVI. Of the meanes how to have such as are valiant and of a good courage into the field. TO haue such as in the former chapter are mentioned, men that will stand to it, and quit themselues like men, the way is, I. To chuse such before hand as naturally be hardy, which shew it in countenance, in vse of manly exercises o which they be given, as leaping,
wrastling, casting the barre, and such like: in their will and readinesse to goe into warres; In their well set bodies, though little men, and by their hard labour in some calling not with∣out danger sometime, as workers in mines, and such like sort of men. II. Is traine vp such well in armes; for of such it seemeth by the History1 Ch: 12. 2 13. 33. of their acts were Davids Worthies. To be ignorant in armes is a great dis∣heartning and discouragement. III. s whatsoever the Prophane Esau, mocking Ishmael, and macha∣vilian Atheist thinkes, to haue them religious: for in Scripture never any religious, but they were truly valian▪ If any sonnes of Belial say, that they finde it not so, No marvell, for  is had of the choise of such▪ but of the riff, raff, and scumme of the people▪ what religious man will ge with these, if he may chuse;  swea¦ring and cursing are their prayers n their greatest dangers; whoring and drinking, carding and dicing their best exercises when they doe nothing. O hosts of spirits and devils, and not of
Christians! Its pitty that any truly re∣ligious Cornelius, or pious Centurion, (and such there be) should be over them, or any fearing the name of God to be among such. IV. Is as the Lord commanded Moses, to make proclamation, that if any be cowards, they should depart the Camp. Which rule Gideon follo∣wed;Iudg: 7. 3 1 Mach: 3 56. and Iudas Machabeus; But per∣haps some will say, this were the one∣ly way to send away most of the Ar∣my. Surely no: For if as before it is observed, such be chosen as are natu∣rally hardy, acquainted with the vse of Armes, be at least in appearance, re∣ligious, they will detest the name of cowards; yea the Proclamation would(Viderint quorum est de huiusmo. de rebus ∣dicare.) make them put on a better resolution, then to take the benefit of departing, and bee ever after branded for Co∣wards: & if any such departed, whom shame would not reteine; better were their absence, then presence; For surely such would never fight with courage; and those shamelesly depar∣ting; good it should be, that an open brand of infamie should in their re∣turne
home be put vpon them, with sharpe punishment. V. Is when they are come abroad at the first to imploy them in light ser∣vices, where hope is to come off with some encouragements; and not to cast them into a desperate actions, of great hazard at the very entrance, except extreame necessity compell therunto. VI. Is to promise good rewards for well-doing, with due and faithfull performance thereof; Thus the Lord of hosts encouraged his host promi∣sing them Canaan, lands, houses, Ci∣ties,Deut. 1. 31. 35. & 3 2. 2 Sam. 5. 8 1 Chro: 11 5. and inheritance for them and theirs. David offered honour to such as would and could prevaile against the Iebusites, and he performed his word faithfully to Ioab. This did the Romanes with their Souldiers; and therefore had very valiant men: For nothing more stirreth vp valour, then due respect, and deserved rewards. Caesar so wonne, and tyed fast to himDe bell ci∣vili, l. 3. the hearts of Souldiers by bounty and liberality, as many revolted from his enemies to him, but none could be drawne from him to them. The
Turkes reward greatly worthy Cap∣taines, not regarding birth, but the quality of the party and his deserts: For one Ochali a poore Mariner for his valour and good service was made Admirall of the Turkes Navy. The Romanes rewarded Horatius CoclesLiv: 2. for repelling the Hetruscians with a statue of Marble, and with lands. De∣cisLiv. 7. had a Crowne of golde, and eve∣ry souldier of double allowance, and double apparell, for his and their service. Scipio gaue Coronets of gold to those that first mounted the wallsLiv: 26 of new Carthage in Spaine. If Generals and Captaines were chosen not for Nobility, Gentry, friends, but for ve∣ry worth in them, and souldiers well rewarded for their valour, we should not want Armies of valiant men. VII. And last is to punish cowar∣dise, treachery, disobedience, mu∣tinies, and other offences without partiality. The other, to wit reward, is not to be wanting, and this name∣ly, due punishment is not to be neg∣lected; For what the hope of re∣ward in some base spirits cannot ef∣fect;
yet the feare of this will worke it in them. Feare made thou∣sands with one consent to come vnto Saul, to goe against the1 Sa: 11. 7. Ammonites: By these es∣peciall meanes men shall bee made valiant.
CHAP. XXVII. Of the meanes how to make the basest spirits and Cowards in battell to stand to it and if they doe flie away, how to make some vse thereof as some haue wisely done. THough never so good choice bee made, and meanes vsed, yet some will be found faint har∣ted, God and good men
in the Bible, tooke no other course with them, but dismission: but if they be reteined, the courses taken in former times by great Commanders were these. I. To hemme them in, and environ them with the choisest troupes, and so perforce to holde them to it. II. When they begin to shrinke back to cut off some of the foremost for example to terrifie the rest;  Atti∣liusLiv. 10. by killing the first with his owne hand, when his souldiers gaue ground, made the rest to make head against the Enemie. The Romane Generall gaue charge to his men, that whomLiv. 2. they perceived Cowards, and to fly, to take them for enemies, and there∣after to deale with them. For indeed a Coward is a betrayer of his fellowes and an incourager of the enemy, to get the victory. III. To take from them all hopes of helpe, though they should ru a∣way. And this sometime did wise Commanders though they did not leade knowen or suspected Cowards. As General Vere did send away all the
ships from shore at the battle at New∣port. William the Conquerour, to make his to fight, and hope of no helpe but victory, landing here in England, he burnt the ships that brought them o∣ver. So did Tariff the Moore entring into Spaine. Charles Martell when he went to encounter the infinite host of the Saracens, commanded the City of Tours to keepe the gates shut, and to open them no more but to the Victo∣rers. The basest spirits haue beene made thus to stand to it: But if feare sometime cease vpon better Spirits, as it hath done, then some rebuke may make them take heart, or feare of future shame; A speech and example of Caesars valour with∣all in the last battell that ever he fought; which was with Pompeys sonnes in Spaine, when his souldiers began to shrinke encouraged them to a new onset, and so got the victory, onely he said but this, Remember that at Munda they had forsaken their Ge∣nerall. The courage and act of the Cō∣mander will quicken the spirit of such as haue not lost all heart. Iudas Ma∣chabeus
seeing his people fearefull to1 Mach: 16 6. passe a brooke to the Enemie, led the way, and then they all followed. Io∣nathan when his company fled from him, yet standing to it, and something prevailing made the runawayes, to re∣turne and to pursue the Enemies. Lu∣cius Sylla seeing the Legion to giue to Archelaus the Commander of Mi∣thridates forces, he drew his sword and made towards the battell; and said to his Souldiers, If any aske you for your Leader you may tell them, that you left him fighting in Bosia: At which words they were strucken with shame, and went on to the Service. M. Furius Camillus seeing his Army slacke to charge the Enemy, pluckt the Ensigne out of the hand of the bearer, and carryeth it himselfe vpon the Enemie; which the Souldiers see∣ing with much shame set forward af∣ter him. Thus valiant Leaders haue put courage into the hearts of their company; of which ranke with the old and ancient Generals may be rec∣koned, the renowned oice, the re∣doubted Vere, and with these the ne∣ver
dying Sidney as one calleth them. Sometime trayterous spirits will dare in the face of the Generall to fly to the Enemy: whereof some wise∣ly have made good vse. When Luci∣us Lucellus saw the Macedonian horse flying to the Enemy, he presently cau∣sed an allarum to be given, and so sent out other after them; by which the enemy supposed the former to make the onset, and the followers to bee ready to second them, whereupon the Enemy shot at the formost, and the Runnawayes seeing their course welcome before them, and the dan∣ger behind, fell in good earnest to fight with the Enemy, and so against their intended purpose, quit them∣selves as it were like honest men. So one Damates when he perceiued some of his flying to the Enemy, presently did follow after, and cunningly fal∣leth to commend their forwardnes, that they would first charge the Ene∣my, which made them turne their minds, and to doe otherwise then they intended, even to make indeede the first onset vpon the enemy, cleane
contrary to their former purpo∣ses. To conclude this, if so be yet that feare happen, and that there be great insufficiencie to fight with the Ene∣my, one way also withall be made to auoyde the stroke, then it is best, not disorderly to flye, yet to make a faire retreat, or a secret flight as ma∣ny Roman leaders have done, or o∣penly to flye so it be orderly. Abner2 Sa: 2. 17 9. after a sore battle did flye: That com∣pleatly qualified Commander, Gene∣rall Norice, made a retreat at Gant. To flye well, as one saith, is as praise∣worthy, as to fight well. For nature, reason, and religion too, doe concur in this, that in a manifest peril! to save life by lawfull meanes, is no disgrace but a duty. And what is desperate ha∣zard when there is no absolute neces∣sity to compell thereto, but a foole∣hardnesse, a fleshing of a prevailing enemy, a losse of serviceable men, and discredit to the Commander, who cannot but herein haue his wisedome questioned. But put case, men cannot possibly
flye, neither in any humane reason be able to withstand the Enemy, what should then be done? To answer  hereunto, there must be considered, the nature of the Enemy; whether true of his word, or false, whether mercifull or cruell. Againe, whether the conditions be honourable or base, in which respect death is better then life; for it may be, they may conditi∣on to renounce religion, or such a con∣dition as the Ammonite offered to the1 Sa. 11.  men of Iabesh, that so they might bring not onely base shame vpon the parties, but a reproach vpon the whole nation; Its better to dye then to hear∣ken to such conditionr, or to such as Benhadad propounded to Ahab,1 King. 20 6. which made him adventure the battle, as also did our blacke Prince with the King of France, whom no reasonable conditions could satisfie: moreover it must be weigh∣ed whether any succor may in conue∣nient time come, to helpe in such a strait as the men of Iabesh did; fur∣thermore, whether by adventuring life; yet the enemy may receiue more
losse by selling to them their deaths more deare, then by yeelding and li∣ving they may profit-their country. These and such like considerations must be had before yeelding: but if the enemy be faithfull of his word, and mercifull, the conditions reaso∣nable, no hope remaining of helpe, and the adventuring to fight it out, in all likelihood to procure little hurt to the Enemy, in reason it is better to save life, then to lose it. Very valiant spirits have yeelded sometimes with∣out any disparagement vnto them.
CHAP. XXVIII. Of getting fully the victo∣ry, when the enemy is in part subdued. AN Enemy may seeme to be overthrowne when he is not: therefore to get a full victory, I. Beware that the E∣mies giving way and seeming to flye, be not a stratageme, as it was in the Israelites to the Beniamites; and Io∣sua with his company to the men of Ai, and Bethel; by which subtlety he did vtterly overthrow them, when they were too confident of the victo∣ry. Scanderbeg that Prince of Epirus,
thus overcame Amose his kinsman that had fled from him, and brought against him 60000 Turkes▪ from whom be seemed to flye, and for feare to leave his country; by which apparent flight so farre he made them secure; and so after certaine dayes re∣turned backe vpon them secredy, o∣verthrew them, and tooke his trayte∣rous kinsman prisoner. II. If the enemy be routed, then to pursue the victory as Abraham did inGen: 14. Ios: 7. 25. & 8. 11, 12 1 Sam: 14. 22. 1 Mach. 10 49, 50. & 4 15. & 7. 45. chasing his enemies, Gideon the many and mighty Kings with their hostes; Saul the Philistims, king Alexander sonne to Antiochus Epiphanes king Demetris host; and as Iudas did Gorgias; and Nicanors host, Caesar obtaining the victory over the Hel∣vetians so pursued them, as hee left them not till all yeelded; so having foyled Vercingetorix he followed him till he got into Alexia▪ Scipio vanqui∣shing Asdrubal pursued him to theDe Bel. Gal: l. 1. 7. vtmost coast of Spaine, Hannibal in not pursuing his victory gotten at Cannas, lost Rome; he had skill to overcome, but wanted wisedome
to vse well the victory. III. Yet in the pursuite, 1. Be∣ware it be not too heady, disorderly and scattered, least pursuers fall into Ambushments, or come to neer some garrison, or give so advantage to the flying Enemy to fall on againe, reco∣ver their losses, and become of Con∣quered suddenly Conquerours. Phi∣lopoemen charging the Enemy, thatLiv: 35 too eagerly did chase his men, over∣threw him. Carus the Generall of Segadans having overcome. Quin∣tus Fulvius; yet by disorderly pursu∣ing and too securely, lost his victory, was by the same Fulvius horsemen, charged suddenly, and so Carus him∣selfe killed, and sixe thousand more put to the sword; Gaston de fois ha∣ving foiled the Enemy at Ravenna by advancing himselfe too farre, and ill followed, lost his life. Moses Scander∣begs Generall with other worthy Commanders by too forward pursuitHist of Scanderbeg of the Turkes were taken prisoners; And by Mahomet the mercilesse Ty∣rant were fleyed alive, and that by little and little, for the space of 15. dayes together.
Secondly, take heed of pursuing one part routed, that an other part of the enemy entire and strong remaine not behind to follow the pursuers; This oversight cost worthy Mach∣beus1 Mach: 8. 14. 18 his life. Thirdly, not to follow too late, Ioab followed Abner till night, and Alex∣ander,2 Sam: 10. 49, 50. 1 Mach: 10. 49, 50 Demetris, but beware of dark∣nesse, it hideth many mischiefes, not to bee foreseene, nor preven∣ted. IV. The Enemy once scattered is not to be suffered to recollect his for∣ces: for thus Pyrrhus, that Noble Warriour, yet once herein ouerseene; lost his victory over Valerius Lavi∣nus. The Carthaginians in Spaine, af∣ter the deaths of the two Scipioes; suf∣fered the reliques of the Romans toLiv: 24. breath and gather head againe, where hereby at length they were vanqui∣shed themselves▪ Alexamens having slaine Na, yet suffering the Euemy to gather head and to waxe strong, was with all his company by them cut in pieces. V. To abstaine from spoyle till the
enemy be vtterly vanquished, driven away, and they secure from perill. Of this Iudas forewarned his followers in chasing enemy: which charge they1 Mach: 17. 23. well observed. Hannibal lost a more full victory of the Romanes at Tre∣bia, because the Numidian horsemen hastened too soone to the spoyle. The Dutch at Gunigast extorted the vi∣ctory out of the hands of the French; which almost they had got∣ten, while they too hastily followed the spoyle. The Italians at Taro had foyled the French, but that at the be∣ginningAnno 1596 they fell to spoyle the bag∣gage. The Germanes at the bat∣tle of Erlam in Hungarie, having thrice defeated the Turkes, were yet at last by vntimely falling vpon the spoile ouerthrowne. Therefore Iehoram King of Is∣rael in the strait Siedge of Samaria by the Syrians, when hee heard that they were suddenly fled, and2 King. 7. left grea store of victuall and trea∣sure behinde them (though the In∣habitants were almost all famished)
yet did he withhold them from fal∣ling vpon the spoyle, till he certain∣ly vnderstood that hee might with safety doe so. VI. Having gotten a full victo∣ry, and none seene to make head against them: yet it is good not to be over secure; as were the Amale∣kites, Sam: 30. when they had burned Zig∣lag, and carryed away all the Inha∣bitants captive. For they beeing carelesse, eating, drinking, dauncing, and not suspecting any pursuite after them so farre, were suddenly over∣come by David. The Captives were rescued, the prey recovered, and all the Enemies almost slaine, and so Da∣vid returned with ioy. Neyther may they vnadvisedly, while they be in their Enemies Country, divide their armie one part from another. This was the destruction of the Cimbri, who being together three hundred thousand, and having overthrowne Manlius and Cepi, two Consulls, Marius let them passe by his Camp quietly; but afterwards when for
their easier march over the Alpes, (they fearing no Enemy) divided themselves into three compa∣nies; he severally set vp∣on them, and put them to the sword.
CHAP. XXIX. Of vsing religiously the Ʋictorie. WHen God hath given vs the victory, wee should doe as did the Lords people in old times. They did see and acknowledge the2 Cro: 20, 26 2 Mach: 15 29 Gen: 14 20 Exod: 15. 2. 10. Ios: 10. 12. Iudg: 5. 4. & 15, 18 hand of God therein, and together blessed him for it; Melchisedech said to Abraham when he was returned with victory, Blessed be the most high Go, who hath delivered thine enemies into thine hand. So did Moses ascribe all to God▪ likewise Iosua, Deborah, Sampson, and David. And this their
acknowledgment and thankefulnesse they expressed many wayes; to shew it to bee true, heartie and vnfeig∣ned. I. They made rehearsall of the2 Sam: . 18. 30 40, 41. 48 & . 0. Iud: 5. 11. righteous actes of the Lord in parti∣cular. 2. They framed Psalmes, and pious songs of deliverance, as did Moses, Miriam, Delorah, David, and the valiant men of Machabeus2 Mach: 0 38. company. 3. They would somtimes put a remarkeable remembrance vp∣on the place where the victory was gotten giving to it a name, as David2 Sa: 5 20. did, calling it, Baal Perzim, where he overcame the Philistims: So Iehosopnat called the valley, in which2 Chro: 10 26. they blesse God for the victory got∣ten, Beracah. 4. They would doe outward worship and service to GodExod: 17. 14, 15. Ios: 8. 30. Iud: 21. 4 Moses built an Altar. vpon the ouer∣throw of Amalek. Iosua did so when he won Ai, and so did the Israelites when they vanquished Beniamin, built an Altar whereon they offered thanks-giving; They gave the Altar sometimes a name, as Moses called2 Cron: 29 26. his Iehuva Nesse, that is, the Lord my
banner. 5. They would repayre to the Temple with great ioy and reioy∣cing: as did Iehosophat and the peo∣ple1 Mach: 4. 26. & 5. 54. 2 Mach: 8. 27. and he before them; so did Iudas and his army, carefully keeping the Sabboth, yeelding exceeding prayse and thankes vnto God. Yea, the hea∣then Philistims would after victorie honour their Idols, and had their Priests to make speeches thereof, as we now doe sermons vnto the peo∣ple in their Temples. 6. They by their1 Sa: 30. 9. victories were the more mooved to advance true Religion, and to roote out Idolatry, (marke this.) Thus did Asa and Iudah with him, vpon the vi∣ctory obtained against Zerah the E∣thiopian;2 Cro: 15. and after the Sermon prea∣ched by Azariah the Prophet the son of Oed, they put away the abhomi∣nable Idols, they entred into couenant to seeke the Lord, and confirmed it with an oath; and that with great ioy, and vprightnes of heart, Asa hereup∣on put downe Machah his mother from being Queene: because she was an Idolatresse, whose Idol in a grove be cut down stampt it, and burnt it in
the fire, so dealt Dauid with the I∣mages2 Sa. 5. 21. of the Philistims after his vi∣ctory; he did not foolishly as Amazi∣ah2 Cro: 25 did, who having subdued the Edo∣mites, tooke their Idols and set them vp inludah to be worshipped, both to his owne ruine and the destruction of the people. 7. They tooke of the preyNum: 3 50 and spoiles, and thereof first offered part vnto God for his service; the Captains of thousands and Captaines of hundreds, in their great victory o∣ver the Kings of Midian, gave freely, besides 700 and odde head of cattle, of gold, jewels, eare-rings bracelets, rings and such like, to the value ofA shekel is 2  6. 16750 shekels. Ioab Dauids Generall dedicated something vnto God, and so other valiant worthies offered of2 Sa: 8. 11. the spoiles. So David gave to God very much of his victories. In likeGen. 14. 20 manner did Abraham vnto Melchise∣dech, the Priest of God. Thus these valiant warriours respected Religion and Gods service, and therefore offe∣red for the maintenance thereof. As also for the Lords Priests and for the places wherein God was served, and
not herewith contented, wee may reade what care some had of the poore, for Iudas Machabens gave of2 Mach. 8. 2. the spoiles to the maimed, to wid∣dowes and Orphanes; so these valo∣rous worthies spent not all they got vpon themselves in braverie of ap∣parell, much lesse any of it in glutto∣nie, drunkennesse, whoring, nor did they basely hoord vp all to enrich themselves. To these courses valiant1 Mach. 7. 48, 49. spirits in those dayes were very stran∣gers. 8. And lastly, they kept some∣time a day of ioy and reioycing vnto the Lord for their victories obtained, and kept it yearely; for we may andPsal: 58. 10 Pro: 11. 10. Rev: 18. 20. Ier: 51: 48, 49, ought to reioyce ouer our enemies subdued, and with ioyfull triumphing praise the Lord our God. And thus should we vse religiously our victo∣ries.
CHAP. XXX. Of the Generalls carriage to∣wards the persons conquered, and towards their Countrey when hee hath obtained a full Victory. VIctorie as the hea∣then Orator saith, Est sem per info∣lons, it maketh mansheart haugh∣tie, if the Con∣querour doth not know how to subdue his corrupt na∣ture, if he remember not the instabi∣litie of things here below; that hee which is to day victorer, may to mor∣row
be vanquished, if the great com∣mander and Ruler of hostes bee so pleased to alter the course. The people of God, sometimes dealt with the subdued enemies very severely; but this was vpon some spe∣ciall charge from God so to doe; as we may see in Israels dealing with Ogg, and Shon, with all the Kings of Canaan and their people, as also in Sauls destroying of Amalek, these by Gods commandement were vtter∣ly to bee destroyed. Vpon speciall reason we may read how David took a sharpe course with the Ammonites, in putting them vnder sawes, yron Harrowes, axes of yron, and made2 Sam: 12 31. them passe through brick-kills: be∣cause they had violated the law of Nations in abusing his messengers,Cap: 10. 2. 6. maliciously perverting his honest meaning: They also first prepared warre against him, gathering migh∣ty powers, of the neighbouring countries against him causelesly; they caused hereby warre betweeneVers. 15. 18 David and Hadarezer; they were abhominable Idolaters in offering
their children to the Idol Molech; and therefore they wilfully standing out, till perforce the City of Rab∣bahDeut: 20. 12, 13. was taken by the law of Moses, their males were to be put to death, if their offence had beene no grea∣ter. But commonly Generals after vi∣ctory should not be without huma∣nitie; but shew clemencie and mer∣cy. To be cruell is a signe of a savage nature. Elisha onely foreseeing the brutish cruelty which Hazael would vse against the Israelites, made him2 King: 8. to weepe, yea Hazael himselfe seemed so to detest such inhu∣mane carriage, as he asked Elisha, whether he held him to be a dogge or no. Oded the Prophet condem∣neth2 Cro. 28. 9. the mercilesse slaughter that▪ Israel made of Iudah in one day, Pi∣ty and compassion is therefore to be shewed, and respect had to all sortsEzek. 39. 11 both of the dead and the living. First for the dead, they were allowed bu∣riall;Ios. 10. 27. & 8. 29 Warres of the Iewes. so shall Israel doe to Gog and his multitude. The very Heathen performed this to their slaine ene∣mies:
for at the request of Scipio, As∣drubal did bury the Romane Tri∣bunes.Appion. To cast out to dogges, and fowles the bodies of the slaine, andPsa. 79. 2, 3 not bury them is inhuman: cruel∣ty. As it was in Tyberius forbid∣ding to bury the dead, or to vse cru∣eltie to their bodies, as the King of Moab did to the dead body of theAmos 2. 1 King of Edom, which hee burned with fire in lyme, for which God threatned his destruction. Againe, concerning the dead, when they are looked vpon, it must be with hu∣maneTatit in Ann el.  . compassion; The Israelites did weepe for Beniamin, because they were destroyed. It's recorded of E∣paminondas the Theban; that when he came forth the next day after his victorie, at Leuctra among his soul∣diers, with a sad countenance, the cause being demanded, hee answe∣red, that he did chastise himselfe for the bloud that was shed. Agiselave the Lacedemonian, after his victory at Corinth, when hee saw a great number of the Corinthians and A∣thenians lying slaine, in sorrow cry∣ed
out, woe is me for Greece, who in civill combustion hath lost so many brave souldiers. These men were not like to Charles the ninth, in the bloudy massacre in Paris, who said, oh how good is the smell of the dead enemies. An vnsit speech of a Christian, but as hee delighted in bloud, so came hee to a bloudie end. Now concerning the living. I. There must be a reverend re∣spect had of men of the Church, e∣ver sacred by the law of Nations. Nebuchadnezzar gave a charge toIer. 39. 11, 12 looke well to Ieremy, and to doe him no hurt. II. To keepe good quarter withIos. 1: 20 all such as doe yeeld themselves, and to whom faith hath beene promised to give them life, and to vse them well: when Iosephus was taken, ha∣ving yeelded to Nican, who in theIn the warres of the Iewes name of the Generall Vispasian pro∣mised him life, and some Romans perswaded Vespasian to kill him, but Titus reprooved them for it, and held it treason to moove Vespasian
to breake Caesarael fidelitie as he cal∣led it. Cato accused Gba for slay∣ing the Lusitonians after composition made. Faithlesnes & breach of word in this kind maketh men desperate, & to sight it out as one man to the death rather then to yeeld; as it did the Iews in Iorpata, when the Romans were come into the Citie, not one yeelded, though Iosephus was fled, & the reason is given, because they had heard how a Iew had yeelded to a Roman souldier, who had sworne to give him life, and yet afterwards slew him perfidiously. This vnfaith. fulnes caused also others so to deale with them; as did the Rebel Eliezar the prime Author of the last warres of the Iewes, & their vtter destructi∣on with a valiant Roman, who had vpon Eliezers oath yeelded himselfe III. To shew mercy to priso∣ners and Captives, and note to be bloud-thirsty: The Israelites did not2 Kings 6. 22 2 Chron▪ 28. 15. slay such as they tooke captives: but shewed mercy and great compassion vnto the lame, poore, and wounded, so mercy should be shewed to wo∣men,
children, and old folkes. To sley all that are taken, as once the Lacedemonians did of the Atheni∣ans, and the Athenians of them, is great crueltie, and inhumane, of which at length they will be made to repent, as those two sorts did, as Thuidides writeth. To slay pooreThucid. prisoners in cold blood is a note of a savage and implacable nature. But here is to be excepted, such priso∣ners taken as doe deserve iustice to be executed vpon them, as did Agag1 Sam: 15 32, 33. the King of the Amale kites, as also such great ones, as have caused re∣bellion, as the Princes of Iudah did, who counselled Zedekiah to hold outIer: 39. 5, 6 against Nabuchadnezer, contrary to his oath, and the word of God deli∣ver by Iermy: These Nabuchadnezzar tooke and gave sentence vpon them. Also when there is treacherie found in the Captives, or iust cause of feare, if the Enemie should make head against them, that then they would helpe to worke the Conque∣rour destruction, in such a case Cae∣sarHist de h Hspan. souldiers at Munda in Spaine
flew their prisoners, and so did the English theirs at Poytiers. IV. Among Captives and priso∣ners to consider persons according to their qualities; and to respect them according to their place, as Prince Edward did King Iohn of Frace his prisoner, attending him at his Table. And as Tamberlaine did Baiazel whom first he went out to meet, then brought him into his owne Tent, and set him downe to meat with himselfe, and did him all the honour he possibly could, till the proud Tyrant provoked him to deale with him, as he would have done with Tamberlaine, had he been the Conquerour. Great Princes and Commanders should consider what may befall themselves. It was Ty∣rant-like in Adonibezek to vse kingsIud. 1, 7 as dogges, and cruelly to handle them, in cutting off their thumbes and great toes: but he was rewarded thereafter. It was too great height of heart for King Edgar to be rowed over the river of Doe by seven Kings; Tyranes the King of Arme∣nia,
was too much puffed vp to make so re Kings to wait at his Ta∣ble: but most vnmindfull of muta∣bilty and regall maiestie was Sesostris who made Kings to draw his Cha∣riot: and most inhumane was Al∣bonius a King of the Lombards, who vanquished Cuemed a King of Ie∣pidi, slew him, and of his skull made a quaffing Cup. We reade how Io∣sua commanded his Captaines to tread vpon the necks of Kings; but that was extraordinary, and it was vpon such as they were commanded to kill, whose posterity they were to roote out. Nabuchadnezzar did put out the eyes of Zedekiah, but he was a periured wretch having contrary to his oath rebelled, when Nabuchad∣nezzar had made him King. After victory gotten in the Field over their persons, the Army being sufficient, and a Conquering host; the Generals in olde time were wont to make vse of their victories in the Country. I. They tooke the Citties of the Enemies from them, as Abijah did
from Ieroboam after the battel fought Bethel, Ieshanah, and Ephraim, with the Townes belonging to them. Hannibal should haue gone to Rome vpon his victory at Cannas. When Scipio overthrew Hannibal, he forth∣with went to Carthage, which made presently composition with him. II. They set strong garrisons a∣mong1 Sa: 13. 3 & 10. 5. & 14. 2. 4. 2 Sa. 8. 6. them, as the Philistims did in Israel, and David did in Syria of Da∣mascus, to keepe the people vnder; and while the army is abroad to haue places of safe retreat, III. They disarmed them to keepe them from rebellion, when they intended to holde them in sub∣iection. Thus did the Philistims with2 Sam: 13 19. 22. Israel, and Cyrus thus vsed the Lidi∣ans: for vpon such a course taken aHerod. lesse force may serue to holde the Country in obedience. IV. They removed their King sometime, and placed another over them; thus dealt Pharao Neco with Iehoahaz King of Iudah, he carryed2 King. 23 33, 34. him away Prisoner, and made Elia∣kim King in his stead. In like sort
Nabuchadnezzar with Iehoiachim, in2 Kings 24, 17. whose roome hee placed Zedekiah; yea they haue translated most the in∣habitants, and sometimes placed o∣ther of other Nations in their stead. So did Salmaneser with the Israelites, and set a collonie in Samaria and in2 Kings 17. 24. Citties thereof. The Athenians ta∣king the Iland Cythra from the La∣cedemonians, removed the olde Inha∣bitants,Thucid. 4. and peopled it vvith other their friends. By peopling of Caleis with our owne Nation that Towne continued long in obedience to the English; if so Rochell, Poyti∣ers, Burdeanx, and other places had beene, we had not so lost France perhaps as wee haue.
CHAP. XXXI. Of the Generals carriage to∣wards his owne Armie, State and Country. HE that is of an honoura∣ble disposition to others, he cannot but e worthi∣ly disposed towards his owne, and to the honour of his King and Country. A worthy Comman∣er will take the summe of the host, to see who are lacking and not light∣ly passe it by, but at the death of va∣liant and serviceable men to doNum. 31, 10 them honour being dead, as Dauid
did Abner. And to cause that all the slaine be buried. II. To haue a great care in a spe∣ciall manner to the sick, aimed and wounded, that they perish not, nor being brought home, to be negle∣cted, so as they be forced to beg like Rogues, but that some convenient allowance be provided, till they can recover, and be able to liue by honest labour. III. It was the manner of r∣nowned Christians to take diligent heed that all their whole army did behaue themselues worthy th vi∣ctory; Charles the great after victo∣ry, in the long warres against the Lombards and Saxons, was pleased to call his Souldiers Nobles, and Kings fellowes, charging them to carry themselues as Kings over their owne corruptions, which if they did a g∣nous spirits, he promised to main∣taine them, and account the injuries done to them, as done vnto himselfe: but if they did let loose their raines to disorder, shame they should haue for honour, and suffer punishment as
a due reward. Frederick the Empe∣rour after his victory over the Gun∣zians in Hungary, said thus to his souldiers, you haue done a great worke, my souldiers, but yet there remaineth a greater, to overcome your selues, & not become through the victory, insolent, cruell, and re∣vengefull. They may not be given to drunkennesse, as Elah King of Is∣rael was, as was Behadad with his 32 Kings, as was Alexander the great at length to his everlasting disho∣nour; nor to Luxury, as Hibal was at Capua, by which he received more hurt, then all the Romanes could doe him; neither defile them∣selues with women; nor abuse cap∣tiue maids, no matrons. IV. The worthy valiant and such as haue done good service are to be incouraged. 1. In giving them due praises, as David his worthies had, e∣very2 Sam: 23 one after his desert; and as Da∣vidcap. 26. himselfe had after his desert; and as David himselfe had after his sley∣ing of Goliah. 2. In rewarding them; The Romanes did many wayes re∣turne
their worthy Valiants, as is before noted; Some had honour bestowed vpon them, some money and lands, some had places given them, some titles and names; great care was had by one meanes or other to reward the well deserving. V. As care is to be had to reward the worthy; so the ill deserving, and such as be worthy of punishment should surely haue it; this the Ro∣manes did not forget, when the wars were ended. The great Ones felt their displeasure; Fulvius was ba∣nished,Liv because through negligence his Army was discomfited by Hanni∣bal, at Herdonea. M. Posthumius had a mighty fine set vpon his head, for that the Romanes at Ʋii were over∣throwne through his default; Ru∣tilis spared not his owne sonne,Val. ma who by his negligence lost the Ca∣stle of Tarentum in Sicily. VI. A worthy General, is to haue care of dividing the spoile, and vsing of it aright. 1. That in it iustice be observed, that what belongeth to one, may not be given to another.
This care had Abraham, that wha belonged to his Confederates they should haue. Scipio restored diverse things to the Sicilians; which he found in the sacking▪ of Carthage, and had been taken from them. The Romanes tooke not that for spoile which did belong to their friends & Confederates. David had a care in1 Sam. 20. 20. 25. this to order the spoile in giving to those that kept the stuffe, as well as to those, that went forth to fight. 2. That charity be shewed first vnto such of their owne as be in misery by reason of the warre, the woun∣ded, and lame: Great reason is that these be pittied, and made partakers with the sound and whole in the spoile. Then to manifest charity also2 Chro. 28 15. to such of the Enemies, as stand in extreame need, whom the General is pleased to send away, as did wor∣thily the Nobles of Israel, to the mi∣serable captiues; And after this to reserue some portion among them for their poore at home, poore wid∣dowes, Orphanes, and other impo∣tent by age or sicknesse. As Iudas
Machabeus and his Army did. 3. To2 Mac: 8 28 shew gratitude and thankefulnesse vn∣to friends, this is no to be negle∣cted; David forgot not this; as you may reade in 1 Sam. 30. 26. to the end of the chapter. Thus did Scan∣derbeg send of the spoiles of the Tur∣kish army led by Isaac Bassa which came with Amase Scanderbegs Ne∣phew with 50000 horse to subdue Epyrus. 4 Pietie may not be omit∣ted,Num: 31 but that some part be for Gods service, as before hath beene noted, in the example of the Israelites: a∣mong the Romanes to vphold their warres it was a custome for the Ge∣neralsCap: 29 to bring into the publicke treasurie of the spoiles, as did Furius,Liv: 30. 34, 35. Helvius, Minutius, Cato, Scipio, Ae∣milius Paulus, and others. Lastly, a General is to be wary and wise in dismissing of his Army, least he doe as King Demetrius did who procured hatred of his Fathers1 Mach. 38 39, 40. 55. forces. Of which one Tryphon tooke occasion to lift vp young Antiochus against him, with who against De∣metrius the foresaid dismissed forces
tooke part. A discontented Army set at liberty may doe very much mis∣chiefe, as those of Israel did which2 Ch: 25. 10-13 were sent home by Amaziah; they fell vpon the Citties of Iudah, smote three thousand and carryed away much spoile. Therefore must there be speciall wisedome in this point, especially, if there be spied any such Tryphon among them.
CHAP. XXXII. Of some things concerning those that be vanquish∣ed, & how they should demeane them∣selues. IT is an excellent praise in such as be put for the present to the worse, not to lose their wisedome nor valour. Their wisedome in flying must each them to watch advantages gi∣ven by the pursuer, to marke his, it
may be, over hasty following, or dis∣order therein, or scattered companies or too suddenly, or vntimely turning to the spoile; or the slacke pursuit, giving them that fly leaue to breath, and to gather together, that by some of these advantages, they may make head vpon the pursuers; and so, perhaps turne the course of present losse and defeature, into an vn∣expected victory over the Victo∣rers. Their wisedome must also teach them, when they haue escaped by flight, seeming farre enough, yet then not to be secure and carelesse, as not yet out of danger of an hot pur∣suing enemy, who may follow them farther then they would imagine; as Gideon did the two Kings of Mid∣an, Zebah and Salmanah, whom heIudg▪ 8. 10. followed to Karkor, where they and their host of fifteene thousand re∣mained secure, which he vtterly▪ dis∣comfited, and tooke the Kings Pri∣soners, who might haue escaped, had they not beene over carelesse, not fearing any other pursuite of
them after the slaughter of Oreb and Zeb, and 120000 with them that drew sword. As they may not lose their wits; to be as men amazed, distracted, and without vnderstanding; so may they not lose their valour, nor be daunted when they be taken, and fall into the Conquerours hands: Base dejection of spirit befitteth not a souldier; the truly noble heart will not debase him∣selfe below his worth; drunken Ben∣hadad foolishly proud in his prosperi∣ty1 Kings 20. 16. 31, 32. did slavishly in adversity humble himselfe, in sending his servants clo∣thed in sackcloth, with ropes about their heads in his name to begg life. King Perseus being taken by Paulus Aemilius, fell downe very basely on his face before him, held vp his hands and as one of a womanish heart with teares cryed forgiuenesse; vpon whom Aemilius did looke with a sterne countenance, and tolde him, that he was a miserable man, indeed, and more worthy to be a Captiue, then a King, holding himselfe with∣out glory in conquering so vnworthy
an Adversary, and one of no worth. Iosephus tooke a Romane Captaine belonging to Vspasian, and comman∣dedWarres of the Iewes. both his hands to be struck off, and he sent so to the enemy: but the Captaine said to Iosephus, I beseech thee my Lord, let me lose but one; for which suite Iosephus and his souldiers laughed him to scorne, and judged him to be therefore no valiant man, nor of a haughty courage. The chiefe Commanders taken Prisoners should be of vnconquera∣ble spirits, like King Pous▪ that wouldQ. Curti not acknowledge himselfe vanquish∣ed by Great Alexander, though he had lost the field, and almost wounded to death: Or like Cato▪ who being per∣suaded to submit to Caesar, said, it was for the conquered and delinquent so to doe, but Cato had not behaved himselfe so in all his life as one ever either conquered or taken; Its recor∣ded of Fraci the first, that being ta∣ken Captiue by Burbou, yet he shew∣ed such inbred maiesty in his coun∣tenance, speech, and behaviour, as made his very enemies honour him
no lesse, then, as if he had beene in the top of prosperity; such great courage and magnanimity of heart should be in a souldiers brest. They may not lose their quiet pa∣tience, which is not a stupidity or senselesnesse of the present misery; but a willing constant bearing of the burthen: They may not poyson them∣selues as Mithridates did, nor like a▪ cowardly Saul, (as Iosephus held him▪ for that act) nor as his Armour-bea∣rer) slay themselues; nor rage and sweare, and curse, foaming out the filth of their furious natures, blasphe∣ming heaven it selfe for the over∣throw, as some haue done: Nor by quaffing downe the cups, and potts of strong drinke to make themselues senselesse of their calamity, nor as Va∣lence the Emperour, flye vpon his re∣ligious and valiant General, one Tra∣ian, with base termes of cowardize; nor as Israelites murmure against1 Sa: 4. 3. God, and say, why hath the Lord smitten vs this day, before the Phili∣stims? As if God had not just cause so to doe. Nor as Cato, foyled by
Caesar, to say that a great deale of mist was over the eye of divine provi∣dence. Impatiency of losse should not make men guilty of such blasphemy. Christian souldiers should be religi∣ous, as before is shewed, and in their overthrow they haue need of it, to worke this royall vertue of patience, and to manifest other graces in their defeature and overthrow; For now religion requireth, I. That they should acknowledge their overthrow to be the very hand of God; as the Scripture teacheth,Amos 3. 6. 1 Sam: 2, 3, Iud: 4. 2. 1 Sam: 4. 3. Esay 42. 24 Ier: 18. 17. & 12. 7. Lam: 2. 3. 1 Kings. 20. 23. as the Lords people haue acknow∣ledged; as God himselfe said hee would doe; and did vnto them: They are not to ascribe their losse as the Syrians did to the hills; nor to the disadvantage of the place; nor to mans rash attempts or oversight, nor to this mans sloath, and negligence, nor anothers treachery, nor to their small number, nor to any secondary meanes whatsoever, which yet no doubt may all concurre therein; but vnto Gods hand vpon them. TheyBel. Gl. may not with Caesar ascribe it to for∣tune,
nor to chance as the Philistims did, nor to destiny as the Stoicks, nor to Planets, as idle starr-gazers, nor to any power, but Gods from heaven. When Xerxes with his so huge an host was overthrowne, Mar∣donus the Persian his Generall ascri∣bed it to Gods will, and said, what God would haue done, none was a∣ble to avert. II. In acknowledging it to beeLam: 3. 3. Num: 1. 42 43. Gods hand, they must confesse it to be for sinne; For otherwise, God doth not afflict, nor grieue willingly▪ any of the Children of men. There∣foreEsay 42. 24 said Esay, the Lord gaue Iacob to the spoile, and Israel to the robbers, because they had sinned against him. When Valence the wicked Emperour▪ blamed Train for the foyle, TraianNiceph Ec∣cle. Hist. was bolde to tell him, that it was his warring against God, in persecutingDe: 28, 25 of good Christians that gaue his ene∣mies the victory. God threatens o∣verthrow in battell for sinne. III. In confessing of it to be for sinne, religion teacheth them to hum∣ble themselues for their sinnes; to ac∣knowledge2 Chon 12. 6.
God to be righteous, as did Rehoboam, yea and as did the cru∣ell Canaanitish King, Adoibzk, who said, that as he had done, GodIud. 1, 7 had rewarded him. The people of Israel vpon theirIud: 20: 23 26. losses received, humbled themselues with fasting, prayers, and teares, so often as they had the foile: yea thatIos: 7. 6, 7 most renowned worthy valiant Iosua, when the Israelites were chased by the men of Ai, (though the losse was small, only thirty men slaine) yet he tooke it to heart, fell to humbling of himselfe, to fasting and prayer for the same, with the Elders of Israel, and when he knew the sinne for which God was offended, he found out the party and rewarded him with death, that had caused by his sinne; the death of the slaine, and the Enemy to get the victory. Thus should worthy Generals doe; Esay reproveth it asEsay 42: 25 an evill in the people, when the strength of the battell was against them, and they beaten▪ that they did not lay it to heart. Alas for our times, where in too many mock at such hu∣miliations,
scorne with disdaine to be so cast downe, for the liues of men. They know not, that this is in them, great contempt of Gods dis∣pleasvre: Its not so much the losse of men, which those Valiants bewailed, as for sinne, the cause of the defeae; for Gods absence from them in his anger, giving them into the power of the Enemie; for the Enemies pride and triumph over Gods people; for the dishonour which commeth to God therby: for these things, Iosua2 Sam. 1. 11. 17-26. mourned, David wept, and other ve∣ry valiant men lamented; and not onely for the death of the slaine. And yet in their sorrowes they neglected not to thinke of these as David did, even of his Enemy Saul, and his sons, with his faithfull friend Ionathan; being much grieved for the rejoy∣cing of the Philistims, Gods Enemies when they should know thereof: This did he lay to heart; as we should the Enemies of God, his Church, and his people, glorying over vs, at this day, as if God had vtterly forsaken vs.
But there is hope, if we will seeke Gods favour, cut off sinne, repent, and be reformed; for doe we not reade, how after Iosua's humiliation,Ios: 8. God was with him in the victory; and wee may find vpon the Israelites true repentance, their deepe sorrow, with abundance of teares, their put∣ting away of Idols; and preparing of their hearts to serve God; after their1 Sam: 7. 3 miserable overthrow, and the great slaughter of the people; when Hoph∣ni and Phineas were slaine, the Arke taken, and 30000 put to the sword; how graciously did God looke vponCap: 4: 10: . them tooke Israels part, and thunde∣red with a great thunder vpon the Philistims, and so discomfited them,Cap▪ : 10 that from that time they came no more into the Coasts of Israel. Therefore to make a conclusion, Oh you valiant hearts, you truly vlo∣rous, you sonnes of the worthy, you vn∣daunted spirits, yet religious, yet faith∣full, yet chast yet just in your man i∣esse▪ yet full of humanity, even to the enemie, and truly respectfull of your owne companions, yea, and
common souldiers, fellowes in affli∣ction▪ doe well, bee reconciled to God▪ craue his aid and he being with you, goe forth with confidence, and prosper. Even so Amen. FINIS. ERRATA. WHich for with page 3 line 4. Then for their line 12. as for is pa: 18. l. 21. haue for hat pa: 27. li: 18. Munidians for Nu∣miians pa. 70 li. 7. Adde men pa. 75. li: 15▪ in for infinite. sisime for sism: pa: 72. li: 7. armie for arms pa: 68. li: 2. Put out And though pa: 92. li. 15. you for them pa 9. li 28. Narmi∣nius for Harmnu p: 128. l. 9. need for hed p: 142 l: 17. Pu out b p: 158. l: 9. and mer. l. 11. Adde evill p. 162. l. 15. hake for lke p. 194: l 20 holden for holpen p. 190. li: 4. ar for as p: 199. l. 24. Inulia for Iuli p. 203. l: 8. Adde for p. 204. l. 18. Put out him l. 8. One for a p. 230▪ l: 6 Salanus for Salamis p: 07. l: 12. Numida for Munda p. 104. l. 12.
