B4549A R229466 99895281 152567
A Brief, but most True RELATION Of the late Barbarous and Bloody PLOT Of the Negro's in the Island of BARBADO'S On Friday the 21. of October, 1692. To Kill the Governour and all the Planters, and to destroy the Government there Established, and to set up a New Governour and Government of their own. In a LETTER to a Friend. SIR, THis day I arrive'd,—But I had like to come short of the Governour. For the Negro's in this Island had made a PLOT to have distroy'd all the Christians therein: And it was to have been done that very day that we came hither. But as it happen'd, the Night before it was found out very providentially, by Two of them that were a talking of this their wicked Design; who being fully overheard to discourse thereof, they were taken up, and Examined, and so
frankly confessed (when it could not be help'd) what their Design was. Upon which discovery, the Government hath taken up between two and three hundred Negro's: And Tryed and Condem∣ed many of them. Of which Number of the Con∣demn'd persons, Many were Hang'd, and a great many Burn'd. And, (for a Terror to others,) there are now seven Hanging in Chains, alive, and so Starving to Death. It is reported, they design'd to have taken up the Sirnames and Offices of the Principal Planters and men in the Island, to have Enslaved all the Black men and Women tothem, and to have taken the White Women for their Wives. This PLOT was formed by the Negro's that were born in the Island, and no imported Negro was to have been Admitted to partake of the Freedom they intended to gain, till he had been made Free by them, who should have been their Masters. The old Women (both Black and White) were to have been their Cooks, and Servants, in other Capacities. And they had chosen a Governour among them∣selves, and every thing was prepared and setled in Readiness for giving the Fatal Stroak. They have been contriving of this Wicked and Bloody design this three years, and had so long kept it very secret until the very day before it was to have been done. But we hope in a little time to see a Stop fully put to their Contrivance, and the Vil∣lains themselves speedily discovered and detected. Adieu. January 18th. This may be Printed Edmund Bohun. LONDON, Printed for George Croom, in Thames-street. 1693.
