C2025A R227710 99895259 152623
THE CHARACTER Of the late Upstart House of Lords: Together with some Reflexions on the Carriage and Government of His late Highness. By a Friend to the Good Old Cause. LONDON, Printed in the Year 1659.
Courteous Reader. THere was formerly a Narrative published, giving thee an Account of the Choosing, Coming together, Secluding of some, and Sitting of the rest of the late Parliament (so called,) as also of the things that dd attend them, and the Acts that were passed by them: The goodnesse of which Acts, with their tendency to Enslave and Op∣presse the Nation, is sadly experienced (to the Cost and Sorrow) of not a few; For instance, First, that Wicked, Unjust, and Oppressive Act for New Buil∣dings, under which many a Soul hath groaned; some though having in the last 16 or 18 Years past, paid twice the value of their Houses in Taxes, have there∣by been forced, unlesse they will be plundred or cast into Prison, to pay a Years Rent more; in the cruel prosecution of which Act many sad Cases have fallen out. Secondly, the Act for the Excise imposing it for ever (with the Customes) as a standing Revenue to the Crown; and letting it out to Farm, to the horri∣ble Oppression of the People, setting up Patentees to Rule them at pleasure. Thirdly, An Act for a three Years Tax to pay the Soulders, where the Great ones get all, and the Inferiours very little, but are behind near a year; many of them living on Tickets, whilest their great Leaders ruffle in their Gal∣lantry: And as if that were not enough, did then Order a Three Monthes Tax to be paid twice over. And to name but one more (for brevity sake) Fourthly, an Act for a High Court (so called) of Justice, for the Preservation of the Pro∣tectors Person, as if the Law and Souldiers were not as sufficient to protect him now, as when he was General, but an Arbitrary and Illegal Court must be erected in a time of Peace, to take away the Lives of persons at their pleasure. There is likewise in that Na rative a Catalogue, or an Account given of One hundred eighty two of the Members of that unworthy Assembly, who were Sons, Kinsmen, Servants, and otherwise engaged unto, and had Places of Profit, Offi∣cers, Sallaries,Which amounts unto in the whole, one million sixteen thousand three hundred and seventeen pounds sixteen shillings and eight pence per An. according to the favourablest computation by the former Narrative, or Book of Rates. As it was said there, so, here: If there be any mistakes, they are desired who best know, to rectifie them; if not, then what is here mentioned may be taken for granted. Nehemiah did not eat the bread of the Governour; why must so great Sallaries be continued to them who have gotten so much already. The Taxes raised from the people to pay this, doth ruine thousands. and Advantages under the Protector, (so called) whereby it doth appear, what fine Suckers they are of the Riches and Fatnesse of this Common-wealth, and how unlikely they were, being so back'd for his Interest, and so well seasoned with the Salt of his Palace, (Ezra 4.14.) to bring forth
the so much prayed, engaged, fought, and fld for Rights and Liberties of the People. After some Queries proposed there∣upon, follows a Catalogue of the Kinglings, or the Names of those Seventy persons, (most of them being the Protectors Kinsmen, and Sallary-men) that voted for Kingship, with the Counties for which they served, that so they may be remembred, and called to an account hereafter. After this, there is mentioned, how that the New Government, of the Humble Petition and Advice, pretended by them to be then settled, was carried in the House and by three Voices, fifty three against fifty; as also that it was contrary to the Desires of the good people of the Nation, but not being able at that time to get the Names of those fifty three persons, who also higly deserve to be taken notice of, they were not therein mentoned. You have also those Members of that Assembly, who though they gave not their Vote either for Kingship, or the then Government by the Humble Petition and Advice, but pretended to be against, and dissatisfaction with both, sharply, and justly reproved, for betraying the Trust committed to them by the People. First, for being so Sneaking, and Cowardly in their Spirits, as to suffer their Fellow Members to be Secluded from them; and the Council, who had nothing to do with it, so to intrenc upon their Privi∣ledges, as to let none sit but whom they approved of. Secondly, For being so ready to comply to Sit, or Adjourn at the Protectors pleasure, as if they were his Servants, and not he theirs. Thirdly, That when they saw the Liberties of the People endeavoureed to be violated afresh by the Kinglings, and also really given away by the afore-mentioned fifty three persons, who petitioned and advised the Protector (so called) to take the Government upon him, and to chuse his Successour; they did not Cry out, Protest, De∣clare against, and withdraw from them, which being their duty they ought to have done; in doing whereof, those unparallel'd wickednesses would of ne∣cessity have fallen to the ground: but instead thereof went on with them, stifeling their own Consciences, and endeavouring to satisfie their oppressed Brethren, by saying, He had not the Title of King; as if all the Evill; Oppression, and Arbitrarinesse lay in that; when as at the same time, he hath the same, and no lesse power, then if he had the Title, and were called King. Yea, a far greater Power then what cost so much Blood and Trea∣sure, to oppose in the late King; and that these slight Pretences would not be Plea sufficient to excuse them, in the day of their Account for so doing. After which, some general Queries being soberly proposed as a close to the whole, is the Conclusion of that Narrative. Now here thou wilt finde related some of the most remarkable Passages which occur'd in their second Session, with the end, and dissolution of the whole, after two or three Weeks sitting. As also something of another House, (though Namelesse yet) covertly intended for a House of Lords,
with a Description of forty three of them, by all which thou mayest be able in some measure to resolve thy thoughts concerning the change of the Cause and Principles, which these great Masters formerly carried on, and profess to do so still. It is notoriously known how even the chief of them sometime said, It would never be well, neither should we ever see good Dayes, whilest there was one Lord left in England, nor untill you (speaking so to him) my Lord of Manchester be called Mr. Montague: yet now new Lords must he made by the dozens. What Declaring, what Fighting hath there been? and how much Blood and Treasure spent against a Negative Voyce, in the King and Lords? Yet now, not onely the Pro∣tector himself, forsooth, but all his new upstart Lords, such as were our equals, or it may be below us, must Lord it over us with their No, to our I. Is not the World grown mad? were there ever such wonders before? To fancy what after Ages will think of these men, who pretend to be of the Saints of these times, will never make a person melancholy that shall be se∣rious in it. Not to trouble thee further, eye God more, and Men lesse, and that will stay and quiet thy Spirit: and say to thy self as the Psalmist did, (Psal. 62.5, 9.) My soul wait thou onely upon God, for my expectati∣on is from him. Surely men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a lye. A Second Narrative of the late Parliament (so called) giving an Account of their second Meeting, and the things transacted by them; as also their Dissolution after two or three weeks Sitting. With an Account of three and forty of their Names, who in the interval of the Adjourn∣ment were taken out of the House, and others that sate in the Other House, so greatly designed for a House of Lords: with a Brief Cha∣racter and Description of them. THe late Parliament (so called) having made their new Modell of Government, called The Humble Petition and Advice, before they had well licked their Golden Calf, or given the Brat of their Brain a Name, were called upon to Adjourn, and break up: And so making more haste then good speed, they left things very raw and im∣perfect, which afterwards occasioned great Contests, and in fine, their Dissolution. According to the time they Adjourned unto, they Assemble again, being January 23. 1657. where after the usuall Solemnities of Devo∣tion performed, they repair to the House, where they found some of their Number Commissioned, and impowered by the Protector, to swear them. The Copy of which Oath here followeth.
The Oath. I do in the presence, and by the Name of God Almighty, Promise and Swear, That to the utmost of my power in my place, I will uphold and maintain the true Reformed Protestant Christian Religion in the pow∣er thereof, as it is contained in the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, and encourage the Profession and Professors of the same: And that I will be true and faithfull to the LordCan those be faithful to the Rights and Liber∣ties of the People, who swear to be faith∣full to the Government in a single Person, which our too sad experience tells us, so naturally tends to destroy them? Do not those who so swear, undertake to uphold that in the Protector which cost so much Blood and Treasure to oppose, as Antichristian and Tyrannical in the King? Or, Is that a lawful Authority which contrary to all Presidents and Priviledges of Parliament, was carried but by three Voices of them that was permitted to sit, there being at the same time at least 80. of the Members purposely kept out till that Act was past? Ought not things to be searched into, and set right upon this account: for that (Mat. 6.24.) No man can serve two masters. Protector of the Common-wealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging, as Chief Magi∣strate thereof: And shall not contrive, designe, or attempt any thing against the Person, or lawful Authority of the Lord Protector; and shall endeavour as much as in me lies, as a Member of Parliament, the Preservation of the Rights, and Liberties of the People. Which having taken, and coming into the House, they find not onely some of their FellowTo the other House they were gone for greater prefer∣ment. Members, but their old Servant and Clerk, Mr. Scobel gone, and a new one put in his room, whose name is Smith, which with biting a little the Lip, and something in way of Complement, as with a Salvo of their Rights and Priviledges, they for quietness sake Vote him (so put upon them) to be their Clerk, and then settled themselves in a posture for their future work. And the first thing they undertake, is to keep a Day of Prayer in their House, which accordingly they did; and with great prudence, plowing with an Ox and an Asse together, the Presbyters and Independents being both called to Officiate. The Other House, who would fain have the Honour to be called Lords, or rather a House of Lords, did likewise in their House pray at the same time with much Devotion, and did afterwards agree to send to the Parliament, (or as they would have them again called, the House of Commons) by Baron Hill and Serjeant Windham, (after the manner of the House of Peers formerly) to declare their Message, viz. That the House of Lords, or the Lords of the other House had sent unto them, to de∣sire their joyning with them in a Petition or Message to the Protector, That a Day of PrayerIn nomi∣ne Domini incipit om∣ne malum. and Humiliation might be appointed through the whole Common-weath.
Which Message begat very high Debates, and sharp Speeches from many that were not at the making this tame and imperfect Modell, so as the aforesaid Messengers were fain to wait a long time; but at length got this Answer, viz. That they would return an Answer by Messengers of their own. The House filling daily, and many of those that had been secluded in the former Session coming in, the Face of things in the House were in a great measure changed, another Spirit appearing in them then be∣fore, insomuch, that many made question of the things that were for∣merly done; some speaking at a high rate in behalf of the Rights of the English Free People, and against the Wrongs and Injuries that had been done unto them. This being done day by day, and the House not agreeing what to call that Other House, which was as it were a namelesse Infant, and fain would be named the House of Lords, was the greatest part of their work, save that now and then, some little Matters came under Debate, as the Reviving and perfecting their Commitees, and Reading some former Bills. The Lord Graven's Case also was taken in, and the Council on both parts heard at the Bar of the House, with some other little Matters, that passed; but the greatest part of time that was spent in the House, (whilest sitting) was in Considering and Debating what they should call the Other House. Towards the end of their sitting, there came another Message from the Other House, after the same manner as before, Desiring their joyn∣ning with them, in moving the Protector to Order, that the Papists, and such as had been in Armes under the late King, might be exiled the City, and put out of the Lines of Communication &c. This Message being also designed as a shooing-horn, to draw on their owning of them, received a like Answer as did the former. As for the Other House (who called themselves the House of Lords) they spent their time in little Matters, such as choosing of Commit∣tees, and among other things, to consider of the Priviledges and Ju∣risdiction of their House, (good wise souls) before they knew what their House was, or should be called. About which time also, a Petition was preparing, by some faithful Friends to the good Old Cause, in, and about the City of London, which was afterward Printed, and signed with many thousand Hands: which Petition makes mention of the several Particulars that were the Grounds of Contest between the late King, and Parliament, and the good People of the Nation. And prayeth, The settling these good things fought for, as the Reward and Fruit of the Blood and Treasure so greatly expended in the late Wars, &c. This Petition was ready to be presented
to the Parliament (in a peaceable way) by the hands of about twenty in the name of the rest, desiring to submit the issue thereof to God, and the Wisdom of that Assembly. The Court hearing of it, were so affrighted, as they began to consider how they might quell and put a stop to that honest Spirit, which so appeared against them; the Protector (in the mean while) calling them Traytors, and Seditious per∣sons, &c. Threatning to cut their Sculls, and to tread them down as mire in the streets, &c. And turning outAs Major Packer, Mr. Kiffin, and others, by endeavouring to promote the Apostacy at its first Rise, hath occasioned many bap∣tized persons, and others, simply to wander after the Beast. They now seeing their Errour, ought they not to declare it to the peo∣ple, as also to stir them up to keep close with more refinednesse in their Spirits to the good Old Cause, and to be for no single Person whatsoever, till he comes, whose Right it is, Ezek. 21 26. Major Packer, and most of the honestest Officers of his Regi∣ment of Horse, for refusing to serve his Lust there∣in. And apprehendsng that nothing could do it, but a speedy dissolving the Parliament, they put on Resolutions accordingly, onely, waited for a convenient opportunity. But something happen∣ing that morning, that put the Protector into a Rage and Passion, neer unto madnesse, (as those at White-Hall can witnesse) he gets into a Coach, and to the Other House he comes, and sends for his son Fleetwood, Mr. Nathaniel Fines, and some others, acquainting them what his Purpose and Resoluti∣on was, and what he came to do, (who as it's said) earnestly endeavou∣red to disswade him from it; but he refused to hearken, and in great passion sware By the living God he would dissolve them. And so going into the House, and sending the Black Rod with a Message, to call the Parliament to come unto him, He with laying great blame upon them, and charging them with great Crimes, and Magnifying of himself (as his manner is) dissolved them. And this was the fourth Parliament broken by him in five years. Thus the Two Houses fell and perished together; their Father, their good Father, knocking his Children on the Head, and killing of them, because they were not towardly, but did wrangle one with another; but what hath he gained thereby? Solomon the wise saith, Prov. 14.1. Every wise woman buildeth her house, but the foolish plucketh it down with her own hands. Upon the whole, it is Humbly Queried as followeth, viz. First, Whether there may not very plainly be read and perceived, a Hand of Displeasure from the Almighty, blinding the eyes, and infa∣tuing the understandings of those unworthy persons, who (1 Kings 16.34. Hiel like (would have built Jericho again, (to wit) fallen Monarchy in a single Person and a House of Lords, with their Negative Voyce over the
good people of these Lands) so as to cause, or suffer them to do their work by halves? and to rise, and leave so Lame, Namelesse, and In∣significant their New Modell of the Humble Petition and Advice, (alias Instrument of Bondage to the English Nation.) Let the Curse of Confusion that attended the Builders ofGen. 11.7, 9. Babel be considered of. Secondly, Whether those so very wise Gentlemen, who saw it so necessary, and ventured so high, and took so much pains, to bring in again, and anew restore fallen Monarchy and Kingship in these Lands, could according to the rules of common reason and understanding of men, imagine and conclude, That the Gentlemen who had formerly been so wronged, abused, and exasperated by them, in being kept out of the House, would be so easie and tame, as presently, without any more ado, addresse themselves to lick their new Golden Calf, and nurse up that Babylonish, Antichristian Brat, they had no hand in, but were against the begetting of? And whether it doth not speak out a very great weaknesse in their Councils, and a marvellous shallownesse in the Protector, his Council, and whole number concern'd in that Design, in making no better provision before-hand, and seeing no further into the ensuing Danger, so likely to attend their whole Device, and the namelesse Infant of the Other House, which they would have to be Christned, and Called by the Name of Lords. Thirdly, Whether the good people of this Nation have not cause for eer as to abhor the Memory of the afore-mentioned back-sliding persons, so that Parliament (so called) in the first Session of it before their Adjourning, that of their own Heads, and contrary to their En∣gagement to theThe first Instru∣ment is not hereby owned, but abhorred as much as the latter, though I thus speak. Instrument of Government; by vertue whereof they sate at first, and without consulting the respective Counties for whom they served, or so much as one Petition delivered to them for that purpose, changed the Government, and made one worse, har∣der, and more grievous to be born, then that they put away; so fa∣stening their new Iron yoke upon the Necks of the good People of this Land, settling great Taxes, with the Customes and Excise for ever, to keep this Yoke upon them? Fourthly, Whether those Gentlemen kept out in the first Sitting, when those hard things were transacted, and afterwards comming in, and being present in the second Meeting, notwithstanding the so great Repoach and Dirt cast on them by the Court, are not highly to be honoured and esteemed, for appearing and standing so far as they did, for Right, and Freedom, and against the Bondages, which contrary to Ingagements, Covenants, and Promises, were put upon the good Peo∣ple of this Land? As well as to be blamed, not onely for not declaring at their first Seclusion, to inform the People of the wrong and injury
done unto them; But also, when afterward they were so Arbitrarily and Tyrannically dissolved, with the rest of their unworthy Brethren, they took it so patiently, and went so tamely home, and did not in the very time of the Action, Protest and Declare against the Tyrant, and then retire into their places, (from whence they ought not to have stirred at first) and call him to the Bar, or otherwise proceeded against him for so doing? Had it not been sutable to, and well be∣coming that noble Commonwealth-Spirit (so much pretended to) thus to have assay'd, though they had fallen in it? And whether the Army in Honesty, Conscience and Duty, their former Declarations and Ingagements considered, ought not to have assisted them therein, as well as they did the long Parliament against the King and his Cour∣tiers, upon the like account? Doth not the loud cryes of the Souls of the SaintsRev. 6.9, 10. under the Altar, slain for the Testimony which they held in their Day, as also the blood of the Saints and others slain in the late Wars, and the Sufferings of our dear Brethren in Prisons and Ba∣nishments, call for this their Testimony also? If so; Ought not this honest word of Reproof for what is past, and of excitation for the future to take place? Fifthly, But since things were as they were, and as it seems could be no better, whether all good People in these Nations, have not great cause exceedingly to blesse and praise the Lord? (though they owe little to the Instrument) who (Ashur-like had other ends) that the late Parliament (so called) was dissolved; who were many of them, such Mercenary, Salary, and self-interested men, as in all pro∣bability, had they continued much longer, would have over-voted the Lovers of Freedom, and so have perfected their Instrument of Bondage, and rivetted it on the Necks of the good People for ever by a Law, and thereby made them Vassals and Slaves perpetually. But hitherto the Lord hath in a great measure frustrated their wicked De∣vice, blessed be his holy Name. Sixthly, Whether the Protector (so called) be not a great destroyer of the Rights and Liberties of the English Nation? for hath he not ingrossed the whole power of the Militia into his own hand? The Right also of Property? Power of judging all matters of the highest and greatest Concernment? And doth he not take on him to be sole Judge of Peace and War, of Calling and Dissolving Parliaments? Raising Money without Consent in Parliament? Imprisoning persons without due form of Law, and keeping them in Durance at pleasure; using the Militia in his own hand against the good people, in these fore-named things, and against their Representers in Parliament. Seventhly, Whether the Protector, and the Great men his Confe∣derates,
be not rather to be termed Fanatick, Whimsical and Sick∣brain'd, then those, (who remaining firm to, and being more refined in their former, good, and honest Principles, and will upon no account be drawn to desert the good Old Cause) they account and call so? And whether this unsettlednesse in their Government, and changing both it and their Principles, in so short a time; and going so diame∣trically contrary to their former honest Protestations, Declarations, Sermons, and Actings, doth not in the view of all the world, De∣clare them so to be? Eighthly, Whether the Protector (so called) be not that himself which he untruly charged upon the Members turned out of the Little Parliament (so called) viz. A destroyer of Magistracy and Ministry? Of Magistracy, in breaking four Parliaments in five Years; and pul∣ling up by the roots, what in him lieth, the very Basis and Foundation of all just Power, to wit, the Interest of the good People of this Commonwealth; making himself, and his own Will and Lust, the Basis and Foundation thereof? And doth he not at his pleasure sup∣presse and destroy all Military and Civill Power, and Governours that submit not thereunto? Is he not likewise a great destroyer of Mini∣stery, in taking from them their Religious, or Divine Capacities, put∣ting them into that of Lay or Common? and accordingly, in a profes∣sed way, preferring them to places of Advantage by the Tryers. Ninthly, Whether the Protector be so wise and understanding, so tender and carefull of the Common Interest (as is pretended to) above all others whatsoever? yea, above and beyond the four Parliaments he hath dissolved? And may it not be enquired how he came to this great height of Knowlege and absolute understanding, seeing there are very many worthy Patriots, sometimes his Equals (at least) of as high a Discent, of as good breeding, of as great Parts, of as fair an Interest, as also as well versed in Government as himself? Whether it may not be wondered at, that he should be so exceeding wise, and tender above all, even above Parliaments themselves. Tenthly, Whether Sir Henry Vane, Major Generall Harrison, the late President Bradshaw, Sir Arthur Haslerigg, Lieutenant General Ludlow. with hundreds more of worthy Patriots, that have ventured far in their Countreys Cause, for Justice and Freedom, may not rationally be thought to be as carefull and tender of the good of their Country as the Protector? Eleventhly, Whether it doth not rankly savour of high Pride and Arrogancy in the Protector (so called) to set up his Sense and Judge∣ment, as the standard for the whole Nation, even Parliaments them∣selves?
And whether thus to do, be not the sad fruit of Enthusaisme, one of the great Errours of this day and time? Twelfthly, Whether the Protector being so highly conceited of his own understanding, so changeable and uncertain in his Principles and Resolutions, so given up to his Passion and Anger, as against all Advice and Counsel, in a condition near unto Madnesse, to swear by the living God he would Dissolve the late Parliament, and accordingly did so, though the doing of it tended to the hazard of the Common∣wealth? Whether he according to Reason, can be thought a person capable, and fit to Rule and Governe this so Great, so Wise, and Noble a People? Thirteenthly, Whether since the Protector assumed the Govern∣ment, the state and condition of this Nation be not very greatly im∣paired? Their Land Forces wasted and consumed at Hispaniola, Ja∣maica, Mardike, and elsewhere? Their Shipping lessened and dimi∣nished; their Stores and Provisions for Sea and Land expended and consumed without profit; their Magazines emptied; their Treasures wasted; their Trade in a great measure lost and decayed; and very great new Debts contracted, little of Old being satisfied? And whe∣ther all this be not the better fruit of Apostacy and Treachery, and setting up a single person, as Chief Magistrate contrary to Ingagements: And the casting away of that Righteous Cause of Freedom, Justice, and Righteousnesse, this Land was so engaged in? Lastly, Whether the Protector (so called) will not in all likelihood dissolve the next Parliament also, if they begin to question and make Debates of former Transactions, and do not presently without any disputing, proceed to perfect the new Modell, of the Humble Petition and Advice? What assurance shall be given to the Countries and Ci∣ties that shall chuse, or to the Gentlemen chosen, that they shall not be served as those before were? And whether, if the honest Citizens shall begin to make ready their former sober, and very worthy Peti∣tion, or one of the like natute, it will not be looked at again, as a Crime little lesse then Treason at the Court, and become a means of sudden Dissolution to the next Parliament also? Alas for poor England! What will become of thee in the end? How hast thou lost thy self and thy good Old Cause? And whither will these Masters of Bondage car∣ry tee?
A List of their Names who were taken out of the House, and others: (beingAll of them, but four, are salary men, sons, kins∣men, and otherwise engaged to the Prote∣ctor, and allyed to his Confederate. forty three in number) that sate in the Other House, so greatly designed for a House of Lords; with a brief Description of their Merits and Deserts: whereby it may easily appear, how fit they are to be cal∣led (as they call themselves) Lords; as also being so very deserving, what pity it is they should not have a Negative Voyce over the free People of this Common∣wealth. 1. Richard Cromwel, eldest Son of the Protector (so called,) a person of great Worth and Merit, and well skilled in Haw∣king, Hunting, Horse-racing, with other sports and pastimes; one whose Undertakings, Hazards, and Services for the Cause, cannot well be numbred or set forth, unlesse the drinking of King Charles's, or (as is so commonly spoken) his Fathers Landlords health; whose Abili∣ties in praying and Preaching, and Love to the Sectaries, being much like his Cousin Dick Ingoldsby's, and he so very likely to be his Fathers Successour, and to inherit his noble Vertues, in being the light of the Eys, and breath of the Nostrils of the old Heathenish Popish Laws and Customs of the Nation (especially among the Learned) the University of Oxford have therefore thought fit (he being also no very good Scho∣lar) to chuse him their Chancellour. And though he was not judged meet (not having a Spirit of Government for it) to have a Command in the Army when there was fighting, or honest and wise enough to be one of the little Parliament, yet is he become a Colonel of Horse now fighting is over; as also taken in to be one of the Protectors Council, and one of the Other House, and to have the First Negative Voyce over the good People of this Commonwealth, being in so hopeful a way to have the great Negative Voyce over the whole, after his Fathers Death. 2. Commissioner Fiennes, Son of the Lord Say, a Member sometime of the long Parliament, and then a Collonel under the Earl of Essex, had the command and keeping of Bristol, bu
gave it up cowardly, (as it's said) for which he had like to have lost his head; he being a lover of Kingship and Monarchy (as well as his Father) was taken in by the Protector at his first setting up, to be one of his Council, and made Commissioner of the great Seal, as also Keeper of the Privy-Seal, whereby his Interest and Revenue is raised from two or three hundred per annum, to twoAs saith the Book of Rates, or former Narra∣tive. or three thousand, and more: And for his Merits and Greatness, (being after the old mode) he was taken out of the late Parliament, to be the Mouth of the Protector in that Other House, and so is fit, no question, to have the second Nega∣tive Voyce over the good People of these Lands. 3. Henry Lawrence, a Gentleman of a Courtly Breed, and a good Trencher Man; who when the Bishops ruffled in their pride and Tyranny, went over to Holland, afterwards came back, and became a Member of the Long Parliamet; fell off at the behea∣ding of the late King and change of the Government, for which the Protector (then Lievtenant-General) with great Zeal declared, That a Neutral Spirit was more to be abhorr'd then a Cavalier Spirit, and that such men as he, were not fit to be used in such a day as that, when God was cutting down Kingship root and branch; yet came in play again (upon design) in the Little Parliament, and contributed much to the dissol∣ving of them, as also setting up the Protector, and settling the Instru∣ment of Government and a single Person, affirming, That other foun∣dation could no man lay. For which worthy Services, and as a Snare or Bait to win over, or at least quiet the baptized people, (himself being under that Ordinance) he was made and continued President of the Protector's Council, where he hath signed many an Arbitrary and Ille∣gal Warrant, for the carrying of honest faithful men to prisons and Ex∣ile without cause, unlesse their not apostatizing with them from just and honest principles. His Merits are great and many, being every way thorough-paced, and a great Adorer of Kingship; so as he deserveth, no doubt, and is every way fit, to be taken out of the Parliament, to have the third place of Honour, and a Negative Voyce in the Other House over the people of these Lands: 4. Lievtenant-General Fleetwood, a Gentleman formerly of the Long Parliament, and a Colonel of their Army, then Lievetenant General, afterward married (honest Iroton's Widdow) the Protectors eldest Daughter: Major General Lambert be∣ing put by, by the Parliament from going over to Ireland as Lord Liev∣tnant, it savouring too much of Monarchy, and being not willing to ac∣cept of a lower Title, he was sent over thither under the Title of Lord
Deputy in his room, where he continued about three years; and to put a check upon those godly men there, who are no Friends to Monarchy, he was sent for over again, and cajoled in to be one of the Protectors Council, as also Major General of divers Counties in England: his Salary supposed worthSee the former Narrative. 6600 l. per anum, by all which he is become advanced to a princely Interest and Rexenue: he is one of good prin∣ciples, had he kept them, and of good words like his Father-in-law, whereby he hath deceived many an honest man, and drawn them from the good Old Cause, and by that way hath greatly served the Protectors Designs. His Merits therefore are such, as he, no question, also, de∣serves to be taken out of the House, and made a Peer, and to have a Negative Voice in the other House, when it shall be named Lords; notwithstanding he so helpt in the Army & long Parliament to throw down the House of Lords, and to destroy the Negative Voyce, and did fight against it in the King. 5. Colonel Disbrow, a Gentleman or Yeoman of about sixty or seventy pounds per annum at the beginning of the Wars; who being allyed to the Protector by Marriage of his Sister, he cast away his Spade and took a Sword, and rise with him in the Wars, and in like manner in the principles of Justice and Freedom, advanced his Interest very much: if he were not of the Long Parliament, he was of the Little One, which he helped to break. Being grown consi∣derable, he cast away the Principles by which he rise, and took on prin∣ciples of Violence and Tyranny, and helped to set up the Protector;His Sa∣lary 3236 l. per annum See former Narrative, or Booke of Rates. for which he was made one of his Council, and one of the (c) Generals at Sea, and hath a princely command at Land, being Major General of divers Counties in the West, as also one of the Lords of the Cinque-Ports. His Interest and Greatness being so far advanced, his Merits must needs be great, and he every way fit to be taken out of the House, and put into the Other House, with a Negative Voyce over the good peo∣ple, for that with his Sword he can set up that again in the Protector and himself, which before he cut down in the King and Lords. 6. Lord Viscount Lisle, Eldest Son of the Earl of Leicester, he was of the long Parliament to the Last, & at the change of Government, and making Laws of Treason against a s ngle persons Rule, and, no question, concur'd with the rest therein: he was also of the Little Parliament, and of all the Parliaments since; was all along of the Protector's (d) Council, and was never to seek;Salary 1000 l. per num. who having learned so much by changing with every Change, and keeping still (like
his Father-in Law the Earl of Salisbury, and Peter Sterry) on that side which hath proved Trump, nothing need farther be said of his fitness, (being such a man ofAsk his late Wifes Sister, the Lady Sands principles) to be taken out of the Parliament to have a settled Negative Voice in the Other House over all the good people of these Lands, he being a Lord of the old Stamp already, and in time so likely to become a Peer. 7. Sir Gilbert Pickering, Knight of the old Stamp, and of a considerable Revenue in Northampton-shire, one of the Long Parliament, and a great stickler in the change of the Government from Kingly to that of a Commonwealth; helped to make those Laws of Treason against Kingship, hath also changed with all changes that have been since: he was one of the little Parliament, and helped to break it, as also of all the Parliaments since, is one of the ProtectorsHis Sa∣lary 1000 l. per annum besides his other pla∣ces. Council; and, as if he had been pin'd to his Sleeve, was never to seek, is become high Steward of Westminster; and being so finical, spruce, and like an old Courtier, is made Lord Chamberlane of the Protector's Houshold or Court: so that he may well be counted fit and worthy to be taken out of the House, to have a Negative Voice in the Other House, though he helped to destroy it in the King and Lords. There are more besides him, that make themselves transgressors, by building again the things which they once destroyed. 8. Walter Strickland, sometime Agent or Em∣bassadour to the Dutch in the Low-countrys from the long Parliament, and a good friend of theirs; at length became a Member of that Parli∣ament; was also of the little Parliament, which he helped to break: was of the Parliament since, and is now of the ProtectorsSalary 1000 l. per annum, be∣sides other places Coun∣cil: he is one that can serve a Commonwealth and also a Prince, so he may serve himself and his own ends by it; who having so greatly profi∣ted by attending the Hogan Mogans, and become so expert in the Ce∣remony Postures, and thereby so apt like an Ape (with his brother Sir Gilbert and the President) to imitate or act the part of an old Courtier in the new Court, was made Captain General of the Protector's Mag∣pye or Gray-Coated Foot-guard in White hall (as the Earl of Holland formerly to the King:) who being every way of such worth and Me∣rits, no question can be made, or exceptions had against his fitness to be taken out of the Parliament, to exercise a Negative Voice in the Other House over the people of this Commonwealth. 9. Sir Charls Ousely, a Gentleman who came something late into play on this side, being converted from a Cavalier
in a good hour. He became one of the little Parliament, which he helped to break, and to set the Protector on the Throne; for which worthy service, he was (as he well deserved) taken in to be one of his Council; was also of the Parliament since: a man of constancy and cer∣tainty in his principles, much like the wind; and although he hath done nothing for the Cause whereby to merit, yet is he counted of that worth, as to be every way fit to be taken out of the Parliament to have a Negative Voice in the Other House over such as have done most, and merited highest in the Cause, (the Protector and his fellow Negative Men excepted) and over all the Commonwealth beside. 10. Mr. Rouse, one of the Long Parliament, and by them made Provost or Master of Eaton Colledge; he abode in that Pa∣liament, & helped to change the Government into a Commonwealth, and to destroy the Negative voice in the King and Lords; was also of the Little Parliament, and their Speaker; who when the good things came to be done which were formerly declared for, (and for not doing of which the Old Parliament was pretendedly dissolved) being an old Bottle, and so not fit to bear that new Wine; without putting it to the question, left the chair, and went with his fellow old Bottles to White-hall, to surrender their power to the General, which he as Speaker, and they by signing a Parchment or Paper, pretended to do. The colou∣rable foundation for this Apostasie, upon the Monarchical foundation, being thus laid and the General himself (as Protector) seated thereon, he became one of hisHis Sa∣lery for both places 1600 l. per annum. Council, (good old man) and well he deserved it; for he ventured hard: he was also of the Parliaments since; and being an aged Venerable man (all exceptions set aside) may be accoun∣ted worthy to be taken out of the House, to have a Negative Voyce in the Other House over all that shall question him for what he hath done, and over all the people of these Lands besides, though he would not suffer it in the King and Lords. 11. Major General Skippon, sometime cal∣led, The honest English Captain in the Netherlands, was afterward Captain of those of the Artillery Ground in London; who refusing to attend the King at York when he sent unto him, and adhering to the Parliament, was by them made Major General under the Earl of Essex, under whom many an honest man lost his life in fighting for the Cause of Freedom & Justice, and against the Negative Voice of the King and Lords, whose blood surely will lye at some bodies door, and cry. He was of the Long Parliament, and helped to change the Government, and make the Laws of Treason against a single persons Rule, and was outed with
them. After the Little Parliament (for endeavouring to bring forth what the old Parliament was turn'd out for not doing) was dissolv'd, he, was brought in play again by means of Philip Nye (Metrapolitan Tryer of White-Hall) and made one of the ProtectorsHis Sa∣lary for both places 1666 l. 13 s. 4 d. Council, and Major General of the City, in the decimating business; hath been of all Parliaments since: who being so grave and Venerable a man, his er∣rour in leading men to fight against the Kings Negative Voice, may be forgiven him, and he admitted as fit to be taken out of the House, to have a Negative Voyce in the Other House himself, not onely over those who have fought along with him, but all the people of these Lands besides, the rather, for that he is very aged, and not likely to ex∣cercise that power long. 12. Colonel Sydenham, a Gentleman of not very much per annum, at the beginning of the Wars; was made Gover∣nour of Melcomb Regis in the West; became one of the Long Parlia∣ment, and hath augmented his Revenue to some porpose: he helped; no question, to change the Government, and make those Laws of Trea∣son against Kingship; was also of the Little Parliament, and of those that were since; one also of the Protector'sHis Sa∣lery for both places 2000 l. per annum. Council; hath a princely command in the Isle of Wight; is one of the Commissioners of the Treasury: by all which he is grown very great and considerable: and although he hath not been thorough-paced for Tyranny in time of Parliamens, yet it being forgiven him, is iudged of that worth and merit as to be every way fit to be taken out of the House to have a Ne∣gative Voyce in the Other House over all his Dependants, and all the people of these Lands besides, hoping thereby he may so be redeemed, as never to halt or stand off for the future against the Protectors Inte∣rest. 13. Col. Mountague, a Gentleman of Hunting∣donshire, of a fair Estate, a Colonel formerly in the Association Army, under the Earl of Manchester; where he for some time appeared (whilst Colonel Pickering lived) to be a Sectary, and for Lay-mans preaching, as also a lover of the Rights and Freedoms of the People, rather then of the principle he now acts by; but that honest Colonel dying, some other things also coming between, he became of another mind: he gave off being a Souldier, about the time of the new Mo∣del, it is likely upon the same account with Colonel Russel; did not greatly approve of beheading the King, or change of the Government, or the Armies last march into Scotland, as the Protector (then Gene∣ral) may witnesse; yet after the War was ended at Worcester, and the
old Parliament dissolv'd, he was taken in (though no change appearing from what he was before) to be of the Little Parliament, which he helped to break, and to set up Monarchy a new in the Protector, which he designedly was called to do; for which worthy setvice, he was made one of the Council,Salary 3095 l. per annum a Commissioner of the Treasury, and one of the Generals at Sea; he was of the Parliaments since: all which con∣sidered, none need question his fitness to be a Lord, and to be taken out of the House to have a Negative Voice in the Other House, not only over the Treasury and Sea-men, but all the good people of these Lands besides. 14. Colonel Philip Jones, his Original is from Wales: at the first of the Wars he had about 17 or 20 l. per annum, and improved his Interest upon the account of the cause; first was an A∣gent for some Parliamenteers to London, where gaining acquaintance, and making good use of them, he became Governor of a Garrison, then a Colonel, as also a Steward of some of the Protectors Lands in Wales, and one of the Long Parliament; after of the Little Parliament, which he helped to break; and to advance the General his Master to be Pro∣tector; for which goodly service, himself was advanced to be one of his Council, afterwards Comptroller of his Houshold or Court: he made Hay whilst the Sun shin'd, and hath improved his Interest and Revenue in Land (wellIf part of the purchase mony was not paid with the great bribe of about 3000 l. for which (as it's credibly reported) he hath been private'y questioned, he would do well to clear himself, being very much suspected, having gotten so great an Estate in so short a time. gotten, no question) to 3000 l. per annum, if not more: he is also very well quali∣fied with self-denying principles to the Protectors Will & pleasure, so as he is fit, no doubt, to rise yet higher, and to be taken out of the House to be a Lord, and to have a Ne∣gative Voyce in the Other House over all the people in Wales, (if they please) and over all the Commonwealth be∣sides whether they please or not. All have not lost by the Cause, though some have. 15. Commissioner Lisle, sometime a Counsel∣lour in the Temple, one of the Long Parliament, where he improved his interest to purpose, and bought State Lands good cheap; afterwards became a Commissioner of the Great Seal, and helped in Parliament to change the Government from Kingly to Parliamentary, or of a Commonwealth; changed it again to Kingly, or of a single person, and did swear the Protector at his first installing chief Magistrate, to the hazard of his Neck; contrary to fourSee these Acts in a Book called, The Looking Glasse, pag. 43, 44. Acts of Parliament, which he helped to make, with others, that make it Treason so to do. He hath lately retired for Sanctuary into Mr. Rowes Church, and is still Com∣missioner
Salary 1000 l. per annum of the Seal; and being so very considerable in worth and merit, is also fit to be taken out of the House to have a Negative Voice in the Other House over the good people, and all such who shall any way question him: he is since made President of the high Court (so called) of Justice. Treason never prospers: what's the reason? For when it prospers, none dare call it Treason. 16. Chief Justice Glyn, sometime a Councel∣lour at Law, and Steward of the Court at Westminster, formerly one of the Long Parliament, and that helped to bait the Earl of Strafford, and bring him to the block; was Recorder of London, and one of the E∣leven Members impeached by the Army ofHe helped to raise the City against the Ar∣my, and made the Spea∣ker flee to the Army for shelter, and chose ano∣ther Speaker in his room in the Kings be∣half; and a great deal more. Treason, and by that Parliament committed to the Tower: the Protector (through Apostacy) assuming the Government took him up, and made him a Judge; and finding him so fit for his turn, did also make him Chief Justice of England: so that of a lit∣tle man, he is grown up into a great Bulk and Interest, and of complying principles to the life; who being so very useful to advance and uphold the Protectors great Nega ive Voyce, is thereby, questionless, in his sense fit to be ta∣ken out of the House,His Sa∣lary 1000 l. per annum. and to have a Negative Voyce himself in the Other House, not only over the people, but over the Law, he is to be chief Judg of, and in a capacity to hinder, that no good Law for the future be made for the ease of the people, or hurt of the Lawyers Trade. 17. Bulstrode Whitlock, formerly a Coun∣sellour at Law, one of the Long Parliament, profited there, and advan∣ced his interest very greatly; became one of the Commissioners of the great Seal; one that helped to change the Government, and make Laws, against a single persons Rule: in the time of the Little Parliament, he went Embassadour to Sweden in great State; that Parliament being dis∣solved, he agitated there for the Protector, then came over: and when some Alteration and pretended Reformation was made in the Chance∣ry, he stood off from being any longer a Commissioner of the Seal, and became on of the Supervisors of the Treasurie, at 1000 l. per annum,See Booke of Rates. Salary: he is one who is guided more byAsk George Cckai Policy then by con∣science; and being on that account the more fit for the Protectors ser∣vice, there is no question to be made of his worth and merit to be taken, out of the House to have a Negative Voyce in the Other House over the people there, though he helped to put it down in the King and Lords.
18. William Lenthal, a Counsellour at Law, made Speaker of the Long Parliament by the late King; sate it out in all Changes, weather'd many a Storm and high Complaint made against him, and was too hard and weildy for all his Opposers: his policy and good hap carryed him on so, as he he ended his being Speaker, with the ending of that Parliament. For the time of his sitting, he advanced his Interest and Revenue very much; became Mr. of the Rolls, purcha∣sed Lands in others names as well as his own, for fear of the worst; he was (to be sure) at the change of the Government from Kingly or of a single person and House of the Lords, as being uselesse,See two Declarati∣ons of Par∣liament; one against the Lords, the o∣ther against Kingship. charge∣able and dangerous: As likewise at the making those Laws of Trea∣son against a inge person for the future (not yet repealed.) The Lit∣tle Parliament (where some of his Law Judicature was questioned) being dissolevd, and the Protector taking the Government upon him, he adventured to comply with the rest, notwithstanding the danger, that so he might keep his place and interest, and avoid a new Storm or Frown from the present Power. Men need not seek far, or study much to read him, and what principles he acts by. All things considered, he may, doubtless, be very fit to be Lord of the Rolls, being Master already, and to be taken out of the Parliament to be made a Lord, and to have a Negative Voyce in the Other House over the people, as well as over the causes in the Rolls, being so thoroughly exercised in Nega∣tives at his own will and pleasure, as too many have sadly felt. 19. Mr. Cleypole, Son of Mr. Cleypole in Northamp∣tonshire, now Lord Cleypole, he long since married the Protector's Daughter; a person whose qualifications not answering those honest principles formerly so pretended to, of putting none but godly men in∣to places of trust, was a long time kept out; but since the Apostacy from those principes, as also the practise break in and his Father-in-law (the head thereof) came to the Protector, he was then judged good enough for that dispensation, and so taken in to beHis Sa∣lary is not wel known Master of his Horse; (as Duke Hamilton to the King.) Much need not be said of him, his Re∣lation, as Son-in-law to the Protector, is sufficient to bespeak him e∣very way fit to be taken out of the House, and made a Lord; and ha∣ving so long time had a Negative Voyce over his Wife, Spring Gar∣den, the Ducks, Deer, Horses and Asses in James's Park, is the better skilled now to exercise it again in the Other House over the good peo∣ple, of these Nations, without any gainsaying or dispute. 20. Lord Faulconbridge, a Gentleman whose Relations are most Cavaleers, (his Uncle formerly Governor of Newark
for the King against the Parliament) was absent over the water in the time of the late Wars; a Neuter at least, if not disaffected to the cause; came back, the Wars being over, and hath lately marryed one of the Protectors Daughters, and was in a fair way (had things hit right) to have been one of his Council, as well as his Son-in law; however, (suitable to the times) he his lately made a Colonel of Horse: his Relation both to the old and new Monarchy, may sufficiently plead his worth and merits, not onely to have his Daughter, but also a Nega∣tive Voyce in the other House, over all that adventured their lives in the cause fotmrely, and over all the people of these Lands besides. 21. Colonel Howard, his Interest (which is con∣siderable) is in the North; his Relations there are most Papists and Caveleeres, whom he hath courted and feasted kindly, and served their Interest to purpose;An honest man told some of the Council worse things of him then these. it's no matter who lost by it: in favour to Sir Arthur Haslerigg, was made Captain of the Generals Life-Guard when he was in Scotland, wherein he continued for some time in En∣gland after he was Protector; but not being a Kinsman, or a person fur∣ther to be confided in, in that place, was shuffled out from thence; and to stop his mouth, made a Colonel, and, as the Book sayes, a Major General, and had power of Decimation; as also made Governour of Barwick, Tinmouth, and Carlisle; hah also tasted with the first, of that sweet Fountain of new honour, being made a Viscount: he was of the Little Parliament, and all the Parliaments since; is a Member of Mr. Cockains Church, and of very complying principles (no question) to the service of the new Court, from whence he received his new honour; and having with his fellow Lord Cleypole so excellent a spirit of Go∣vernment over his Wife, Family, and Tenants in the Country, to be ta∣ken out of the House to have a Negative Voyce in the Other House, might seem of right to belong unto him, being also lorded beforehand. 22. Lord Broghil, his Rise and Relation for means, is Ireland a Gentleman of good parts and wit, able to make a Romance, but was not looked on formerly by those of the Good Old Cause, as a person fit to be trusted with the Command of one Town or Castle in Ireland; yet he is now, by his happy change, become a goodly Con∣vert to be consided in, and is madeHis Salary 1474 l. per annum. President of the Protectors Council in Scotland: he was of the Latter Parliaments; a great King∣ling, and one that in the Last Parliament (so called) put on hard that way; wherefore it were great pity, he being also a Lord of the old Stamp, and so well gifted, if he should not be one to have a Negative Voyce in the Other House over the people of England and Scotland, as well as of Ireland; it being a good while since, and almost forgotten,
that the Protector said, It would never be well, and we should never see good days, whilst there was one Lord left in England, and untill the Earl of Manchester was called Mr. Montague. 23. Colonel Pride, then Sir Thomas, now Lord Pride, sometime and honest Brewer in London, went out a Captain upon the account of the Cause, fought on, and in time became a Colonel, did good service in England and Scotland; for which he was well rewarded by the Parliament: with cheap Debenters of his Souldiers and o∣thers, he bought good Lands at easie rates; gave the Long Parliament a Purge, fought against the King and his Negative Voyce, and was a∣gainst the Negative Voyce of his Brethren, the Lords Spiritual and Temporall, being unwilling to have any in the Land; but hath now changed his mind and principles with the times, and will fight for a Negative Voyce in the Protector, and also have one himself and be a Lord, for he is a Knight of the new Order already, and grown very bulky and considerable: it is hard to say how the people will like it. However, his worth and merits rightly measured, will, no question, render him fit to be taken out of the House to be one of the Other House, and to have a Negative Voyce not onely over the Bears, but all the people of these Lands, though he did formerly so oppose and fight against it: and the Noble Lawyers will be glad of his Company and friendship, for that there is now no fear of his hanging up their Gowns by the Scotish Colours in Westminster-hall, as he formerly so greatly boasted and threatn d to do. 24. Colonel Hewson, then Sir John, now Lord Hewson, sometime an honest Shoomaker, or Cobler in London, went out a Captain upon the account of the Cause, was very zealous, fought on stoutly, and in time became a Colonel, did good service both in En∣gland and Ireland, was made a Governour of Dublin, became one of the little Parliament, and of all the Parliaments since, a Knight also of the new stamp. The world being so well amended with him, and the sole so well sticht to the upper Leather, having gotten so considerable an Interest and Means, may well be counted fit to be taken out of the House to be a Lord, and to have a Negative Voyce in the other House over all of the gentle Craft, and Cordwayners Company in London, (if they please:) but though he be so considerable, and of such Merit in the Protectors, as also in his own esteem, not only to be a Knight, but also a Lord; yet will hardly pass for currant with the good people of these Lands, it being so far beyond the Last; neither will they think him fit (saving the Protectors pleasure) to have a Negative Voyce over them, though he formerly fought so stiffly against it in the King and Lords, in ore to set them free.
25. Colonel Barkstead, then Sir John, now Lord Barkstead, sometime a Goldsmith in the Strand of no great rank, went out a Captain to Windsor Castle, was somtime Governour of Reading, got at length to be a Colonel, then made Lievtenant of the Tower by the old Parliament. The Protector (so caled) finding him fit for his turn, continued him there, and also made him Major General of Middlesex in te Decimating business, and assistant to Major General Skippon in London: he is one to the life to fulfil the Protector's desires whether right or wrong, for he will dispute no demands, or make the least demur, but (in an officious way) will rather do more then his share: his principles for all Arbitrary things whatoever being so very thorough, let friends or foes come to his Den, they come not amisse so he gets by it; yea, rather then fail, he will send out his armed men to break open honest mens House, and seize their persons, and bring them to his Goal, and then at his pleasure turns them out: he hath e∣rected a principality in the Tower, and made Laws of his own, and executes them in a Martial way over all comers; so that he hath great command, and makes men know his power: he was of the latter Par∣liaments; is one of the Commissioners (like the Bishop Panders in the Kings dayes) for suppressing Truth in the Printing-Pesses, an oppression once the Army so greatly complained of; is for Sanctuary gotten in to be a Member of Mr. Griffith's Church; is also knighted af∣ter the new Order: and the better to carry on the Protectors Interest among the ear-board slavish Citizens, is lately become anHis Sa∣lary 2000 l. per annum. Alder∣man: so that he hath advanced his Interest and Revenue to purpose. His Titles and Capacities emblazoned, will sufficiently argue his worth and merits, and speak him out fully to be a man of the times, and e∣very way deserving to be yet greater, and (Haman-like) to be set high∣er. All which considered, it would seem a wrong not to have taken him out of the House, and made him a Lord of the Other House with a Negative Voyce there, as well as where he is; the rather, for that he knows so well how to exercise the same, having used it so long a season, as likewise that he may obstruct and hinder whosoever shall question or desire Justice against him for his wicked doings. 26. Colonel Ingoldsby, a Gentleman of Buck∣inghamshire, allyed to the Protector; he betook himself to the Wars on the right side as it happened, and in time became a Colonel: a Gen∣tleman of courage and valour, but not very famous for any great ex∣ploits, unless forbeating the honest Inne-keepers of Alisbury in White-hall, for which the Proector committed him to the Tower, but was soon released: No great friend of the Sectaries (so called) or the cause
of Freedom then fought for, as several of his then, and now Officers and Souldiers can witness; and although it be well known, and com∣monly reported, That he can neither pray or preach, yet complying so kindly with the new Court, and being in his principles for King∣ship, as also aHis Sa∣lary 1141 l. 3. s. 3. d. Colonel of Horse, and the Protectors Kinsman, he may well be reckoned fit to be taken out of the House and made a Lord, and to have a Negative Voyce in the Other House over the good people of this Land; the rather, for that he as a Gentleman, engaged and fought onely for money and honour, and nothing else. 27. Colonel Whaly, formerly a Wollen-Draper, or petty Merchant in London, whose Shop being out of sorts, and his Cash empty, no having wherewithall to satisfie his Creditors, he fled into Scotland for refuge till the Wars bgan, then took on him to be a Soul∣dier, whereby he hath profited greatly; was no great Zealot for the cause, but happening on the right side, he kept there, and at length was made Commissary General of the Horse: he was of these later Parlia∣ments, and being so very usefull and complying to promote the Pro∣tectors designes, was madeHis Sa∣lary 1141 l. 3. s. 3. d. Major General of two or three Coun¦ties: he is for a King or Protector, or what you will, so it be liked at Court; is with his little Brother Glyn, grown a great man, and very considerable, and wiser (as the Protector saith) then Major Generall Lambert, who having with his fellow Lords Cleypole and Howard, so ex∣cellent a spirit of Government over his Wife and Family, being also a Member ofNote tha man for what you may read in the Post-Script. Thomas Goodwins Church, no question need be made of his merit of being every way fit to be a Lord, and to be taken out of the House to have a Negative Voyce in the Other House over the people, for that he never (as he saith) fought against any such thing as a Negative Voyce. 28. Colonel Goff, (now Lord Goff that would be) sometime Colonel Vaughans Brothers Pretice, (a Salter in London) whose time being near or newly out, betook himself to be a Souldier instead of setting up his Trade; went out a Quarter master of Foot, and continued in the Wars till he forgot what he fought for; in time became a Colonel, and (in the outward appearance) very zealous, and frequent in praying, preaching, and pressing for Righteousnesse and Freedom, and highly esteemed in the Army on that account when honesty was in fashion; yet having at the same time (like his General) an evil Tincture of that spirit that loved and sought after the favour and praise of Man mor then that of God, as by wofull experience in both of them hath since appeared, he could not furthe believe or per∣severe upon that account, but by degrees fell off: and thi was he who with Colonel White, brought Musquetters and turnd the honest Members left behind in the Little Parliament out of the House. Com∣plying
thus kindly with the Protectors Designes and Interest, was madeHis Sa∣lary 1141 l. 3. s. 3. d. be∣sides Ma∣jor-Gene∣ralship. Major General of Hampshire and Sussex; was of the late Par∣liament, hath advanced his intere greatly, and is in so great esteem and favour at Court, as he is judged the onely fit man to have Major Gene∣ral Lamberts Place and Command, as Major General of the Army; and having so far advanced, is in a fair way to the Protectorship hereafter, if he be not served as Lambert was. He being so very considerable a person, and of such great worth, there is no question of his deserts and fitnesse to be taken out of the House to be a Lord, and to have a Nega∣tive Voyce in the Other House; the rather, for that he never in all his life (as he saith) fought against any such thing as a single person, or a Ne∣gative Voyce, but onely to put down Charles, and set up Oliver, and hath his end. 29. Colonel Berry, his Original was from the Iron Works, as a Clerk or Overseer, betook himself to the Wars on the Par∣liaments side, profited greatly in his undertaking, and advanced his in∣terest very far; who though he wore not the Jesters Coat, yet being so ready to act his part, and please his General, in time he became a Co∣lonel of Horse in the Army, afterward a Major General of divers Counties, a command fit for a Prince, wherein he might learn to lord it in an Arbitrary way beforehand at his pasure; that he is of com∣plying principles with the Court, his preferment sufficiently speaks out (neither ought any other be believed of him, or any of his brethren, without a real demonstration to the contrary) so that he may well pass for one to be a Lord, and to be taken out of the House to have a Negative Voyce over the people, being so far advanced and gotten out of the pit above them; and if he did formerly fight against a Ne∣gative Voyce, and lording it over the people, it may be forgiven him. 30. Colonel Cooper, sometime a Shop-keeper, or Salter in Southwark, a Member of ThomasNote him for that goodly speech he made to his new Prote∣ctor. Goodwins Church, one formerly of very high principles for common Justice and Freedom, like his brother, Titchborn. The Army then in Scotland, sending into England for faithful praying men to make Officers of, the honest people in the Burrough recommended him to the General, in order to have a com∣mand; who accordingly went down, but left his Principles behind him, and espoused other; was made a Colonel at the first dash; and though he began late yet hath so well improved his interest, as he hath alrea∣dy gotten as many hundreds per annum, as he had hundred pounds when he left his Trade: he hath a Regiment of Foot in Scotland, and another in Ireland, where he is Major General of the North in Ve∣nables Room, and Governour of Carrick fergus, so as he is a ve y hope∣ful
way to be a great man indeed: he was of the Latter Parliaments, and there is full proof that he is every way thorough paced and true to the new Court-interest: so that upon the whole, he also may be coun∣ted fit to be a Lord of the Other House, and to have a Negative Voyce over the good people in Swark, if they please, and al the people of these Lands beside, it being the Protectors plasure; the rather, he being the Mirrour of the times for thorough change of principles; Alderman Tichborn and O. P. excepted. 31. Alderman Pack, then Sir Christopher, now Lord Pack; his rise formerly was by dealing in Cloth, one at the beginning of the Long Pariament, was made an Alderman, was then very dis∣creet, and medled little, more like a Neuter or close Malignant, then a Zealot for the cause; was a Commissioner of the Customs also Sheriff, and Lord Mayor of London nxt after Alderman Vinor: the Protector taking on him the Goernment, the Sunshine of the new Court plea∣sed him, and brought him in full complyance: he was one of the Last Parliament, and zealous to re-establish Kingship in the person of theFor which good service, up∣on his Peti∣tion to the Protector, he dis∣charged him from an account of 16000 l. which he & others were lyable to make good to the Trea∣sury of the Customs. Protector, and judged the onely meet man to bring the Petition into the House praying him to accept of, and take it upon him; which though he then refused, yet (as it reported) hath since repented his then re∣fusal. Howeer, the now Lord Pack deserves well at his hands for that good service, who being a true Kingling, and of right Principles to the Court-interest, having also been a Lord (to wit, Mayor) once before, may upon the whole be counted very worthy to be again so called, and to have a Negative Voyce in the Other House over London, and all the people of these Lands beside. 32. Alderman Tichborn, then Sir Robert; (Knight of the new Stamp) now Lord Tichborn; at the beginning of the Long Parliament, when a great Spirit was stirring for Liberty and Ju∣stice, many worthy Petitions and Complaints were made against Pa∣tentees, the Bishops, and the Earl of Strafford: he being the Son of a Citizen, and Young, fell in and espoused the good cause and prin∣ciples then on Foot, and thereby became very popular, and was greatly cryed up by the good people of the City, &c. His rise was first in the Military way, where he soon became a Colonel, and by the Parlia∣ment made Lieutenant of the Tower of London; and though he was a Colonel, yet never went out to fight, but became an Alderman ve∣ry timely, and then soon began to cool and lose his former Zeal and Principles, and left off preaching (as his Pastor Mr. Lockyer did the Church) to his brother George Cockain. He was fterward Sheriff, and Lord Mayor in his urn; was also of the Committees for the sae of States Lands, whereby he advanced his Interest and Revenue con∣siderably:
out of Zeal to the Publick, he offered the Parliament to serve them freely as a Commissioner of the Customes, whereby he sup∣planted another, and planted himself in his room, and then with the rest of his brethren, petitioned the Committee of the Navy for a Sa∣lary, and had it; notwithstanding he was so well rewarded for his pains (after he had pretended to serve them for nothing) yet with his brother Col. Harvy and Captain Langham came off blewly in the end: He was of the little Parliament, and helped to dissolve it; one of the late Parliament also: he hath by degrees sadly lost his Principles, and forgotten the good Old Cause, and espoused and taken up another, be∣ing so very officious for the new Court-interest, and such a stickler for them, he is become a great Favorite: it's not hard to read his change, it being in so great Lettrs. Also things considered, he is (no question) fit to be called Lord Tichborn, being also so willing to receive and re∣solve to own that Title whoever maligns it, as also of the Judgment that whatever passes from him in any other name, will be void in law: wherefore to have a Negative Voyce in the Other House over London, and all the good people of these Lands, is very suitable to him; and what though he was so great an Opponent to those things formerly? it's no matter; then was then, and now is now, 33. Sir William Roberts, a Gentleman who in the time of the Bishops ruffling, went into Holland, and lived there for a season; the Parliament ruling, and in war with the King, came over again, and after the then mode, found favour, having upon the sore mentioned account been out of the Land, and was made a great Com∣mittee-man, and in much employment, whereby he well advanced his interest, and is grown a great man. He was of the little Parliament, and helped to break it, and then (according to Rev. 11.10.) rejoyced, and made merry with the rest of his brethren in Colonel Sydenhams Chamber, &c. as the Lawyers and other vild persons made Bon∣fires, and drank Sack at the Temple and elsewhere: but if ever a spirit of Life from God (which is not far off) comes in to raise up that honest Spirit by which some of them were acted, will not he, his bre∣thren, and the rest of that earthly rout, (the false Spirit of Magistracy and Ministry) be tormented and afraid? He was of the Parliaments since, and no doubt of right Principles to the Court inteest, wherein his own is bound up: Is one that helps on the bondage in divers greatHis Sa∣lary 900 l. per annum, though he hath a good state. Committees whee he sits; and is therefore, no question, the more fit to be called Lord Roberts, and to be taken out of the House to have a Negative Voyce in the Other House over the people, being so greatly experienced in that way already, having continued in the aforesaid Committee so long.
34. Col. John Jones, a Gentleman of Wales, one of the Long-Parliament, was a Commissioner in Ireland, for governing that Nation under the Parliament. One of good principles for com∣mon Justice and Freedom, had he kept them, and not fallen into tem∣ptation; he helped to change the Government, and make those Laws of Treason against a single persons Rule; hath a considerable Revenue, and it's likey did not lose by his employment: he is Governour of the Isle of Anglesey, and lately marryed the Protectors Sister (a Wid∣dow) by which means he might have become a great man indeed, did not something stick which he cannot well get down: he is not thorow-paced for the Court-proceedings, nor is his Conscience fully hardned against the Good-Old-Cause; but there is great hope (no question) that in time he may be towardly: however, (for Relation sake) he may be counted fit (with his Name-sake and Countrey-man Philip) to be called Lord Jones, and to be taken out of the House to have a Negative Voyce in the Other House over the People; and all his being against such things formerly, may be forgiven, and not once remembred against him. 35. Mr. Edmond Thomas, a Gentleman of Wales, of considerable means, a Friend of Ph. Jones, and allyed to Walter Strickland (both of the Council) and brought in upon their account; and of complying principles, no question, to say no more of him, (not having been long in play) being none of the great Zealots, or High-Se∣ctaries (so called) in Wales, may doubtless be counted wise and good enough to make a simple Lord of the Other House, and to be called Lord Thomas, and to have a Negative Voyce over all the good people in Wales, with his Country-men John and Philip, and over all the peo∣ple of these Lands besides. 36. Sir Francis Russel, Knight Baronet of the old Stamp, a Gentleman of Cambridgeshire, of a considerable Revenue: in the beginning of the Wars was first for the King, then for the Parlia∣ment, and a Colonel of Foot under the Earl of Manchester; a man (like William Sedgwick) high-flown, but not serious or substantial in his principles: he continued in his Command, till the New-Model, then took offence, and fell off, or laid aside by them; no great Zealot for the Cause, therefore not judged honest, serious, or wise enough to be of the Little-Parliament, yet was of these latter Parliaments: Is also Cham∣berlain of Chester at about 500 l. per annum; he marryed his eldest Daughter to Harry Cromwel second Son of the Protector, then Colo∣nel of Horse, now Lord Deputy (so called) of Ireland, another to
Colonel Reynolds, a new Knight, and General of the English Army in France, under Cardinal Mazarine, since (withWhite, Who assist∣ed Col. Goff to turn the honest Mem∣bers left be∣hind in the litlle Parli∣ament out of the House Let Goff look to it. Colonel White and others) cast away coming from Mardike; there is no question but his principles are for Kingship and the new Court, being so greatly con∣cern'd therein: wherefore it were great pity if he should not also be taken out of the House to be a Lord of the Other House; his Son-in-law being so great a Lord, and have a Negative Voyce over Cambridge∣shire, and all the people of these Lands besides. 37. Sir William Strickland, Knight of the old Stamp, a Gentleman of Yorkshire, and Brother to Walter Strickland, was of the Parliament a long time, but hath now it seems forgotten the cause of fighting with, and cutting off the late King's head, and suppressing the Lords, their House and Negative Voyce: He was of these Latter Parliaments, and of good complyance, no question, with the new Court, and setling the Protector anew in all those things for which the Kig was cut off: wherefore he is fit, no doubt, to be taken out of the House and made a Lord; the rather, for that his younger Brother (Walter) is so great a Lord, and by whom in all likely∣hood he will be steer'd to use his Negative Voyce in the Other House over Yorkshir, and the people of these Lands, to the interest of the Court. 38. Sir Richard Onsloe, Knight of the old Stamp, a Gentleman of Surrey, of good parts, and a considerable Revenue; he was of the Long Parliament, and with much ado (thorough his poli∣cy) steer'd his course between the two Rocks of King and Parliament, weather'd some sore Storms: was not his man taken in his company by the Guard in Southwark, with Commissions of Array in his Pock∣et from the King, and scurrilous Songs against the Roundheads? Yet by his interest rode it out till Colonel Pride came with his purge, then suffer'd loss, and came no more in play till about Worcester fight; when, by the help of some friends in Parliament, he was impowred to raise & lead as Colonel, a Regiment of Surry men against the Scots and their King, but came too late to fight, it being over: being popular in Surry, he was of the Latter Parliaments; is fully for Kingship, and was never otherwise, and stickled much among the 70 Kingsings to that end; and seeing he cannot have young Charles, old Oliver will serve his turn, so he have one; so that he is very fit to be Lord Onsloe, and to be taken out of the House; to have a Negative Voyce in the Other House over Surry if they please, and all the people of these Lands besides, whether they please or not.
39. Mr. John Fiennes, Son of the Lord Say, and Bro∣ther to Commissioner Fiennes, brought in, it's likely, for one upon his score, is in a kind such a one as they call a Sectary, but no great stickler; therefore not being redeemed from the fear and favour of man, will, it is probable, follow his Brother, who is (as it is thought) much steer'd by old Subtilty, his Father that lies in his Den, (as Thurloe by his Mr. St. Johns) and will say No with the rest, when any thing opposes the interest of the new Court their power and and greatness; & may therefore passe for one to be a Lord, and to have a Negative Voyce in the Other House over all in Oxfordshire (the University men onely excepted) and over all the people of these Lands besides. 40. Sir John Hubbard, Knight Baronet of the old Stamp, a Gentleman of Norfolk, of a considerable Estate, part where∣of came lately to him by the Death of a Kinsman: he was of these latter Parliaments, but not of the former; had medled very little, if at all, in throwing down Kingship, but hath stickled very much in helping to re-establish and build it up again, and a great stickler a∣mong the late Kinglings, who petitioned the Protector to be King; his principles being so right for Kingship and Tyranny, he is in great favour at Court as well as Dick Ingoldsby, and, no question, deservs to be a Lord, and to be taken out of the House to exercise a Negative Voyce in the Other House over all the good men in Norfolk, and all the people of these Lands besides, being become so very tame and gentle. 41. Sir Thomas Honywoood, Knight of the old Stamp, a Gentleman of Essex, of a considerable Revenue; he was a Committee-man in the time of the Long Parliament, and also a Mili∣tary man, an led as Colonel a Regiment of Essex-men to the fight at Worcester; came in good time, and fought well against Kingship and Tyranny in the House of the Stuarts; was of the last Parliament: he is not so wise as Solomon, or so substantiall and thorough in his princi∣ples for Righteousness and Freedom as Job, (chap. 29.) but rather soft in his spirit, and too easie (like a Nose of Wax) to be turned on that side where the greatest strength is: being therefore of so hopeful prin∣ciples for the New Court interest, and so likely to comply with their will and pleasure, no doubt need be made of his fitness to be a Lord, and to be taken out of the House to have a Negative Voyce in the O∣ther House, over all the good men in Essex (the now Lord of Warwick the Protector's Brother-in-law excepted) and all the people of these Lands besides.
42. Lord Ewre, a Gentleman of York-shire, not very bulky or imperious for a Lord; he was once well esteemed of for ho∣nesty, and therefore chosen to be one of the Little-Parliament; hath also been of all the Parliaments since: the York-shire men happily may like his being new Lorded, and that he should have a Negative Voyce over them; the rather, because they never chose him to any such thing: the Protector being so well satisfied with his principles, and easiness (like his Fellow-Lord Honywood) to be wrought up to do whatever their will and pleasure is, and to say No, when they would have him: it is very meet he also pass for one to be taken out of the House to have a Negative Voyce in the Other House, not onely over York-shire, but all the good people of the Common-wealth beside, being a Lord of the old Stamp already. 43. Mr. Hampden, (now Lord Hampden) a young Gen∣tleman of Buckinghamshire, Son of the late Colonel Hampden, that Noble Patriot and Defender of the Rights and Liberties of the English Nation, of famous memory never to be forgotten, for withstanding the King in the case of Ship money, being also one of the five impeached Members, which the said King endeavoured to have pulled out of the Parliament, whereupon followed such feud, war, and shedding of bloud. This young Gentleman, Mr. Hampden, was the last of 62, which were added singly by the Protector, after the choice of 60 together: it is very likely that Col. Ingoldsby, or some other Friend at Court, got a Cardinals Hat for him, thereby to settle and secure him to the Interest of the New-Court, and wholly take him off from the thoughts of ever following his Fathers steps, or inheriting his noble vertues; as likewise that the honest men in Buckinghamshire, and all other that are Lovers of Freedom and Justice, that cleaved so cordially to, and went so cheer∣fully along with his Father in the beginning of the late War, might be out of all hopes of him, and give him over for lost to the Good-Old-Cause, and inheriting his Fathers noble Spirit and Principles, though he doth his Lands. He was of the latter Parliament, and found right, saving in the Design upon which he was made a Lord after all the rest, and the Protectors pleasure. It is very hard to say, how fit he is to be a Lord, and how well a Negative Voyce over the good people of this Land, and his Fathers Friends in particular, will become the Son of such a Father; and how well the aforesaid good people (now called Secta∣ries) will like of it: but being it is as it is, let him pass for one as fit to be taken out of the House with the rest to have a Negative Voyce, and let him exercise it in the Other House over the good people for a Sea∣son.
Sir Arthur Haslerigg. Lord? No; stop there! not Lord Haslerigg, a Knight of the old Stamp, a Gentleman of a very large Estate and Revenue, was one of the Long Parliament, and one of the five impeached Members whom the King endevoured to have pul∣led out of the House with the other, but was hindered from doing of it; was a Colonel in the Army, and adventured far in the Wars, con∣tinued of that Parliament till the dissolution thereof; was also cho∣sen of these latter Parliaments, but not permitted to sit at the first; he was by the Protector (as may be seen in the printed List) cut out for a Lord of the Other House, and to have a wooden Dagger (to wit, a Negative Voyce) with the rest; but he missed his way, and instead of going into the Other House among the simple Negative men, theSee Armies Declara∣tion in Looking-Glass, pa. 5. (say they) The first ground and rise of Tyranny over the free People of this Nation, did proceed from the Ba∣stard of William, the sixth Duke of Normandy, who to prevent the English of all relief by their Parliaments, created Lords by his Pa∣tent and pogative to sit by Succession in the Parlia∣ment as Representers of his Conquest and Tyranny over us, and not by Election of the People as the Representers and Patrons of the Common∣wealth; and to make his u∣surpation firm and inviola∣ble, he subdued the Law gi∣ving power of the free Peo∣ple in Parliament to the Ne∣gative Voyce of himself and posterity; and under the yoke of this Norman Captivity and Vllainage, we have been held by that Succession to this very day, &c. See large Petition. Pag. 11, 12. of that Book. Off-spring of the Bastard of William, the sixth Duke of Normandy, he went into the Parliament-House among his fellow Englishmen, and there spake freely, bearing a good witnesse in behalf of the Good Old Cause, the Rights and Liberties of the people of England; at which the Court were vexed and sore dis∣pleased. However, for all this losing of his way, and the loss sustained by it, his Fame and Name amongst all true English spirits, will be higher and more honourable then the simple Title of a New Lord could make him: and instead of a Negative Voyce in the Other House, he will be honoured by after Ages as a rare Phoenix, that of forty four was found standing alone to his principles and the Good Old Cause so bled for: Oh sad and wonderfull! but one of forty four to be found standing firm to so noble a Cause as ever was on foot since the world began? Let all true English Spirits love and honour him, and that will be better then a Feather in his Cap, or a wooden Dagger. His Name for ever in the Chronicles will live as one that was a true Pariot of his Countries Liber∣ties; which noble action (if he persevere and be more refined in that honest spirit) may deservedly obliterate all humane frailties and miscarriages of his, during the sitting of the Long Parliament, and the free people of England may (doubtless) for ever bury them in oblivion. No question the Protector found he was mistaken in him, and that he was not fit to be a Lord, or to have a Negative Voyce, being of no more complying principles to his interest and Designes, and the then New Model of Government, and will scarcely a venture to give him a second invitation to that Honour and Dignity he so ungratefully and disdainfully sleighted.
There was one or two more of the new Champions that with their wooden Daggers went into the Other House to fight against the Rights and Liberties of the good people of these Lands; but their Names being wanting, and not worthy the enqiring after, nothing can be said of their noble Vertues, save tht in all likelyhood they were of such worthy principles as their fellows were of, and such as would concur to carry on any design or interest th y should be put up∣on, and would say No with the rest, when any thing ame in qestion that seemed to be against the Protector's height and absoluenesse, or interest of the new Court; which he that hath but half an eye may see, was the onely design of calling them thither, as a Balance of Go∣vernment to the Parliament, so greatly (though falsly) pretended for the good of the people. There were also of this chosen number of Sixty two, some of the old Earls and Lords called Peers, which stood off, (viz. three Earls, Warwick Musgrave and Manchester, and two Lords, Say and Wharton) and sate not at all, disdaining, as some thought, to sit with thee new Up-start Lords; though others again apprehend that this their forbea∣rance was onely out of their old State-policy, till they saw whether a House of Lords formerly so abominated and thrown down (by the consent and desire of the good people) would again be resented and established, and intended to come in; but I shall leave it: Some were in Scotland, viz. General Monk, Earl of Cassils, Lord Warriston, and Sir William Lockhart; which persons may also discover to him hat hath but half an eye, what a pitifull carnal low design they are carry∣ing on. Some in Ireland viz. Harry Cromwel Lord Deputy (so called) Recorder Steel, and Colonel Tomlinson: some it may be had no great mind to it, to wit, Colonel Popham, Mr. Peirpoint: others it's probable were letted by political or State-illness, or other occasions, viz. Chief Justice St. Johns, Mr. John Crew, Sir Gilbert Gerrard, so as they also appeared not, there being not above forty four or forty five of that worthy choyce of Sixty two, that appeared and sae there; and it's very likely some think there were too many of them. Thus for the Description and Narrative. Three or four General Quaries are further propounded for a Close to the whole; and it is humbly offered to all ingenious people, and queried. First, Whether if it should come to pass (as how soon we know not) that that noble spirit should (like a Lyon raised from sleep) rise again in the English people, such as it was in forty one or forty two, or about that time, whether these Champions with their Feathers in their Caps, and their Wooden Daggers, and those fifty three persons who pre∣tended to settle the Government by the Humble Petition and Advice,
would be able to fight with, stand against, and overcome the same any otherwise then their Predecessors the Lords Temporal, and the Bi∣shops the Lords Spiritual did then? And whether it would not in all likelyhood fare with them and their Dependents the Patentees of the Excise, and all others employed by them, that so oppress and im∣poverish the Nation, as formerly it did with them, if not far worse? They may please to think of it at their Leisure. Secondly, Whether in these five years now past of the Protectoral Government, that blessed Reformation which the Protector (then General) and other Grandees of the Army so often promised, and for not bringing forth of which they pretend they dissolved the Old-Parliament, hath so been set upon as to make any the least proceed therein? Or rather, hath there not been a gradual and an apparent re∣lapsing into those very Evils and Enormities formerly so greatly sha∣ken, and in some degree broken, but now healed again of their Wound, and flourishing afresh with open face; the spirit of wickedness and pro∣fanenss being risen very high, even among Professors, like the unclean Spirit cast out, and entring again? And in particular, that abominable corruption and abuse in the Law, and Administration of Justice, touch∣ing which the Protector (so called) sometime said, It was not to be en∣dured in a Christian Common-wealth, that some should so enrich and grea∣ten themselves in the ruine of others. So likewise that often complain'd of Grievance of Tythes; touching which he also said, (as was lately at∣tested in an open Court of Judicature, several standing by to witness the truth thereof, to whom the words were spoken) That if he did not take away Tythes, by the 3d of September next, (to wit. 1654.) or such a time, they should call him the greatest Juggler that ever was, and would juggle in all things else. Yet is there any thing done in either of these? or any thing gone about tending thereunto, now in these five years? as if it were so, that no fruit would ever grow upon such a Tree, (viz. the Monarchical Foundation) which the Lord hath pulled up and cursed, as the barren Fig-tree was: onely there is one goodly amendment, to wit a confirmation of the Act for treble damages, to the undoing of many an honest man, that upon conscientious grounds do scruple the payment of them. And as for the Law and the Lawyers, they are as before, if not much worse; and is there any ground of hope that the next five years (should he continue so long) will produce any btter fruit then the five that are already past? Thirdly, Whether this Calculation of these ignoble Lords of the New-Stamp, being of several Complexions, and standing in the afore∣mentioned Capacities and Relations, having also such dependence upon and lying under so great Engagements unto the Protector, (so
called) as his Sons and Kindred, Flattering Courtiers, corrupt Law∣yers, degenerated Sword-men, and a sort of luke-warm indifferent Country Knights, Gentlemen and Citizens, most of them self-interest∣ed Salary-men, be not likely (according to the very specious pretence) to prove a brave Balance of Government? And whether the good peo∣ple of this Land are likely to have their just Rights and Freedoms, or religious men the Liberty of their Consciences by this Constitution, any otherwise, then according to the pleasure of the Protector and the Court? Or than they had in the time of the late King? And whe∣ther this Calculation were made to any other end then so? Lastly, Whether, all things soberly weighed and considered, the Times be now so happy and blessed, as some do loudly bespeak them to be? And whether for the future we are likely to have such prospe∣rity, success, and good days, as some so largely promise themselves? and others it may be expected? Or whether such smiling upon old wickedness, and frowning and turning the back upon Righteousness, suppressing its growth, be any comfortable ground of such hope and expectation? Or whether upon the whole Series of things, as they now appear, there be not rather to be expected some sadder matter, if the Lord in mercy prevent not? Let the wise in heart consider. THE END.
READER, IF thy Patience be not quite worn out, read the following Postscript, which makes mention of the late flat∣tering Addresses, &c. it may concern you: As also, a Vindication of that faithful Friend to the Cause of God and his People, M. John Portmans, (late Secretary to the Fleet under General Blake) now Prisoner for Truth in the Tower, whom that ly∣ing Court-Pamphleter Nedham hath falsly aspersed and reproached in the late Diurnals. A Post-Script to the Reader. THE fore-going Narrative was composing and preparing to have come forth (like Apples of Gold in Pictures of Silver) in the fittest Season, during the life-time of Oliver the late Protector (so called) and calcu∣lated for that end, among other, that as in a Glass he might clearly see his Mutability and Changeableness in his Principles; as also his Ju∣das-like Teachery and Deceit, and how wickedly he had dealt with the Lord, his People, and the Nation, and the Righteous Cause on foot therein; but the Lord having in answer to the earnest Desires and Prayers of some of his faith∣ful Remnant, and in great mercy to the Nation, and the good People there∣in,
and the righteous cause, removed and taken him out of the way, it was thought fit however to publish it for the sake of his Associates and Confede∣rates he hath left behind him, who may happily make some use of it; as also that the standers by, yea, the whole Nation, might likewise see and judge of what hath lately fallen out in this our day. It is said of Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, That he not onely sinned himself, but made Israel to sin; and there were those of his Confederates that then sin∣ned with him,1 King. 15.34. compared with 2 King. 17.21, 22. and after he was dead and gone, of whom it is recorded, That they walked in the ways, and departed not from the sins of Jeroboam, the Son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin. The parallel hereof we have in England in this our day: Oliver the late Pro∣tector (so called) who (Jeroboam-like) so greatly appeared with the People for Justice and Freedom against Oppression, highly professing and declaring for the same, hath sinned in the breach of those Protestations and Declarations, in building again those things he had been so greatly instrumental to destroy; therein surpassing not onely the deeds of the Wicked who were cut off upon the like account, but also of Jeroboam, who never made such Professions and Declarations as he had done. There also are of his Confederates (as the Confederates of Jeroboam) that sinned with him in his Apostacy and Revolt, and do yet continue in those sins, and walking in his steps now he is dead and gone, as if they took no notice of the displeasure and wrath of God revealed from Heaven against him, in cutting him off for his unrighteousness. Israel smarted sorely for their evil, and at last were carryed away Captive: England hath likewise suffered, and is brought very low, at Tradesmen of all sorts, Shop-keepers, and others, both in City and Country, find by such sad and woful experience as rhey never did before, nor in the memory of man was the like ever known or heard of: and what may fur∣ther suffer, the Lord (who will not be mocked) onely knows. For how unworthy are the People of this Generation, not onely the more dark and sordid, but too many who profess to be Saints, and are Pastors and Members of Churches; nay, some who are Mercurial and more high flown, that once spake the Language of Zion, and highly appeared for the Good Old Cause, who notwithstanding they have seen the mighty Arm and Power of God displayed, in bringing down the unrighteous, oppressive, high and lofty Ones (with their Foundation) for their unrighteousness and oppression, yet have so far forgotten the Good Old Cause so signally owned from Heaven, and are so besotted and degenerated into a self seeking slavish, and enslaving Spi∣rit, as they not onely justifie, but strengthen their hands, who (instead of pres∣sing forward with more refinedness in that Work and Cause, leading to what it shall be when the Promises and Prophesies relating to the Kingdom of Christ and Zion shall be fulfilled) have made a Captain or Protector, and are gone back to Egypt, (to wit, the old wicked Foundation and things of Monar∣chy that have been destroyed) and thereby under a new name upholding and keeping the People under the old Oppressions.
And do say ofIn their Addres∣ses to his son Ri∣chard, his worthy Successor. Oliver their late Egyptian Captain, who hatched this Cockatrice Egg, and brought forth all his wickedness, and thereby did more hurt to the Nation then ever he did it good, and for which his Memory will deservedly for ever stink in the Nostrils of the Lord's faithful People, That he was a Moses, the great Father and Protector of his People, our late most worthy Prince that used all means to deliver us from Bondage, by whom we enjoy Freedom in Spiritual and Civil Government, &c. most excellent Prince of happy Memory, the famous Champion of our Liberties, &c. the Fa∣ther, Protector, and Buckler of these Nations, and the People of God, who res∣cued, procured, and maintained our just Liberties to us, &c. the great Assertor of the Liberties of God's People, and a Lover of their Civil Rights, &c. who well deserves to be a Pattern to all succeeding Princes, &c. our gracious Bene∣factor, a Nursing Father to his People, by whose hand the Yoke of Bondage hath been broken both from the Necks and Consciences of good People, &c. an Instrument of unspeakable Blessings, all whose great Enterprises the Lord constantly prospered with high success, &c. the great Protector of our Peace and Joy, who admirably got andHave you for∣got Hispaniola, and the war with Spain. never lost, but left three Nations in Peace, &c. We cannot but deeply re∣sent that stroke of Providence that took away the breath of our Nostrils, and smote our head from off our shoul∣ders, your most gloriously renowned Father. Our Elijah, &c. your most illustrious, accomplished, most glorious, heroical, most renowned, blessed, most holy, serene Princely Father, that sacred Person, the delight of our Eyes, our glorious Sun is set, that unspeakable loss, the Light of our Eyes, and the breath of our Nostrils, &c. But alas! This our Moses the Servant of the Lord is dead; and shall we not weep? If we weep not for him, yet we cannot but weep for our selves; we cannot but look after him, crying our Father, our Father, the Chariots of Is∣rael, and the Horsemen thereof, &c. Falsly and wickedly alluding to Moses and Elijah, those two, for ever to be honoured, faithful Servants of the Lord: with many other the like fawning, blasphemous, lying Expressions, have they, in these wicked Addresses, wherein they lye and flatter: for the Lord and his faithful Remnant know he was not so, especially in his latter days, but was ra∣ther acted by the back-sliding Spirit of Chora, Dathan, and Abiram, as also the famous and renowned Princes of the Congregation; yea, the Congregation it self, who rebelled against the Spirit of the Lord in Moses, Caleb, and Joshua, &c. and would not press on to Canaan, (the Work of that day) but said, Let us make aNumb. 14. Captain, and return into Egypt, and would have stoned Caleb and Joshua, because they would have had them gone forward: As also by the Spirit of Ahab, Jehu, and the rest of the backsliding wicked Kings of Israel and Judah.
The Spirit of the Beast and false Prophet in the former and present Mo∣narchs of this and other Nations, which the Lord hath, and will disown and curse; but not the Spirit of Elijah, Moses, Caleb, and Joshuah, the Lords faithful preserving ones of old, as by what is before and afterwards mentioned, doth too plainly and sadly appear; for he not onely endeavoured to establish him∣self in this Tyranny, but before his departure, when he scarce had his senses, or could hardly speak, appointed (as some report, though some speak otherwise, his fore-mentioned eldest Son Richard, to succeed him in the Government to sup∣port and maintain that Apostacy and Wickedness, which himself and Thurlo, &c. had been the first Contrivers, and then Actors of, thereby to hold us perpe∣tually under the old Monarchical Egyptian Bondage, which was no sooner ef∣fected, and he proclaimed, but the afore-mentioned Addressors, as they blasphe∣mously and flatteringly speak in way of honouring his Father, so in the same Addresses do they speak of hm, falsly and wickedly alluding to good Joshua, Solomon, and Elishan, who succeeded Moses, David, and Elijah, after their death, saying to this purpose: We humbly beg. That though your renowned Father, who as a designed In∣strument, helpt us out of Egypt (having Canaan in his Eve) was even then called to Mount Nebo to dye there; yet you, as another Joshua with his Spirit, re∣doubled upon you, may by the efficacious conduct of the Captain of the Lords Host, lead us into a more full possession of Truth and Righteousness, &c. In times of old, when God took away Moses from his People, in tender Mercy he gave them a Joshua to succeed him: Such are our hopes of your Highness. Gods aim and end in taking away his Moses was to usher you in, his Joshua, &c. But since it was the Will of God our glorious Sun should set, and that even whilest he was ascending we ought to submit unto it: it is no little Alleviation to our sorrow, that though our Sun be set, no Night hath followed, but our Evening hath been light, by raising your H ghness into your Royal Fathers Seat, &c. You are our great Master, the person designed by God and Man to reign over us, &c. It begets no little joy in our spirits, when we behold the Son of that Father by a Divine Providence succeed him in the Throne by his own appointment, given us a most choice Legacy, and his last Blessing, &c. A Pledge of Divine Love and Goodness to these Nations, &c. Some saying, If his Father had not appointed him to succeed him, the common interest and peace of the Nation, without Gods Assistance, had perished together with him, &c. Happy Successour, n whom we shall be able to say, Mercy and Truth are met to∣gether, under whose Government, Righteusness and Peace hath kissed each other, of whose exceeding Vertues and Endowmnts we have had experience, &c. God hath been pleased in the midst of Judgment to remember Mercy, in appointing your Highness to succeed your Father; your most excellent serene Highness, a Branch of that Princely Stock, on you our hopes rest, Richard by the Grace of God Lord Protector; your most serene Highness, our Soveraign and General, the Noblest Branch of that Renowned Stock: and desire that he might build up unto perfection upon that (wicked) Foundaion which his Fathers blessed hand had laid. And pray, that the spirit of their departed Elijah, even the Chariots and Horsemen of Israel might rest upon him, &c.
And a great deal more of this blasphemous flattering stuff, which would be too tedious to relate: Which Addresses, The Humble Petition and Advice, being so often mentioned, and their desiring him to keep the Sword-Military in his hand, the Design in them, and strain of expressions so like to other, begets a shrewd suspition, they were rather hatch'd at the Court by Secretary Thurlo, and the old malignant Pamphleter, lying, railing Rabshakeh, and defamer of the Lords People, Nedham, alias Mercurius Pragmaticus, who formerly writ for the King against the Parliament; and by their Mercenary Emissaries and Agents suggested to, and forced upon the simple People (as the Address to his Father were formerly upon the Army and elsewhere, rather then in their first motion naturally flowing from the Addressors; which the Lord in due time will dis∣cover: And not onely these, but also that great Independent Docto (so cal∣led) Thomas Goodwin, he (Aaron-like) comes in as a Leader, one of the first among them, to encourage the rejoycing and dancing about this new Golden Calf, and in the speech that he made (pretendedly in the name and by the ap∣pointment of the Pastors and Messengers of above one hundred Congregatio∣nal Churches from several parts of the Nation (as says the Pamphlet) says he, We come with hearty acknowledgment of the best Liberties, enjoyed under your Hghness now blessed Father, &c. all which have been continued to us through the Protection of the great Mordecai, that sought the Weal of his Peo∣ple and spakeWas impri∣soning the Lords people for their faithful∣nesse to the Good-Old-Cause, and lea∣ving them there when he dyed, a Morde∣cai's spirit, and a flattering peace? Well said Doctor. Peace to all his Seed: blessed be God for his unspeakable gift, &c. which we are here come joyntly to acknowledge to your Highness, &c. We also come full of rejoycing, blessing God for so happy and quiet a settle∣ment of the Nation and Government in your person and succession: Solomon, though he had his name from Peace, yet was not his first entrance so peaceable as this of yours, &c. And after mentioning, about what they met at the Savoy, and that his Father knew of the Meeting before-hand, and approved of it, and of a Declaration they had drawn up to clear themselves from the aspersions laid upon them, and laying down therein what the Principles of the Indepen∣dents were, &c. And now (says he) we present to your Highness what we have done, and com∣mit to your Trust the common Faith once delivered to the Saints of the Go∣spel and the saving Truths of it, being a National Endowment bequeathed by Christ himself at his Ascention, and committed to some in the Nations behalf; committed to my trust, saith Paul, in the Name of the Ministers; and we look at the Magistrates asTo wil, Keeper of both Tables. Custos utriusque tabulae, and soDo not these severall Churches by their silence, hold forth that they consent to what their Pa∣stors and Mes∣sengers have done herein? and so are fallen in with, and Abettors of the Apostacy of this day? And if it be not so, ought they not to declare against it? commit it to your trust as our chief Magistrate, &c and we bless you out of Zion, &c. Whith practice and speaking, especialy considered as the Case now stands, and as to the Person to whom it is spoken, having also (according to the Doctors sence) no footing in Scripture, is the Practice and Language of Babylon, and not of Zion, and greatly discovers, that the po Doctor neve had a true Tincture within him, or taste of sweetness in Communion with God in discovery of that Glory of Zion, and Kingdom of Christ, he so largely hath spoken and writ of, but had it from Books and Hear-say; for it is impossible, that one who hath truly tasted of that Glory, except he be desperately infatuated, or holds falling away, should bring forth such cursed untimely fruit, so contrary to the true light
and spirit of Zion, as this is. Was not the Bishops, and the simple Clergy, who were acted by their fear or favour, formerly condemned by him & others for styling the late & former Kings, Defenders of the Faith, and supreme Head of the Church under Christ; so generally acknowledged in its original to proceed from Harry the 8. who for self-ends, not the glory of God, dethron'd the Papal Power in England, and took the Popes (usurped) Supremacy and Title of De∣fender of the Faith, as well as the Tythes and First-Fruits, upon and to himself. Is it not the general received Principle of Independents and other Sectaries (so called) who are clear-sighted (and not without ground) to plead against such a Tenent? But these things declare, that Mr. Goodwin sucks such sweetness from the great Soveraignty, Honour, and Profit of Magdalen Colledge in Oxford, & hath therewith drawn in such a Tincture of that Spirit, which naturally and usually breaths in persons inhabiting those places, as he is loth to be weaned from it; & therefore will, right or wrong, turn in and comply with any thing, so he may keep his interest there: It will be well for him if I am mistaken. But I leave what may further be spoken to this Subject, to a better Pen, who may take it in hand when his Book comes forth in Print. And together with him, that cringing Court-Chaplain Peter Sterry, that also bows to what ever is up∣permost, speaking higher then all this, as is credibly reported by several godly men that heard him to their astonishment: holding forth his Bible in the Chappel of White-Hall, he spake to this purpose: That if that were the Word of God, then as certainly that blessed Holy Spirit (meaning the late Protector) was with Christ at the Right Hand of the Father; and if he be there, what may his Family and the People of God now expect from him? for if he were so use∣ful and helpful, and so much good influenced from him to them when he was in a mortal State, how much more influence will they have from him now he is in Heaven? the Father, Son, and Spirit, thorow him bestowing gifts & graces, &c. upon them. And a great deal more to this purpose: and as he spake thus blasphemously of his Father, so the same Spirit running in the aforementioned flattering Addresses, breath'd from him to his Son (the now Protector so cal∣led) which also greatly discovers within what walls he breaths: But I shall let the Father pass, and speak a little of the Son his Successor, and in short, a little answer to those flattering, blasphemous, ungodly expressions, couched in the late Addresses to him, as if he were a second Solomon, Joshua, or Elisha. Oh you blasphemous, lying, flattering Cycophant Addressours in City, Country, Army, &c. or Off-spring of Thurlo and Nedham the Pamphleteer, who are so ready to cry up Adonijah the false, and to cry and keep down Solomon the true spirit of Magistracy! give me leave a little to reason with you: What eminent appear∣ing Work of Grace, or of the Image of God, did you ever experience in and up∣on him, or heard of from others, not acted by a self-seeking, fawning, servile spirit, but truly fearing the Lord? What eminent action for God, his Cause, or People, did you ever see or hear he did, either in his Fathers life-time, or since his death, that you so highly speak? and allude, as if he had a Joshua, So∣lomon, or an Elisha's spirit? Is Hawking, Hunting, keeping Race-horses, and riding Horse-matches, to the endangering of the lives, both of Horse and Men; wherein, for the most part, the most carnal of Professors, and the worst of men are oftenest exercised, and must therefore of necessity be his com∣panions, such a demonstration of those noble vertues and high endowments you so speak of to be in him?
Pray bear with me, that I thus reason with you; for my spirit is grieved when ever I read or think of these your late Addresses; and it is fully setled in my heart, & I can believe no other, but that it is a carnal, unbelieving, selfish, filthy spirit, by which you are acted, & which the Lord by his spirit in his People hath already, & will further discover, blow upon, & consume. Doth the following words and action declare him to be what you so speak of him? I wi l tell you what is commonly reported amongst honest men, which I had from a good hand, and am fully satisfied is very true, yea, and more then I shall here relate: One Cornet Sumpner in Col. Ingoldsby's Regiment, knowing the wickedness & naughtiness of Major Babington (Major thereof) to be such as to dis-own and brow-beat the honest men in the Regiment, and to countenance Drunkards, Liars, Swearers, and Haters of Goodness, and good men, being for a long time grieved thereat in his Spirit; at length (by the advice of some minent in the Army) drew up several Articles to present to a Court-Martial, or elsewhere against him; which your most illustrious, serene, and renowned Protector, the In∣heritour of his Fathers noble vertues, hearing of, sends for the Cornet to come unto him: who when he was come, the Major and Col. Ingoldsby, &c. being al∣so present, your Joshua, Solomon, and Elisha, spake after this manner to him: Josh. What? have you Articles against your Major? Corn. Yes. Josh. What are they? Corn. A pretty numher of them. Then the Major began to answer to one, but nothing to the purpose; but before the Major had done, your most se∣rene Protector, or Joshua, unjustly takes part with the Major to help him out, saying to the Cornet; You article against your Major because he is for me? you are aMeaning the Officers who often met to sek the Lord, and be∣wail their Apo∣stacy fom the Good Old Cause. company of Mutineers, you deserve a hundred of you to be hang∣ed; and I will hang you, and strip you as a man would strip an Eele; you talk of preaching and praying men, they are the men that go about to undermine me. And clapping his hand upon Col. Ingoldsby's shoulder, said, Go thy way Dick Ingoldsby, Thou canst neither preach nor pray, but I will believe thee be∣fore I will believe 20 of them, And says he to the Cornet, You never owned my Father; you have lst your Commission, and shall never ride more in this Army, &c. and a great deal more to this purpose, which I leave to Pragmaticus (formerly the old, now the new Court-Pamphleter) more perfectly to relate. Is this speaking or action, the righteousness and peace-kissing each other, that you so speak hath been since he took the Government upon him? Or would Jo∣shua, Solomon, or Elsha thus take part with wickedness and wicked men, and do so unrighteous and wicked an action, and speak thus profanely and wickedly? Surely no: Wherefore acknowledge your iniquity, and lye low before the Lord for these your blasphemous, lying, flattering Expressins in your wicked Addres∣ses, whereby you have so reproached and wronged good Joshua, Solomon, and Eisha, in making such undue Comparisons: wherefore repent, you flattering Courtiers, Peter Sterry, and the other Court-Chaplains: Repent, repent, Tho∣mas Goodwin, and ye Pastors and Messengers of (as it's said) above an hundred Congregational Churches in England. Repent you Apostate-Army; Repent you Mayor, Aldermen, Common-Councel, and Militia of London, whose Principles are so base and mercenary, & like a Beast looking downward, as to side with (whether right or wrong) what∣ever is uppermost, like your Sword-Bearer and Officers, who cry Grace, grace, and bow to one Lord Maior to day, and do the same to the next the morrow.
Repent also you Presbyterian Classical Ministers of the City, &c. who by the perswasion of 3 or 4 eminent self-interested Cycophants among you, were drawn in against your Light and Consciences, to carry your bodies to White-hall (leaving your hearty good will at home) to address your selves to this new Golden Calf, as an owning of him; and this from unbelief and slavish fear of being frowned upon, or losing your Parish-places. Will such a Practice as this stand good before the Lord in the day of your account? Repent also all of you for spending 50 or 60000 l. about a Heathenish Popish Funeral Pomp, not one∣ly wicked in it self, but at a time when so many Tradesmen and others break, and are ready to starve; and when yu had done, then following an Image of Wax to Westminster, as if it had been a dead mans body; wherein you lyed unto, and mocked both God and Man. Repent also you Country Professos, & others, of these flattering, blasphemous, lying Addresses, and speak nor do no more so wickedly, lest the Judgments of the Lord break in upon you, as upon back-sli∣ding Israel of old, and your Carcasses fall in the Wilderness, &c. as theirs did, for making, and then dancing about the Moulten Calf, and their desiring to make a Captain to return into Egypt, and opposing the Spirit of the Lord in Moses, Caleb, and Joshua, and his work in that day. And take heed, Oh you Par∣liament, that you do not say, or do as thse have done; whom I so call, if you keep close to, and endeavour the promotion of the Good Old Cause, and cast out the false spirit of the Egyptian Bond-woman, the Protector (so called) and his Lords, and make way for, and bring in the Spirit of Zion, the Free-woman, the true Spirit of Magistracy, by Judges asd Counsellors as at the beginning, men fearing God, and hating Covetosness, and faithful with all the Saints. If you thus proceed, my self, and the Lords faithful People will love, own, live, and dye with you: if not, we shall abhor and disown you, as we did the former, and now Protector and his Lords, and shall trust God with our Liberties, and not fear your Frowns. And now a word for your encouragement, my Friends, who remain faithful to the Lord in this evil day; and are, as it were, in the Clefts of the Rocks Cant. 2.14.) and secret places of the stairs, in pain, crying, and praying night and day, giving the Lord no rest (Isa. 62.6, 7.) till he revive the Good Old Cause, and cause the righteousness of Zion to go forth as brightness, and the Salvation thereof as a Lamp that burneth, and until he make Jrusalem a praise in the Earth: whose voyce, in his account (going forth in the power of his spirit from the sweetness you have tasted in communion with himself in the discovery of this glory) is sweet, and countenance is comely, and unto whom he will in the best time say, Rise up my love, my fair one, and come away; for lo, the Winter is past, the Rain is over and gone, Isa. 26.20. The flowers appear on the earth, Isa. 35.2. Chap 51.3. The time of the singing of birds is come, Isa, 35.6. And the voyce of the Turtle is heard in our Land, Zach. 12.10. And will rejoyce o∣ver you as the Bridegroom over the Bride, with joy and singing, and will rest in his love, Zeph. 3.17. compared with Isa. 62.5. Wherefore be not dampt or discouraged in your spirits at the hearing and sight of the late Addresses, nor at the great Cloud of Witnesses therein seeming to own the present and former Governour. What though many of them are men of s ch raised gifts and parts, and appearing grace, which to such as have not their eyes in their heads, and look not wihin the vail, may have an appearance the Lord doth own them, & approves of what hath been formerly and lately done? For though they are
so great a Cloud of Witnesses, yet they are but Witnesses in the Clouds, whose Testimony, Carnal Wisdom, Policy, and Arm of Flesh, will passe away like the morn∣ing Cloud, or early dew: for the Spirit of the Lord in his People, like the waters, Isa. 28.17. hath overflown and looked into their hiding place, abhor'd and blown upon them, therefore follow not a multitude to do evil. What though there be so many Prophets, great Scholars, learned Astrologers, and wise-men among them? yet know, That amongst almost 400 Prophets in the dayes of Ahab and Jehosaphat, but one Micaiah, a true Prophet that had the mind or God, among all the Congre∣gation that were going from Egypt to Canaan; among whom were many renowned Princes, Priests, and famous men, yet onely Moses, Caleb, Joshua, &c. that truly fol∣lowed God, Numb. 14. Among all the wise men in Babylon, but one Daniel a true Prophet, Dan. 2.19. But one Noah a Preacher of Righteousness, and faithful in his generation before the Flood, Gen. 7.1 One Lot in Sodom. Among the seven Chur∣ches, Rev. 2.3. but two, to wit, Philadelphia, and Smyrna, whom the Lord ap∣proves of; but the other so carried it, (except a few among them) as he said it should be manifested they belonged rather to the Synagogue of Satan, then to the Churches of Christ. When the great destruction comes upon wicked men, a little before or upon the call of the Jews, but a handful, or as the gleaning grapes when the Vintage is done, shall lift up their heads, and rejoyce and glorifie God in the fires, Isai. 24. They onely who speak often one to another when wickednesse is set up, and they that tempt God are delivered; alluding to Israel, who would have made a Captain to return again to Egypt; or rather the Apostacy of this our day, that the Lord owns all those who fear him, and have the promise of the Sun of Righteousness to arise upon them, Mal. 3. The false spirit of Magistracy in Adonijah aspiring to the Go∣vernment, had the assistance of the Kings sons, Abathar the Priest, Joab the General, and all the Captains of the Host, &c. who with slaying of Oxen, &c. eating and drinking, said, God save Adonijah; and carryed it for a time against Solomon: but the spirit of Solomon, Nathan the Prophet, &c. who had the true spirit of Govern∣ment and Prophesie, approved not of, or consented to it, but were for the true spirit to rule, 1 K ng. 1. And so it is at this day; and blessed be the Lord, that our eyes do see a people crying, longing, and will not be at rest, till the earthly selfish spirit of Magistracy be brought down, and the self-denying Magistracy or Horn of David now bdding n Zion, come in its room, sl. 132. Wonder not, neither be turned aside because of that great multitude on the one hand, or smallness of the number on the other, that truly and indeed appear for, and own the cause of God; but stand close, and be more refined in the light and spirit of Zion, and keep your ground; for the Lord hath so appointed, That the foot shall tread it down, to wit, the meanest of the Saints: for it is very probable, that many of the great and wise Saints, accord∣ing to Rev. 18 4. shall be found in the borders, and supporting the things of Babylon, and casting out their Brethren (Isa. 66.5.) saying, Let the Lord be glorified; and ha∣ving the mist of Babylon before their eyes, shall say, The Lord delayes his coming, and will be beating their fellow-servants: onely the e (to wit, the upright conversation) of these poor ones who desire to keep close to God, and not to touch with Babylon; and steps, to wit, the faith, prayers, and honest endeavours of these needy ones, who long for, and cannot be at rest, till judgment, so visibly, return unto righteousnesse, that all the upright in heart may follow it: These shall tread down the lofty City, Isai. 26. The least of the flock shall draw them out: the people that shall bring down
the enemies of God in the latter dayes, are a small and feeble remnant: when the Lord comes to destroy Babylon, and to build up Zion, he will find but a few upright ones, and those very destitute, helpless, and some of thm prisoners too, for their witness to the true Magistracy and Ministry of Zion, whose prayers he will hear, and not despse, and bring forth to declare his glory in Zion, who shall in a holy triumph and rejoycng say, O Lord, thou art our God: we will exalt thee, we will praise ty Name, for thou hast done wonderful things, thy Councels of old are faithfulnss and truth, &c. Lo, this is our God, we have waited for him, he will save us, we will be glad and rejoyce in his salvation. Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace whose mind is stayed on thee, because he trusteth in thee. Trust in the Lord for ever, &c. Isai. 25.1, 9. Chap. 26 2, 3. Which good and comfortable words shall certainly be made good; for heaven and earth shall passe away, but not one tittle of the Word shall passe till all be fulfilled. I the Lord will hasten it in its time, Isa. 60.33. with Jer. 33.25, 26. Hab. 2.3. Read these Scriptures. Wherefore strengthen ye the weak hands, and confirm the feeble knees, &c. Isa. 55.3, 4. And you, my dear Friends, Common-wealths-men (so called) who so greatly seem to presse for righteousnesse and freedom, labour to bring forth this righteousness, not by a common moral spirit and principle, but by the spirit of Zion, a lively, spiri∣tual, active frame of spirit, to wit, that frame mentioned 2 Sam. 23. (not to be pul∣led and haled to do the good that lyes before you, that is more sutable to the unjust Judge) but be as ready to help and refresh, and therein be as suitable to delight the oppressed that come unto you, as the light of the morning when the Sun riseth with∣out Clouds, is to those who have lost their way in a dark night, and as the tender grass springeth out of the earth by clear shining after rain: this is the Spirit of the Horn of David, that shall bud in Zion, Psal. 132. The consideration whereof in the first manifestation and declaration of it by the Spirit unto and by David, having thereby a taste of that glory upon his spirit, made him to break forth into a holy tiumph and rejoycing, saying, And this is all my salvation and all my desire, al∣though he make it not to grow, (to wit, in his day.) Leave no stone unturn'd, no means unus'd to let the people who come unto you, speedily know one way or other what they shall trust to: Say not, Go, and come again to morrow, if you can do it to day; delayes are burdensome and chargeable. Job, from the secret of God being upon his Tabernacle, and the precious dew of the Spirit compassing his root, and lying all night upon his branch, had much of this blessed frame upon his spirit, He put on and clothed himself with righteousnesse; and had more love to judgment then to the robe and diadem; and upon that account, he was eyes to the blind, feet to the lame, a father to the poor, and the cause which he knew not, he searched out, Chap. 29. It concerns you, and is worth your reading. This will be the frame of the handful of corn in the earth, Psal. 72. (or mountain establisht upon the top of the Mountains, Mich. 4.1, 2.) the fruit whereof shall shake like Lebanon, they shall not be shaken by others, but themselves will shake off their fruit: then will you be and do according to the heart of God, and having this excellent spirit so freely, to make it your meat and drink to execute judgment, and therein to make your shadow as the night in the midst of the noon-day to the oppressed, you will abhor to bewray (to wit) give up their right and freedom into the hands of Tyrants and Spoylers. To be to the oppressed as a hiding place from the wind, a covert from he tempest, as the shadow of a great rock in a weary land, and as rivers of water in
a dry place, standing open ready to refresh those that are thirsty, will be the frame of Christ and the Saints (the Horn of David) that shall reign in righteousnesse, &c. Isa. 31:1, 2. Then those that dwell under your shadow shall return, (from their op∣pression) revive as the Corn, and grow as the Vine; and your savour among both good and bad concern'd in you, will be as the wine of Lebanon, Hos. 13. and shall say, The Lord blesse thee, thou habitation of Justice, &c. and wait for, (to wit, desire after you) as (the dry ground) for the rain, and open their mouths wide as (the mowed parch'd ground) for the latter rain, Job 29.23. The foundation of the eternal welfare of your souls being first laid thorough faith in Chrst, and an holy unblameable conversation, (without which you cannot attain unto the other) it wll then be your crown and rejoycng to forget the thngs behind, and to come up hi∣ther; or herein doth the Lord delght, as also will be the great glory of the latter dayes:) and as you are in the power, glory, and sweetnesse of his Spirit herein ex∣ercised, will he delight in, and rejoyce over you, and you will live as it were in hea∣ven while you are upon the earth, and he will be for your protection, as a place of broad rivers and streams, wherein shall go no Gally with oars, or gallant ship passe thereby, &c. Isa. 33. Yea, your bow (as Jobs) renewed in your hand, to shoot at your enemies upon all occasions. The presence of God being thus with you, your terrour will be upon all both at home and abroad that have a mind to hut you, ac∣cording to Psal. 48. God is known in her Palaces for a refuge: for lo, the Kings were assembled, they passed by together, they saw it, and so they marvelled, they were troubled, and hasted away: fear took hold upon them there, and pain as of a woman in travel; thou brakest the ships of Tarshish, &c. This salvation and forementioned righteousness, is the righteousness and salvation of Zion, spoken of Isa. 62.1. which those who understand and taste the glory and sweetnesse of, cannot, will not hold their peace, or be at rest, till it go forth as brightnesse, or as a lamp that burneth. This is the true Spirit of theDan. 2.44. Stone that disturbs and will destroy the beast and false Prophet. Be growing up in your light, and in the frame of your spirit to these things, in or∣der to which, pray for the dawnings of that measure of the Spirit which the Lod hath promised to pour forth in the latter dayes. The ordinary measures of the Spirit relating onely to the work within, will not do it; therefore is it that so many Saints at this day turn in with the spirit and things of Babylon. Do not (like Alderman Tichborn) pretend to serve your Country freely, and aferwards take great Salaries: The people are poor, and it is your duty that have Estates, to take nothing from them except they freely give it: So ought also the Ministers of Christ to do. With other Scriptures read Micha 3. A word on the behalf of that faithful Servant of the Lord, Mr. John Portmans, now close Prisoner under lock night and day in the Tower of London, so that none may come with freedom to visit him. Prov. 31.18. Open thy mouth for the dumb, in the cause of all such as are appointed to destruction. THe Reader may take notice, That Mr. Portmans (formerly Secretary to the Navy) could not in conscience continue his employment under this Apostacy, though it were worth more then 300 l. per annum; and for his faithfulnesse to the cause o
God, his People and the Nation, hath (amongst others) been a sufferer unto Bonds in the Tower this 17 of the 11 moneth 1658, a year want ng 3 weeks, never hearing what was laid to his charge, or that there was any to accuse him of evil: having de∣manded of Col. Barkstead his Jaylor (when first brought in by his Soulders) what his Crime was? could get no answer; niher was there any exprest in the Warrant by which he was apprehended; the substance whereof was, hat he should be rought into the Tower to be kept untill te further pleasure of the late Tyrant, whom the Warrant blasphemously styled his Hghness the Lord Proctor: who being lately dead, Mr. Portmans took notice of it n a Ltter to Col. Barkstad, deliveed to hs hand by two faithful Bethren, meekly demanding, If he hd ny further Warrant to continue him a prsoner? If he had, hat then h might have a Copy, or at least the sight of it; which if he had not, in some short time, he must conclude there was none; and thereore his occasions to go forth for the well-beng of his Family urging him to it, he should assay to attend uon them: but if upon Tyal he found the foce continued, he must consider what might be hs further duty. This for substnce, but with more plainness was intimated in the Letter, and accordingly a week after, not hearing rom him, about three in an afternoon, not disguised, but in his constant ha∣bit, he went to the gate, expecting to be stopped, rather then otherwise; but finding the passage free, went foth to his Brother-in-laws house, not with an intent to con∣ceal himself; from whence he was again taken within an hour. This is briefly and truly the matter of Fact, and may, it's hoped, justifie him in his attempt not to be left to any thing unbecoming a sober Christian: yet was he the rather induced thus to do, upon words not long before spoken by Col. Barkstead, viz. That he might go out if he would. Asking some friends, If there were no way to perswade him to it, &c. There needs nothing be said to such as know that foul-mouth'd Malignant Nedham, to wipe off the reproach he hath raised in his Pamphlet, That Mr. Portmans should say, He would not go out if the gates were open, untill he was satisfied for his imprisonment, to go about to do it, were to imply, that the Pampleteer did sometimes speak truth; which should he do, he would be utterly disabled to serve his Masters, who make lies their refuge, and hire him at no small charge (as a means to uphold their own reputation) to asperse the faithful in the Land: yet considering the report may come to those that know him not, such may be assured, That Mr. Portmans never spake ny such thing, but hath ever declared, That he should not continue there, were the force he is under removed. But by all the noyse hath been made of this matter in the News-Books, they onely declare how grateful it would be to have any thing to colou over their unrighteous proceedings, and justifie themselves in their hard and mo e then Heathenish usage of such as dare not say a confederacy with them in their Apostacy; for unto this hour, after now almost a years imprisonment, and at this time so close, as that he is locked up night and day, can he not hear of Accusation or Accuser, or so much as a Warrant for his Detension, other then as is before mentioned, That he should be taken and kept during the pleasure of the deceased Tyrant: which may become every true Englishman to be sensible of; for who knowes whose lot it may be next, to feel the like oppression, when it shall please our Task-makers to impose it?
A Third Narrative. IN the afore-going Narrative, you have an Account of the Actors upon the Stage, in this present Juncture of Time, the eminent Lords of the Other House: It is intended in this Supliment to take a General View of all the Alterations that hath happened, their Rise and Cause; and then consider the pre∣sent Debates in Councel of Parliament. The first Original Cause of disturbing the Mindes of the whole Nation of England, as well as that of Scotland, was the pride of the Bishops, who not contenting themselves with the power set∣led in their hands, in the Days of Queen Elizabeth; but invading the Civil-Power, and taking Cognizance of Civil-Causes, and imposing upon the Consciences of the just Religious People, and promoting of New Ceremonies in the Church, gave thereby occa∣sion of dislike to the good people of this Nation; they engaging the late King in the Quarrel, the which weakned his power over his Subjects, and gave thereby opportunity for the late Civil and Unnatural War. While they were thus building this Fabrick of Ecclesiastical Tyranny, they take to their Aid several of the great men of the Court; and to espouse them into a Quarrel with the people, un∣der-hand aided them in gaining Monopolies of most of the ven∣dible and staple-commodities of the Nation: all which discon∣tented the people in such sort, that the Kings Commanders were every where disobeyed, and slighted by his Subjects: insomuch,
that when he waged war with the Scots, he had con∣tracted such great debts, that he was necessitated to call a Parlia∣ment, without which Authority, the Subjects wuld not submit to payments of any kind whatsoever. A Pacification is made with the Scots, in hopes to make use of these Arms raised to op∣pose them if they would thereupon have layed down their Arms. Then the Arms in the Kings hands, should have been made use of to awe the English Nation, and reduce them to conform to the exorbitants, and Illegal wiles of the corrupt Ministers of State. But that prevailing not, a second Parliament is called, and made triennial: they disband both Armies, and take upon them to question divers who had abused the King and Kingdom; the King suffereth some of his friends to fall into their hands: others he defends by taking Arms, and settleth a Commission of Array, contrary to the advice of his Council: who advised him not to put his life and power, into the Scales of an uncertain War: espe∣cially, since that upon the aforegoing considerations, of his people being incensed by the invading of their Liberties and just Rights, his disadvantages were the greater on every hand; and it would give the greater advantage to factious Spirits desiring of change, to carry it on with greater vigor and ods by far, then any designs that ever was carried on against any of his Predecessors; And that it were better for him to give away all then lose all: and that it was better for him, to grant that which they could rest from him, by which means he might secure himself and posterity; and also that it would be greater glory for him to Rule Princes, then be a Prince of slaves, for no better were his people at that day. This was the advice of a Noble person, that followed him in all his wars, to the losse of his Estate and ruin of his Family. Well, the King is in Arms, the Parliament Armes also: the Parliament begins to Levy vast sums on publick faith. The King useth such other means by his friends, as putteth him in a condition to take the field with a powerful Army. Several Battels fought with various events: the King is Master of the field at first. The Parliament become Pres∣byterians to draw in the Scots to their aid. At length the Parlia∣ment new Moddeleth their Army, in which Cromwel is a person of no small ranke. The King declineth in power and loseth, he ta∣keth himself to the Scots, who sell him for 200000 li.
Addresses are made to the King during his restraint by the Ar∣my when he was at Oatlands. When the City of London and part of the Parliament oppos'd, the Army prevaile by their approach only to the City, the Tower, all Forts, and Magazines are surren∣dred to them. Now they fear their applications to the King, the King is got by a trick into the Isle of Wight, to make way for the after-game. He is not long after beheaded as a Tyrant, Traytor, and grand Incendiary: the Nation is declared a Free State, during which time, great and horrid injustice and abuses were committed, to the shame and infamy of that Parliament. omwel being now arri∣ved to the dignity of Commander in chief, over all the Forces of the three Nations; in it he planteth Anabaptists, to poyze with the Independants and Presbyterians, who were the friends of the Parliament. The Parliament foreseeing the underhand dealing of the Army to play into Cromwel's hand, Resolved to dissolve them∣selves, and call a new Representative; but Cromwel preventeth them, and forcibly dissolveth them, under pretence of the heavy burthens that yet continued upon the people, and his Army ru∣leth. Now, you must suppose the people of England a Free People indeed, after the expence of both sides, had cost the Nation of En∣gland, one hundred thirty five Millions of money, which is more by one third then all the Wars since the Conquest, either forreign or other, did cost the Nation; all which are carefully collected, and shall ere long be made appear, to the shame of those dry Spun∣ges, that have suckt the wealth of the Nation. Well, Cromwel now calleth a number of wisemen from Gotam, and other parts of the Nation to Council: they call themselves a Parliament, and were about to let him know as much; But some of these wise-men, repair to him, resign their power back to him, and he is made Lord Protector; after he calleth a thing like to a Parliament, and they would not warpe to his Design: he dissolveth them because they could not make Musick of the Instrument of Government.
He falleth into a Fit of Dislike of his Instrument, and putteth it up into its Case, and calleth another Parliament; excludeth a great part thereof, with the one half, or little more: A Petition of Advice it framed; in is He is desired to be a KING: He smelleth the Design, that those who promoted that, did it in order to destroy him: For that then the Cause, and other Pretences must be laid aside, which were good Barres against the Stuart's Claim to the Royal Dignity. Upon which, He waveth that part of the Advice, and accepteth all the rest; is again made Protector. With great ado this Par∣liament is adjourned: at their next Meeting, the Excluded Mem∣bers are admitted, upo aking an Oath to be true to his Highness, forsooth: But so soon as these Excluded Members were admitted, they fall to questioning all that had been done before. Some ob∣ject, that they had sworn to be true to the Legal Government. Others answered, They knew none in being that was Legal. Well! He seeing that when they were together, they were not for His Tooth, He contents himself with the Petition of Advice, which inableth him to nominate his Successor; to have another House: And as he had not the Confidence to take upon Him the Title of KING; so also had He not the Impudence to call them a House of Lords, since no One in this Nation was a greater Instru∣ment of designing the Ruine of Both, then Himself. He dyeth, and as it is said, nominateth his Son Richard Protector, to succeed Him. Richard calleth this present Parliament; wherein the Petition of Advice is wholly set to nought: the great Oppressions, Tyran∣ny, and Inconveniencies of the Times fully debated. To obstruct the Debate thereof, it was alleadged, That all the Members had taken the Oath at their Admission, to be true and obedient to the present Power; and therefore they could not with good Con∣science admit of such Debates. To that it was answered, That the best Stamp of the present Power, was Parliamentary Authority, and what was done by one Parliament, might be undone by another: That their Fore-Fathers
did formerly, when admitted Members of that House, take the Oath of Allegeance to be true to the KING; and obedient to the Laws in being: Yet notwithstanding, so soon as they came into the Parliament, they Debated of New Laws, and altering of Old; nay, repealing many: Therefore, the Oath binds them as private persons; not as publike persons: else they had been in that point all forsworn. That no Parliament can make a Law to binde a Successive Par∣liament; but that they may alter what is fit to be altered: There∣upon they took in hand the Debate of the Petition of Advice; to prevent which some of the New Courtiers bring in a Bill, or Recognition, which hath been variously debated; and upon the Debate, Resolved, That the Nation shall be governed by a Single Per∣son, and Two Houses of Parliament. Now having taken some Orderly View of the various Changes and Turns; and also of the present Position of Govern∣ment, though undigested, and unliked; therefore no Judg∣ment can be made of it what it will be, nor what it may be able to produce, as to Settlement or Security. There∣fore,
I. IF we must have a single Person, and that Succession be hereditary, Whether this will not make more for the STUARTS Family to claim against any Family whatsoever? and assert their Right and Claim, which hath been endeavoured to be shut out by several Acts of Parliament? II. Whether that the maintaining of the Dignity of a single Person will not be exceeding burdensome, seeing the Crown-Revenues are disposed of into private Hands? III. Whether that the Constituting of such a HOUSE of LORDS, of such persons mentioned in the foregoing Narrative, will bring any benefit to the Nation, or the single Person, when that the Abi∣lity and Interest of the whole Number cannot draw in∣to the Field (in case of Invasion or other Insurrection) 2000 men at Arms. When that the Intention of such Constitutions was at first, to Expect from them to make in such Cases, considerable Levies, sooner then could be expected from the Commons.
IV. Whether or no doth the Spanish Warre bring any ad∣vantage to the Nation, other then to keep up a pretended Necessity of Arms; when that thereby already we have lost 705 Sails of Ships, great and small, to the value of Two Millions, and Three Hundred Thousand Pounds; besides the value of a Million of Money lost, for want of employing the Manufactury of the Nation, in the Com∣modities that might in the time of the War with Spain; have been vented there. THE END.
