C6175 E104_20 99859518 155940
A COPY OF A LETTER, VVritten to Master STEPHEN MARSHALL Minister. By a Gentleman a Parishoner of his, desiring satisfaction about the lawfullnesse of this Warre. To which is added An Ansvver by a vvelvvisher. May. 30th LONDON, 1643.
SIR, I Had almost fallen into the common complement, and saluted you with a profession of my sorrow, for your long indisposition to bodily health; but calling to mind your own and often instructions, that we ought in all things, wholely to submit our selves and pleasures to that better seeing Provi∣dence, who out of his infinite wisdm works his own ends by his own meanes, and prosecues his unlimited and secret will, by his own unsearcheable ways; my timerous pen, guided by a tremb∣ling heart, changeth that complement of grief for your present visitation, into a dialet of prayer for your future happines. Every sicknes is Gods Lecture, and every leture for our Instruction, & every Instruction is a subject for our humble & srius Meditatiō, when heaven is our journeys end, no mater whether, our horse trot or amble, so he hlds it out, it mattes not, whether the un shine or the Wind blow, so our way be right; Prosperity is a pleasant roade but slippery and flattered with security, is mre dangerous; Adversity is lesse comfortable, but sweetned with patinc is more safe. Sir, I have always accounted you a good horseman in respect of yur selfe, and a trusty guide in respect of others; and my ambition hth been to kep pace, at least to follow you. Both on journeys have aymed at the same end and for many miles we have both travelled the same way. But since these Nationall di∣stractions and unnaturall distempers, wherein the whole Church and State is plunged and puzled, your confidence and my feares have led us into severall pathes▪ insomuch (to my great griefe I feare) that one of us hath lost our way, yet give me leave to say without offence, you deviate and have lost that road which for∣merly
your steps have trod, whereby my zealous feares still un∣confident of new ways, intergreets you too bold so neare a wil∣dernesse. You cut down stiles, leap ditches, trample hedges, and force a man thorough other mens possessions: I keep the beten track, whereby our late peacefull travellers, without the smallest dam∣mage, have safely, timely and sweetly, attained their happy jour∣neys end; you by the red Sea, pursue your obvious foes, I by the quiet banks of lordan profecute my calme designes; in brief you go the way of bloud, wherein I feare your actions a little too much relish of your name, and I the name of peace. True in that bloudy and cloudy time of the Law, God stile himslfe the Lord of Hosts, you are a Minister of that Gospell, you a Steward of that peace. When the Lord of Peace expired, He left us a graci∣ous Legacy of Peace, you are one of the executors of his last will: What is become of this Legacie? we demand, you deny it; we appeale to equity, you to the sword; He that smiteth by the sword, shall perish by the sword: Our blessed Saviour is the Prince of Peace, but where and all his subjects? Even making war, and embrueing their hands in bloud. But in the bloud of whom? of Pagans, Turks, Infidels? No, in the bloud of Christians, nay, brethren of the same Religion, wherein all relations both Politicall and Oeconomicall, both Civill, Naturall and Christiar, are dissolved and overwelmed: Sir, you have approved of these wars; nay, being a Chaplaine to this Army, have animated our brethren in these wars: Men whose ignorance have pinned their salvation upon your warrant, and whose bloud you must justify in the great account, deale truly with me, what is the occasion of these wars? the voyce cryeth Reformation: Tell me, was ever Reformation made in bloud? the Epidemick voice crieth truth or else no Peace: What truth is it, of Doctrine or of Disciplin? If we want the Truth of Doctrin, Actum est de nostra Religione, or is it of Disci∣pline? Must this truth be propagated by the sword, must this Truth be bought with the price of bloud, and perchance with the destruction of those soules, which the Lord of Peace sufficiently dyed for. O deare, ô bloudy Truth, without warrant beyond president, did the fountain of all mercy, peace and truth require such a truth beyond all merey & peace? Did the Lord of the Sabbath dispence
with the breach of a morall Law, the strict observing of his Sab∣bath to save the life of an Oxe or an Asse? And shal we prefer the sudden abrogatiō of some indifferent Ceremonies, before the lives of many thousand Christians? nay, Ceremonies approved of by holy and learned men, chosen and thought worthy to depose their lives in defence of true Religion against that Church, whereof these our Ceremonies rellish, Ceremonies established by that pi∣ous Prince Edward the 6, and his religious and pious Counsell in Parl. confirmed by that Illustrious and renowned Princesse, the Phoenix of her time, our late Q. Elizabeth; Ratified by the late learned Defendor of our Faith, K. James, of blessed memory; the charge whereof (as a holy legacy) he left to our Gracious Sove∣raigne now labouring to execute his will. Are these the Ceremo∣nies that chalenge so much bloud, or is the suddain abrogation of them to be ballanced with the ruine of a Kingdom? Sure the oc∣casion of this bloudy flux is neither truth of Doctrine nor of Dis∣cipline? therfore not religion. Or is the cause of this unnaturall and civill commotion civil? is the Kings Prerogative too large, or the Subjects Priviledge too narrow? His Majesties gracious offer is to regulate both by the known Laws of the land; And ha∣ving taken a Spontaneous execration to performe it; for my part I dare not in my heart conceive such evill of the Lords anointed, as once to distrust him. Sir, as one that desireth, yea preferreth the glory of Almighty God above his life, and the testimony of a good Conscience above a thousand worlds, I desire you to satisfie me in these particulars. And as you shall answer it before the great Tribunal of the Iudge of Heaven and Earth, when you shall give account of all your flock, where of I my self am one: deale plainly, clearely and truly with me, concerning the lawfulnesse of this war, wherein as I shall direct my prayers to Almighty God to direct you, so I shal require you, that he would be pleased to make me capable of your directions, ayming at none other end but Gods glory and my own salvation. Vincat Veritas, Evanescat Vanitas. FINIS.
A Speedy Answer to the said Letter. SIR, I Know you will much wonder, by what fate it happened, that your Letter should so miscarry, as to fall into my hands, you pretend it to be written to M. Stephen Marshall, and your self a Parishoner of his; but whether true or no, I cannot tell; but I beleeve the contrary, for surely had your ingenuity beene such, as became one of his flock, you would rather have first con∣ferred with him privately, than to be so ambitious of the Presse, as to publish such a Letter before you had acquainted him. And for my part I cannot be so ignorant to conceive, that you should ex∣pect that so worthy a Divine would so much forget his more se∣rious imployments, as to answer in publick, such weake objecti∣ons, which must needs disparage his worth and abilities; Yet perhaps you in your fancy much magnifie your own notions, and it is possible imagine great matters of this child of your braine▪ seeing now that any thing how silly soever, if it be but barly ap∣prehended to favour the Malignants, how it is hugged and recei∣ved, though it be but an Apology for the Cavaliers, but lest you should too much glory in your own conceipt, here is a sudden re∣ply to your Letter, and if you should happen to discover your op∣poser, you will be as much ashamed (being so confident of your own strength) to be wrestled with by such a one, as that party will blush to be known to be in print, but leaving such comple∣ments, I passe over your Preface, being as little to the controver∣sie as I shall find the rest, you confesse, that both your journeys aymed at the same end and for many miles you both travelled the same way: How came you to pat? was there any Malignant that overtook you, and whispered in your eare some Court doctrin of the uli∣mited power of Princes and unconfind prerogative, was there any such that carried you into another road? You tel s indeed that since these National distractions and unnaturall distempes wher∣in the whole State is plungea and puzled, his confidence ad you fears have lead you into severall paths and one of you hath lst his way. These distractions and unnaturall distempers are confessed, but it is ex∣pected that you should rest us who were the first causers of them, or wherein M. Marshall hath lost that road wherein formerly his steps
did tread. I cannot take your bare affirmation, & abate your proofs in a matter of this consequence, I pray tell us, who first disturb'd our peace? not to speak of the late strange innovations both in Church and State, the occasion of the difference with our brethren in Scotland, the ground of the rebellion in Ireland; all these are suf∣ficiently known, but you think perhaps that we should have yeel∣ded our throats, and made no defence against that inundation of Arbitrary power, both in Church and State, that we should have betrayed our Parl. falsified our Oaths & Protestations, & though the Law of God and Nature, and the Law of the Kingdome like∣wise, do allow us to defend our selves, yet we should have wilfully ected all these; What think you of the Rochellers, did they lawfully defend themselves against the French K. or did K. Charles do well to aide and assist them? Yet shew me where the Parl. of France gave them authority to take up armes, and yet no question they might lawfully do it. And what is all that you have said but Mutato nomine de te fabula narratur; For, who more bloudy and cruell than those Malignants, You would seem to justifie? who more bloudy than those very men, I say those Delinquents, who have seduced his Sacred Majesty, & detain him now amongst the are these they, who with a Popish Army will maintaine the Pro∣testant Religion? can our Kingdom be to blinded, that after above 80 years preaching of the Gospell, we should be so seduced to be∣lieve this, & that Protestants should joyn with Papists to destroy Protestants, and that free borne Subjects should joyne with De∣linquents to destroy their Laws and Liberties, and that the meere will and pleasure of the King should command obedience against the Laws of the Kingdom, doth the Parl. require any thing but the being of a Parl. and if the being of a Parl. then surely the authority and power of  Parliament▪ So that the Kings personall absence or refusall, cannot disanull that authority, for he is continually there in his politique capacity; these things have been sufficiently di∣lated upon by the learnedst and ablest Pennes. You say M. Mar∣shall hath approved of this war, and he will tell you and so will as a∣ble, godly and learned Divines as any in England, that this war by authority of Parl. is lawfull; read his learned Letter, a book inti∣tuled Scripture and Reason and those Answers to D. Ferne. When you talk of Reformation, is there not need, what our do∣ctrine hath suffered by the erroneous expositions of the Arminians
of late is sufficiently known, if you but read that learned book of M. Chenel and how forward some were for a reconcilement with the Church of Rome, is apparent by the Venitian Embassadors in∣formation to the State of Venice, which you may see in that little Tract intituled the Popes Nuntio; You prceed to the Ceremonys and tell us, that they were approved of by holy and learned men, chosen & thought worthy to depose their lives, in defence of true Religion against that Church, whereof you say these Ceremonies rellish, you confesse then that these Ceremonies relish of the Ppish Church, but speake out, dare you say that these holy & learned men died in defence of these Ceremonies, we honor the memory of those holy Martyrs in Q. Maries days, and though some of them did approve of the Ceremonies, yet others did not, and we can withall distinguish betwixt time and times. For that pious King Edward the 6, and his sister the vertuous Q. Eliz. their memories are precious amongst us, for the first he had but a short raign & so could not make any perfect Reformation; and for Q. Eliz. what Counsellors she was necessitated to make use of, when she came to the Crown and what power and authority the Bishopss there were in, is apparently known; K. James who succeeded her, was, it is confest, a most learned Prince, and but read his Basilicon Doron, you shall find he was no great enemy to the Government of the Church of Scot. but Bishops here did too much flatter him, yet the Archbish of Cant. was never cordially respected by him, thoughby his servile fawning on the D. of Buckingham, the K. grea favorite, he obtained some preferment. Your demand is the K. Prerogative too large or the Sub. liberty too narrow. The Parl. ath not any ways lessened his Majesties just Prerogarive, nor the Sub. desired it, and for their Priviled. they desire none but what are right; we know his Majesty hath made many gracious offers, but we know like∣wise, that untill his Majesty forsake those all Counsellors about him, we shall see but small performance? how many Petitions hath the Parliament sent him? what disires of peace? could ever subjects be more dutifull, nay? how loath to defend themselves, and after all this, what scandalous papers come out to their defama∣tions, I need not repeat, you know them better than my sel; I end, desirng God Almighty to prosper that Army which stands most ready for the true Protestant Religion, the honor of the King and the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom. Vivat Rex, Floreat Parliamentum. FINIS.
