e3574b r229826 99895703 153202
An Exact ACCOUNT of the manner of the EXECUTION OF Algernoon Sidney Esq On Tower-Hill, For High-Treason, with his Behaviour on the SCAFFOLD. Algernoon Sidney Esq having been A∣raigned this Term past, for High Trea∣son the particulars of his Charge being for Conspiring the Death of his most Sacred Majesty his Royal Highness &c. And Con∣triving to make a miserable slaughter of his Majesties most Loyal and Faithful Subjects through the Kingdom of England &c. And an alteration of the Govement, both of Church and State, whereby the present hap∣py
flourishing Monarchie and Hirarchie were wholy to be Exterpated, and in their stead a Democratical, Popular, Rabular, and most Arbitrary Goverment were to have been e∣stablished. On the 21st. Of November last past, Mr. Sid∣ney, was brought under a strong guard by the Lieutenant of the Tower, to the Kings-Bench-Bar: The right Honourable Sr. George Jefferis, Lord Cheif Justice, Sr. Francis Withens, Mr. Justice Holloway, and Mr. Ju∣stice Walcot, being present. After a full and fair hearing of all that could be said, for and against the said Prisoner. about 7 a clock the same Evening, the Jury found him guilty of the high Treason, aforesaid On the 26th of the same month, Mr. Sidney, was brought in man∣ner aforesaid to the Kings Bench-Bar, where being asked by the Cleark of the Crown, what he had to say for himself, that Sentence of Death might not be awarded against him, according to Law. Said nothing to any such purpose, upon which, the Court Proceeded to give Judgment, which was, That he should be conveyed to the place from whence he came, and thence to the place of Executi∣on there to be hanged by the Neck, and Cut down alive, his Privie Members to be cut of and burnt before his Face, his Bowels to be burnt, his head to be Severed from his Body, his body to be devided into four Quarters,
nd to be disposed of at his Majesties plea∣ure. But such was the Grace and Favour of his Majestie (in respect to the many Noble and Illustrous Families the said Criminal was allied to) to remit all the Sentence except Se∣vering his head from his body, and accord∣ingly on the 4th. of this present December, the Sheriff of Middlesex having received a Warrant to execute the said Algernoon Sid∣ney, on the 7th. day of this present Decem∣ber, at the usual place on Tower hill, between the hours of ten and two in the afternoon of the same day, Issued his Sumons to the Bay∣liff of the hundred of Oswalston, & his Depu∣ties: to appear compleatly armed with halberds and to attend at the place of Execu∣tion till further order, and accordingly this Morning, Mr. Sheriff being assembled with a very strong Guard as aforesaid, in pursuance of his Warrant attended before the Palizadoes of the Tower, to receive the said Prisoner. At which time the Right Honourable the Leiutenant of the Tower, attended by a very strong Guard of Warders and in their habit, brought the Prisoner and delivered him to the Sheriff, who immediately conveyed him to the place of Execution, on the Hill before the Tower, being the same Scaffold of the late Lord Viscount Stafford was Executed upon, about this time three years past. The Hills, the Houses and the Walls, of the Tower, were croud∣ed with a Numerous Company of Spectator of all Ranks and Qualities. Mr. Sidney having ascended the Scaffold, the Spectators begun to keep silence, expecting what Mr. Sidney would say, relateing to himself, and others concer∣ned
in the Horrid Conspiracy, for which he now was just∣ly to suffer Death. The Executioner and all things being ready prepared for that purpose. But such is the witchcraft of the sin, of Rebellion & Treason, that it is almost if not im∣possible, for any of them that have thorowly dyed them∣selves in it, ever to change their colour, or be any ways pe∣nitent for the wickedness of their time past, as daily expe∣rience tells us: scarce an Old Rebel, Collonel, Major, Captain, Leiutenant or Corporal, that is now surviveing amongst us, but upon all occasions of discourse of the late Bloody Treasonable and Horrid Rebellion, but values himself for that part he was concerned in that Fatal Tra¦digie, so far as he dare, without coming under the Lash of our Established Laws, and if by chance they meet with a check for their Seditious Insolencies, they presently fle to the Inexhaustible Treasure of his Majesties mercies, and replie that the King has been pleased to pardon them, and whats that to any man what they have done without the lest Token of Grace or Repentance in 'em as this present Con∣spiracie shews, and particularly, the present Object that they are still ready to do the same thing over again, want∣ing nothing more than a convenient opportunity, for if his Majesties mercy in time past, could have made an Infallible Cure, Mr. Sidney had not been here at this time, to suffer for Treason. He said very little, but gave Mr. Sheriff a pa∣per, and prepared himself for the Stroke. and after a short prayer the Executioner did his Office, Exposing the Head of a Traytor to the people on every side of the Scaffold. LONDON Printed by E. Mallet, 1683.
