G1639 E542_6 99865171 164929
A GREAT AND BLOVDY FIGHT AT SEA: Between five Men of War belonging to the Parliament of Eng∣land, and a Squadron of the Irish Fleet; wherein is con∣tained, the full particulars, and manner of the said Fight; the number of ships that were sunk and taken, together with di∣vers prisoners, great store of Match and Bullet, and 40 pieces of Ordnance, and the rest of the Fleet quite dispersed and scattered. Also, the Resolution of the Welsh-men, and the Parliaments Declaration to the Kingdom. Likewise, the Act and Proclamation of the Kingdom of Scotland, touching the crowning of the Prince of VVales. Imprimatur, Theodore Jennings. feb: 10th 1648 depiction of the sea battle between the English Men of War and the Irish fleet
A great and BLOUDY FIGHT AT SEA, Between five Men of War belonging to the Parliament of England, and a great part of the Princes FLEET. SIR, ON Wednesday last, being the 7. of this instant there happened a great and bloudy Fight at Sea between the English and the Irish, neere the Coast of Ireland, the manner thus: Capt. Peacocke (a man of known and faithfull integrity to the Parlia∣ment) sayling towards the Irish Seas with five Men of War, for cleering the channell about Dublin of Pyrates
and Robbers, discovered a Fleet of ships about three leagues distant, who immediatly made towards them, and comming within Canon-shot, hayled them in, to know what they were, and whence they was bound; who replyed, that they belonged to the Parliament of Eng∣land, and were bound for the relief of Dublin; but say∣ling near to each other, Captain Peacock discovered them to be Enemies, who presently gave them a broad side; whereupon the Enemies Rear-Admirall answerd them with another Volley, insomuch that a hot dispute began, continuing for the space of an hour, and although the Enemy was two for one, yet (by divine providence, and the assistance of the Almighty) by the gallantry of the said Captain Peacock, and his Sea-men, he became victorious, and after a bloudy Conflict, sunk two of the Enemies ships, and near upon 70. men, and boarded the Rear-Admirall; the rest escaped having a faire Gale of Wind to separate them from their Engagement, and the raging Billowes forcing them to the Ocean for sanctu∣ary. This Fleet consisted of ten Sayl, five whereof belong∣ing to the Princes Fleet, the rest Irish, who were desig∣ned against Dublin. The ship which was boarded, was called the Patrick, being Rear-admirall to the Fleet, wherein was forty piece of Ordnance, six Tun of Match, twenty Barrels of powder, and about two hundred Sea-men. In this Conflict divers were slain on both sides, Cap∣tain Peacock lost near upon twenty men, and his owne ship (called the Dragon) was in great danger of being sunk, who leaked exceedingly betwixt Wind and Wa∣ter; but by the great ingenuity and vigilancy of the car∣penters
she was preserved: the Enemies losse is very great, and doth far exceed the other: and many of the prisoners now in custody exceedingly wounded. This happy newes was communicated unto us by a Fisher∣man, who with his Bark struck into this Harbour, being chased from Sea by the dispersed Fleet. Upon proclaiming of the late Act of parliament, and fixing it upon posts, the adverse party seemed to be much grieved thereat, and when the dark Curtaines of the most high Canopy were drawn, they caused the said Act to be pulled down, and in stead thereof, caused a most treasonable paper to be set up, wherein they de∣clared their inveterate malignancy, to sacrifice their lives and fortunes. in the defence and preservation of Monarchical Government, &c. But all diligent care is taken for discovery of the chief abetters and Fomenters of the said treasonable paper; which they perceiving, begin now to be very silent. There are great discontents appearing in several parts throughout North and South Wales; but their design is (as yet) of small maturity, and its conceived will not be of any consequence, unlesse Laughornes Brother, and others from Ireland prove instrumentall for the delive∣ry of this great Machavilian Monster into the World; but we hope it will now be frustrated, by reason of the late blow given to the Enemy at Sea. Bristol 9. Feb. 1659.
Other Letters from the VVest make mention, That divers of the well-affected in the Counties adjacent, upon a meeting near Warham, on the 3. of this instant, declared their Resolutions, and entred into protestation, to sacrifice lives and fortunes in the defence of Parlia∣ment and Army, for the obtaining of Justice, Liberty, and Freedom, together with the common Rights of the people of England. And do desire, that impartiall Justice may (without detraction of time) be forthwith executed upon all Offendeas wdo have beene ayding and assisting in this tyrannicall, and bloudy war, and promoted the Designes of the adverse party, against the well-affected of this Kingdom. Since which Declaratory Expressions from the said well-affected party, the spirits of malignancy have been much abated in these parts: But in some parts of He∣reford, & Somertsetshire, the Coles of Enmity are kind∣ling, and ready to break forth into new flames of Dis∣cord and Contention, the Clergy stirring up the people in their pulpits, and using all meanes possible to incite them to an Engagement against the Parliament and Ar¦my. Worcester 9. Feb. 1648. Edenburgh Feb. 7. The Assembly of the Kirk have pub∣lished their Declaration and Testimony; wherein they utterly detest against toleration, your new Agreement of the parliament and Army, their breach of Covenant, and their proceedings about the King; and it is said they are drawing up a Message to be sent to His Highnesse the prince of VVales, together with severall proposals to be ten∣dered to His Highnesse, for the obtaining of His Royall as∣sent, to their Vniformity of VVorship, and to subscribe
unto their Rules and Discipline of the Kirke, as it now stands confirmed and established within this Nation, and if His Highnesse subscribes, and declares for presbytery, here is few but will embrace him, and cast a smiling coun∣tenance on him, which that He may, here are many pray∣ers, and good wishes, the Earles of Lanericke and Lauther∣dale are gone to the Prince, and the Marquis of Montrosse is gone for Ireland; and its believed, many wits will be em∣ploy'd against the Spring. The Declaration and Resolution of the Parliament of England, concerning the Government of this Kingdom. The Parliament of England now assembled doth de∣clare, that they are fully resolved to maintain, and shall and will uphold, preserve and keep the fundamentall Laws of this Nation for and concerning the preserva∣tion of the lives, properties and lirerties of the people, with all things incident thereunto; with the alteration touching King and House of Lords, already resolved in this present Parliament, for the good of the people; and what shall be further necessary for perfecting thereof, And do require and expect, That all Judges, Ju∣stices, Sheriffs, and all Officers and Ministers of Justices for the time being do administer Justice, and do proceed in their respective place accordingly. And it is hereby ordered and appointed, That this Declaration shall bee forthwith proclaimed in Westminster Hall, and the Sheriffes in their severall Counties are to cause this Declaration to be likewise published.
SIR, The death of his Majesty was conveyed to us by an expresse the 6 of this instant; much lamentation was here for the losse of their Native Soveraign, both by the Royall and presbyterian party, with much threat∣ning for revenge of his bloud, which they will doubtless put into a speedy way of execution against the next Spring, and to shew a testimony of their dis-satisfacti∣on herein, some disaffected persons have this day pro∣claimed Charles Stuart, eldest Son to Charles Stuart the first, late King of Great Brittain, King of Scotland, and to the end that none may plead ignorance therein, have ordered that the same bee proclaimed at the Market-crosse throughout every Burgh in the Kingdom of Scot∣land, which is not contradicted or gainsayed by the par∣liament, or rather Kirk of this Nation; a foundation of another war is laid herein, but what proceedings there∣upon, a short time will discover: Yet divers of the E∣states conveened in parl. have declared, That before Hee be admitted to his Royal power, He shall give an assu∣rance for the security of Religion, and the liberty and safety of the people, according to the solemne League and Covenant between both Kingdoms. Edenburgh, 8 Febr. 1649. FINIS.
