G1560 E575_26 99865511 165450
October the 22. 1649. The Three-penny Cooks fat in the fire, Or rhe downefall of As-in-presentie; Or the Schoole-master under the Black-rod. Or the Brain-breakers breaker newly broke out againe. By Thomas Grantham, Master in art of Peter-house in Cam∣bridge, Heretofore Professor in Bowlane and Mug∣well-street neere Barbar Chyrurgions Hall: Now over against Graies Inn Gate in Holborne, at Master Bulls. Printed for Thomas Pabody, in Queenes-head-Alley, in Pater-noster-row. 1650. VPon a time, walking by my selfe, I fell into con∣templation of my former life, and of all the miseries that befell me, either by my inconsi∣deratenesse and rashnesse, or Gods justice up∣on me for my sins. And although I added weight to some of those crosses, by taking them more heavily then I ought to have done; Yet I found no∣thing crucifi'd me so much as my long and tedious going to the Schoole; how many showers of teares? how many streams of blood? And I was cuffed, as if the Messenger of Satan had beene sent to buffit me; and after two seaven years spent con∣stantly in this Bride-well, so that I was nineteene or twenty yeares of age, I could not understand so much Latine as a suc∣king
Child, nor speak so much as a spelling Child; Methought it was strange, that a Child should suck in more with Milke, then I should get with so many drops of Blood, having so much advantage of yeares, but some will say, it may be you were very dull in learning, if I were never so dull, nor never so stupid, nor never so blockish; was this cruelty a way to quicken me? But some will say, wee know the misery's so great, that many of us had rather have our Children ignorant then learn with so much torment: Therefore the time will be better spent by me in showing the remedy, and that is my task at this present. 1. Remedy. One remedy against this Epidemicall disease is, let a Boy learn his Grammer Aschams way, which way those learned Schooles beyond Seas doe highly commend, that is, to understand within Booke, and to apply every necessary Rule: It makes no matter whether he can say his Grammer word by word without Booke or no; if he can give the sence without Booke, and turne to the Rule within Booke, it is sufficient; No University man, no great Scholler, can say his Grammer word by word without Booke, no, not the Master himselfe; and yet he whips the Schollers for that he cannot doe himself; If a man remember there is such a Rule, or such a sence of the Rl, it suffices: No Grammer have the same words, the sense is all wee looke for; and so soone as wee come to the Univer∣sity wee forget to say our Rules word by word without book, may, scorn and deride him that doth it. Thus this many yeares great labour is lost in a moneth or two, and is so farre from profiting, that it becomes rediculous. Consider also, the Grammers which were before Lilly, were some of them almost as bigge as a Church-Bible, if you take out the Apocrypha and Common-Prayer. Now to learne these word by word with∣out Booke, was a taske passing the patience of an Asse; Upon this Erasmus concludeth, that Grammer it selfe is enough to make a man spend his whole life in tortures. Ascham, in his first Book hath these words; so as the Gram∣mer-booke be alwayes in the Schollers hand, and also used of him as a Dictionary for every present use, this is a lively and perfect way for teaching of Rules, where the common way u∣sed
in common Schooles, to reade the Grammer alone by it selfe, is tedious for the Master, hard for the Sholler, cold and uncomfortable fur them both. Now you see according to Ascham, the Grammer must be used as a Dictionary, and he that knowes any thing, knowes that a Dictionary is not to be learned word by word without Booke therefore not a Grammer: He tells you in this place, that it is tedious to a Scholler; let any man consider who hath not the patience of an Asse, what a tedious thing it is to have all the Grammer or most part of it lapt up in his head word by word, and presently to apply every Rule word by word, or else up he goes, if he were as good as George a Greene. Read Ascham in his second Booke, these are his words; I remember when I was young, in the North there went to the Grammer-schoole little Children, they came from thence great Lubbars, always learning and little profiting, learning without booke every thing, understanding within book little or nothing; their whole knowledge by learning without the booke was tyed only to their tongue and lips, and never as∣cended up to the braine and head; and therefore was soone spit out of the mouth againe; they were as men alwayes going, but ever out of the way; and why? For their whole labour, or rather great toyle without order, was even vaine idlenesse without profit; Indeed they tooke great paines about lear∣ning, but imployed small labour in learning; when by this way prescribed in this Booke, being strait, plain and easie, the Scholler is alwayes labouring with pleasure, and ever going on forward with profit. Here this Scholler famous all over Christendome, and the glory of his Kingdom for Languages, tells you learning without booke, was vain idlenesse without profit; He tells you, they tooke great paines about learning, but imployed small labour in learning. Erasmus, the restorer of the Fathers Greeke and Latine, the greatest Writer in his time, incomperable for Wit, Learning, and Eloquence, hath the same words; some make it their grea∣test care to learne the Rules word by word without book, which thing saith he, I allow not of, for it is great paines to no purpose, nor profit all.
Brinsley, a famous Schoole-Master in his Booke called, A Consolation for our Grammer Schooles, writes of one Master Tovey a Schoole-master equall to the best, that teaching As∣chums way; that is, only the sense of the Rules, brought a No∣bleman to a perfection beyond all expectation. Comenins, a man admired for his quicknesse in teaching the Languages, hath writ sharply against this dog-bolt way; Innu∣merable are the learned men who have sought to take away the servitude and slavery that Youth hath undergone; some Authors I have quoted in my Animadversions upon Cambdens Greeke Grammer, made for the use of Westminster-Schoole, and I have shewed, and I will shew more hereafter; That it is a false, obscure, imperfect Gammer, abounding with above twelve grosse errors, besides many little ones; and those who are Schoole: masters of great Schooles, and make men beleeve they know much, when alas it is very little they know; they might blush if they had any shame, to let so many errours goe uncorrected in a Grammer, which is the founda∣tion of a Language; If Foundations be false and rotten, what will the building be? I need not spend much time upon this point, because I have represented in a Comedy often acted by my Schollers, the Cruelty, Folly, and Non-sense of Com∣mon School-masters, which I intend to Print as soon as I can. Looke upon Aschams successe in this way, in his first booke he speakes thus of Queene Elizabeth; It is your shame, I speake to you all (you young Gentlemen of England) that one Maid should goe beyond you all in excellency of Lear∣ning and knowledge of divers tongues; point forth six of the best given Gentlemen of this Court, and they altogether shew not so much, will not spend so much time, bestow not so ma∣ny houres, dayly, orderly and constantly, for the increase of Learning and Knowlidge as doth the Queenes Majesty here: Yea, I beleeve tht besides her perfect readinesse in Latine, Ita∣lian, French and Spanish; she did reade more Geeke every day, then some Prebbendary of this Church doth read Latine in a whole weeke; And that which is most praise-worthy of all, within the Walls of her Privy-Chamber, she hath obtained that excellency of Learning, to understand, speake and write,
both wittily with head, and faire with hand, as scarce one or two rare Wits in both the Universities have in many yeares reached unto. Among all the Benefits that God hath blessed me withall, next the knowledge of Christs true Religion, I count this the greatest, that it pleased God to cal me to be one poore Minister in setting forward▪ these excellent Gifts of Learning in this most excellent Prince. Looke upon his successe in his second Booke, amongst ma∣ny others, one Witney, a most accomplished Gentleman, these are his words; I gave him a translation to turne into Latine, which he did so choisely, so orderly, without any great misse in the hardest points of Grammer, that some in seven yeares in Grammer-schooles, yea, and some in the Universities too, cannot doe halfe so well: and this perfection be obtained from Christmas to Alhallowes-tide, & this Scholler was altogether ignorant of the Latine Tongue and the Rules before. Now briefly take some few Reasons against this way of saying word by word without Booke. All Arts, as Geometree, Arithmetick, Logick, Navigation, men attaine too, and never learne Rule word by word with∣out booke, and what offence hath Grammer done that it must be cuft into a Boy word by word without booke? If learning without booke word by word be necessary for the understanding of a thing, then it is before a Boy under∣stands or after he understands. Now for a Boy to learne with∣out booke like a Parret, that he understands not, is very labo∣rious and rediculous; and to learne without booke after he understands, that is to no purpose; for the Master understan∣ding himselfe the sense of the Rule, neglects saying word by word without booke, and whips Shollers for that he cannot doe himselfe: If saying without book word by word be pro∣fitable to the understanding, then he that saith best without booke understands best, but this is false; there are many that can say much Scripture without book, but understand not so well as those that can say none. Take this instance, Christopher Grecu, Clerk of a geat Parish, a man of threescore yeares and ten, he can say all the Psalmes without booke, and yet I dare not trust him to apply a Psalm after my Sermon.
I have had Boyes come from common Schooles, could say all the Grammer word for word without booke, and yet could not make halfe a Line of true Latine; and that which is most absurd of all, they teach a Boy to make Latine by the Latine Rules, when a Boy understands not Latine; just as if a man should teach one an art in French, when he understands not French; then there are many Boyes can say without book to their Companions or by themselves, but the Master, strut∣ting with the Rod in his hand, and his imperious looke and threatning, puts a Boy cleare out; as for a Master to talk thus to a Boy, Sirra Ile smoke you, Ile make your Buttocks blush, Ile make you feare me; these words confound a Boy and fright him out of all: If a Boy be to say this Rule, Aectives that signifie fulnesse, emptinesse, plenty, &c. If he mis-place a word, although the sense be the same, presently the Master fells him all along, where as some Grammers have the first words last, and the last words first, the sense being still the same. Observe Doctor Webs words, in his appeale to truth, now if Gammer should be the best course to Languages, and Kings may have their choice of best courses, I wonder what Gram∣mers were made by Mithridates? and that makes me wonder more, we that have no businesse but a Language, spend all our life and are not perfect in one, and he that had a Kingdoms af∣fairs to look upon, had two and twnty compleat Languages. Now if a Language cannot be got but by learning word for word without book, then Mithridates, who had a Kingdomes affairs to look to, must learn two & twentie Grammars, word by word without booke; and to learne a Grammer in this manner, will take up five yeares, to be compleat in a Language as he was wil be at least five years more, which reckoned, make up two hundred and twentie yeares. Now Mithridates lived not a quarter of the time. Doctor Webbe in that learned work quotes above a hundred learned men, who envey bitterly a∣gainst Grammarians, and he undertakes to prove by learned Authors, that a Language may be learned without a Gram∣mer, which needs no proofe at all to men of common sense. How many are there that can speake French and Latine that never saw a Grammar? Many young Gentlemen and Gentle∣women
have learned to speake French in halfe a yeare, who never knew any Latine. Doctor Webbe names many Noblemen who speake Latine excellent well at five yeares of age, having nothing but Latine spoken to them before. And I have knowne many, who spoke Latine and French admirable well, and understood Greeke very well in a twelve∣moneth. And this is easily done, by joyning Doctor Webbes way with Aschams. I had Boyes when I was in London, who had beene but one yeare at most with me, and in these foure points we challen∣ged any Schoole in London. First, who understands the Greeke and Latine Grammers best in Accents, and Dialects, and all things necessary Secondly, who understands a Greek and Latin Authour best. Thirdly, who can prove a Greeke or Latine Verse best. Fourthly, who can make a Greeke or Latine Oration, or a Greeke and Latine Verse best and soonest; and the highest of my Schollars was but fifteene yeares of age, and the second to him but ten. Some I had I confesse, could not doe a quarter so much, which was no fault of mine; For I often told them, if they were carelesse and would not mind, and would not learne without cuffling, pulling, lugging and whipping, they must goe to Masters that delight in this way of teaching; They may be taught in many places very reasonably this way, as for a noble or seven shillings a quarter, at some Free-Schooles they may have it for nothing. Some Schoole-Masters thinke they pay me home, when they say I make Schollers unfit for other Schooles; truly I confss it, I teach without any correction, and they teach with correction, and in this we differ. We teach to understand the Rules first, and they teach to learne without booke first, in this we differ; Our Schollers understanding the Rules, and often applying them, the Rules come without booke, whether they will or no. Then we dif∣fer in severity. Some keepe their Schollers so strictly for four or five houres that they allow them not so much as a mouthfull of fresh aire,
not so much as to ease nature: I have read, and heard many Schollers speake against this severitie. Let a Boy be tyed three or four hours to that Game he likes best, and let him be sound∣ly cuft and whipped when he doth not play his Game well, you shall see this Boy as weary of his play as his Booke, and the reason is, because of great severity. Socraes the wisest man of his time, and many who have writ concerning the instruction of youth, often say, Learning must be taught with Love: and some Schollers at London being thus taught, seriously professe they had rather come to Schoole, then goe about any pleasure or delight. Remedyes 3. First, there are three things most necessary in a Language, the Words, the Stile, and the Rule; For the words a Boy may easily learne a thousand▪ words in ten dayes, that is, a hundred words in a day. Suppose a man allow an houre for twentie words, in five houres he learneth a hundred words. I have taught some that have learned a hundred words in an houre, but I doe not meane after the silly Fustian way of learning in the common Schooles, to say them all by rote like a Parriot; but let him have an hundred English words, and a hundred Latine words printed or writ, he shall tell you Latine for English, and this is the Latine I meane; and he that understandeth a thousand, must needs understand many thou∣sands more, for many Derivatives, Compounds, De-compounds, are understood by the helpe of the Simples, and he that under∣stands thus much will understand most Authors he reades. Remedy 2. Secondly, for stile take this example; there is a certaine Bird called a Dotterell, this Bird if you see him thrust out his right wing, thrust you out your right arme, and if he thrust out his left leg, thrust out yours; and thus▪ by imitating of him, you will come so neere till you take him in your hands; and so in an Author, where you see him place his Ad∣jective, Adverb or Conjunction, doe you so too, and by this imitation you will catch the strain of your Author, and come to a great perfection, if you imitate but six leavs in a transla∣tion, which you may doe in six dayes, then you may come neere the straine of your Author. Remedy 3. For the Rules teach thus, Consider there are
eight parts of speech, for the foure that are undeclined, I bid my Scholler take very little care, because they are not varied nor declined at all; you find them every where after the same manner. Of the other foure, I bid him take care but of two, that is, a Nowne and a Verb, for a pronoune is much like a noune, know one, know the other; a Participle that takes part of a Noune & a Verbe, both those known, the Participle is known. So here is but two chiefly to be cared for, that is, a Noune and a Verb, but be sure to understand the definition of every part of Speech, not word by word without Booke, but the sense of it. I cannot follow this point any further, take some Propositions. Proposition first, My councell is to take away al the Revenus that belong to Free-Schooles, and other Schools, and let it be committed to a Treasurer, and every one in any part of the Kingdome that makes a Scholler fit for the University, hee shall have ten pounds out of the Common stock, and the Scholler preferred, & if he make him fit to be an Apprentice to a Chyrurgion or a Lawyers Clark, he shal have five pounds, by this means none shall have any mony but those that deserve it. Prop. second, Let any man judge whether they or I teach the best; was it ever knowne that any Graduate in the University, or Master of Art, Physitian, Lawyer, ever came to their School-Masters to better themselves in the Languages, whereas all my gaines and practice many times in the yeare, have been chiefly by these men. Prop. third, Their Schollers before they go to the Univer∣sity come to me a Moneth or two to be oyled over, & professe they profited more in that time with me, then they did before in foure Yeares. Prop. fourth, they will make a man believe that a Boy is a Po∣et, and able to make Theams and Verses; now these Boys can neither speake Latine, nor understand an Author; and will a∣ny think a man to be a Freench Poet, when he cannot speake French, or a good Orator when he cannot understand it, these Verses are onely patched up of phrases (a meere delusion) see more of this in my six quoeries to the Free-Schooles, in and about London, printed three yeares agoe, and not yet answe∣red:
At that time had I followed my blow, the Free-Schools had been absolutely routed, and never able to rally or recruit againe: and I set up a Challenge in the Exchange, to all the Schooles in London or thereabouts seaven to seaven, which stood nine dayes. Our Schoole stood open to all examination for one whole yeare, and when the best Schollers of one of the primest Schooles in London contended with ours, there was a Gentleman of the Innes of Court, that delivered in a Latin Speech, Vobis laudem, llis palman tribuo; I give you praise (saith he) to the Schollers of that great Schoole, but I give Master Granthams Schollers the Victory. All that I shall say in this great hast is; I desire that there may be an act of Oblivion of the abuses and mistakes of both parties, and that wee may all joyne together, and study Reformation of the Schooles, that Schoole-masters may no longer make Merchandize of the precious time of Youth, which is of that great height, that it is many times the destruction of Soule and Body; and if the sin of scandall shall deserve the weight of a Mill-stone; what shall he deserve that keepes Youth many yeares in teaching, and can shew no progresse to the purpose: Imployment now cuts me off, but I should be happy in London, before Authori∣ty to have a dispute with these Schoole-masters, and that there may be an account taken of every Boy that goes to Schoole, what he is when he goes, and how much he hath profited when he comes away. I Will undertake in two Monethes, to make him that can reade English, to conster an Author▪ in Latine and Greeke, he shall make Greeke and Latine Verses and Orations, and his progresse in Hebrew shall be correspondent; and because men may thinke that a man doeth this for Mony, I will desire but two shillings a day whilst I teach, for the publike good, and al the rest shall goe for charitable uses, only I desire that I may make choyce of what kind of charity the Mony may be bestowed on. Now to that God that hath commanded love and charity amongst us, be all Honour, and Glory for ever, &c.
Herculea cecidisse manu tot monsta negamus, Quot Methodo & Calamo iam perierie tuo. The hand of Hercules did never kill, Such Monsters as thy Method and great Skill. CAnst thou that art full twenty yeares and more? Tremble and shake to heare thy Master roare Like a storme frighted Sea-man, oh yee Fooles, How does all wise men laugh to scorne your Schooles? Thou humbly on a Horse, hangs down thy head, And a fierce Rod thy Buttocks over-spred, Or horst upon an Asse, much like to thee, Horse, Oxe, and Asse injoy more liberty; At every stroke thy trembling Buttocks quake, Like two great Custards, that are newly bak't, Teares trickle from thy Buttocks, from thine Eye, Who can hut laugh to see this Booby cry? Younger then thee dare on the Cannon goe In spight of fire, and flame confront their Foe, And when a Bullet flyes in full carreere, They scorne to stirre or starte aside for feare, Then rouse brave Spirits boyes and you shall see A way to learne, with all facility: The Latin's call a Schoole, a learned Play, And so is mine, 'tis alwayes Holiday, In twenty dayes I'le fit you for a Gowne, If you'l but leave this play of Hose goe downe. Mans life is short, but Art is long they say, O happy's he that goes the nearest way, Homer discribes his God, flying with speed, Shooting his Arrowes till the Grecians bleede; The gels good and bad have wings, the Sun The light of lights, how swiftly does he run;
The Goddesses came down like shooting starrs▪ When Greece and Troy were at their bloody Wars, Homer does say the horses of the Sun, So farre as one can see at one step run, I hate the Snaile, the Crab, the flow pac't sse, That hums and drums out a foire Houre-Glasse. The Creatures in the Law had foure feete, God dam'd because they could not gos▪ but creepe, And he that creepes and slugs at whipping Schoole, The flower of his age, I call a Poole. If on Pernasses-hill one did but sleepe, Or on the Muses-well chance to drinke deepe, Then would he sing such Verses and such Rimes, As made him live for everlasting times; All this condemns your cuffing, whipping Schooles, That spend so many yeares to make men Fooles. Thou that dost strike where Christ himself doth kisse Let any judge how far thou do'st amisse, Thou that dost cuffe those whom he did imbrace, How canst thou answer't to thy Masters Face. Raptim.
