G1784 E568_16 99865428 165313
A GREAT VICTORY Obtained by the Marquesse of ORMOND AND THE LORD INCHIQVEEN AGAINST THE Parliaments Forces, WITH The manner of their surrounding of Dublin, for storming of the City, their taking of Trim Castle, with great store of Ordnance, Arms and Ammunition, 1000 killed, and divers taken prisoners. ALSO, The Declaration of the Irish Army; the Message and Pro∣positions sent to Charles the second; and exceeding strange News from Hereforashire containing the Prophesie of a young Infant touching his Highness and the Parliament, delive∣red in a speech to two Mowers in a Meadow field, and the manner how it vanished away, after speaking of the words. Imprinted at London for R. Williamson, August 9. 1649.
The last great and bloudy FIGHT At DUBLIN in IRELAND UPON The advance of the King of Scots Army to the Walls of the City, for a storm, with the manner thereof, and the number killed and taken prisoners. SIR, THe Marq. of Ormond (we hear) is resolved for a storm, and in order thereunto, hath drawn down most of his Horse and Foot within two miles of the City, skaling ladders, and other instruments of Warre being in a readinesse to be put in execution; And by our last expresse from thence we were advertized, that he had made severall attempts against the North side of the City,
stormed Patrick Fort, and many other places, but received so desperate a repulse, that he were forced to quit the place and desist from any further enterprising on it, in which con∣flict he lost about 50 men. Sir Thomas Armstrong is also very active for his young Soveraign, and maketh many on∣sets against the Out guards, and having a choice and select party drawn forth of severall Regiments, he advanced from the Camp within pistoll shot of the walls of Dublin, and endeavoured to drive all before him, but Col. Jones made a salley, and charged him with such courage and successe, that he not only regained what before lost, but killed and took about 60 of the enemy. During which action, the L. Inchiquin playd his Guards with great policy, and by his strong allarum on the South side of the City, kept the be∣sieged in play, whilst another party disputed the Rings-end who at the last became masters thereof, with the losse of 20 men; since which time he hath attempted the cutting off the Mills neer adjoyning to the City, and as we hear) are resolved suddenly for a finall storm. But that which addes most to the propagation of the Work in hand, is the taking of the strong and impregnable Castle of Trius, with many pieces of Ordnance, Arms and Ammunition, but not with∣out the losse of at least 1000 men since the first befieging thereof. Bristol 7 August, 1649. Other Letters from Dublin say as followeth. Since the enemies receipt of the intelligence of the Lord Lieutenant Crumwels designment for this bleeding City, they have somewhat awakened us with stronger allarms, and (as we hear) have entred into Protestation, to live and die, stand and fall together, and to fight it out to the last man, and that upon receipt of the foresaid intelligence, Ormond called a Councell of Officers, at the head quarters neer Fingles, the
result was, whether they should prepare for a storm, be∣fore his Lordships landing, or whether they should begirt the City, streighten other Garisons, take in what they could and then randezvouz and draw into a Body, and give him battell at his landing: Upon mature deliberation thereon, it was unanimosly declared by most of that Popish and Pre∣laticall faction, That if he set footing there they wold fight him; in the mean time they would use their utmost endea∣vours for the reducing of those Garrisons which the Par∣liament had in possession. But the thing that our Souldiery are most doubtfull and dubious of, is, that they fear the enemy will not give them a field upon the additionall forces landing, but that they wil rather betake themselves to the Bogs and Woods. On Thursday morning last, a party of the Marq. of Ormonds horse and foot faced our frontier Guards, kee∣ping a great careering up & down neer the City Wals, and making four or five desperate attempts within Pistol shot of our Line, Spurs, and Sconces, which continued for the space of half an hour; till at the last Capt. Freeman (Com∣mander in chief of the new Fort) made a salley out with a party of horse and foot, who placed the Musquetiers in an obscure trench, for an Ambuscado; he himself being the Coy, for the calling in and ensnaring of the adverse party; but upon his first advance towards them with his horse, he found it a Work very full of difficulty, by reason that they had used the like point of policp: However, he resolved to dispute the place, and thereupon divided his horse (being 60 in number) into two parties, he himself commanding the one, and Cornet Jackson the other; Capt, Freeman charged the Van of the Enemies Forlorn, Cornet Tomson flanked them, and upon their first charge exchanged ground, with the losse of three men on both sides.
New Propositions to the King of Scotland, May it please your Majesty, VVE are commanded by the Estates of Parl. of your Maj. Kingdom of Stotland, hum∣bly to represent to your Majesty, that as they were not wanting in giving faithfull and timous coun∣sell to your Maj. Royal Father, for yreveuting the dangers which were then feared, & have since to their deep sorrow and unexpressible grief fallen out: and as they have with all care and faithfulnesse contributed their utmost endeavors for preserving their late Soveraign, as their Letters & De∣clarations can evidence; so they do resolve to continue the same loyal affection and faithfulness to your Maj. and ac∣cordingly have acknowledged and proclaimed your Maj. King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, with all readi∣nesse, unanimity, alacrity and solemnity; and have protested in favours of your Majesties just Right of Succession in the Royall Government of your Kingdoms of England and Ireland, against all Acts done, or to be done to the contra∣ry: As also have commanded Us in their name, humbly to offer to your Majesty, that they conceive it necessary for establishing of the happy Government of that your Maje∣sties ancient Kingdom, and for restoring your Majesty to the setled and peaceable possession of your just Right of Government of your other Dominions. First, That your Majesty would be pleased to assure and declare, that you will by your solemn Oath under your Hand and Seal allow the Nationall Covenant of Scotland, and the solemn League and Covenant of Scotland, England and Ireland, and that your Majesty will prosecute the ends thereof in your Royall Station. Secondly, That your Maj. will ratifie and approve all Acts of Parl. enjoyning the solemn League and Covenant,
and establishing Presbyterial Government, the Directory of Worship, the Confession of Faith, and Catechism, in your Maj. Kingdom of Scotland; as they are already ap∣proven by the General Assembly of the Kirk, and by the Parl of that kingdom: and that your Maj. will give your Royal assent to acts of parl. enjoyning the same in the rest of your Maj. Dominions: and that your Mai. will observe the same in your own practise and family, and never make opposition thereto, or endeavour any change thereof. Thirdly, That your Mai. will consent and agree, that all matters Civil be determined by the present and subsequent parl. of your Kingdom of Scotland, and all matters Ecclesi∣asticall by the ensuing Generall Assemblies of that Church rs was formerly condescended and agreed to by your Ma∣iesties Royall Father. These desires are so just and necessary for the securing of Religion, the peace of that kingdom, and for gaining not only the outward obedience, but also the inward affection of all your Mai. good people, to your Royal person, au∣thority and government, after so great distractions and tro∣bles, that the granting thereof will so far endear your Mai. to that Nation, that they will not only receive your Mai. with all cheerfulnesse, and most willingly render to you that subiection and dutifull obedience which can be expe∣cted from loyall Subiects to their gracious King; but like∣wise will contribute their utmost endeavours by all neces∣sary and lawfull means, according to the Covenant, and the duty of faithfull and loyall subiects, that your Mai. may be restored to the peaceable possession of the Government of your other kingdoms, according to your Mai. undoubted Right of succession. In order whereunto, we humbly de∣sire, that your Mai. will be pleased to give a direct and sa∣tisfactory answer to these our most just and necessary de∣sires;
in doing whereof, your Maiesty will be to these affli∣cted kingdoms, like the rain coming down upon the mowen grasse, and as showers that water the earth. Signed by the Commissioners of Parliament. There came further intelligence to the parliament, out of Lancashire, that one Sunday last a Minister was appre∣hended, for incerting this ensuing? passage in his prayer VVe pray unto thee for thy truths protectour, thy young, ancient Catholick faiths defender, thy Servant our Sove∣raign: defend him in it; preserve him from it: be good to them that have the tuition of him, that with alacrity and cheerfulnesse, be may at all times, but especially in the need∣full time of trouble defend and provide for the fatherlesse and VViddows. Son of God we beseech thee to heare us, Moreover, that it may please to thee to strengthen such as do stand with him, to comfort and help the weak hearted for him, to raise up (if it be possible) them that are fallen from him: and finally to beat down Sathan under his and our feet. Letters from the West say, That in Herefordshire there was lately found a young Child i a green Meadow by the Mowers which were cutting do the grasse, and upon the taking of the Infant up, its said, that it uttered these expres∣sions, That in that field should be fought the greatest battell that ever hapned in England, which would prove fatall to ma∣ny, but prosperous and tryumphant to some, &c. having spoken these words, the Relator saith, that it vanished away sudden∣ly, no man knowing how, nor which way. FINIS.
