g1777 12846764 151564
THE GREAT VICTORY Obtained by His Maiesties Army Under the Command of his GRACE the DUKE of MONMOUTH, Against the REBELS In the West of SCOTLAND, On Sunday and Monday, being the 22. and 23. of this Instant. SIR, I Could not omit giving you an Account, of what happened lately between the Kings Ar∣my and the Rebels, knowing you to be a per∣son of great and exemplary Piety, and untainted Loyalty, to whom such news will be altogether grateful. Upon Sunday last being the 22d of this
Instant, his Grace the Duke of Monmouth march∣ed with the Army under his Command towards the Rebels, and being upon his March he receiv∣ed a Message by a Trumpet from the Rebels, to this effect, (viz) That if his Grace was pleased to confirm, and agree to those terms they had alrea∣dy made in their last Declaration, they would lay down their Arms, but upon no other account. But his Grace contemning to agree to their terms, or to indulge Rebellion at such a rate, contrary to the established Laws of that Kingdom (drew up his Forces towards them) The Rebels had secured Bottle-bridge, having strongly Barrocaded it, hav∣ing a very Considerable party of Horse there, and had planted their Army on the other side the Ri∣ver, but notwithstanding that, his Grace made an Attacque upon them with a like party of Horse; which behaved themselves with that galantry and Courage, as soon caused the Rebels to quit their Post, with a very considerable loss. His Grace having thus succesfully gained the Bridge, present∣ly marched them over and drew up his main body; and after having put them in Batalia, and given ne∣cessary orders to his Officers, he engaged their main Body, and after a sharp dispute gave them a final rout, destroyed most of their Horse, and so much disordering the foot, that few of them esca∣ped, save a small number which fled into the
Woods about Hambleton; Sir, it is incredible to express in what great numbers the Gentry came in to joyn the Kings Forces, and are daily coming in to the great satisfaction of all faithful and Loyal Subjects, and to the great hopes of speedily put∣ting an end to these Rebellious Insurrections. Many thousands are upon their march from the North of Scotland chearfully to joyn his Majesties Forces, which is believed will be stopt upon the account of this happy Victory; and had not the Engagment begun so soon, till such time as these Assistants had joyned the Army, with∣out all doubt the Rebells would have never been able to have made the least escape. His Majesties Privy Council here have been indefa∣tigably careful and industrious in supplying the King's Army with all things necessary, acting as with one head and heart, or rather striving to out-do each other in their Fidelity and Loyalty. And whereas the Rebels made use of these words in the latter part of their Declaration, (viz.) That they requested their Country-men, now the standing Forces of this Kingdom, some of them being their Friends and Relations, not to fight against them, left in so doing they should be found fighting against the Lord, whose Cause and Quarrel they were sure he would own and signally countenance, seeing they fought under his Banner, who is the Lord of Hosts. Those whom they thus called their Friends and Kins∣men, were so ready and vigorous in fighting against them, and the happy victory which they obtained over them, seems rather to represent to every Loyal Subject,
and impartial mind, that it is not the Lords Cause or Quarrel, which they thus pretend to maintain, but rather a fighting against God, in Rebelling against their lawful and undoubted Soveraign, and his Government, and bringing upon themselves a Curse instead of a Blessing; the Apostle declaring, That he that resists shall receive damnation. SIR, This Account I thought good to give you, and by the next expect the Particulars, not doubting but you will accept of it from him who is, SIR, Your humble Servant, &c. Edenburgh, 22o Junii, 1679.
