G2140 669.f.6[45] 99871028 160906
THE GROUNDS OF MILITARY DISCIPLINE▪ Or, Certain brief Rules for the Exercising of a Company or Squadron. Observed by all.IN March, in Motion, troop or stand, Observe both Leader and right hand, With silence note in what degree You in the Body, placed be: That so you may without more trouble Know where to stand, and when to double. Distance.True distance keep in files, in ranks Open close to the front, reare, flanks, Backward, forward, to the right, left, or either, Backward and forward both together. To the right, left, outward or in, According to directions given. To order, close, open, double, Distance, distance, double, double: For this alone prevents distraction▪ And giveth lustre to the action. Facings.Face to the right, or to the left, both wayes to the reare, Inward, outward, and as you were: To the front, reare, flanks, and peradventure To every Angle, and to the Center. DoublingsTo bring more hands in the front to fight, Double Ranks unto the right, Or left, or both, if need require, Direct divisionall or Intire: By doubling files accordingly, Your flanks will strengthened be thereby. Halfe files and bringers up likewise To the front may double, none denies▪ Nor would it very strange appear For th'front half files or double the reare: The one half Ranks to double the other, Thereby to strengthen one the other. Counter∣marches.But lest I should seem troublesome To Countermarch, next I come. Which though they many seem to be, Are all included in these three: Maintaining, gaining, loosing ground, And severall wayes to each is found; By which their proper motions guided, In files, in ranks, in both divided. Wheeling.Wheel your battell e're you fight, For better advantage to the right, Or left, or round about To either Angle, or where you doubt, Your Enemie will first oppose you, And therefore unto their Foot close you. Divisionall wheeling I have seen In sundrie places practis'd been, To alter either form or figure, By wheeling severall wayes together. And had I time to stand upon't, I'de wheele my wings into the front. By wheeling flanks into the reare, They'le soon reduce them as they were. Besides it seems a pretty thing To wheel, front, and reare to either wing: Wheele both wings to thereare and front; Face to the reare, and having don't, Close your Devisions; even your Ranks, Wheel▪ front and reare into both flanks: And thus much know, cause, note I'le smother, The one wheeling doth reduce the other. Conversion and Inversion.One thing more and I have done, Let files rank by Conversion: To th'Right, to th'Left, to both, and then Ranks by Conversion fill again: Troop for the Colours, march, prepare for fight, Behave your selves like men, and so goodnight. The summe of all that hath been spoken may be comprised thus. Open, close, face, double, countermarch, wheel, charge, retire: Invert, Convert, Reduce, Trope, March, Make readie, Fire. FINIS.
