G408 E309_19 99861182 113310
To the most VERTVOVS, And therefore most ACCOMPLISH'D LADY, the LADY V. M. MADAM, THough other Cards passe here, and there Vnder the name of Nicholas Benier'e; And his Protections good, (unlesse it be From the Excise-man, or Monopoly.) These cannot so: A Grand Commission sits, And every one's Exciser of our Wits: Wherefore these Guardlesse Fancies humbly fly Into your Hands, for sweet security. All in one Suite, that you would Deale them out, And happily they then may go About. Who will not say in ordinary kindnesse, (Deliver'd by Such Hands,) they're Cartes Fines. They may perchance the happy fortune get Of some New Fashion, where the Ladies met, And my good Ladies Dresse being lik'd and New, All their good Ladiships to like it drew. So may they Draw, when you doe once begin, At least for your Sake say, Give't me agen.
To the Ingenuous Reader, A Directory to Play. A Iove Principium. So these Cards begin. Perchance you'l aske, what Humour I was in To be so Pious? when (our Luck being Bad) I should have sworne, and with the Cards been mad: It grieves me much, to see the Game so plaid, Sure there's Foole Play, some cheating. I'm afraid. We dealt, and Clubs were Trumpe, and we had most, And Ace, and King to Boot, and yet we lost. The Cards Morall. This drove me into serious Thoughts, and Things Of higher notions of Ace, Queenes, and Kings. And there I found all well: But you must have The truth. All these are worsted by the Knave. To keep him right, I set a guard of Ten, Ten goodly Precepts, and Nine Valiant Men: Beside I shew'd him, what such tricks did wait, In the first Worlds Correction: Except Eight. I shew him too, to trust in Starres is silly, His Grammar may as soon him save, as Lilly. But if he spent his Sixe dayes, as he shu'd, Himselfe would be as they; And they were good. Bid him his Senses use. The Members Five His Senses are, by them hee'l Live and Thrive. Then wroth (said I) ransack the Elements, Never more wicked knave, nor worse intents, They will get all. No Mr Peters, wee Will keep our Threes, Faith, Hope, and Charity. And our two Twoo's (Tam Foole.) No more tricks vent; We keep the Bible, and the Sacrament. To his Deare Friend, the Author. SOme men doe make no other use of Play, But only This, to passe the Time away. As if that which we all complaine's too short, Lingerd too long, unlesse helpt on by sport. But thou (Deare Friend) hast so contriv'd thy Pack▪ That we might neither Time, nor Pastime lack. Who passes here his Time, what e're they cost, Shall say, in using these theres no Time lost.
THE INSPIRER. To his Deare Friend the Author, Upon His CHARTae SCRIPTae. DEare Friend, you make a dry dead stock to bring Forth fruits, (an offering for the highest King) Heavens just Tribute, or an Out-Rent due From all alike, but only paid by You. You Digge up Vice,Spades. and stay it in the Root, Beating downe sinne,Clubs. before it spring or shoot; That Vertue Crown'd with glory may appeare In Diamonds,Diamonds. sparkling like the Starry Sphere, Where every one, exceeding farre all Art, A Jewell makes, and Beames of Grace doth Dart Into the Soul: a Charm for every Sense, As if inspir'd by some Intelligence. Thus you have Pack'd the Cards, and dealt the Game, And by your Hearts,Hearts. well playd, All Hearts you gaine.
To his most loving Friend, the AUTHOR. DEare Friend, you chid me when I said your Pen Reviv'd BEN: IOHNSON from his grave agen. Tell me you Criticks, I'le be judg'd by you, Can there  CHARTAE SCRIPTAE due? They all agree it, and with mee allow, As large a Laurell to Empale thy Brow. They thinke Tom: Randall (if alive) would be Too weake a Gamester to play with Thee. Since Iustice Why should your Hate, to your owne Fame be such▪ If you'le not be Commended, leave to write, So you'le want . An Advertisement to the Ʋertuous LADIES. DEale fairely Ladies; 'tis a Pack Of arrrant Knaves? What is't you lack? Men dare not see themselves in Print. Hee is  you something of the Price: Wood-cocks and Wit pay no Excise. And if he but your Favour Winnes, In the next Pack you shall be Queenes.
ON CHARTAE SCRIPTAE. WHat more Knaves yet? Nay then we're in our dumps, For they're still followed by the smaller Trumps. Hang these Committee-men, we're so o're matcht, An honest (Tenne cant stirre, but straight hee's catcht; But play not Booty, let no Cards be seen, And wee'le win yet; see here th' Ace, King, and Queen These are the leading ones, if these ca'nt gett, Ev'n throw the rest , wee'le sit by and Bett. To his Friend, on his Ingenious CHARTAE SCRIPTAE. COme my Deare Sister, shall we have a Game? The Cards are hallow'd now, all but the name. Here are Religious Kings and Queens, we may Worke out Salvation, while we seeme to Play. Blest Reformation! see how Grace gets in By th' very meanes which did intice to sin. Now may in godly sort the Zealous mate Deale with a Brother, yet Communicate. They that forbad th'Prophaner Ace and Duce, Should they see these, they would command their Vse. Virtue thus Conquers Vice, by an unknowne way, And Satan's beaten now at his owne Play. What good may wee not hope for, when we heare, A Sermon Preach'd by Nicholas Benie're?
Incertus AUTHOR, to his Anonymos Friends. I Thank you (Friends) for your Conceits, they're witty: But let's remember Myndus was a Citty, And had great gates; whether it be Command Or Play, it is the word, no more, I'le stand.
CHARTAE SCRIPTAE. The ACE, Vnity. ETernall One, who mad'st, and knowst our Hearts. How wonderfull art thou; whose formost parts No eye can see, and live! The Best of Things Doe homage unto thee; even Queenes and Kings. And though the word now worser meaning have, Who was not borne thy vassall, and thy Knave? All Hearts are Open unto thee▪ no shrowd To hide the low so Base; Nor  so proud To exalt the high: thou lifrest up the low, And down the proud do'st from their high Hearts throw. The King of HEARTS. NExt to th' Ace on the Earth, the power of Kings Derivatively flowes, as streames from Springs; Pollute not then these chrystall waters, no, They must untouch'd to their owne Fountain flow. So long as He pays duty to the Ace, He will defend his delegated Place:
And though at Gleeke, the Knave in Number be More then the King, Yet the precedency Is given to him in play, And Tom goes downe, And do's his Crosse-legg'd homage to the Crowne. The Queene of HEARTS. ALas what fortune's this here's not a Packe, The glorious Card of All is gon: we lacke The Queene, nor will we a small Card suppose. We thanke the Thistle, that we want this Rose. She's gon to play a better game, from parts That Forreigne are, to get us  Hearts, Then these at home; then count it England's Spring. When she and those Hearts joine to Ace and King. The King of DIAMONDS. IF ever King had such unvalued gemms, Flow'rs of his Crowne, then our great King had them. Not Aaron's brest plate brandish't such a Ray, Nor darted so much lustre▪ As that day When that throughout these Islands we could see Of peace and plenty A Monopoly. Religion brought forth wealth, but little after The honest Dame was eaten by her daughter. Two sparkling Diamonds were this Land's two Eyes, The through the-word-fam'd Ʋniversities; But now we bunke. His power at Sea alone, No Prince can shew me such another stone. What pitty i'st such goodly pearles and fine Should be cast out (as now they are) to Swine!
The Queene of DIAMONDS. Great Queen, how thou hast cut thy way we have seen, Not now of Diamonds, but true Diamond Queene. Thy greater Pearles, (not like that unchast she Who quaff'd them up dissolv'd with Antony.) To reinthrone thy injur'd Lord thou sold't; Bart'ring for Bullets Diamonds▪ and uphold'st The Crowne Maugre thine enemies hate, and scorne With high Supporters, Feirce as th'Ʋnicorne, Or Lyon: Thus by gallant poverty, Thy selfe will the unvalued Jewell be. The King of SPADES. THis King resembles much prime Monarchy. Just such a King was Adam as is he: Made by his sinne a sab'ring digging Prince, And so the greatest Princes have beene since, Full of great Cares and Feares; In throbbes of state, In height 'bove others plac'd, and so in hate, Laid open to reproaches, censures, scornes: So that their Crownes are truly Crownes of Thornes. By base misprision, what they are not, made; So that they doe not call a Spade, a Spade. Vexing their sacred persons till they have No rest but by the Spade, and that i'th'Grave. The Queene of SPADES. Ʋpon the Queene of Spaines death. THe Mournfull Court in Heart, I meane, not blacke, (For they mourne truly, who their Mourning lacke) In Elegiacke faces doth expresse For loyall Spaine's great Queene, great heavinesse.
More sorrow in a looke cannot be showne; I have knowne lesse greife, when mourning has beene on▪ Who can forbeare a dolefull song to sing? Dead is the Catholicke Queene, and Christian King. If the Popes Title so small a Power hath. God blesse (pray we) Defender of the Faith. The King of CLUBS. THis is the worst of Kings, beware of him, N King indeed, but a meere popular Pim, Voyc'd, and cry'd up by Impudence and noyse. Guarded with store of Apron men and Boyes, Saylors and watermen; and since the wives Set to reforme, their foremen venter lives More precious then their husbands, to bring in Religion, and beate downe the Man of sinne; For which they exalt a Levita in a Tub▪ And he perswades to tumults the rude Club. When swarmes of waspes, and hornets buzze: Then fly. No honour in a Crowd for Majesty. The Queene of CLUBS. TO make a Queene of Clubs I must extract The spirits of three Ladies most exact; The Legislative, Preaching, and Prophetick; These qualities well jumbled by a Sedgewicke In close Alembecke, will a Queene install Most pure, most vertuous, and Synodicall, Who shall go out, and in before the People, And preach high doctrine placed in the Steeple, These are the Peoples joy, their life, their breath, Dearer then late most deare Elizabeth.
Io the Queene. A beast of vast Commands, With many heads, and tailes, and many hands. The Knave of HEARTS. I Am the worst of Knaves, others by Art Are wicked, studyed; I me a Knave at Heart. Where vile Ingredients poyson all my will, Whatsoe're I thinke, or do, is mischeife still. Like to an Indigestive stomack I Convert all good to bad: Here roguery Originall is; no vertue, goodnesse, love Can such a monster save; Repre'hend, reprove, Like a fierce mastiffe at your throat I fly; Advice and Counsell I voyd cunningly. And by a mentall reservation Make and breake Oathes to damne a Nation. The Knave of DIAMONDS. Prince GRIFFITH. A Precious Knavel Y'ould Madams Quarry Enter, While precious stones you craftily present her, And rob her of a Jewell above price. Fowle ravisher, only a Prince in vice! Are these your close Committees? if you sit Upon such plots, we know what you Commit. If that from Brutus we derive our name, Like him let's bravely flay our Nation's shame, Let not our Chast Lucretias suffer thus, By an adulterous Griffithins. O make one Order against him most just, Who pimp'd the sacred order for his lust.
The Knave of SPADES. THis Knave by stanch and forced gravity In a Spade Beard covers all pravity. You must not thinke his Cato's face would cozen, Having the justice of the honest dozen Good men, and true; yet this upright treader Is closely link't unto the Devils tedder: So sanctified a cast of his white eye, Will usher nothing but a very lie. And while you Imagine you a sure card have, You'le finde this envious Spade digging your grave. The Knave of CLUBS. THis is a foolish, proud, tumultuous Chuffe, Whose mouth runs ore with filthy Kitchin stuffe, The scumme of private raylings; which he vents Now against Kings, and will 'gainst Parliaments, For this same knave likes nothing that hath power, Nor learning, but whats infused in the Houre. Every thing's his greivance, but beleives Above all other things the poore lawne sleeves. He has a plaguy and malignant spight, (For his soules ste) 'gainst any thing that's white. Pound him to dust, and his Ingredients see, He is compos'd of pride, and villany.
The TENS. Decem Praecepta. THese if they were kept have power enough, To purge the world of all such knavish stuffe. In dreadfull thunderings upon Sinas hill By divine pencill wrote, the Almighties will And high mandamus were these ten: The Jew Had the first priviledge: He heard, and knew The Legislative voyce: whose Majestie So dreadfull was, it did the Jewes to die. So they desired a Speaker, whose meeke soule, In place of God might safely them controle, Yet he was mov'd from patience at the men, And first of all broke all those blessed ten. (1) THe first provides that I no Atheist be, Against plurality, and Anarchie. I am the Lord thy God, and I alone; Not Gods, nor Lords then are there, no not none. (2) THe second shewes Invisibility; You may not picture what you cannot see: God cometh as a winde. Who can be found Of Cunningst Painter that could paint a Sound? But know there is a decent use of Images; When t'any thou dost bow; an Idoll 'tis. (3) THat doth his nature keepe, and this his name, Neither must common be: ô what a shame Is it to us; That that name which the Jewes Durst not pronounce, we frequently do use,
Without regard unto this precepts taile, Vengeance is his: the sweares shall not faile. (4) HOw faire and reasonable are thy demands! Lord! of seaven dayes thou askest one. There stands An Item to this precept shewes the ods; Six dayes we have our selves: The seventh is Gods. Twill shame us if we yeild not: On this day What on the other six you safely may, You may not do; now works then do wherein Thy profit, or thy pleasures are, They're sinne: Do not the day to Superstition force: Deny thy Brother helpe, and save thy Horse. The workes forbad are workes of Pride, and hate: To rest from works of love is reprobate. (5) THe greatest blessing that on earth can be Is firme annexed unto loyalty. He that would Nestor's Age to's children give, Teach them to meane, Father and King long live. (6.) NO man would hazard sure the Curse of Cain; Doe not thou kill, nor wish the Power of slaying. Whose life thou would'st preserve, through hate for shame In Reputation murder not, and name. Yet thinke not hence, there is no power to stay; In spight of this, the sword of Justice may. (7.) STones cry the Jewes for prov'd Adultery. That is not all, thou mayst not in thine eye, Nor in thy heart (that private closet) doe, What may pollute thy selfe, and neighbour too.
(8.) THou shalt not steale from Man, nor God. The Edge Of this same precept will cut Sacriledge. (9.) IN publicke Judgement, nor 'mongst private freinds, Doe not by Injury serve thine owne ends: The bread that's got by anothers losse, though sweet, O it is foule, and marke it, It is greet. (10.) HEre's little difference 'twixt my neighbour and My selfe, both for the same priviledge stand. No longer let's be two: My Counterpart, The very Copy of my Soule and Heart. Thy Beast, thy servants, fortunes, and thy wife, Are all as deare to me as my owne life. The NINES. Nine Heroes. THis number's not so sacred, as the last, But yet 'tis famous, for the Ages past Laboured in this same number (as a vie) To manifest all humane gaslantry. We rake the Christian, Heathen, Jewish State, And by extraction make it sublimate: In histories Alembecke there were nine, Whose spirits (as Elixar) did out shine The rest of men: These were their dayes high noone; Amongst the lesser starres the exalted Moone. Wee'l mount 'em in their severall Orbs, and see How different their's, from these dayes Chivalry. God's Cavalier Joshua leads the valiant va The Conqueror of fruitfull Canaan.
The Sunne and Moone were in his muster roles, And listed Starres recruited his slaine soules. Rivers retreated, Jordan was drove backe, The blowing of 7 hornes do Jericho sacke, Thirty one Kings all fell by him. No place Was strong, nor men, no not the Anakims Race. Yet one base lurking Achans cursed sinne, Routed all Israel: Have not we beene Strangely dispirited, and beat sometimes? There is a cause, brave Cavaliers; Our crimes. DAVID. WHat's fein'd St George and Bevis to have done, Great David did indeed; he Ladies wonne By sling and sword: when vast Goliah lay After the Beare and Lyon the worse prey. What worthies were his Captaines? and if they Such mighties were: What was their King I pray! That gallant man after Gods heart a King, (The peoples sinne provoking) did a thing Was folly to the Lord. That sinne this day The People Acts in a Militia. Be favourable O Lord, and grant that we, Like him, may feele but one Curse, not all three. JUDAS MACH. Puissant Judas strong in faith, not men, Beat proud Antiochus. His zeale even then Unto Jerusalem did brightest flame, When that Jerusalem was but a name. When heathen Ignorance threw downe her Courts, And of their holy vestures made their sports May after Ages (Charles) give thee due praise Who fightst (as he) the ruin'd Church to raise.
HECTOR. HEctor did many valiant Acts, but he Oppressed was by Club, and so are we. Where Homer's learned pen hath sweat, and chast Virgil hath sung, for me to rime were wast. ALEXANDER. HEre's he, for whom the world too little was, He sweat in the streight compasse; know the cause, His large ambitious minde did know no Bound, As little roome serves him (as me) i'th'ground. CAESAR. HEres he that wept at Alexanders Tomb, 'Cause at his yeares he had not so much orecome. Who did advance the Aristocracy Unto Imperiall State, though cruelly, Witnesse the dy of chang'd Pharsalia's fields, Whose story lofty Lucan fully yeilds. A man more famous for his Pen or Sword 'Tis hard to judge nor can I here afford. Him, when the fawning Senate said, they'd make Happy and high, basely his life they take. Tres Moderni Arthur the Prince renown'd for Lady-fights, And his round Table, and his sturdy Knights, Read now, like to Romances will be sound; And what's his Table? now the whole world's round. I shall not write of Godfrey, Bulloignes Duke, Nor yet shall Charlemaine swell up this Booke. No, since my owne good Charles is not the great, Unlesse it be in Soule, in Cause, more yet, Great in his wrongs, great in his sufferings too. I shame to write it Countrymen to you. Shall it be said, and not recanted? Freinds, Have your great promises these homely ends?
Glorious and Rich; courage, our Lord was so; He made the World, yet knew not whereto go. The Nine Muses. Yet while by these this number's made divine, Let's not forget, the Muses they were nine. When those nine worthies shall augmented be By Charles his Nephews, and his Progeny, And the swolne Annals strout with thy brave Deeds. Which now the world in quaint Mercurius reads. Those nine well warm'd with a peculiar fire, Shall Penne themselves thy warres; and not Inspire. EIGHTS. Octo Personae. WHen first I drew this Card, it griev'd my heart; For high offence this figure did impart. It call'd to mind that Watry world, when th' Earth Was drown'd; and of mankind a generall dearth. That high gigantick, and rebellious race, That fought against their God for highest place; Broke into drops like to a proud swolne wave, And were intombed in a floating grave. High were the men, the women heavenly faire, (And fruitfull too) for Continence was rare. Wherefore God punisht their inconstant blood Except eight Persons with a constant Flood. WHat Ovid in his Metamorphosis Doth as a Fable tell; In truth is This: And many wise men thinke that his Mor-phosis Was stolne out of the Pentateuch of Moses. And what you read of good Deucalion, And grandam Pyrrah, each one threw their stone,
And they forthwith took kindly heat, and life, Is true in good-man Noah, and his wife, And Sem and Japheth, and accursed Cham, And their three dames, from whence all people came. The Seminary of man was then the Arke, That too was of all Beasts the moving Parke, The Rabbins very pretty stories have Of Noah, when he built that swimming Cave. How that his Neighbours wondred, and did say, Good Lord, whither went my Cock and Hen to day? Anothers Ramme and Ewe, his Bull and Cow, Her Dogge and pretty Bitch were here but now. And Lamech loving Doves: but all were met And hundred Couples more, as if they had set Some merry meeting at that huge new House Which Noah built, There was the Rendeavouze. A Brace of Lyons were met lovingly; And Tygers twaine, and Bears both he and she. And so of Birds their paires in mighty joy, As if they had all been flocking to a Coy. Thus while the amused world were wondring at The Beasts procession; Not dreaming that A deluge would succeed, they merry made, And God ore whelm'd 'em, 'ere they were afraid. SEVENS. Septem Planetae. IF we may trust divining Mr Booker, Our New States Wyzard, and old Starre looker. From the untoward conjunction of these Starres Ensue results of Peace, or bloudy Warres.
I have not studied Astronomie so farre, As to confute this sage Albumazur: Yet I remember, when our Archiflamen Vpon Prognosticks did the wight examine. And ask't him, Bonâ fide whether He By art could guesse certaine futuritie. He answer'd plainly, no, he could not tell, But put things in, to make th' Almanack sell. But that these lights have powerfull influence Over inferiour Corps, is plaine to sence. As in all Plants and waters; and mans mind By unequall temperature is much inclin'd. Yet the wise men, (whose number was not eight) Controle these seven, and overlooke their Fate. Who under Saturnes sullen raye are borne, Live Melancholy, and seeme to be forlorne. Who under Mars had their Nativity, To Bloud and Rage have a proclivity. The generous aspects of Sol and Jove Vnto Heroick actions People move. When these in an auspicious posture meet, We shortly doe the birth of Princes greet. So doe these Rayes appeare i'th royall Plant, That we may judge, who were predominant. For in thy early progresse like the Sun About thy Fathers Kingdome thou hast run. While he triumphing like Majestick Jove, Shew'd thee the patterne of his state and love. This is the Sparkling Diamond of the Sky, The Beauty-speck of Heaven, and bravery. Which for th' illustrious figure, and quaint light, Is Lady Huisher to the Day and Night.
Her kind and pleasing Influence doth raise More then Platonick heat; and though her wayes Are dark and secret, and her fire's unseene, (For Mercury a friend to th' stealth hath been.) Yet Mistrisse Luna in her nightly round, Hath heard the cryes of this Platonick wound. SIXES. Opus sex dicrum. IF the same Sixe be truly understood, The Reader will perceivd, That all were good. For need must they be good, whom the best best Himselfe made, and on the 7th day took rest. Gods working dayes were sixe, one resting day; So must ours be, but not a rest to play. For when the great Creator finish'd had, And saw all good, (for nothing could be bad) Into himselfe he did reflect, to see The power and goodnesse of the Trinitie. Imitate ô man: and though sixe dayes thou spend Vpon thy selfe, in Him let the 7th end. The first daies Worke. THat there might be a First daies worke, the Light Was first Created, seperate from Night. Night which was nothing but a want of Day, And gets a being when that's gone away. Iust such is that in which this blinded Land Doth grope; unwillingnesse to understand,
Naturall privations serve to produce, But Voluntary Darknesse's of no use. The Second. The next daies labour was that Canopy, (The vulgar usually doe call the skie▪) And is that glorious substance which is spread, Like a blue spangled Mantle or'e our head. The Seat of God mounted so exceeding high, It is not to be reach'd untill we dy. The Singer sweet doth it a Curteine call, Draw it O Lord, and entertaine us all. The Third. For all that high precedency of Birth, The lowest is most courted, this base Earth. Which when it first was made, did freely give All that by which with sweat we now do live. 'Twas Meadow all, and no inclosure then; What God made common, was inclos'd by men. To make a Land like that, 'Tis my advice, Downe with inclosures; They're no Paradise. Laying of ground to ground, doe none of these, The gathering of Waters were the Seas. The Fourth. Heaven in it selfe was glorious enough, Yet as a pallace with rich household stuffe Thou deest Lord thy dwelling place with lights Of lesse and greater magnitude. Our sights Cannot behold their lustre; even they Dazle that rule the Night, who rules the day
Is the great Author of our Heat and Light, Yet is not hot, nor seen of any sight. Let us, O Lord, on Earth to thee consent, To make thy houses full of Ornament. And as to worship them's Idolatry, So in thy adorn'd Churches let it be. The Fifth. The Watry Regions had no people yet, But Wave with Wave did play, and Nimph, Nimph met▪ When great Leviathan, (no Tyrant than,) Was made Grand-Signior of the Ocean. And Scaly Officers in shoales did presse Vnto his, then not dreaded, Dreadfullnesse. Vnder whose vast demensions, safe did lye As in a Trench, the Finny Ministry. Like Lord, like Servants, who did execute By signes his will; for Both as Fish were mute. Farre different were the vast Aires feather'd Peers, Where warbling Birds sing to the playing spheres. The Sixth. This was the great Compleating day; God's last And best of workes, not hundled up in hast. Wherein the species sensitive were made, Those wondrous beasts, of which we'r now afraid; Whose mutuall kindenesse to each other prove Them all Created by the God of Love. So sweet an Innocence fil'd every thing, Serpents no poyson had, and Bees no sting. The Lamb and Wolfe together friendly lay, No Sheep-heards then, nor Doggs to part a fray. Wolves in Sheeps-clothing were, and Sheep indeed, As quiet (as in the Picture) they did feed.
They were so far from injury, that they Expected dayly whom they should obey. Then sate the Divine Iunto, the great Three In consultation, who that should be, To whom the Soveraignty of Sea and Land Should be committed, Such a vast Command Was fit for none, but who could represent Himselfe, he therefore his owne Image lent, And stampt an Impresse of Divinity▪ Into a peice of Clay, (such as you see,) And it upstarts a glorious Creature, wise, And Innocent, and meek in his owne eyes, The joy of Angels, and the Divels hate, The Lord ot'h Creatures, high and fortunate. Who all out of innate Obedience came And knew from him their Essence in their name, This solitary Monarch could not see Amongst his Servants fit Society: But from himselfe (as from the Noblest Earth▪ And choice Materialls) Woman had her Birth. So all were wonder-struck, the Beasts to see The Man, He Eve, and they the Trinity. FIVES. Quinque Sensus. Seeing. THe Diamond Sense, the Bodies faithfull guide, Is meerly unto Psyches selfe allied.Five Senses▪ Soule of the Senses this▪ whose chearfullnesse. Even as in death (for blindenesse is no lesse)
Without the sight is dampt. He that's borne blind Walkes in a sleep, and only lives in mind. That such a one may live, he first must dye, The Resurrection's his Nativity. Hearing. The Soules Intelligence, and nimble Scout, Iust like the Scout doth truths and tales put out. For at these subtle Port-holes doth not stand A Sentinell, who may the word demand Before it passe, but every word doth flye Into the Presence, chamber instantly. The Convoy of our Faith; Sciences Clewes; The Staple and the Magazine of Newes. Touching. Tactus has got so great an Excellence, That to want it is said to have no Sense. I never heard of any thing but one That was insensible; and shee Alone. But in a just recruite ought to abound With that fine sixth sense which great Scaliger found. The Bodies Life-Guard this, no little harme, But presently the Touch doth give Alarme▪ Tasting. Our Victualls garnish, Entertainments flourish, Without our Palates, we like Embryons nourish: As much delight the Infant Navell-fed, Takes in his meat, as when'ts unrelished. This is the Sawse of sawse: this Salt doth season Our Appetites Second. Manciple to Reason.
Smelling. Could you a Face in any wise suppose Handsom, without this goodly ridge the Nose? Iust such a nonsense Nose (as that's a Face,) Is that which wants this rare Olfactive grace. The Loadstone of the brain, the sense magnetick, Natures High-chamberlaine and Groome prophetick. FOURES. Quatuor Elementa. Fire. THese are the subtle principles 'oth world,Foure Ele∣ments. Which where they're temper'd well, or rashly hurld, Doe make their Compounds plausible, or loath'd: All things in these, though undiscern'd, are cloth'd. In extasie at this the good King said, I'me fearfully and wonderfully made. O the art and wisedome of the Deity! Which from confused Chaos, where did lye These blended Elements in strange disguise, Gave them their place, and due proprieties; And did advance the active Fire so high, It's next unto the throne of Majestie. Aire. This into severall Regions is decided; For Breath, for swaggering Winds and Snowes provided. The Magazine of Heavens here: Artillerie Which oft in dreadfull thundrings rend the skie.
And gives proud Tyrants check▪ which bravely awe All under powers, and guard the Supreme Lawe. This like a silken girdle doth surround The moving waters, and the fixed ground. This is a Proteus, which in quaint attire Condens'd, is Water, Rarified, is Fire. Earth and Water. These two are Inmates to each other; friends Checqred together in kind mutuall blends. So necessary Neighbours to us, that All pleasures are, as they are, scituate. When our fond thoughts are wearied in the sports O'th Earth; we dally in the watry Courts: This glazen Element, (unlesse the wind Dimple her surface) is most smooth and kind. Her numerous Subjects farre the Earth's exceed, And are the great supply of humane need. What wealth are in their Bowells hid? Her Jewells And t'others Gold, are all Contentions fuell. Quatuor Anni Tempora. IT were unseasonable to passe these foure,Four Seasons of the yeare. In which our life is pass'd. Nay count them o're. You'l find in every man even every season, So man is but a yeare indued with reason. His Child-hood is the Spring: when flowry Cheeks And smiling looks, a Springall him bespeaks. The Summer is his youth: which Harvest yeelds, Himselfe of Corne a constant standing Field's.
He hath his fall too, and Autumnall change, And Snow and Winter on his white haires range. They differ thus: the Season never failes, But oft in Spring and youth death man assailes. THREES. Virtutes Theologicae. Faith. HAnd of the Soule and Eye: what silly we Nor see,Three Theo∣logicall Ver∣tues. nor comprehend for Majestie. By Faiths attain'd▪ and what the Heathen thought So strange, and Papists dangerously have taught Without a Miracle, or Ethnick jeere, By Faith we feed on God, Hee's Christmasse cheere. And as of a good Conscience he profest, So we oth' Sacraments, it is a Feast. A Feast where Angels would kneele downe and eat, Where Gods the Entertainer, and the meat. Away these sinfull Senses, get you hence, You let in Vice. Faith is the Christian sense. Hope. Wer't not for thee, what commonly we speake Is very true; Our very Heart would breake. Mother of Patience, sweetner of all losse, Supply of want, miseries Anti-crosse. The Anchor of this Floating Island, where Our Hope doth live, but strait begirt with Feare.
The Penitents Cordiall, Bezar stone of griefe, The Parted's internuntius, Prisoners reliefe, The only Key of Heaven, which doth ope, (When Faith and Charity doe cease) to Hope. Charity. The glew of Earth and Heaven, whose new state Is to be now Conjoyn'd, not separate. So great God's love unto his Creature is, That both are joyn'd in one hypostasis. Love Borne, when name of Duell was not known, And with Astraea, and the rest hence Flowne. Wrapd up in  Mantle, which doth hide And not proclaim the faults, that are espied. Antipathy of hate, keene malice's regret, At very name of foule Revenge, shee'l sweat. The Centry of my Neighbours Fame, and House, Salvation's universall Rendevouz. TWO's. Duo Testamenta. THese are God's Magna Charta,Two Testa∣ments. the ancient Law Which did the Jewes, now doth the Christian awe. Who for themselves are credited: the Ground Of their owne Truth, and Rule of what is Found. Not both like plausible; The letter Red In that, and threatning Death; appropriated In certaine priviledges unto a Few; And hid in types, scarce knowne unto the Jew.
The other's▪ letter faire, and plaine; That he That runs may read, and for all commers free. A Testament of such extent; which makes The World Executor, He that will partakes. Duo Sacramenta. THese in their types were bloody,Two Sacra∣ments. and did fright The Heathen world from their severer Rite; The Jew did want his Spectacles in part, Nor did the Circumcision see oth' Heart. But doted on the outward Formes: and Became lesse Iew, and was but one in He saw the Infant bleed, but understood No issue of his sinne, but only bloud. And knew not when he us'd his cruell knife, The wound in's Flesh, was 'gainst his sinfull Life. So when with bitter herbs the Paschall Lambe Was eaten by the Sonnes of Abraham; They look't not throw the Mystery, Nor saw in Pharo's, Satans Tyranny. And so for all their great deliverance, Are still asleepe in an Aegyptian trance, And feed on shadowes, while the Lambe indeed Was slaine by them, but they no whit will Feed. No more let Superstition them befoole, Nor thoughts of Iordan or Bethesda' Poole. But give them grace (good Lord) they may Confide Ith' streame of bloud, and water from thy Side. FINIS.
