H182 E126_36 99860789 112914
A wonderfull And Strange Miracle OR GODS Just Vengeance against the Cavaliers Declaring how Mr. Andrew Stons∣by, a Cavalier under the Command of the Lord Mohone at Listelleth in Cornwall, at the Signe of the Dolphin, dranke a health to the Devill. Daring him to come and pledge him, with many blasphemmous imprecations. Also how the Devill appeared to him at that instant, so that he was distracted, and died raving and blaspheming, to the terrour and amaze∣ment of all the behoulders. Attested by Mr. Adam Nicholson, Cler. P. & Co. Mr. Dudley Silvester, Clericus. Mr. William Holsonford, master of the Jnne, And many other sufficient and wel-affected Gentlemen. From Listelleth, Octobar the 30th. 1642. LONDON Printed for HENRY HVTTON 1642.
A Wonderfull And strange Miracle OR GODS Vengeance against the Cavaliers. Sir, IN returne of your last Newes, J shall make bold to informe you of some unusuall pas∣sages that lately hap∣pened in our Towne of Listelleth, it was our fortune, ill fortune J may call it, to have some two hundred of the Cavaliers billi∣ted in our Towne, those sonnes of Beliall, whose wickednesse is so great that wordes
cannot ex presse it, these inhuman Catter∣pillers for better epithite thy deserve not being billited in our towne, the cheife unbrideled Rorers, to the number of thirty five were billited in the cheife Jnne of the towne, in a very honest religious mans house, for such is our misery we dare deny them nothing, ney and glad they will be pleased to take it, that so we may save our houses from being fired and our bodies unmaslacred, it being indeed their whole delight to exercise cruelty upon those that are wel-affected to the King and Parlia∣ment, to be briefe, in this mans House the roysters were calling (as is their custo∣mary use) for what even the House could afford, so they had indeed was not sit onely to satisfie, but also to superfluity, having sild their ungodly paunches, upon the goods of this honest man, they began withall those horrid imprecations they are used to utter, to call him Rogue and Rascall,, and Roundhead, telling him that he went about to starve them because
they were Cavaliers, the man of a good honest patient spirit, intreated them to be quiet, and told them nothing should be wanting that he could procure for their content, then flew out oaths as thicke as Haile-stones like an impetuous storme from the mouth of the most deboyst Ca∣valier that he would have a Sea of drinke, a Wildernesse of Tobacko, and ten Legi∣ons of Whores, what Company if this wretch might have had his wish, had he provided for his owne destruction, a Sea of Drinke, that Leviathan-like he might swill himselfe to death in his owne Elle∣ment, J cannot chuse but comment on his detestable Phrases, A Wildernes of Tobac∣ko, that he might loose his soule in those misty vapours of that Jndian Devill, ten Legions of Whores, that luld in the lap of Sensuallity, he might dally himselfe into damnation, oh most intemperate wretch, Sollomon the wisest and richest King that ever was, had but a thousand yet they made him become an Jdollater.
And J beleeve, might I appeale to the conscience of the most luxurious man now living, he would ingeniously confesse the truth of this assertion, that one Strumpet by her wiles and false allurements, has unmanned him of his best part, his reason and left him to the mercy of her devou∣ring appetite; J doubt J have exceeded the customary bounds of a Letter, but J hope not the limits of your patience, for though the subject be bad, yet in some part to defect those vices is not amisse, that that advice may serve as a Bouy, to give warning to the approaching Marriner, that so he may avoid the danger, J have exten∣ded this discourse, and now must fall u∣pon that which is most fearefull to the apprehension of you or any other Christi∣an. Some volleys of unaccustomed oaths being shot up to heaven, that they might the sooner pull downe vengeance on his owne head, he begunne to advance his horrid voice among them, craving atten∣tion and silence, that he might be heard
my masters quoth he. J beginne a health to the Devill, and I would fain see who dare pledge mee, but the rest of his com∣pany though they were steeped in Wine, began to shrinke backe, and looke one u∣pon another, as fearing the even, when he redoubling his damnable resolution, cryed out, if none dare pledge me, let the De∣vill come and doe it himselfe, the word was no sooner spoken, but a damp faint Aire begunne to move in the roome, and an unacquainted person stood in the mid∣dest of them,, who said with a terrible and hideous voice, Andrew Stonesby J am here, immediately all his Company fled from him and the misserable man was left alone, where after some quarter of an houre of an houre of terrible noyse, the man of the House, Master Silvester our Minister, and the other persons here mentioned, adven∣tured into the roome, where they found the miserable wretch layd groveling on the ground, raving and blaspheming, and so he continued for the space of a day and
a night, and afterward died raging and blaspheming against God, and cursing the Roundheads. Let this serve as a warning to the rest of that Crew, that they mend their manners, for feare Gods Vengeance fall in like manner upon them, so having troubled you to long I take leave to rest, Your loving Friend John Hadfred Listelleth, October, the 30th. 1642. We whose names are here subscrbed were eye witnesses of this fearefull spec∣tacle. Adam Nicholson. Cler. P. Dudley Silvester, Clericus. William Holtonford, Master of the said House FINIS.
