H2440 669.f.20[51] 99870596 163468
ON THE UNTIMELY AND MUCH LAMENTED DEATH OF Mrs Anne Gray, the Daughter of the Learnedly accomplisht Doctor Nicholas Gray of Tunbridge in Kent, Who dyed of the Small Pox. AN ELEGIE. SCarce have I dry'd my Cheeks, but Griefs invite Again my Eyes to weep, my Hand to write, Which still return with greater force, being more In weight and number then they were before. Mechanick Griefs are eloquent, their sound Beats through the streets, and in that spacious Round Salutes each strangers eare: Nor can so high And wide a Ruine in one Family Contracted keep; but seeking farther bounds, Fills every brest with its afflicting sounds. Youth met with Beauty weeps; then who forbears To Griefe's Exchequer to bring in his tears? Het that such tributes doth not now returne, Knows neither Vertue, nor for whom we mourn, SHE, whose unequall'd, and whose rich desert Did take possession in each knowing heart; Whose life was such, it may be well deny'd, That she did ever ill, but that she dy'd. SHE, like another Nature, but whose Name Gave life to Beauty, and a voyce to Fame; SHE, whose pure worth was such, whom gone, that even Heav'n would lament with many a tear, if Heaven Had not assum'd her, who in all she did, Both Grace in it and Innocence were hid, Is hence ascended, while our Griefs infer Their moyst Complaints, and envy Heav'n, not Her. Death, who did boast his high Prerogative, And hourely Conquests over all alive, Did here begin to startle, and did seeme To feare her Beauties would now conquer him: Therefore a danger to prevent so nigh, Drew forth at once all his Artillery, And so direct the Battery was laid, So full the Charge, so fast the Case-shot play'd, That the poor Body fell upon the place, A thousand wounds being printed on her face: Yet spight of Death, and Fate, we must imply, That she her selfe was well content to dye; For in this sad and tedious vale of Teares, Ere she had hardly numbred eighteene yeeres, She had done all her businesse, and made even With Earth, and drawn up her accounts for Heaven. Rich in her Sexes value, good mens praise, And full of all could be desir'd, but dayes; Where after her we sigh our soules, the while She counts our teares, and with a pittying smile Beholds our following Love; and now no Drums, Nor voyce of Cannons, nor of Trumpets comes To vex her quiet eare; nor any noyse Dares once approach to interrupt her joyes; But Health and Strength doe court her, and the treasure Of endlesse light, and unrepented pleasure, And all the Blessings which faire Peace doth bring Sent for so oft by my late Lord the King Her Epitaph. WOuldst thou know who lies here, under This cold Marble? read, and wonder: For body, beauty, feature, sense, This was the Maid of Excellence, Whose early Soule soone understood And practic'd all that men call Good: And wondring threescore yeares should stay For what so soone she bore away, She sudden unto Heaven did fly, Asham'd of dull Mortality. SAMUEL HOLLAND.
