H3233 669.f.25[56] 99871084 163861
Something against SWEARING And concerning the Oath of ALLEGIANCE And SVPREMACY. AS it was the Disciples Religion principle and practice to obey Christs command as in Matth. 5. 34. But I say unto you swear not at all neither by Heaven for it is Gods throne nor by the Earth for it is his footstool, neither by Jerusalem for it is the City of the great king, neither shalt thou swear by thy head, for thou canst not make one hair white or black but let your yea be yea, and your nay, nay, for whatsoever is more then these cometh of evil, and this being the Apostles Religion and practise, they preached this doctrine unto o∣thers as it is written, James 5. 12. But above all things my brethren swear not neither by heaven neither by the earth, neither by any other oath, but let your yea be yea, and your nay, nay, least you fall into condemnation, so this is our doctrine, principle and practise that we can∣not swear at all; by any oath least we fall into condemnation, and so sin against Christ, and if we do suffer or be persecuted, and imprisoned, because we cannot swear. then it is for our Religion, and exercise of our Consciences, and obedience of Truth un∣to our God in which suffering we shall rather dye then sin against him. And whereas it is required of us to testifie our obedience as subjects unto CHARLES the second, as our lawful King and own his Supremacy and Government in all just and lawful commands, whereupon an oath of Allegiance and Supremacy is tendred. As it is our principle and hath ever been our practise to be obedient subjects under every Power ordained of God, and to every ordinance of man (set up by him) for the Lords sake whether unto King as supream, or unto Governors or any set up in Authoritie by him who are for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well, 1 Pet. 2. 13. 14. and unto such we do freely promise obedience unto all just and lawful Commands: And we do own and believe that it is not without but according to the purpose of the Lord, that he hath this Day and Power given him as King head and chief Magistrate over this Nation, that while he hath his Day and Power he may rule for God in civil and outward affairs, and matters relating unto the outward man and estate, in which all his just, and lawful commands we can willingly be subject unto not for wrath but even for conscience sake, and all com∣mands which are otherwise, whether from him, or any other, we shall willingly and patiently suffer under them what men shall be permitted to impose upon us, and thus we do accept and own the King and his Government, as he and it is according to God, and answerable unto him, we are willingly obedient, and in Conscience bound to accept it, and shall yeeld subjection thereunto, but if otherwise contrary to God, he rule in Tyranny, oppression injustce or the like that we must bear witness aginst by the spirit of Truth, but not by outward opposition as rebellion by insurrections plots, or carnal weapons to destroy or overthrow, either him or the Government thereby; for that is contrary to our life. But as for swearing it being contrary both to Christs Command, and our Consciences as we never have, so we never shall swear, neither for nor against any Man Power or Government but shall be true and faithful, to what we promise and profess. And as concerning the Church of God, and spiritual things relating unto Gods Kingdom, we own onely Jesus Christ as supreme Head, Ruler and Lawgiver there according to James 4. 12. There is one Lawgiver which is able to save and to destroy, and as it is written, Ephes. 1. 22. that God hath given him to be the had over all things to the Church which is his body the fulness of him which filleth all in all, and as the Apostles did hold forth him to be the head of the body the Church, who is the beginning the first born from the dead, that in all things he might have the preemenence Col. 1. 18. And him we do own as Head Ruler and Commander in all matters of Faith obedience and worship in things appertaining unto his king come, and he onely is to rule (give laws and order) in the Consciences of men, by his spirit light and power, and as he is the Author of his peoples Faith, so he is the defender of it; and them in it, and so to him we give the Dominion Rule and Government, as head and supreme over his Church, and not unto man: so in him who is our Life King and Lawgiver we honour all men, and do seek the peace of all men and not the destruction, and unto this we do acknowledge, and bear witness to, who are members of his body which is his Church. London, 23 day 4 moneh. 1660. Richard Hubberthorne. George Fox, the younger. London, Printed for G. C. at the Black-Spread-Eagle at the west end of Pauls. 1660.
