H3054 E228_1 99859850 111950
Ah, Ha; Tumulus, Thalamus: Two Counter-POEMS, The First, an ELEGY Upon Edward late Earl of Dorset; The Second, an EPITHALAMIVM to the Lord M. of Dorchester. Invicem cedunt Dolor & Ʋoluptas, Funera, Taedae, Sorrow may endure for a Night, But joy cometh in the Morning. LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Prince's Armes in St Paul's Church-yard. 1654.
An Advertizement to the READER. IN regard ther are divers imperfect and spu∣rious Copies of these two Poems dispersed abroad, I obtain'd leave of the Author to com∣mit them to the press assuring the Reader that these are concordant with the Originalls. H. M.
AN ELEGY UPON THE MOST ACCOMPLISH'D, AND HEROIC LORD EDWARD, EARL OF DORSET, Lord Chamberlain to His late Majesty of Great Britain, and Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, &c. Alluding to The Quality of the Times, His admired Perfections, His goodly Person, His Antient Pedigree, His Coat of Armes crested with a Star, The Condition of Mortality, The Passion of the Author closing with an Epitaph.
AN ELEGY UPON THE LATE EARL OF DORSET. LOrds have bin long Declining, (we well know) And making their last Testaments, but now They are Desunct, they are Extinguish'd All, And never like to rise by this Lords Fall; A Lord, whose Intellectualls alone Might make a House of Peers, and prop a Throne, Had not so dire a Fate hung o're the Crown, That Privilege Prerogative should drown; Where e're he sate he sway'd, & Courts did awe, Gave Bishops Gospell, and the Judges law
With such exalted Reasons, which did flow So cleer and strong, that made Astraea bow To his Opinion, for where He did side Advantag'd more than half the Bench beside. But is great Sakvile dead? Do we Him lack, And will not all the Elements wear black? Whereof he was compos'd a perfect man As ever Nature in one frame did span. Such Highborn Thoughts, a Soul so large and free, So clear a Judgment, and vast Memory, So Princely Hospitable and Brave Mind We must not think in hast on earth to find, Unless the Times would turn to Gold agen, And Nature get new strength in forming men. His Person with it such a state did bring That made a Court as if He had bin King, No wonder, since He was so neer a Kin To Norfolks Duke, and the great Mayden Queen.
He courage had enough by conquering One To have confounded that whole Nation, Those parts which single do in some appear Were all concentred here in one bright Sphear, For Brain, Toung, Spirit, Heart, and Personage To mould up such a Lord will ask an age, But how durst pale white-liver'd Death seaze on So dauntles and Heroic a Champion? Yes, to Dye once is that uncancell'd debt Which Nature claymes, and rayseth by Eschet On all Mankind by an old Statute past Primo Adami, which will alwaies last Without Repeal, nor can a second lease Be had of Life when the first term doth cease. Mount noble Soul, Among the starrs take place, And make a new One of so bright a Race May Jove out-shine, that Venus still may be In a benign Conjunction with Thee,
To check that Planet which on Lords hath lowr'd, And such malign influxes lately powr'd; Be now a star thy self for those which here Did on thy Crest, and upper Robes appear, For thy Director take that Star we read Which to thy Saviours Birth three Kings did lead. A Corollary. THus have I blubber'd out some tears and Verse On this Renowned Heroe, and His Herse, And could my Eyes have drop'd down Perls upon 't In lieu of Teares, God knowes, I would have don't, But Teares are real, Perls for their Emblems go, The first are fitter to express my Wo; Let this small mite suffize untill I may A larger tribut to his ashes pay, In the mean time this Epitaph shall shut, And to my Elegy a period put.
HEre lie's a Grandee by Birth, Parts, and Mind, Who hardly left his Parallell behind, Here lie's the Man of Men, who should have been An Emperour, had Fate or Fortune seen. Totus in lachrymas solutus sic singultivit I. H.
UPON THE NUPTIALLS OF THAT PRINCELY PAIR HENRY Lord Marquess Of DORCHESTER, AND The Lady KATHERINE STANLEY, Daughter to the late Heroic Earl of DERBY, An Epithalamium by way of Dialog 'twixt Philemon and Sylvius. Alluding to their 1. Complexions, He Sanguin, She Black and Fair. 2. Coats of Arms, Both Field-Argent, His a Lion Rampant in an orb of Cinqfoyls. 3. Countries. 4. Pedigrees. Going on with an Hymenaeum, or Vote, comprized in four Musicall Stanzas, the three first Ayrie and Poeticall, the last Serious.
The DIALOGUE. Philemon. VVHat Object's that which I behold Dazzling my eyes with gemms and Gold? Her Face, me thinks, darts such a ray That adds more brightnes to the Day, Her breath perfumes the place, Her curls and hair Like Indian spice aromatize the Air, A sparkling white and black breaks from her sight Like to the Diamonds redoubling light, As she doth walk the very ground and stone Turn to Field-Argent which she treads upon; A Mortal sure she cannot be But some transcending Deitie; My dearest Sylvius pray unfold Who's that rare Creature I behold?
Sylvius. SHe is a Princess and a Bride Goes to the Temple to be ti'd In Nuptiall bonds, her starrs will not permit That at the Vestall fires She longer sit; She's Derbie's Royall bloud, Derby le Gran, And now She travells to the Ile of Man, She of the Princely Orenge is a branch Imp'd on the high Trimovillan stem of France, Two of the fairest Kingdomes strove, and try'd Their Utmost to compleat this Lovely Bride. 'Tis she which makes 'twixt gemms and gold That Constellation you behold. Philemon. BUt who's that comely sanguine Peer Which on her heart-side walks so neer? He likewise makes all Argent as he goes, Look at his feet how thick the Cinqfoyl grows.
Sylvius. TIs Wise and Wealthy Pierrpont, who renowns With Titles, Three of Englands chiefest Towns, A precious pond'rous Lord, whose fole Estate A Jury of new Barons might create, Patron of Virtue, Chivalry, and Arts 'Cause he himself excells in all these Parts; 'Tis He who by the hand doth hold That Demi-Goddess you behold. Philemon. IS't so? then my Autumnall Muse shall sing An Hymenaeum, and fetch back Her spring, This Subject a fresh vigor doth inspire, And heats my brain with an unusuall fire.
AN HYMENAEUM, OR BRIDAL-SONET, Consisting of four Stanzas, and to be sung by three voices, according to a choice Air set thereunto by Mr. WILLIAM WEBB. 1. Chorus MAy all Felicity betide This Princely Bridegroom, and his Bride. May those delights this morn shall bring Be endless as their Nuptiall Ring, May they be constant, and exceed Each Others Wishes, Hopes, and Creed, May the three Regions of the air Powr showrs of blessings on this pair,
May Sol and Cynthia with their rayes, Silver their nights and gild their dayes. 2. Chorus▪ All joyes attend and best of Fate This noble Marques and His Mate. 2. YEe gentle Nymphs of Trent and Dee Make hast to this solemnity, Your streames and beds now meet in one By this High-sprung conjunction, Ye Wood-nymphs who green garlands wear In Shirewood launds, and Delamer, Yee Dames of Helicon attend, And Graces your sweet presence lend, Lucina com, and pray ther be Employment in due time for thee. Chorus. May all Felicity betide This noble Bridegroom, and his Bride.
3. MAy they such gallant Males produce Both to the Rose and Flowerdeluce, That Englands Chivalry and French May multiply, and bourgeon hence, Whose branches shooting o're the Main May knit, and blossome here again, That Pierrponts Lion and Cinqfoyl May ramp and root in every soyl; Nor may this noble Race wear out Till Plato's Great year wheel about. Chorus. May all Felicity betide This noble Bridegroom, and his Bride.
4. Stanza Closing with a serious graduall Vote. MAy all the Elements conspire To make them bless'd in their desire, May all the Stars on them reflect Their mildest looks in Trine aspect, May all the Angels them defend From every thing doth ill portend, May Angells, Stars, and Elements Affoord Them such compleat contents That They have nothing els to wish But a Perseverance of Bliss. Chorus. All joyes attend and best of Fate This noble Marquess and his Mate. Idem I. . FINIS.
