H3513 669.f.3[33] 99868605 160591
THE HVMBLE PETITION of the Inhabitants of the County OF BVCKINGHAM, Presented to the KINGS most Excel∣lent Maiestie at WINDSOR the thirteenth of this instant January. 1642. In the behalfe of Mr. Hampden Knight for the said County, and of the rest of the members of Parliament, accused by his Maiestie of Treason. VVith his Maiesties gratious answere thereunto. Sheweth, THat your petitioners having by vertue of your highnes writt chosen Iohn Hampden Esquire Knight for our Shire in whose loyaltie and wisdome, we his Contrymen, and Neighbours have ever had good cause to confide: how ever of late, to our no lesse amazement then greife, wee find him with other members of Parliament ac∣cused of Treason, and haveing taken to our serious consideration, the manner of their impeachments we cannot but (under your Majesties favour) conceive, that it doth so op∣pugne the rights of Parliaments, to the maintenance whereof our Protestation bind us: That we beleive it is the malice (which their zeale to your Majesties service, & the State, hath contracted) in the enemies to your Majesty, the Church, and common wealth hath occasioned this fowle ac∣cusation rather then any desert of theirs; who doe likewise through their sides wound the judge∣ment and care of us your Petitioners, and others, by whose choice they were presented to the House. Your petitioners most humbly pray that Master Hampden, and the rest that lye under the burden of that accusation may enjoy the Iust privi∣ledges of Parliament. And your Petitioners will ever pray &c. His Maiesties answer. At the Court at Windsor the 13th. of Ianuary. 1642. HIs Majesty being graciouslie pleased to let all his subjects understand his care not (knowingly) to violate in the least degree, any of the Priviledges of Parliament, hath therefore lately by a Message sent by the Lord Keeper signified; That hee is pleased (be∣cause of the doubt that hath beene raised of the manner) to waive his former proceedings a∣gainst the said Master Hampden and the rest mentioned in this Petition, concerning whom his Ma∣jesty intends to proceed in an unquestionable way. And then his Majesty saith it will appeare that hee had so sufficient grounds to question them, as hee might not in Iustice to the Kingdome, and Honour to himselfe have forborne; and yet his Majesty had much rather that the said per∣sons should prove innocent, then be found guilty, however, hee cannot conceive that their crimes can in any sort reflect upon those his good Subjects, who elected them to serve in Parlia∣ment. London Printed for Iohn Burroughes 1641.
