h3377 e402_8 99862310 160438
THE HƲMBLE ADDRESS. of the AGITATORS of the ARMY To His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax. Presented the 14. of AUGUST. On behalf of the Kingdom and the Army, &c. May it please your Excellency, THe continued destructive de∣signs and dangerous Combi∣nations of perfidious men, formerly Members of Parlia∣ment, which constantly blast the fairest hopes and expecta∣tions of Peace and Freedom, rendring all our endeavours and hazards of our lives fruitless,
and at present threatning the ruine and deso∣lation of this poor distracted Kingdome, con∣strains us once more to address our selves to Your Excellency, to improve the present opportunity that Providence hath put into your hands, of making them incapable of prosecu∣ting their mischievous purposes; being fully confident that though their former treacheries were more obscure and intricate; yet their late unparalleld proceedings in violating the free legal Parliament, and USURPING A PAR∣LIAMENTARY POVVER, on purpose to have embroiled this miserable (and almost, still, bleeding) Nation, again in blood, cries aloud to Justice to remove them from their USURPED, DESTRUCTIVE POVVER. Seeing therefore those Honorable Members of Parliament that discharged their trust, have been forced to fly to this Army for refuge; that they might endeavour to secure them to sit as a free and legal Parliament, and your Excellency with this Army have engaged themselves to improve the utmost of your possibilities to that intent; and seeing those worthy Mem∣bers are now again dis-inabled for discharging their Trust, through the UNEXPECTED
INTRUSION OF THOSE USURPERS, and their assuming to themselves a Power of voting amongst them, whereby those desperate enemies to the Kingdoms peace and welfare, do again obscure and pervert the true Parlia∣mentary power, and imprint the Image of that highest Authority upon their own designes, protecting themselves and their Accomplices from justice. We cannot but humbly and earnesty implore your Excellency, That those Vsurpers of that su∣pream Authority might not be permitted (even contrary to the Law of nature) to sit judges of their own prodigious Treacheries. But that all and every person, that have sate in that pre∣tended Parliament, or adhered to them or their Votes, when the free legal Parliament was by violence suspended, might immediatly be declared against, as persons uncapable of sitting or voting in this Parliament; That so according to our last Declaration, and our for∣mer Proposals tendred to your Excellency for that end, we might secure that free and legal Parliament, til the differences of the Kingdom be composed, and the Peace and Liberties of the people firmly established.
THE PROPOSALS of the AGITATORS To His Excellency at Hammersmith, the 5. of AUGUST, 1647. Before the free Parliaments return to WESTMINSTER. FOrasmuch, as your Excellency with the Councel of War, by their Representations and Declara∣tions have referred the Composure of differen∣ces; And the Establishment of the Peace and hap∣pines of the whole nation to a free Parliament. We being very sensible, that the ends of all our labours, and manifold hazards of our lives are now depending there∣upon; And of how dangerous a Concernment it may prove, if persons dis-affected to the peace and welfare of the Kingdom, should retain places therein; do hum∣bly offer to your Excellencies Consideration, To be by
you presented to the Members of Parliament, now Resi∣dent in the Army. FIrst, That all those who have sate at Westminster usurping a Parliamentary Authority, since the Tumultuous and forcible ex∣pulsion of the Parliament of Eng∣land, and choice of new pretended Speakers (thereby giving encou∣ragement and assistance to the City of London to raise a new War in this Kingdom) may immediatly be excluded the Houses. Secondly, that all which for∣merly have been Members of Par∣liament, and have adhered to the pretended Parliament, may be al∣so Excluded the Houses; And a Penalty agreed upon, to be impo∣sed upon such person, or persons, appearing guilty, that shal presume
to fit after the said Exclusion. Lastly, that all former Votes a∣gainst Members dis-affected may be duly Executed. Daniel Hincksman. John Blackmore. Geo. Tracey. Will. Younge. Timothy Thornberry. Will. Hall. Ed. Vaughan. John Wells. John Wilson. Io. Radman. Nich. Lockier. Geo. Stevenson. Sam. Whitmore. Richard Clerk. Edmond Gurne. Consolation Fox. Tho. Butterroy. Iohn Willoughby. Ed. Twigge. Will. Pryor. J. Reynolts. Joseph Wallington. Hen. Cannon. Rich. Hodden. John Perke. Fran. Allen. Tho. Robinson. Iohn Clerk. Tho. Iohnson. Geo. Ioyce. Ed. Sexby. Will. Allen. Rich. Iohnson. Ioseph Adams. Rich. Flower. Edmond Chillington. Rich. Colbrand. Tim. Whiting. Tho. Butler. Stephen Shipden. Will. Knolles. Will. Wilkinson. Edw. Tomlint. Rich. Salter. Robert Stedman. Harbert Field. Robert Baldwin. Tho Ellis. Iohn Felpes. Will. Symond. Iohn Wood. Tho. Sheppard. Tobias Box.
