H3638 99870918 163411
The humble Representation of his late Maje∣sties and Princes Domestick Servants, signifying their Distressed Condition, and necessitated Designment for Relief. VVHereas by the sad distraction of this Nation, and the fall of our late Soveraign and Master, We, with our Wives and Children, have been exposed to the greatest miseries of want, some of our Socie∣ty being famished to death, and most of us, with our Families, likely to perish, if not timely reliev∣ed, after many waies attempted by humble Petitions, and all earnest solicitations, being still helpless, and now alto∣gether without hope of relief, we have made this our last refuge, even to cast our selves and our Families upon the Charity of Pious disposed Christians, in confidence, that God hearing our loud cries, and graciously pittying our sad distress, will move their hearts with a relieving bounty. And to prevent the abusing of any mans Charity through Imposture, by some pretending themselves to have been the late Kings Servants; and others taking upon them as imployed in their behalf; We the late Kings Servants, about the number of fifty, have joyned our selves in a common Collection of the privat and Charitable Contributions of those whom God shall move with pitty for our relief (our Families many of them being very great:) And have obtained the favour of some worthy Per∣sons of known integrity, to oversee the equal distribution of what is Collected, according to each persons place, ne∣cessity, and condition. And to take off all suspition of deceit in the Collection, the Collectors imployed in our be∣half, are to receive by Box and Seal, what shall be contributed to our relief, or indorsed on the backside of the Papers in words at length. These three Doctors are pleased to be Overseers, to see things equally carried, ac∣cording to each mans place, necessity, and condition. Emm. Uty, S. th. D. Samuel Baker, S. T. P. Samuel Collins, Med. D. THese are to certifie, that we whose names are underwritten, do either upon our own personal examination know, or upon others indubitable information believe, this undertaking of the late Kings Servants for their relief, to be really true; and therefore do recommend their very miserable condition to others Charitable Contribution. Earls, Barons, &c. Bishops, Deans, Doctors, and Ministers. Hen. Dover Ja. Armachanus, Bishop of  Armath Anthony Faringdon, B. D.   Br. Sar. Bishop of Salsbury Ro. Mossom, Eccl. S. Pet.   Brune Ryves, S. th. Pr. Henry Vertue Barkshire William Fuller, D. D. George Hall.   Lodovick Wemes, S: theol D.     Bryan Walton, D. D.   Ro. de Kellam Ja. Margetson. D. D.     Jeremy Tayler, D. D.   Ro. Bruce Ri. Dukeson, D. D.     George Gillingham, D. D.   W. Maynard George Wild, D. D.     Tho. Swadlin, D. D.   Salton H. Bernerd, D. D.   Tho. Folwer, Knight. John Hewyt, D. D.     Joseph Hodgey, D. D:     Henry Starling, D. D.     Sa. Sibbales, D. D.  
