h3604 e413_6 99862753 114929
The Humble REMONSTRANCE AND DESIRES OF Divers Officers and Souldiers in the Ar∣my, under Command of Colonl HEWSON; Presented to his Excellency Sir Tho∣mas Fairfx, upon Thursday last. Novemb. 4. 1647. to be communicated to both Houses if Parlia∣ment assembled at Westminster. Wherein is declared, the Great and Dismall Cloud now arising, together with their firme and constant Resolution to adhere to his Excellency, against all Dividers and Opposers in the Common Cause of this Nations Peace and Safety, and to sup∣presse all Incendiaries, who do or shall en∣deavour to beget Divisions within this Kingdome. BY the Appointment of the said Officers and Souldiers, Whose Names are hereunto subscribed. Novemb. 9. 1647. Imprimaur, Gilb. Mabbot. LONDON: Printed by J. C. for G. Horton, and are to be sold neere this Royall Exchange in Cornhill. 1647.
To his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax Captain Generall of all the Parlia∣ments Forces. The humble Remonstrance and Desires of divers Officers and Souldiers, under Command of His Excellency Sir Tho∣mas Fairfax. SHEWETH, THat your Petitioners do with all thank∣fulnesse acknowledge the Lords grati∣ous hand in making your Excellency a choice Instrument of his glory, and a publike good to this distressed Nation; In whose de∣liverance, you have abundantly manifested
very great integrity and faithfulnesse. Not∣withstanding, the many difficulties and dis∣couragements, wherewith you have been ne∣cessitated to encounter, not only from open Enemies, but also from pretended friends: And now divine presence having scattered your and the Kingdomes open Enemies, we joyfully expected the fruits of all, even peace and righteousnesse to flourish in our Nation. But to our great Griefe, wee see a dismall Cloud againe arising over our heads from Divisions and Discontents: The dispelling whereof, we are confident, is and still will be your Excellencies earnest desire, and utmost endeavour. In order whereunto (your Petitioners most thankfully acknowledge) your Excellercies great care hath not been wanting (as in other things so) to provide Necessaries for your Army, and to procure them those long de∣cayned Arreares, which they have so dearly earned, although your endeavours herein have been hitherto greatly frustrated. From the consideration of all which, your Petitioners are fully resolved (the Lord assi∣fting)
in the middest of all discouragements, to remaine firme and constant in our duty and obedience to your Excellency in the pro∣secution of all your just Endeavours and Un∣dertakings, for the good and safety of this Nation; for which we shall not accompt our lives deare unto Us, to serve your Excellency in opposing and suppressing all Incendiaries, who do, and shall beget Divisions or Distem∣pers in your Army, or to rend them from your Excellencies command: The issue whereof, would doubtlesse be a second and more mi∣serable Warre, and sad effusion of English Bloud, which God in mercy prevent. May it therefore please your Excellen∣cie, to accept our cordiall acknowledg∣ments, of your faithfulnesse and care for Us, the Army, and Kingdome; And to be assured of our firme Resolutions to adhere unto you against all Dividers and Opposers in the Common-Cause of this Nations Peace and Safety: So shall your petitioners be further enga∣ged to love and honour your Excellen∣cie. And shall over pray for your Posterity.
Field-Officers. John Hewson John lubbes Daniel Axtell Captaines Thomas Price John Carter Henry Davis samuel Grime Alexand. Brayfield Thomas Atkinson Ralph Gale Lieutenants. George Jenkins George Smith Thomas Baker Jenkin Bevan Samuel Axtell John VVebb VVilliam Hill Rob: Mullings Martin Iubbes Ensignes Tho: Newnham John Davis Morgan Porhay Thomas Rawlins Henry Williams Joseph Grimna Edmond Garney Daniel Hinksman Edward Hore. Agents VVilliam Jones William Racie Roger Newberry John Barton Thomas Shepheard Richard Nichson Edward Spencer Thomas Chapman Edward Rush VVilliam Darkey
Certain Proposals from the chiefe Agents of the Army, offered to the joynt considerations of all the free Commons of ENGLAND. I. That the People of England being at this day very unequally distributed by Counties, Cities, & Burroughs, for the election of their Deputies in Parliament, ought to be more in∣differently proportioned, according to the number of the Inhabitants: the circumstances whereof, for number, place, and manner, are to be set down before the end of this present Parliament. II. That to prevent the many inconveniences apparently arising, from the long continuance of the same persons in authority, this present Parliament be dissolved upon the last day of September, which shall be in the year of our Lord, 1648. III. That the People do of course chuse them∣selves a Parliament once in two yeares, viz. upon the first Thursday in every 2d, March,
after the manner as shall be prescribed before the end of this Parliament, to begin to sit up∣on the first Thursday in Aprill following a Westminster, or such other place as shall bee appointed from time to time by the prece∣ding Representatives; and to coninue till the last day of September, then next ensuing, and no longer. IV. That the power of this, and all future Re∣presentatives of this Nation, is inferiour only to theirs who chule them, and doth extend, without the consent or concurrence of any other person or persons; to the enacting, alte∣ring, and repealing of Lawes; to the erecting and abolishing of Offices and Courts, to the appointing, removing, and calling to account Magistrates, and Officers of all degrees, to the making War and peace, to the treating with forraign States: And generally, to whatsoe∣ver is not expresly, or implyedly reserved by the Represented to themselves. Signed by the severall Agents of the Respective Regi∣ments in the Army. FINIS.
