H765 E402_10 99862313 114467
St. Edwards GHOST: OR, Anti-Normanisme: Being a patheticall Complaint and Motion in the behalfe of our English Nation against her grand (yet neglected) Grievance, Normanisme. Quaenam (malùm) est ista voluntaria Servi∣tus? Cicer. in orat. Phil. 1. LONDON, Printed for Richard Wodenothe at the Starre under Peters Church in Cornhill. 1647.
Ad Lectorem. Reader, THis Essay having long waited for roome and free au∣dience on the publick stage,Being written Anno Dom. 1642. doth now appeare; if thou hast a mind to quarrel with it, it must be against the matter or the forme; against the matter thou who art English canst not without betraying either thine ignorance in not knowing thy Nations dearesti. e. the title and quality of a free Nation. Rights, or thine impietie in opposing them; being no other then what she injoy'd and joy'd in, till she lost them by See pag. 15. perfidious Robbers; But if it be the forme that thou disrelishest, I confesse it needs much favour, and therefore should gladly have seen thee or some other to have prevented it with a better; yet for thy better bearing with the pro∣lixity of the historicall part of it (occasion'd by the copiousnesse of the subject worth and opposite arrogance,) thou maist remember that it was King Ahashuerus his choice recreation to review the Acts of his Ancestors, and that the Jewes could heare even Saint Steven reciting their high Pedigree, patiently; however, it shall suffice mee in this businesse to have attempted to have done worthi∣ly, and I doubt not but every true English-man will not only in∣dulge the works weaknesse, but also lend both his heart and hand in all lawfull meanes toward the accomplishing of its See pag. 19.Demands, as without which obtained (at least in a good degree,) this Nation can never be Honourable nor (consequently) Happy. Vale. JOHN HARE. ERRATA. Page 1 line 8 read magnanimity. p. 2 in margine r. vide Virgilium. ibid. l. 20 for right r. weight. ibid. l 21 r. sulphureous. ibid. l 27 r. ingenuous p. 3 l. r. unnatural'd. p. 9 l. 9 r. Cimbri p 7 l. 1 r. symptomes ibid. in margine, for subject r. scilicet. ibid▪ r. Excrescentia. ibid. l. 19 r. recordeth. ibid. l. 25 r. con∣fest. ibid. l. 27 r. their. ibid l. 38. r. activenesse▪ p. 6 l. 14 for of r. as. ibid. l. 16 for is r. are. ibid. l. 26 r. Bulloigne p. 13 in margine r. Varianâ. Praeter alia le∣viora.
Saint EDWARDS Ghost: OR, Anti-Normanisme. WHile I behold and revolve the great andExordium. laborious inversions and eversions of things effected by the representative body of this Kingdome in this and precedent Parlia∣ments, with that liberall and vast ex∣pence of English bloud, lives, labour and cost, which with the height of animosity and seeming magnamity, former genera∣tions have bestowed, and the present doth not spare in asser∣ting the publick causes of this Nation,Viz. The aba∣ting of Prero∣gative, aboli∣shing Courts, Monopolies, &c. and all excepting whats about some Ecclesiasticall nicities, for the securing (or enlar∣ging) of our Estates and Priviledges from domestick oppres∣sion, and concentred in the object of ease and commodity, and such like petty advantages; I cannot but with shame and greife of mind look upon the genius of our Nation,Nebuchadnez. as seem∣ing to have transmigred from that metamorphosed Prince of Chaldea, who being transmitted from the top of humanity in∣to the condition of beasts of the field for a great part of his ensuing age, made fodder and other brutish accommoda∣tione the proper subject of his content and contentions, not harbouring in the meane time a back-looking thought towards that Royall Estate, by the possession whereof hee had been once the most eminent of the mortals of his age; or as resembling
some strange Heros, who being captived and marked for a slave, should have his senses so captivated also, as to be more ambi∣tious for to bee chamber'd in his Iayle, and to glister in guilt fetters, then to be restored to his lost freedome and reputa∣tion, contending with earnest extremity for the one, but not breathing so much as a wish for the procurement of the o∣ther. That this is our case I would that the heavy long and ever∣lasting,Narratio oneris Nomini Angli∣co incumbentis. (heaven grant not everlasting) groans of the hereditary Libertie and Honour of our Nation, (the choycest and most es∣sentiall fundamentals of her temporary wel-being, and the most precious part of her earthly Patrimony, the happy ornaments of her youth) long since overthrowne, and for many ages to∣gether, lying patients most wretchedly under a masse of unwor∣thy oppression, did not too evidently evince, whilst wee (her sonnes) in the interim sparing no endeavours in the behalfe of our lesse valuable rights, are in this respect so stupidly senselesse, that whereas wee have cause enough with that Aetnean pri∣soner Enceladus (the eternall monument of dejected great∣nesse) to testifie the right of our disgraceful burthen with fie∣ry fighs and sulphurous blasts of indignation;2. Virgilium. Aenead. 3. wee contrariwise are so farre from any reluctance as to lie in a dead sleep under it, as under our grave-stone, having inscribed thereon the Epitaph of our honour in red letters of shame, not daring, or not wil∣ling so much as to breath forth a complaint, or to wish for a removall of that, then which there is nothing under heaven more insufferable to ingenious men, and to such as would be ac∣counted other then the progeny of Cham preordained to ser∣vility. This mountaine of dishonour which the English name hath so long groaned under,xlicatio. and yet we have never once adventured to complaine of, much lesse endeavoured to remove, is no other then that infamous title of a conquered Nation, and that by so infamous a conquest; but more especially the still visible fetters of our captivity, the evidences of that title; those forraigne Lawes, Language, Names, Titles and Customes, then intro∣duced, and to this day domineering over ours, our stupid de∣generatenesse consists in this, that in all our contentions by pen
or sword, in all the essayes of our Poets or Orators (excepting some few, whereof Verstegan deserves to be memorized) I could never yet find any considerable endeavour for our vindication from this thraldome and disgrace, but rather like tamed Crea∣tures or unnaturall Ianizaries, wee sooth and applaud our selves in these gyves and servile robes as patrician Ornaments; and (that which mee thinks no true English man can observe with∣out indignation (many of those that would be accounted to have honoured our Land with their pens,Viz. Some Po∣ets and He∣ralds. have placed that their honouring us for a great part, in celebrating the glory of that Normanisme and Francisme which the desert of our sins hath inflicted on us, and seeme to have sacrificed their love and duty to their owne Nation, together with their discretion for an ho∣locaust on the Altar of that name, which is diametrically enmi∣ty to the English; and such are those that ascribe so much worth to the Normane bloud, and strive to pen up all nobility and gentry within the accursed Catalogue of those names that came from the gallick continent. Indignities that merit a Lucans genius and Tullius dicendi vis,Ejusdem tole∣rati Redaergutie to lay open and explode them; But since the such of this Nation contrary to my perpetuall and earnest wishes and expectation, are undutifully silent herein; duty to my countrey shall make it no indiscretion in mee to undertake the taske, though (a∣las) performing it rather by an intimation then due illustration of the truths which follow. There is no man that understands rightly what an English man is,1. Aturpitudine demonstratâ. but knowes withall that we are a member of the Teutonick Nation,1. A Claritate generis nostri. and descended out of Germany; a descent so honourable and happy (if duly considered) as that the like could not have been fetched from any other part of Europe, nor scarce of the universe,Historia gentis Teutonicae. which will be plaine and manifest if we take a just survey of the gloriousnesse of that our Mother Nation, and that in the sundry respects of her ancient and illustrious Ori∣ginall, her generous qualification and magnifick and warlick na∣ture; her atcheivements, domination▪ greatnesse and renown; her Majesty and other heroicall points of excellence, wherein shee is so transendent, and which make her so Princely, that no other Nation in every respect (the Scythick ex∣cepted)
may without arrogance dare to compare with her. To begin with her Original of it, I may say as Ʋirgil of Fame, Caput inter nubila condit shee is a primitive Nation,Ejusdem anti∣quitas. and vaunts her descent to be from no other place, then from the top of Nimrods Tower, where was made the first division of man∣kind into Nations; shee derives not her selfe (like those of her Neighbours that boast so much of their great birth) from the conquer'd relicks of ruined Troy; whence also Virgil took so much paines to deduce his Romans, or from any other Nation, but as most conceive the first transmigration that the Teutones made, was (as is aforesaid) from the building of Babel, from whence they were conducted by the great Tuisco (whose name they still retaine) and placed in those seats, which they have not only ever since defended against all invaders and intruders, but also most notably inlarged the same upon their Neighbours; others in more ignorant times, conceited they had their Origi∣nall and Spring (like the Gyants,Tacitus, &c. Myrmidons, Cadmus his new men and other warlick breeds) from the soyle and earth under them, as which was never known otherwise then appropriate to their name and possession. To this Antiquity of the Teutonick house,Fraenobilitas seu Protogenia. there wants not a conspiring quality of bloud effectuall to make it the most il∣lustrious and primer Nation of Christendome; For Gomer Ja∣phets eldest Son is acknowledged by Historians to have been the first King and Possessor of Europe, whose heyre and first borne was Askenas, the father & denominator of the German Nation; the Jewes at this day calling the Germanes Askenites, and the Saxons (our Progenitors) as the most noble tribe, still retai∣ning (with a little Metathesis) as well the name as bloud of the same Royall Patriarch, but whether he were one and the same with Tuisco, or else his Progenitor, is left uncer∣tain. For the generall qualification of these our Ancestors, it hath ever spoke them to be no other then the true Sonnes of Tuisco,Genii excelsi∣tdo. that is of Mars (as some interpret him.) The first character that was given of them to the world, was by great Alexander himselfe, and resulted from that com∣pendious
discourse betwixt him and their Ambassadours, when upon their worthy Answer to his proud que∣stion, (as the supplement to Curtius his History record∣eth) he pronounced them an haughty and cavaliering Nati∣on,Germanos su∣perbosesse. envying that any should bee as magnanimous as him∣self. The next light that was given of them to the southern world was in lightning terror;Bellicositas se Praestantia ani∣mi Corporisque cum rebus ge∣sti. this was by that fam'd expedition of the Cymbri and Teutones peculiarly so called, when as those our more immediate Ancestours, wanting elbow-roome in their native Countrey of Low-Germanie and the Cymbrik Cherso∣nesse, undertooke in a party of 300 thousand adventurers to seek and mend their fortunes in forraine Countries; the first Countrey they tooke in their way was France, then called Gaule, a Countrey preordained for the exercise and subject of our Con∣quests, and bearing a Nation at that time esteemed the Paragon of the world, and for strength, valour, and numerousnesse in∣vincible; this France and french Nation till then unconquered and in their maiden glory, that Almane Army overran, subdued and trampled under foote, thereby leaving to us the progeny of their Nation, the prime right and Title of conquering them againe; this Province being ransackt, over the belly thereof those second Anakies bore on their uncontrolled March to∣wards the Alpes and Italy, where lay the terme and scope of their resolution and designe, which was to try masteries with Rome for the Empire of the world; Rome was not then in her infancy, under the displeasure of heaven, and propugned by a disorderly and unskilful multitude as Brems found her, but flourishing in the height of her fortune, strength, and youth∣full vigour; her Discipline unmatchable, her Armies almost in∣vincible, and those mannaged and conducted by the greatest Generall of that age Caius Marius, so that well might these positive advantages concurring also with sundry accidental ones (which last were indeed the most efficacious occasions of the event) lend the Romanes the fortune at that time over those our Ancestours; but although by the disposition of the supreme Will they sell short of their designe, and left the honour of Romes destruction for some others of their Countreymen, in
ensuing ages; yet did they shew forth such famous sumptomes of more then human daringnesse and abilities,Subject the Goths. that the affrightment which they case before them, shoke all Italy, and loaded the Romane Altars with prayers at that time, and long after with praises to their deities, for the deliverance of their City from so formidable an invasion, a deliverance that endowed Marius with the preeminent name amongst Romes preservers, as being from the invasion of such whose performances proclaimed them a Gigantean Army, and the most valiant men that ever the Ro∣manes had to deale with. Neither did our Ancestours glory faile to increase with the increase of time;Excesctia for the next age produced Ariovistus, with his martiall Army from Germany over the Rhine to the se∣cond Conquest of France; so that twice was that Nation sub∣dued and broken by our Ancestours the Teutones, before ever the Romane Eagles durst assaile it; and had not the Romanes then interposed all France as well as Belgia had long before the time of Pharamond fallen into the Germanes possession, these Germanes at that time (as Caesar recorded) had the French in such vassalage and subjection as that they durst not so much as mutter out a complaint, or petition to their Romane friends for reliefe against them; nor did the French who had beene accounted of all Nations the most valiant in that age presume in any sort to compare themselves with the Germanes, but (as the same great Authour witnesseth) consist in plaine termes that they were not able so much as to withstand their fulminating looks; and by the reports of the Germanes formidablenesse, (concurring with the Cymbrick memory) so scared even Cae∣sars Legions, that all his Centurions fell to a disposing either of their persons to a more security by flight, or of their estates to their friends by Testament; and whosoever surveyes the wri∣tings of Caesar, Tacitus, and other Romane Authors of those times, no lesse eminent for judgement then Authority, shall find in them the Teutones our Ancestours to have been alwaies accounted (in effect) the Anakitish and most souldiery Nation of the world, and for personage the floure and quintessence of mankind, chosen and advanced above all Nations to the digni∣ty of the Caesarian Guard; by nature consecrate to heroick at∣cheivenesse,
disdaining other then sanguinean desudations, and who during the whole age of the Romane Monarchie re∣sisted the violence thereof, and was as often invaders as inva∣ded. After the dissolution of the Roman Empire,Exundationes. how did the Teutonick glory and puissance break forth and diffuse themselvs; the Germane Colonies filled all Europe; the Frankes seized up∣on the transalpine Gaule, sithence from them named France; the Lombards upon the other Gaule afterwards called Lom∣bardy; the Goths on Spaine, and the Saxons or English, (our peculiar Progenitors) in a more plenary way, upon the best part of Britaine which we now possesse▪ to which wee have since also added the command of the Welsh, Irish and Scots, so that in all the Regions aforesaid of the Soveraignty and Royalty, so also most of the Nobility, and in England the whole commo∣nalty is Germane, and of the Germane bloud, and scarcely was there any worth or manhood left in these occidental Na∣tions, after their so long servitude under the Roman yoake un∣till these new supplies of free-borne men from Germany reinfu∣sed the same and reinforced the then servile body of the West, with a Spirit of honour and magnanimity; in so much that as Dubartas hath well observed, that Land may well be stiled the Equus Trojanus or inexhausted fountaine of Europes worth and worthy men, which was also apparent and conspicuous in that ever-glorious and renowned expedition of the West for the ho∣ly-Land under the conduct of Godfrey of Bullaine, wherein there was scarce a personage of worth, but who (together with the plurality of the inferiour souldiery) was Germane by birth or bloud. As this out Mother Nation hath been transcendent above o∣thers in her atchievements,Amplitudo. and her noble and fruitfull issue of Transmigrators and Colonies, wherewith shee hath replenished and reedified her sister Nations of the rest of Europe, and there∣by enabled them to hold up their heads, as now they do among the potent Monarchies of the world; So is shee no lesse emi∣nent in the vast bulke of her owne body, and the ample tract of Land which shee holds and possesseth, and so ever hath done against all the world, being indeed the heart and maine body of
Europe, as reaching from the Alpes, neare to the frozen Ocean one way, and from France and the British sea, unto Poland and Hungary, the other way, conteining for Members her several tribes of the imperiall Germanes, the Switzers, Belgians, Danes, Norwegians, Swedes, Goths and Vandals, (besides us English;) Tis true that the Celtick Nation was once very great and famous, as possessing both the Gallia's and Britaine, but she hath long since in all her three seats surrendred up her possessi∣ons, (or liberty) together with her name to the incroachments of her Teutonick Neighbours; and doubtlesse were all the fore∣said limbs of the Teutonick Nation as united in the political as∣sociation of one head and heart, as they are in the naturall li∣gaments and communion of bloud, lawes, language and situa∣tion, that Empire would not only be the head of the West as now it is,The Turk. but also able to wrastle with the Orientall Competi∣tor, for the command of the world, or at least to shoulder out of Europe his intruding usurpation. One more flower of this our mother Nations Royall Garland, and a point of her Prerogative above other Nations not only of Europe,Libertas inte. , seu . but also of the rest of the world (the Scythick excepted) is her unconquerednesse, her untainted virginity and freedome from forraine subjection, which from her first foundation and Cradle, she hath so conserved and defended, that none can truly boast to have bin her ravisher; the Roman invasions indeed often assayed her, but could never force her; as for Alexander, the Germanes heard of him, but never saw him otherwise then by their Ambassadours, who gave him and the world notice by their honourable Answer to his insolent question, how much they feared him; and lastly for Charlemains Germane Wars they were but as civill and domestick, his Francks and more particularly himselfe being then in all things (but habitation) Germanes, and consequently also his archeivements may by good right also be reckoned among the Germane acts; what other Nation can glory of the like? Tis confest that the Greeks and Gauls were for many ages famous assertours of their Liber∣ties, but the latter of the two never enjoyed theirs since the time of Arivistus and Julius Caesar, and the poore (never e∣nough to be lamented) Greekes, beside their ancient sub∣jection
to Rome, have in these latter times lost not only their Liberty, but also an Empire to boot, together with their Lawes, Religion, Honour, and never before conquered language, to the cruell oppression of turkish Barbarisme, all which the Teutones have by the speciall favour of heaven, from their first begin∣ning preserved inviolate against all invaders; indeed our Neigh∣bours the Scots boast much of the like priviledge, but upon no equall grounds, for their remotenesse and inaccessiblenesse to∣gether with the unprofitablenesse of their soyle, have been their thiefe protection from following the fortune of their Mother Nation of Ireland, and yet not so protected them, but as their owne Chronicles confesse their Land hath been wonne from them, and they forced into exile for 60. years by the Romans, and their Nation more then once subdued by our Edward the first, when they so often swore fealty and subjection to the Crowne of England: and for the Scythians, as they of all the world have the best right to compare themselves, as having never submitted their necks to any externall power, so may they also for that Priviledge in part thanke their remotenesse and barren Climate, that have rendred their vast Countrey not worth the conquering, and themselves as difficult to bee found as vanquisht by strong and well appointed Ar∣mies. But that which makes up the summe and apex of this Nations preeminence,Imperium. is her imperiall Crowne the Crowne of Christen∣dome, which the divine providence upon special choice hath devolved on her, that so shee might be no lesse in title then me∣rit the Queen of Nations; this her possessive dignity was long since foretold by the Druides who (as Tacitus recordeth) pro∣phecied that the Empire should be translated from Rome over the Alpes, and is no other then what she was borne to in the right of Askenas his bloud, educated to in inviolated free∣dome and generous exercises, and setled in by the purchase of the sword and Romes adoption, and the same hath been for ma∣ny ages by her without competition enjoyed, shee possessing al∣so most of the other Kingdomes and Principalities of these parts by her Colonies, in so much that the Germane Nation may justly seem to have been created and appointed, for heire
of the western world, even as the Scythick of the Easterne, as be∣twixt which two Nations & their Colonies, both the soveraign∣ty and possession of the most part of Europe and Asia is divided, they being in all things Parallels and Competitors; heaven grant that at length our Teutonicks, shaking off their euervating vices and divisions, with the same manhood wherewith in ancient times their Ancestors retunded that Scythick invasion of the Huns, mawling that orbis malleum, and in after ages chased the Turks (another tribe of the same Nation) from the holy Land, and repressed their encroachings on Christendome, may also in these last times at least un-Europe the same Enemy and his Bar∣barisme, and readvancing the Eagle in the midst of Constanti∣nople, recover to great Tuiscoes name that right and honour in Thracia, (which as may be conceived) his person there some∣time enjoyed under the name of Mars, confirmable by the stil-lasting analogy both in roots and accidents betwixt the Greek and Teutonick Idiomes. Such is the transcendent quality of our mother Nation,Transitio à ge∣neae ad gentem. and in these sundry respects, shee sufficiently appeares to be the cheife and most honourable Nation of Europe; of all which honour of hers, wee are true inheritors and partakers, either as Members of that body or as children of that mother, we be∣ing flesh of her flesh, and bone of her bone, yea of the most an∣cient and noble of her tribes, (according to the Germanes opi∣nion) The Saxon, still retaining the name (with a little meta∣thesis as is before related) of the Patriarch Askenas,Pag. 4. and this so totally and entirely that whatsoever bloud among us is not Teu∣tonick is exotick;Pag. 7. for (as is also before intimated) our Progeni∣tors that transplanted themselves from Germany hither, did not commixe themselves with the ancient inhabitants of this Countrey the Britaines (as other Colonies did with the Na∣tives in those places where they came) but totally expelling them, they took the sole possession of the Land to themselves, Quae contra∣ria apud quos∣dam Nomogra∣phos reperiun∣tur sunt ine∣pta figmenta à Galsrido Mon∣muthensi & e∣jus asseclis di∣ctata. thereby preserving their bloud, lawes, and language, incorrup∣ted; And in this panegyrick of the Teutonick bloud I have so prolixly insisted, not only to vindicate our own▪ as being a stream of the same, and to evince the nobility thereof, but withall to convince the folly of those wretches among us, who aversing
ours do so much adhere unto and dote upon descents from France and Normandy. But least any that cannot reproach us as Germanes,Pueritia gentis nostre ingenu & liberatis. should calumniate us as transmigrators, the consideration of the gene∣rall quality of such will be our sufficient Apology, for that it is well knowne that most Colonies and transmigrators are made up and consisting of the floure and choice youth of that Countrey from whence they are transplanted, and being such caelum non animum mutant qui trans mare currunt, though they change aire they retaine their Spirits; and this is moreover observable for our advantage that wee left not the Land of our Fathers either as exiled for demerits with the Parthians, nor forced and profligated by Neighbours as many others, nor yet with the mind of Rovers that goe unjustly to despoile o∣thers of their goods and Countrey, but (then which nothing could be more honorable) the first cause and occasion of our comming into this Land, was at the earnest suit and intreaty of the distressed Britaines, the ancient possessors of the same, to relieve and succour their oppressed Nation against the barba∣rous and more then unneighbourly vastations and invasions of the Scots and Picts, who with the height of insolence and fero∣city domineered at that time over this part of Britaine; this was no lesse honorably atcheived then undertaken by our An∣cestors, for Prince Hengistus with a small band of English vo∣luntiers which hee brought over from Saxonie, renownedly re∣pressed and quelled the pride and insolency of the Scots, and with his additionall forces so secured this land against them, that for many ages after they dared not to set fo out of their own limits; nor ever since could the most sure essefull of their in∣cursions penetrate to the walls of Yorke. But did wee therefore leave the free-Countrey of our Ance∣stors,Ingenu adolescentia. and come over hither to releive and deliver others from forraine subjection, that weet our sves might succeed in servi∣tude, sure it will scarce appeare that wee had any such intent by our ensuing doings and sufferings, for after that upon our fa∣tall falling out with the Britaines about pay, wee had long wra∣stled with that Nation for the possession of this Land, and with infinite expence of blood and labour gained it wholly to our
selves (Hengistus his assistance to the Britaines being much of kin to that of Ariovistus unto the Sequanish Gauls,) what in∣undations of invasions did wee sustaine, what numberlesse con∣flicts and encounters did we continually maintaine, for the kee∣ping of our possessions and preservation of our honour and Li∣bertie, as they were derived inviolate from our Progenitors? and all but against Danish Intruders; a people that were out Consanguineans, our ancient Countrey-men and Brethren, whose prevailing over us would have introduced scarce strange Lawes or Language, nor other bloud then Teutonick, and al∣though in processe of time, being overladen with their inexhau∣sted numbers, and to avoide further profusion of Christian and Teutonick bloud, we condescended to some composition with them, and permitted them a cohabitation with us; yet after∣wards did wee sufficiently quit our selves of them and their in∣truding, and by a generall execution made them an example for such like Usurpers; such was our ancient antipathy to servi∣lity, and the abhorringnesse of our Nations genius from clo∣sing with dishonour. Neither was this our generosity of bloud and freenesse of descent and condition,Ejusdem habi∣tus. the summe of our inheritance or the whole stock of honour that the bounty of heaven had commit∣ted to our possession; we were also blest with a hopefull lan∣guage and happy Lawes, Lawes envied but not equall'd in Chri∣stendome, and by historians admired as most plaine and com∣pendious,Vide Daniels History. and of such a politick structure, as made our Prince a true and happy Monarch, and yet our selves as free as any peo∣ple of Europe; our language was a dialect of the Teutonick, and although then but in her infancie, yet not so rude as hope∣full, being most fruitfull and copious in significant and well-founding rootes and Primitives, and withall capable and apt for diffusion from those her roots into such a Greek-like ramo∣sity of derivations and compositions, beyond the power of the Latine and her off-spring dialects, as might have with Majesty delight and plainnesse interpreted our conceptions and the wri∣tings of forraigners to the capacity of any English man, without tthe helpe of a dictionary or the knowledge of two or three o∣ther languages, which now is requisite to him that will rightly
understand or speake even usuall English; and our Lawes and Language being not only thus laudable, but also congenite and appropriate to our name and Nation, were most essential parts of our honour, and no lesse deare unto us (and that worthily) then our bloud, and so the pleasant subjects of our delight and study, as also our Princes and nobility being no lesse naturally our owne, were the just objects of our zeale and affection, as was testifyed in that title of the Prince Edgar Atheling who was stiled Englands darling, for his blouds sake, and in opposi∣tion to the Normane. ANd is it then suitable to the dignity,Complexio prae∣missorum scili∣cet Redguti∣onis à Turpit∣dne. or tolerable to the Spi∣rit of this our Nation, that after so noble an extraction and descent, such honorable atcheivements performed, so much done and suffered for our Libertie and honour against the most migh∣ty of Monarchies and puissant Nations, and after such Priviled∣ges conferred on us from heaven, wee should have our Spirits so broken and un Teutonized by one unfortunate Battaile, as for above 500 yeares together and even for eternity, not only to remaine, but contentedly to rest under the disgracefull title of a Conquered Nation, and in captivity and vassalage to a for∣raigne power? Siccine in antiquam virtutem animosque viriles Et Pater Aeneas & Avanculus excitat Hector? Did our Ancestours therefore shake off the Romane Yoak with the slaughter of their Legions,Scilicet in caede varianâ. and during the whole age of that Empire (as Tacitus confesseth) resist the puissance thereof, that the honor & freedom of their bloud might be reserved for an untain∣ted prey to a future Conquerour? could not they indure the sight of a Caesarean Trophie,Ʋide Tacitum. set up by Germanicus in their Land? and can wee not only endure, but embrace the title and Ensignes of a Conquest over us, that even still triumphs in our Land, in her full insolence, while wee can turne our eyes and meditations no where about us, but we meet with some object that reproa∣cheth us as Captives: if we addresse a look toward our Lawes, they still scorne to speak otherwise then in the Conquerours Language, and are (if Master Daniel and others write true) for the most part his introductions, shutting up the remaining Liberties of our Nation, under the name and ntion of franchi∣ses,
as if we were no further to be accounted free, then enfran∣chised, that is adopted into the quality of French-men, or made denizens of France, whereby the first point that occurres to the Reader of our Lawes, is our shame; if wee survey our Lan∣guage, we there meet with so much tincture of Normanisme, that some have esteemed it for a dialect of the Gallick: if wee contemplate the heraldry and titles of our Nobility, there's scarce any other matter then inventories of forraine villages, that speake, them to be not of English bloud; but tell us (as their Ancestors sometimes told King John) that their Progeni∣tors conquered this Land by the Sword; and lastly if wee but heare the Royall title rehearsed, we heare it likewise attended with a post Conquestum, so that we cannot move with our senses, but we hear the chains of our captivity rattle, and are put in mind that we are slaves; vinci humanum est, no people but may bee overcome, that may be borne withall; but sub victoria acquies∣cere, for so many hundred yeares together, and in a so long continued possibility of excussing dishonour and regaining Li∣bertie, to sit as it were snoaring in a captive and servile condi∣tion, and to be fed with the bread of captivity, were more proper to an Asiatick Nation, (those natis ad servitutem as Tul∣ly calls them) then to one of Europe, and to any European then a Teutonick, and indeed to tame Creatures and Cattell then to those that professe themselves free-borne men. But let us a little reflect upon the nature and quality of these Conquerours with their conquest over us,Aggravatio. perhaps they may be such as for their dignity may say unto our Nation, as that Hers in the Poet, Solamen habeto mortis ab Ae quod sis jugula∣tus Achillo, and their domination over us such as against the right and equity whereof there is no pleading: But alas what was that Tenth Worthy (whom we are not ashamed even still to sirname our Conquerour) but a Normane Bastard (as a Scotish writer well tearmes him) or at best, a Vassall Duke of a French Province and what his Argyraspides, his gallant followers the Normans, but a people compacted of the Norwegians and Nu∣estrians, that is, of the off-scowring and dresse of the Teut∣nique and Gallick Nations, whose ambitions Leader upon a
pretence of a various title to this Crowne intruding upon us in a time of disadvantage, and being thereupon put to try it out by the sword with his then usurping Competitor, by subtle∣ty (not valour) obtained the hand over him, and so as Le∣gatee and Kinsman of Saint Edward (the last rightfull English King) and upon his specious and faire vowes and promises to preserve inviolate our Lawes and Liberties, was admitted to the throne, so that all the alteration and dishonour that fol∣lowed, was by his villainous perjuriousnesse and treachery in∣troduced upon us, and that title of a Conquerour was not at first, but by the flattery of succeeding times attributed to him, and hath been ever since by our sordid treachery against our Countrey continued,The Duke of Lenox in his Speech to the King concer∣ning warre a∣gainst the Scots. whereas had he assumed it at first, (as was well observed by an illustrious personage of our Neigh∣bour Nation the Scots, (who are generally more sensible of our dishonour in this respect, then most of our selves; perhaps worthily mindfull of the ancient extraction of the most and cheife of their South-Landers from the English bloud;) as he (I say) hath well observed in a late speech of his made to his Majesty,) he must either have come short of his ambitious ends, or have sought after a new people to have exercised his title up∣on, so odious at that time was the Title of a Conquered Nation to our Ancestors. But admit it were so that he wonne this Land by the sword,Redargutio se∣cunda ab Ini∣quitate. as hee and his followers afterwards boasted, and that he obtai∣ned such a dismall victory over us as the Normane writers pre∣dicate, (whereas notwithstanding if wee may beleeve Aemilius Veronensis,Paulus Aemili∣us veronensis deebu gestis Francorum. fol. 91. in his French History, a more impartiall writer in this cause, there was no such matter; who taxing those Nor∣mane writers of arrogance, reports that the truth of it was that our English Souldiers, whom Harold the usurping King brought into the field against the Normanes, were no lesse displeased with him then with his adversaries, and that they only put them∣selves in a posture of defence,Non ipsi homi∣nes sed causae defuncti victa extinctaque. ib. fol. 91. without caring to offend the ene∣my, and that when in the beginning of the battaile, Harold chanced to be slaine by an Arrow, the Controversie was present∣ly ended without more bloud-shed, an agreement made, and the Normane admitted in respect of his claime, and upon his
promises aforementioned, this he reports) but were it so that our English Nation was directly vanquished and conquered by the Normanes, (at the sound whereof every true English mans stomack may well rise,) have not we more then once required their Nation in the like kind? how often have our Armies van∣quished and conquered not only Normandy but also France it selfe, whereof the other is but a vassal Province? and why one victory of theirs over us should be of more moment and effect against us, then so many of ours against them, I see no other cause or reason then injuriousnesse towards us and retchlesse∣nesse in us. But were it so also,Institio. that the Normane race were as Lawfull Lords and domineered by the same right, of an absolute Con∣quest over us, as the Turkes doe at this day over the Grecians, (betwixt whose case and ours (Religion excepted) there is a neere affinity;) will any reasonable man be so unjust? or any English man be so impious as to define it for unlawfull in us, to endeavour to recover our Right and lost honour and Libertie? would any man be so absurd as to stigmatize and detest it for rebellion, in the Greekes to shake off (if they were able) the Turkish Yoake, and to recover from that enimies usurpation their ancient honour, Lawes, Libertie, and Language that now ly overwhelmed and buried in Turcisme as ours in Normanisme? surely wee our selves should condemne them, if they would not endeavour it, while our owne Lawes attribute not to the wrongfull disseisour, any such right to his forceably gotten pos∣sessions, but that he may with more right be redisseised by the the first Owner or his heyres; and indeed it were so farre from injuriousnesse both in the Greeks and us, to dispossesse the Vsur∣pers, that in the meane time we are most injurious to our selves, our Progenitors and our posterity, while wee so traiterously yeeld up to those Robbers, what our Ancestors so dearely pur∣chased and preserved for us to enjoy, and afterwards to trans∣mit and leave to their and our Name and bloud in all succeeding ages; but in this we are farre more inexcusable then the Greeks, for that they never yet enjoyed the meanes of a deliverance, which we either in a faire or forceable way scarce ever wanted; and surely if our right doth call, our honour doth cry out up∣on
us, that if our Progenitors massacred the Danish Garrisons that usurped over them, we should not (like the Jewes eare∣board slaves,) for ever serve the Progeny of their Subjects the Norwegians, that wee who instead of being conquered with other Nations by Charlemain, have conquered even the French themselves, would not live captives to their vassals the Nor∣manes; and that since our Ancestours never submitted their necks to the Yoake of Rome, wee should not suffer ours to be for ever wedded to one brought over from Nstria the mea∣nest shire of one of Romes (anciently) captive Provinces, un∣lesse perhaps it bee more honourable for our Countrey to bee a Normane municipium, then a Romane Province, to use the Nor∣mane Lawes then the Civill of the Empire, and the Normane Language rather then the Latine; any of which (notwithstan∣ding) the Romane Emperors during their prevailing over some skirts of our ancient Countrey of Germany, as Batavia, Rhaetia, and the borders of the Rhine, never obtruded on our Countriemen there, but desiring only (for their worth) their personall assistance in the warres, permitted them (and them only of all Nations) the continuance of their owne Lawes, Lan∣guage and Liberties in all things; But all these wee their de∣generate posterity have in a large degree betrayed to the usur∣pation of a Normane Colony. But if wee thinke we have not yet received shame enough by this Normane Conquest,Redargutio ter∣tia ab Incom∣modo. in being thereby stripped and spoiled of all that Stock of honour which might have descended to us from our Ancestors, and of all that our Nation had to take pleasure in, wee want not a further degree of the same shame to consider our selves in, that is as we are by this pretended Conquest cast into such a Predicament and condition as makes as uncapable of acquiring new honour ever after so long as we remaine therein; the evidency of this wee may descry in our owne Lawes, wherein wee find that such as are in the nature of Villeines, are uncapable of enjoying free-hold Lands, but though they purchase never so much, it belongs all to their Lords; should the Turkes Jiries under their Masters con∣duct conquer the whole world, yet could they not justly gaine to themselves the name of men of honour, but only of
stout and dutifull slaves; which is also illustrated by that Apo∣thegme of Tully, who defining the way for one that would at∣taine to highnesse, Tunc (saith hee) incipiat aliis imperare cum suis iniquissimis Dominis parere desierit, let him first un-slave himselfe before he talke of getting honour in inslaving others; and therefore though both France and Spaine should bee by us never so often conquered, yet could our name thereby take no true lustre, till it be cleared of this fast-sticking blemish, and that wee have unconquered our selves; but as an ill-hu∣mour'd or deformed body is not rectified by nourishment, but finds its pravity to increase and dilate with its selfe; so should our name and fame by our atcheivements be extended to the worlds both temporall and locall ends, yet thither also would our disgrace accompany it in equall Characters, and proclai∣ming that wee are a conquered and still-captive people, quash all honour that otherwise might accrue or adhere unto us.Transitio ad o∣peris scopum. I should be voluminous should I fully describe how injuri∣ous and dishonourable it is to our Nation, for to continue under the title and effects of this pretended Conquest, being such as wee see and feele even the barbarous and contemptible Irish to be more then sensible and impatient of the like, while with so much hazard of their lives and fortunes, and against such for∣midable opposition, they endeavour the excussion thereof; But I am farre enough from exhorting to an imitation of their vio∣lent and horrid practise, we feele too much thereof already a∣mong us, although for lighter ends; neither (I hope) is any such way needfull, since we all from the greatest to the least professe our selves English, and would seem to aime at the honor of the English name, his Majesty for his part having by many passages shewed himselfe the most indulgent Patron thereof and our Nobility and Commons on both sides contending, (or at least pretending) for no other, none (I hope) among us dissen∣ting, that if any should oppugne it, he were worthy to be pro∣scribed and prosecuted either as a viperous malignant or as a publick Adversary; so that it is but the Carkasse of an enemy that wee have to remove out of our territories, even the Car∣kasse and bones of the Normane Dukes injurious and detested
perpetrations, much more meriting to bee dug up and cast out of our Land,Vide Daniels Hist. then those Relicks of his body that were so unse∣pulchred from his grave in Caen; let us therefore untill we have wiped off this shame of our Nation, and demolished the monuments thereof, no more talke of honour, as being a thing that we have least to doe withall, but yeelding that and the glo∣ry to the Normane Name, reserve unto our selves nothing but the inheritance of shame and confusion of face; yea let us ei∣ther confesse and professe our selves for ever, meere vassals and slaves, or else attempt to uncaptive our selves (the end and scope of this whole discourse) that is effectually, (yet orderly and le∣gally) to endeavour these following particulars. 1.Postulatorum capita. That William sirnamed the Conquerour be stript of that insolent Title (which himself scarce ever assumed after his victo∣ry, much lesse pretended to before, but hath been sithence im∣posed on him by Normane arrogance and our servile flattery) and that he be either reputed among our lawful Kings by force of Saint Edwards legacy, or adjudged an usurper; however, that he may no longer stand for the Alpha of our Kings in the Royall Catalogue. 2. That the Title to the Crowne bee ungrounded from any pretended Conquest over this Nation, and that his Majesty bee pleased to derive his right from Saint Edwards legacy, and the bloud of the precedent English KingsAs being de∣scended both of David the male heir, and of Maud the heire female of the English Bloud. to whom hee is the un∣doubted heire; and that he restore the ancient English Armes into the Royall standard. 3. That all the Normane Nobility and Progeny among us, repudiate their names and titles brought over from Normandy, assuming others consistible with the honour of this Nation, and disclaime all right to their possessions here as Heyres or Succes∣sors to any pretended Conquerours. 4. That all Lawes and usages introduced from Normandy, be ( eo nomine) abolished, and a supply made from St. Edwards lawes or the Civil, and that our Lawes be devested of their french rags, (as King James of worthy memory once Royally motioned) and restored into the English or Latine tongue, unlesse per∣haps it may seem honourable for English men to be still in the mouth of their owne Lawes no further free then Frenchified,vide supra p. 14
and that they only of all mortell men should imprison their Lawes in the Language of their enemies. 5. That our Language be cleared of the Normane and French invasion upon it, and depravation of it, by purging it of all words and termes of that descent, supplying it from the old Saxon and the learned tongues, and otherwise correcting it, whereby it may be advanced to the quality of an honourable and sufficient Language, then which there is scarce a greater point in a Nations honour and happinesse. (To which may also be added the removall of an Indignity of kin to the former in quality though not in cause, namely the ad∣vancing of the French Armes above ours in the Royall standard, as if by our Ancestors conquest of that Nation, we had merited nothing but the publick subjection of our honor to theirs; The Scots (though an inferiour Nation) denying us any such Privi∣ in their owne Kingdome.) These things thus obtained and Normanisme thus abolished, we may then (and then only) have comfort in our name, as af∣ter our excussion of that which is utterly destructive to the ho∣nour of our Nation, which is the motive unto us to demand and require these things; neither want there reasons sufficient on the other side why they may and ought to be granted,Paetica. some ledge whereof are these. For his Majesty,1. Ad Regem. it will be no prejudice to his title, nor im∣peachement of the honour of his bloud, should he wave his descent from Normandy, but rather an improvement of the same, by how much it is more honourable to be derived from free Kings then vassal Dukes, and from Saxony the heart and no∣blest part of Germany, then from Nustria or Norway; and it wil moreover settle him aswel in the true affections as on the of this Nation, which none of his predecessors since the preten∣ded Conquest could rightly enjoy, there being too much tin∣cture of domination in their rule and of captivity in our obedi∣ence, and this is confirmed by that love and honour which the most glorious Kings of this Realme have here gained by their inclining this way, Witnesse Henry the first, approved and be∣loved above his Normane predecessors, who for that sole pur∣pose took to Wife Edgar Athelings Neese, the female  of
the English bloud; next Edward the first, whose memory is no lesse acceptable for his being the first reviver of that Name in that line, then for his enlarging the honour and dominion of this State; Thirdly, Edward the third, the most glorious renow∣ned and precious of all our Kings, not only for his famous vi∣ctories, but withall for restoring in a good degree the use and honour of the English tongue formerly exiled by Normanisme into contempt and obseurity; to which purpose also it is ob∣servable that none of our Kings since William the pretended Conquerour and his Sonne, have bore their name, the imposing whereof on our Princes their Royall Parents seeme purposely to have avoided as justly odious to the English Nation, whereas with what honour they have continually used both the name and shrine of Saint Edward, I need not recount, And if these Kings so lately after the Conquerour, and while the Normane bloud ran almost fresh in their veines, thought it their duty in some sort to professe for the English name against Normanisme, how little mis-becomming will it be for his Majesty after his so many ages ingrament into this Nation and disunion from the other, and having in him for one stream of the Normane bloud, two of the true English, to professe himselfe altogether English, and to advance that Nation to the greatest lustre he can, whereof he professeth himselfe the natural head, yea it will so farre transferre him above the honour and felicity of his Predecessors, as it is more honourable and happy for a Prince to be called and accounted the naturall father of his Countrey, then the exotick Lord of the same, of which titles the very Ty∣rants of Rome were ambitious for the formes, but rejected and detested even the one halfe of the latter. For the Normane Progeny,2. Ad Progeniem Normannicam. they may consider that themselves (as Norwegians) are originally (as Ʋerstegan hath well obser∣ved) of one and the same bloud and Nation with the English, namely the Teutonick, and that in doing what is here required, they shall but shake off that tincture of Gallicisme which their Ancestours took in Nstria, and rejoyne themselves with their ancient Countrimen, which also even their owne honour requires of them, even according to the opinion of the ancient Treviri, who as (Tacitus recordeth) though inhabitants of
France, yet disdained to be accounted of the French bloud, but ambitiously adhered to their descent from Germany; the Gallick Nation having been servile ever since the time of Julius Caesar, and no other their language which wee so much honour and dote upon, then an effect of the Romane Conquest over them, and a testimony of their long vassalage and subjection to that Empire. But if they can relish no honour but what must arise and fetch life from our shame, let them revolve how loath they would be to be served as sometime the Romans dealt with the insulting Gaules, the Relicks of Brennus his Army, whom they utterly rooted out of Italy, Nequis ejus gentis superesset qui incensam a se Romam jactaret, as an Historian hath it; and if they will needs continue the Danes Succeeders in insulting o∣ver us, they may also remember that wee are the posterity of those English who massacred them, and that when they had a potent Kingdome at hand to revenge it, which these others are to seeke for. Lastly, State-policy requires it,3. it being requisite to the good and safety of the Kingdome in generall;Ad Ordines seu Procuratores Regni. for if ingenuous va∣lour in the people, and their love to their King, State, Nobility and Lawes, with their regard to honour, be the cheife strength of a Realme against forraine invasions (for instance and testifi∣cation whereof we need looke no further then the Scots) it is necessary that if our State would enjoy that strength, our Na∣tion enjoy these demands; for how can we love and fight for those Lawes which are ours only by our enemies introduction, and are our disgrace in stead of honour, or for that Soveraign∣ty and Nobility, in whose very Titles (as before is related) we read our Countrey to be already in Captivity, and that the alteration of the State will be to us, but changing of usurpant Masters? Neither will the recordation of our ancient honour be any better a provocation to that purpose; should the Turke go about to exhort his Grecian Souldiers to valiantnesse in his cause and against his forraine Enemies, by commemorating unto them the ancient glory and prowesse of their Nation, would not that cohortation merit to be taken as an insulting irri∣sion, and should not the first effect there of be a vindictive incite∣ment
of them against himselfe as the most proper object there∣of in all respects, so also cannot the remembrance of our anci∣ent glory (if we consider our selves aright) incite us to any thing more then to the clearing of our selves from this insul∣ting Conquest; as already and long since pressing us with that dishonour, which other dangers at most but threaten; and as upon these grounds, wee can scarce find courage to fight for the safety and preservation of the State, so for the same reasons have we as little heart to pray or wish for the same, untill our Nationall honour be restored to a coexistence therewith. Since therefore these things are so behoofefull for our Nation to demand,Peroratio. and for our State to grant, if after due consideration thereof we continue to want the happy fruition of the same, it must be ascribed either to an overgrown basenesse of mind in the one, or an natural malignity in the other as indulging rather to a forrain Name then to the Nation wherof the said State is a part and intrusted with the welfare and honor therof; and in this still∣servilizing case it will be ridiculous for us (the Nation) to pre∣tend to honour or renownednesse, but more proper for us for∣ever to professe our selves of that quality wherein we take up our rest, to wit, captivednesse and servility; but if we may des∣cry a glorious morning and  of our benighted honour re∣fulging in the happy accomplishment of these our desires, then shal we with alacrity presse all that the English name investeth, unto the defence and inlargement of the English Dominion, and instead of disclaiming our Nation and transfuging to others, as many of us now doe, and have done especially in Ireland, wee shall joy to make Anglicisme become the only soule and habit of all both Ireland and great Britaine. Dixi. Octob. 1642. I. H. FINIS.
