M1665 669.f.8[16] 99870716 161067
July, 25. 1643. A MEMENTO TO THE LONDONERS, To put them in minde how neere their destruction is, and what meanes is left to prevent it. IT much concernes you (my Brethren) to sit still one quarter of an houre, and consider the perishing condition you are in, for then I perswade my selfe, you will see your selves so surrounded with ap∣proaching miseries, that you will thinke it more then time that you were all in armes, and no long∣er indure to remaine in so naked and despicable condition as you now are in. Will you not bee a∣wakened till you heare your Enemies are at your Out-workes? cannot the noyse of dangers on all sides, and in the midst of you, rouze you out of that destructive Lethargy that hath possest you; but you will continue dreaming about your Trades, till the outragious hand of your implacable enemies seise upon you, your Wives and Children? I wrote to you before to this purpose, but it made no impression in you, and there∣fore I had thought never to have wrote unto you againe, but that I have some hopes left, that now you are ready to perish, you will looke about you, and heare good Counsell: and assure your selves that if this Letter be not an alarme to rouze you, it will prove a passing Bell, rung before your destruction. Never were a People in such necessities as you are in. The Kings Forces are growne strong and powerfull, and will in short time, if you prevent it not, be as able to execute their malice upon you as they are willing; from whom you of all the People in the Kingdome, can expect no more favour than from the Turke or Spaniard, were he come amongst you. The Earle of Essex, you heare, is unprovided in many respects, and what opportunities that will administer to your Enemies, let your feares suggest. Hopton and Newcastle, the Queene and Marquesse Hartford, are all potent and resolved to destroy you. The hopes they have swallowed, and brags they have made of pillaging and ransacking this City, may sufficiently informe you what mercy you are like to find when they come amongst you. The Malignants in Kent are in Armes already. A Pro∣clamation is gone out already, forbidding all Trade and trafficke with the Londoners. Have you dangers enough thinke you, or will you stay till you are more miserable? Perhaps you expect to be saved by a Miracle. Alas! incon∣siderate men! 'Tis true indeed there is nothing too hard for the Omnipotent and Almighty God. But is it to bee expected that his omnipotency should preserve us, when he hath given us understanding, strength and opportunity to preserve our selves, and we out of base feare or other poore respects dare not set about it? Why, what would you have us to doe, you will say? Aske your owne hearts what you have to doe; is there any thing else to be done, but for every man that is able of body to list himselfe immediately for the warres, and every man contribute to the utmost for the maintenance thereof; A Committee of Parliament are appointed you know for the service, and where they fit, such as have beene trusted by thousands, and approved by those from among whom they were chosen, who will no doubt take care for the choyce of such men onely into Office as are of knowne faithfulnesse and integrity, not a suspected or unknowne man to be admitted: Your monies shall be employed to the proper end you intend them; make use of this opportunity to preserve your selves, or expect suddenly to be destroyed. You doe but ruine your selves, your best Friends, and chiefe Commanders, by venturing in small bodies to subdue your Enemies: what can you hope thereby, but onely a prolongation of the Warre, and deferring your destruction for a season, when in the meane time you waste and consume your selves away to nothing? No, you must all rise, or nothing can be done to any purpose. The poore will shortly want bread, and what their wants will necessitate them to, let the rich consider. You have talked a great while that nothing can preserve you but a generall rising, and in private discourses every man concludes that it is the onely thing necessary; now shew that you are not meere Talkers, the Countries will come in to you, who long to be up and doing, they awaite but your leading them the way, let no ceremonies nor excuses hinder you, let not your wife and children with-hold you, this is the onely way to preserve them: I know you may be furnished with excuses, and that they who are unwilling may have much to say for themselves; But thinke all of you what lies at the stake, your Religion, Lawes, Liberties, your Lives, Wives, Children, Estates, all is lost if you doe not now bestirre your selves. Be couragious, and God will blesse you; Lie still, and perish. Farewell. Your Friend, and plaine-dealing Remembrancer▪ This is licensed and entred into the Hall Booke according to Order.
