M2747 E329_7 99861369 159612
Col: Morgan Governor of Glocester's LETTER TO The Honoble William Lenthal Esq Speaker to the Honorable House of Commons. Concerning the total ROVTING AND Taking of Sir Jacob Ashley and his Army at Stowe upon the Wold, intended to joyn with His Ma∣jesties Army at Oxford. Together with a LIST of the per∣sons of quality, and Officers in Commission taken in that fight by the Parliaments Forces. ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Letter and List be forthwith printed and published: H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. London: Printed for EDW. HUSBAND, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons. March 24. 1645.
TO The Honourable William Lenthal Esq Speaker of the Honourable House of Commons. Truly Honourable, HAving received a command from the honourable Committee of both Kingdomes to take charge of a Brigade of horse and foot, drawn out of the Garisons of Glo∣cester, Hereford & Evesham, to prevent the Lord Ashleys conjunction with the Kings forces at Oxford; and to effect that designe I drew forth & rendezvouzed seasonably betwixt Evesham and Warwick, notwithstanding the Lord Ash∣ley endeavoured by all wayes to get by me, which much foiled my Brigade to prevent in marching from place to place to secure the Fords upon the river Avon: yet after some
considerations perceived that he was unwil∣ling to passe over so long as I lay near the ri∣ver, resolved upon Thursday last to draw off and to quarter at Cambdin, the most conve∣nient place wheresoever he made his passage, and that night had intelligence of his march from Droitwich near Worcester, towards Bitford, three miles from Evesham; whereof I presently advertised Colonel Walley and Co∣lonel Fleetwood, and sent post to Sir William Brereton, to desire the assistance of his Horse, which was accordingly granted. But upon Friday the Lord Ashley still continuing his march (and Sir William Breretons horse not come up) was forced to hold him in action for the space of four hours, skirmishing with him by parties, and keeping my Body drawn up in a most advantagious place for pursuit, in case he should passe by me (before Sir William Brereton came up) which about nine a clock that night he did: whereupon I resolved to pursue, thinking it more advantagious to fol∣low upon his rear, then at that time to draw out to meet him in the field; and in my pursuit Sir William Brereton came up with 800 horse,
(of whom I desired to receive orders, but he referred the whole command of the field to me) then being equall in number to the Lord Ashleys forces consisting of 3000, I comman∣ded 400 horse and 200 firelocks to charge home his Rear guard, to put him to a stand before he should passe through Stow upon the Wold (and as my intelligence informed me, the King was to have joyned with him with∣in seven miles of that place) where he made choice of his ground and had the wind with him: yet trusting in God I drew up and char∣ged him home (halfe an hour before day upon Saturday morning) put him to a totall rout, killed many Gentlemen and Officers of quali∣ty, took prisoners the Lord Ashley, and all his Foot officers, whose names are in the inclosed List, besides 1600 common Souldiers; where∣of many of them being wounded, I gave them liberty to go to their own homes, (taking the oath of the 5 of April) the rest are now sent to Glocester. I took also 2000 armes and all their ammunition. Sir William Brereton desi∣red that the Lord Ashley might be his prisoner, which I willingly condescended unto; not
doubting but he will give a good account of him to the Parliament. This good successe, (the glory whereof I desire may be given unto God) will prevent the King from drawing an army into the field which he expected, and am now marched towards Worcester; where I shall observe such orders as shall come from the honourable house of Parliament, or the Committee of both Kingdomes; and in the mean time shall endeavour to make use of all opportunities to weaken the Enemy, and to advance the publick service. The honourable House was pleased to promise a summe of mo∣ney to this Brigade, which I hope you will be pleased to hasten down, that thereby Free Quarters may be prevented, and I enabled to prevent the disorders of the Souldiers in the countrey; which shall alwayes be the desire of him who will ever subscribe himself to be Sir,  your Honors most faithfull and humble Servant THO. MORGAN. Cambdin the 22 of March 1645 at 6 a clock at night. There was no considerable Officers of ours slain but 2 Lievtenants, nor none wounded but Col. Rous, Governour of Evesham. T. M.
A Note of what Officers in Com∣mission are Prisoners. THe Lord Ashley. Colonel Corbet. Col: Gerard. Col: Mauldsworth. Lieut. Col: Broughton. Major Billingsley. Major Harnedge. Major Salonstone. Captain Ed. Gray. Capt. Tho: Gilbert. Capt. Peacock. Capt. Silvanus Hallsel. Capt. Ardinge. Capt. John Bonner. Capt. Henry Bonner. Capt. Joshua Smy. Capt. Hutton. Capt. Harinson. Capt. Jewnger. Capt. Harris. Refor∣madoes Capt. Ioh. Matthews Capt. Devenport. Capt. Geo: Wright. Capt. Pots. Capt. Smith. Lieutenant Hill. Lieut. Hopson. Lieut. Edriswick. Lieut. Warberton. Lieut. George Fancot. Lieut. Hobman. Lieut. Benjamin Thornbury. Lieut. Fletcher. Lieut. Kerk. Lieut. Powle. Refor∣madoes. Lieut. Smith. Lieut. Hart. Lieut. Kelly. Lieut. Vaughan. Capt. Lieut. Aston. Lieut. Ed. Barker. Cornet Godfrey Preses. Cornet Brooks. Cornet Roberts. Cornet Russel. Corne Francis Hesketh. Ensign Blackburn. Ensign Horton. Ensign Detheck.
Ensign Ellis. Ensign Farmor. Ensign Ayres. Ensign Cliever. Ensign Hopson. Ensign Colebrook. Ensign Broughton. Ensign Mason. John de Ashfield Clerk. Alexander Clogley, Chap∣lein to Sir William Vaug∣han. Ed. Barker, Marshal Gene∣ral. Quartermaster Stone. Quartermaster Wats, Re∣formado. Quartermaster Gardener, Robert Weal Chyrurgion. Richard Aston Gentleman, Servant to the Lord Aston. Mr. William Gent. This is a true List of who is taken, besides the Names of some that are not yet brought in. T. M. FINIS.
