N334 E393_6 99862089 160298
FOURE PROPOSITIONS PROPOUNDED. By the ROYALISTS in the City OF OXFORD TO The Officers and Souldiers under command of his Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX. concerning their proceedings in this pre∣sent Designe. Together with the Resolution of the said Army towards the City of London, and their further Desires concerning the Kings Majesties Royall Person. London Printed for G. Cotton, 1647.
NEVVES FROM THE ARMIE SIR, IN my last I promised to send you by the next an account of the proceedings and resolutions of the Army, together with their intention and determination concerning their neerer approach towards your City: I have here sent you an exact Narrative of
the whole businesse, viz. The Generall hath declared to the London Committee, that the Army intends no evill against that renow∣ned City, no violation to the priviledges of Parliament, nor to be Agitators in any thing which may prove prejudiciall to the City, but desire that their grievances formerly declared may be speedily redresled, justice executed, and the Kingdome setled, and up∣on Monday last in the afternoon the Com∣mittee of Aldermen and Common councell returned with an Answer from the Officers and Souldiers in the Army, to a Letter sent from the Lord Mayor and Aldermen by the said Committee, which was to this effect, That they may no longer be the dis-satisfa∣ction of friends, nor the subject of their ene∣mies malice. They as formerly, relate the cause of their not disbanding, and going for Ireland. 1. That the houses be speedily porged. That those that have wronged them and the Kingdom may speedily be brought to a tryall, and ju∣stice executed upon them. Declaring, that very speedily they will nominate some
members in the House of Commons, who have vnjustly scandalized the Army, & that they will proceed to particulars, in relation to their former actions. They further desire, that the Kings Maje∣sty and his Royall posterity may be consi∣dered in their rights, declaring also, that they shall be carefull of the preservation of His Majesties Royall person. This is the effect of the answer returned by his Excellency for Thomas Fairfax, to the Committee of Al∣dermen and Common-councel of London. I shal now give you a hint or two of the present actions of the army, by setting forth their fair usage to the Country people, and their gallant demeanour to all passengers whatsoever. One thing I had almost forgot (being a passage very remarkable) some particulars have been intimated for tender consciences, without any licentious liberty to those who live civil. His Excellency hath also declared that he cannot well remove his quarters 40 miles distance from London. Por the rest, I refer you to the inclosed.
SIR, UPon the close of the fore going pa∣per, I received a Copy of some cer∣tain propositions, dispierced amongst the Souldiery, which came from Oxford (as some say) but not subscribed by any hand or name a Copy of which I shall here present unto you as followeth: Certain Propositions proposed by divers Roya∣lists within the City of Oxford, to the Soul∣diery under command of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, concerning their present de∣sign against the City of London. 1. That you will be pleased to take it in∣to serious considerrtion, the great danger that is likely to befall this poore Kindom, if once (again) involved in a second warre, the sword bath of late bin (almost drunk in bloud, which if once drawn again would have its full fill. 2. That some meanes may be used for a happy composure of all differences, now in dispence betwixt the Honourable Houses of Parliament assembled at Westminster, and the
Souldiery under command of his Excellen∣cy sir Thomas Fairfax. 3. Experience may tell you (if you do not know it) that wars are quickly begun, but not so soon ended, that it is dangerous to begin a new war, especially with those who have assisted you in the late war against the common-enemy of the Kingdome. But (indeed) it is said, that the army wil not sight against the City, unlesse it first begin with them: if the City begin the Fight the City is undone: if the Army be∣gin the Fight they are undone. For certain∣ly, revenge will fall from Heaven, upon that party that shall do so wickedly as to begin a new warre. But it is hoped, (by us who pray for the welfare of our King and Country, and the peace and tranquility of this our Native Kingdome) that if the City and the Army should be in the field neere each other, that they will be so wise as not to fight, but as friends to salute and embrace each other. 4. Consider what a long and chargeable war the last was, with the losse of many thousands of innocent souls, and yet few the
better, but all the whole Kingdome much the worse Certainly no true-born English∣man (that wishes well to the peace and wel∣fare of his King and Country) would be so void of reason, as to be Instruments to in∣volve their native Country in a second war, but such as have gotten by the old. Thus have I given you an exact account of the present proceedings in the Army, and one thing I can assure you, that the Souldie∣ry are very unwilling to engage in a new warre; so that I hope, there will be a gallant composure of things betwixt the Parlia∣ment, City, and Army. But time calling me to a period, I remain Your affectionate friend, R. Neale. Dunstable June 17. 1647. FINIS.
