N950 E446_9 99864279 161776
NEVVES FROM BOWE, AND The Earle of Norwich his Speech at a Randevous on Pickenden Heath, who is designed Generall of the Enemies Forces. WITH The Coppy of a new Oath taken concerning what shall be con∣cluded and resolved upon at their Councells, and for effecting their Results. ALSO The particular Relation of the whole businesse in Kent, and a List of the Names of prisoners taken at Maidstone viz. Sir Gamaliel Dudley. Sir William Brockman. Esquire Scott. Major Price. And many other of quality. Those which are escaped and were very active, are The Earle of Norwich. Esquire Hales. Sir VVilliam Compton. Sir Thomas Peyton. Sir Bernard Gascoine. Sir Iohn Many. And divers others. June 6th LONDON, Printed by B. A. MDCXL VIII.
A particular RELATION From KENT SIR, THere have beene taken since thursday night last, as many prisoners as make up those then taken at Maidstone 1400, di∣vers of them being the Officers of a Re∣giment of foot, four Troops of horse: their qualities are not yet known in re∣gard they conceale themselves: there are taken which we know Sir Gamaliel Dudley who was appoin∣ted Governour of Maidstone, Sir Wil. Brockman Col: of a Regiment of foot, Squire Scot, Major Price, and divers o∣thers, the peefect List of which I shall send you by the next.
Some of the prisoners taken say, that there were present at the Randezvouz on Pickenden Heath, on Thursday the Earle or Notwich, who was designed to be their Generall, who made a speech of incouragement to them, that he would desire them to go no further then he went himselfe, and that if they faild now they should be for ever slaves. The foot were ill armed and some whole files rode on Horse back in a rude & uncouth manner. Squire Hales was to be Lievtnant Generall to this Mock Army, and Sir william Compton their Major Generall, Sir BernardGascoin a French Monsieur offred to bring 50 Lieut. to be imployed in this 'army Sir Thomas Many, and others were very active. Their Lieutenant Generall is to have a Regiment of horse, and another of foot. Yesterday we had intelligence that the Enemy went a∣bout three in the afternoone out of Rochester towards Gravesend, they broke up the bridge that no horse might passe: the Town were very glad they were gone Major Brown Governour of Upnecast as they upon their going away over turned their carriages of their ordinance, and the wo∣men of the Town helpt to throw down the workes, they were not full 3000 that marched out of that Town. One of the Prisoners being a Lawyers Clark, hang'd him∣self in a Belrope in the Church where they were kept. Yesterpay morning one of the Lord Generalls footmen going to view the dead bodies met with Major Price one of the enemies party and took him prisoner with his sword by his side though the other had no sword of other Armes. There was taken in the pockets of the one Lamb the copy of an oath of secrecy which is as followeth: Rocbestor 3 May 1648. We oblige our selves by the faith of Christians and the honour of Gentlemen not to disroven or betrag a∣ny
debate, or conclustons concluded or resolved upon by the subscribers hereof further faithfull and resolute ly to deliver our judgements a indevours in effectuating of these Results, This day his Excellency with Army advanced from Maid∣stone and had Rendezvous upon Packenton Heath between Maidstone and Rochester, where the Army was drawn up and a Councell of Warre being called, divers were procee∣ded against for seuerall misdemeanours one James Pluet of Col. Barksteads Regiment was condemned to dye for taking 35. from a Country woman. We are now come to Rochester, and have sent forth par∣ties to Graves-end Dartford & Craford to attend the Enimies motion who whe hear were this day at Wolwich and black∣heath I pray send word how things are with you in London what you hear from black heath and from Effex, my tender respects all our friend, not forgetting my sweet. Frien, In hast I rest. Rochesher. 3 of Iunij. 1648. A List of the names before mentioned. The Earle of Norwich, de∣signed Generall. Esquire Hales, appointed Lieutenant Generall. Sir VVilliam Compton their Major Generall. Sir Bernard Gascoyne. Sir Iohn Many. Sir Gamaliel Dudley Gover∣nour of Maidstone. Sir Iohn Brockman. Fsquire Scott. Major Price, and many o∣thers.
Upon his Excellencies comming last night to Rochester, where he quartered with the foot and traine, astrong partvos Horse was sent forth under command of Col Wha. to pursue the Kentish bum∣kins, for that's the common term our souldiers give them and Cavies commanded by the Lord Go∣ring, and this morning we fell upon them, and have taken some prisoners which are brought thi∣ther, some of the enemy fled into the I hames, and others boated over into Essex, and left their hor∣les behind them, many o en drowned for hast to get over, a party of horse and foot is gon to clear al about Dover castle & I hope regain Deal castle and perhaps change the disposition of the Seamen, beleeve it if the earl of Warwick was here now they would he glad of such a mediatour for mer∣cy to be shewed to them: the businesse of Maid∣stone was far greater then I first presented, wet tooke above 1400 prisoners, 500 horse 16 barrels of powder, 12 run of march,, and 2000 Armes; A great fear is one the hearts of the whole county, the Lord give the parliament and City hearts to discern and be thankful for so great adeliverance as this of Kest, in which so many so many des∣perate designs are linkt together: I suppose you
have the businesse of the Isle of Wight at large, but the design faild there, and the snare is bro∣ken here. Rochester the 4 of Junij 1648. On Sunday night last being the fourth of this in∣stant June there was asmall skirmish between some of the Lord Gorings Forces which were joyned with the Essexmen at Bow, & some of the Lord Generalls horse which were cone back to mile end, and are commanded by Col: Whaley, there was about 3 men killed on both sides, those of the Essex party were forced to retreat again to Bow bridge and further action ceased for the the present there are more horses mounting in the City of London to assist those on that side the river of bow and the L. Gen. is comming back, and will be on the other side this night or to morrow Sunnons are givento the contrary party for a fuller appearance of the Essex men who are much disoartned at thenew, they hear of successe of the Kentishmen, which were drawn into such a condition by the Cavaliers which were in the head of them, that if his Excellencies forces had bad no more mecy on the poor Country men and their wives, and children, then those by whom they were deluded, with whom they were ingaged they might all have been cut in peaces for when the Generalls Army had ingaged the whole bo∣dy of the Kentishmen to fight, or lay down their Armes,
then those which were most active and most of them gotten into places of command fled away with the L. Goring into Essex and how deeply that Country may also suffer, by en∣tertaining such guests time will make manifest many of the moderate party in Essex are much startled at the Lord, Go∣rings comming thither, some say he is a papist, &c. And did great disservice in Kent, the women also cry out for their husbands and many of them by perswasion do prevail with their husbands which have been forward in appearing. Imprimatur Gilbert Mabbott. FINIS.
