O417 99896340 154321
A Copy of Admiral RUSSEL's Letter to the Earl of NOT∣TINGHAM. Published by Authority. YEsterday about three in the Morning, Cape Barfleur bearing S. W. and by S. distance seven Leagues, my Scouts made the Signal for seeing the Enemy, the Wind Westerly; The French bore down to me, and at eleven engaged me, but at some distance; we continued Fighting till half an hour past five in the Evening; at which time the Enemy towed away with all their Boats, and we after them; It was Calm all Day; about six there was a fresh Engagement to the West∣ward of me, which I supposed to be the Blue; it continued Calm all Night. I can give no particular Account of Things; but that the French were beaten, and I am now Steering away for Conquet Road, having a fresh Gale Easterly, but extream Foggy, I suppose that is the Place they design for; If it please God to send us a little clear Weather, I doubt not but we shall destroy their whole Fleet: I saw in the Night 3 or 4 Ships blow up, but I know not what they are, so soon as I am able to give you a more particular Relation I will not be wanting. May 20. 1692. Cape-Barfleur, S. W. distance 7 Leagues. Some Particulars of another Letter from the Fleet. YEsterday in the gray of the Morning we made the French Fleet, in a Line of Battle, about two Leagues to Windward, they having the Wea∣ther Gage, bore down very boldly, and close upon us; At 11 exactly we engaged; the Engagement was very hot, and continued so till near four in the Afternoon, at which time the French Fleet bore away; then the Wind was as before, at W. b. S. and W. S. VV. veering about to N. by E. and N. N. E. Sir Clouesly Shovel, and Sir John Ashby, having the Weather Gage, fell on, and maintained the Engagement till near Ten at Night; The French all that time bearing away, and the English pursuing them; what Damage is done on either side is not yet known; some Ships were seen in Flames about nine at Night, but it is not discovered what they were. Portsmouth, May 20. SInce this Account, the Mary Galley is come to Spitthead from Admiral Ruffel, whom he left at 8 this Morning, about 15 Leagues S. and b. W. from the Isle of Wight; He saw both the French Admirals seconds sink, and many Ships on Fire; and that for two Leagues together the Sea was full of VVrecks of Ships, but doth not know of the loss of any of Their Majesties Ships, or Commanders. This Morning when he came away the French were Running, and ours in pursuit of them; and about Ten a Clock heard them engaged again, and heard the Guns till one, when the VVind sprung up  S. and S. and by W. Printed by Edw. Jones in the Savoy. 1692.
