P157 E341_21 R200910 99861530 113667
The Packet of Letters: OR, An exact Collection of all the Letters, Messages, and Summons, with their Answers, which have any relation to our present Ingagements: Also the most remarkable Passages and Letters, sent from beyond Seas to this KINGDOME. Printed and published, for the better understanding of all Occur∣rences, Passages, and Accounts, both at home and abroad. Containing Letters this week, from Venice. Newcastle. Coloneil Morgan. Marq. of Worcester. Ireland. France. London. The King to the Prince. Flanders. Yorke. Oxford. Ragland. Iune 26. Published according to Order. From Venice. SIR, SInce my last, it hath pleased Almighty God, so to prosper the ingagements of our Christian Ar∣my, that besides the hopes of regaining the Garrison of Canea, we have taken from the Turks the Island of Metellin, and 20. of their Gallies at that famous Gulfe of Lepanto. And now we are confident that that God whom we serve, as he can, so he will deliver us out of the devouring talents of this Anti∣christian. We heare the Pole will not let him sleep on the one side, and the Persian pricks him up on the other. And for our
parts, we are not idle: Our Generalissim, together with our famous Morosins, are gone towards the Dardanels of Constanti∣nople, and we make no doubt, but before their return, that ser∣vice shall be crowned with victory; it is thought by this time they have met with the Turkish Navy newly come from Canal; and desire nothing more then to fight with them; the Lord of Hosts prottct them, guide them, and direct them in their under∣takings, and grant that the swords that are now drawne against good friends in Europe, may onely have their points directed to the heart of this Antichristian Turk, and help their brethren. Your Servant, T. W. From Newcastle. SIR, THere have been diverse conferences between His Majesty and most of the nobility of Scotland concerning a well-grounded peace; in which they moved His Majestie to take the Covenant, cnofirme the Directory, send for the Prince, and consider of Ire∣land: to all which His Majesty replied, that for some scruples best known to himselfe, he could not consent to the▪ Covenant, nor confirme the Directory. Mr. Hinderson strove by all meanes to stave him off from building his Arguments upon the rotten Maximes of a Monarchie, but could not prevaile for the present. The whole Committee hearing this, upon their bended knees, and with teares in their eyes, besought His Majesty that he would be pleased to put an end to these miserable distractions, and con∣discend: His Majesty observing their posture, hearing their spee∣ches, and beholding their teares, was exceedingly moved to the same passion, but not to the same compassion they expected; yet he told them, he had sent such faire Propositions to the Parlia∣ment of England, that it was beyond his imagination to correct them, and that he verily believed, they should make  happy con∣clusion. He also then cleared himselfe concerning the businesse in Ireland, and protested to discharge all ats of hostility where his power could extend. We hear he hath a great mind to see Mons▪ Moutril returne before he condescend to any thing: The Mar∣quesse of Argile (it is reported) will shortly be at London, and
then I hope wee shall heare of some good conclusion. In the meane time I rest, Sir, Your true Friend, L. C. From Colonell Morgan. A Summns. SIR, I Am commanded by his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, to sum∣mon you to surrender unto me for the use of the Parliament, the Castle of Ragland, with all the Armes, Artillery, Ammuni∣tion, and all manner of military provision therein, which I con∣ceive you have no reason to hold, being out of all hopes of re∣liefe, and that all or most of the Kings Garrisons are surrendred into the hands of such as the Parliament hath appointed, to keep them for their service; and Ragland Castle being one of your last, if you refuse▪ to surrender  upon this Summons, the Coun∣ty will witnesse against you to be the disturbers of the peace of this Kingdome, and deprive your selfe and all with you from those honourable conditions which you may now receive from Your Servant, Tho. Morgan. For the Governour of Ragland, these. The Marquesse of Worcesters Answer. SIR, I Have received your Letter, by which you manifest that you have received command from Sir Thomas Fairfax to summon this place, to be delivered up unto you with all, &c. In the first place, I know not the reason, having not to the best of my know∣ledge given just cause of offence to the Parliament, nor by any Law of the Land forfeited my inheritance, which is none of the Kings to give or disse of; but the Forces I have here are the Kings, which he may dispose of at his pleasure; and therefore if you please to affoord me the civill courtesie, that I may have rea∣sonable time to send to His Majesty, to have leave to give you contentment, I shall be ready to give you any reasonable satisfa∣ction; for loath would I be to live the houre that it may justly be said, that I have falsified my trust reposed in me: if otherwise, I am of beliefe, that God is of more strength then all humane
force, and therefore must rely upon him for aid and assistance: what honourable termes you meane I am ignorant of, and when I shall receive His Majesties answer, you shall not find him obsti∣nate that desires to be esteemed Your Friend and Servant, H. Worcester. There have been divers other passages between this Marquesse and Col. Morgan, of late, concerning the surrender of this Ca∣stle, but partly for brevity, and partly because they are elswhere printed, I omit them. From Irelnd. Sir, I Make no question, but before this time, you are made privie to that great mis-fortune which hath befallen our Army since my last, in the Province of Ulster, and therefore I shall for the pre∣sent forbeare, onely thus much, we lost not so many in number as the report is; though more of eminent persons then they speak of; our onely hopes are now, of a happy reconciliation betwixt His Majestie and his Parliament, and the Scots in England, that so we might be able to cry quittance with these mercilesse Rebels; O that they would at last forget their honourable termes, and private interest, and remember our bloudy wounds, which still do cry for vengeance! Sir Charles Coot, in the Province of Co∣naught still stands upon his legs, and we hope may march on suc∣cessefull, if England, and Scotland, affoord but timely recruits, but if otherwise it fall out, then take my word for it, wee shall finde it as hot a piece of service to regaine that Kingdome, as any we have undertooke since these miserable times: The truth is, we heare (and not without great joy) of an addition of 5000. Foot, and 1500. Horse to these, firs intended for this service, and of moneyes accordingly, which if we finde it to be true, wee make no doubt of as good if not better condition, then wee had before this fatall overthrow. Yours to command, G. L.
From France. Sir, MY service presented, these are to let you know, that the Court at Amiens is now exceeding full, both of French and Strangers, amongst whom our two English gallants Digy and Jermyn are not a little looked upon by her Majestie of England, they being as it is reported, her chiefe Volentiers to the State of France, for a solemne Embassage to be sent to the Parliament of England in her behalfe; what Letters Mouseur Montrill hath brought unto her, we cannot yet learn, we onely wonder at his speedy returne, but must say nothing. The Embassador will be a∣mongst you shortly, and then you will know further. The Queen hath sent for the Prince, and exceedingly desirs his company, ei∣ther at Amiens or at S. Germans with her, but wee hope he will bee so wife as to follow the steps of his Father if he coe to Lon∣don, rather then the instructions of his Mother▪ For French Newes we heare, that the Army of Prince Thomas of Savoy growes very potent, as also that the French Army in generall hath no need of any thing, i is said, they make the Spaniards shake their heads and sometimes their heeles, when they can meet together, their ayme is onely at the Kingdome of Naples▪ protesting no disturbance to his Holinesse, and first of all the intend to begin with the Citie of Gends, &c. Thus I take my leave and rest, Sir, Your servant, I. R. From London. SIR, ALL the newes I have to tell you at present is, that the Presby∣triall Government  speedily to be established in the Chur∣ches in and about London; the Militia is ordered to be in the Par∣liaments hands for 20 years; and (as we heare) the King is com∣ing to us, but as yet there is no certainty upon what condtos. The Marquesse of Argile communicated the intentions of the Scots, in this particular, to the Houses of Parliament, o Thurs∣day, being yesterday, together with many other things, which as yet we are ignorant of; we make no doubt but their a mere
good and honest, though some will scrcely believe so; there is  book intituled Scotch Papers, read it for your better satisfaction. L. Col. Lilburne is close prisoner in Newgate for some unbeseem∣ing words and actions in contempt of the House of Peeres. Ma∣ster Hudson hath beene examined concerning the King, and the manner of his going to the Scots. Now there are divers reports in the town concerning diverse merry passages which befell His Majesty in that journey; therefore give me leave to relate some of them as I heard them. MAster Ashburnam the Gentleman, and M. Hdson, being at dinner, and their servant Charles attending on them, at a place called Barnet, about ten miles from London, the Landlord of the house looked very zalously at the serving man, and thought with himselfe he should know him, which being perceived by the King, he takes n oprtunitie to goe forth, where the Oastler es∣pying him, came to him, and (being a merrie fllow) gives him  good clp over the shoulder, and desired him to drinke  cup, the King condescended, and there they drunk a health to his Majesty in the first place, then to the Qeen, and the Prince, &c. but my Gentleman fearing the worst, as also hearing of the bad newes  London, packed up, and away they went. In another place, Ash∣burnham being somthing pleasant, but His Mjstie somthing sad▪ they called for a cup of eare, which being brought in by a prit∣ty handsome maid, M. Ashburnham told her he would help her to a rich hsband, and desired her to tell him what she thought of his man, doe, you thinke (quoth the maid) that I will have such a dumb dog as this, that can say never a word for himselfe? Nay, faith I warrant you, and away she goes. This is all for the present, from Your ever loving Friend, W. H. From the King, to the Prince. CHARLES, THis is rather to tell you where I am, and that I am well, then at this time to direct you in any thing, having writ fully to your Mother what I would have you to doe, whom I command you to obey in everie thing, Religion onely excepted, concerning
which, I am confident she will not trouble you, and see that you go no whither, without her, r any particular direction, let e are ofen from you, So God blesse you. Postscript. If Iacke Ashburnham come where you are, command him to wait on you, as he was wont, utill I shll send for him, if your mother and you be together, if she will, he must wait on her. From Yorke. SIR, VVE are all exceeding glad to heare that his Majsti will bee a∣mongst us shotly, yet withall we a as soie on the o∣ther side, to heare that the Scottish Ay comes along with him, for I am confident if ever they come amongst us again in York∣shire, we shll cetainely e all nd ne, wee know them (God wt) too wll to b the contrry▪ yet, we hope the best, and perswade our sevs that Hi Majesties Pers y somthing restraine their insol I must also confesse the best of them will be perswaded with reason, but the rest are devilish, yet wee hope the goodnesse of the one being Commanders, will pre∣vaile against the wickednese of the othe, being but common-soldiers. Also Generall Po is so gallant a man, that wee rest confident he will see all well; we are now (thanks be to God) in a pritty good condition, especially in the East Riding towards Hull, and this is the greatest Newes and the best that for the present I can tell you, if the King comes, I will send you word, and of all proceedings, till which time I res▪ Yours to command, T. L. From Flanders. SIR, ALthough the French be too hard for us in Italy, yet we are e∣ven with them ee in Flanders: For since our strengthening of S. Omer and completing the new dike, wee have had a sight with them, and in fine after a hot dispute on both sides, wee had the glory of an absolute victory: there were slain and taken pri∣soners between 7 and 8 thousand French, and on our side not a∣bove one thousand in all; the particulars I will send you more at large hereafter; we have since raised the siege at Cortnick, and have hopes of regaing the Castle at Lanny. I am Yours, T. M.
From Oxford. SIr, these are to confirme both you and all others, who desire satisfaction in this particular, that the Garrisons of Oxford, and Farringdon, are now delivered up into the hands of his Ex∣cellency Sir Tho. Fairfax, for the use of the Parliament, they en∣joying as honourable Articles, as possibly they could desire: ma∣ny hundreds of them came out on Munday, and as many of ours went in, but now they are all packing up as fast as can be; This piece of service we hope hath put an end to our English war, and will prove the cause of a better condition to incounter Ireland then otherwise could possibly have been expected. Yours to command, H. S. From before Egland. SIR, Since these divers Letters and Summons which have past betwen the Marquesse and Col. Morgan, concerning the surren∣dring of this castle, there hath fallen out a scurvey piece of ser∣vice for our men, the enemy making readie 80. Curasiers and as many Firelocks, together with 200. foot, sallyed forth of the castle on Fryday last, and fell dangerously upon Col. Kerls Quar∣ters, yet notwithstanding God assisting us, beat them in againe. Capt. Temple, and Capt. Crosse, have deserved well in this en∣counter, we lost some men and had manie wounded, 14. of the e∣nemies slaine upon the place, &c. we hope another Summons will let them see their error in holding out so long to their grea∣ter ruine, I pray God they take example by Oxford and Farring∣don, and prevent it in time: Thus I rest Yours ever, T. D. We heare since the writing of these Letters, that His Majesty hath condescended to all things formerly desired, and that an ab∣solute peace is expected by both Kingdoms. Likewise that Prince Rupert and P. Maurice lay at Maidenhead on Wednesday night, and came on Thursday to Oatlands; but Sir Tho. Glemham and some other Lords are still in Oxford. Printed for Thomas Bates at the Maidenhead on Snow-hill.
