p2959 42476305 151286
Popish Treachery: OR, A Short and New Account OF THE Horrid Cruelties Exercised on the PROTESTANTS IN FRANCE. Being a true Prospect of what is to be expected from the most solemn Promises of Roman Catholick Princes. In a Letter from a Gentleman of that Nation, to one in England, and by him made English. Licensed and Entred according to Order. Edinburgh, Re-printed in the Year 1689.
The Preface. IT is not long since this Letter was writ to me by a French Gent¦man, at my Request, and for my particular Satisfaction; who he is a Person of much Worth and Integrity, and has been an Eye-w¦ness of most of the things whereof he speaks, so the readier Faith a greater Credit ought to be given to them. But his Testimony alo need not to be rely'd on for the Matters of Fact he here relates, the are thousands of other French Protestants, now in England, that co¦firm the truth of all; and who having felt the smart of a severe Pers¦cution in France, are fled from thence to avoid the extream Fury a insupportable Violence thereof. Now the unquestionable Evidence have for the certainty of what is advanced in the following Accoun and the desire of many to see it Published in English, has made me co¦sent to expose it, hoping it may give some seasonable Information, an Satisfaction, to our People. For though most of them may have heard much talk of a Persecution i France, and have Generously and Bountifully contributed their Chari¦ty towards the Relief of those Miserable Persecuted French Protestants who are come hither for Refuge and Succour, yet I have reason to believ that very few of them know any thing of the Cruel manner, wherewit the Barbarous and Inhuman Papists have pursued that Persecution this is what they will find set down in short, in the little Relation her presented to them; and they may there see a Notorious Example of th base Treachery of Popery, and of the Cruelties which it holds, as  Point of Religion, to make Protestants suffer; over whom it pretend to have a Soveraign and Absolute Dominion. So this little Histor not being perplex'd and embarressed with numerous and tedious Cir∣cumstances, all sorts of people may thereby easily inform themselves o this Persecution, as much as we ordinarily desire to know of such Events And besides that Charity of our poor Persecuted Brethren and Fellow Protestants makes us concern'd therein, as being equally Objects of th Hatred and Oppression of Popery, so it may serve to prompt us to som Reflections for our own Interest: Nam tua res agitur paries cum pro∣ximus ardet. When our Neighbours House is on Fire, it behooves us to take Care of our own, and to use all Lawfull and Convenient means to eserve it from the Rage and Fury of a Merciless Enemy. Such has Popery ever been to Protestants, and from it, Good Lord, still Deliver England.
Popish Treachery: Or, a Short and New Account of the Hor∣rid Cruelties Exercised on the Protestants in FRANCE, &c. SIR, Cannot but wonder, as well as you, that no History of the Per∣secution of the French Protestants, has yet appeared in your Lan∣age: 'Tis to be wished it were well known to all people of the Re∣rmed Religion, that they might there see Popery in its true Co∣urs, and be taught by that great Example, to understand, that the omises it makes, are but Lyes and snares, to deceive the Honest ith and good Nature of other Men. They would there see like∣se, how by little and little it advanceth its Affairs, still swearing at it has no design to proceed any further; and how it, at length, ds Inhumanity to Perfidiousness, when it has once got to be up∣rmost: But we had enough to convince us of the Treacherons and oody Spirit of Popery, without the History of this late Persecu∣on. The Massacre of the Waldenses so often reiterated: The gene∣ Massacre of the Protestants all over Europe, in the beginning of e Reformation: The Persecution and Massacre of the Low-Coun∣ies, under Philip the Second: The Massacre of St. Bartholomew in ance: The Gun-powder Treason in England: The Massacre of Ire∣nd: The last Persecution of Hungary; and the late one of the Val∣ys of Piedmont, shew sufficiently, how that Communion thirsts af∣r the Blood of men, and is Ingenious in satiating it self therewith, om time to time. However, Sir, since you desire it, I will here aw you a short Scheme of that great Persecution, which ought to  an Eternal Advertisement to all Protestants in the World, that
Popery spares neither Oaths nor Promises to delude them, and stic at no Frauds nor Violences to obliterate them totally, if it we possible, from off the face of the Earth. And this Relation I a now going to make you, will be so much the more faithful, as tha shall say nothing therein, but what my own eyes have seen, or wh I other ways know for certain Truth. The Protestants of France, liv'd under the Faith of many Edict which promised them liberty of Conscience, and equal Priviledg with the rest of the French; the most considerable of their Edicts w that of Nantes. Henry the Fourth, Grand-father of His present Ma¦jesty, having by their Assistance and Fidelity, put an end to th League which the Papists had made, to hinder him from gettin into the Throne, was desirous to recompence the Blood and Live which the Hugonots had expended for his service; and he did it b that famous Edict, which gave them the same Priviledges as his oth Subjects enjoy'd, and he granted it to them, and to their Posterit for ever, under the Title of PERPETUAL and IRREVOCABLE so it was, as a Law of the State, which was confirm'd by the King at their coming to the Crown, and has been expresly so, by man Edicts of Lewis the 13th, and of Lewis the 14th, now reigning. When this King came to the Crown, he was very Young; th Prince of Conde stirr'd up Civil Wars to ravish it from him, and th greatest part of the Papists sided with him, but the Protestants we all of a constant and uncorrupted Fidelity to their Soveraign, so tha they made all the Prince's Designs prove Abortive; and preserv the Scepter to him that yet bears it. After which, he gave them publick Declaration of his acknowledgement, and assur'd them of h favour and protection, during his whole Reign; but at this same tim that he gave this publick Declaration, and a thousand other privat¦ones to particular persons, he even then began to form a design  ruining those who had saved him: He made reflection, that since, b their means, he had been settled in his Throne, they might, in a other occasion, shake him out of it; and upon this reflection it w that he refolved to ruine them, as he has in effect done. At first, he began with Retrenching, by degrees, all the Hugono
om his House, who had any Imployment therein, and the which  had given them as a recompence of their faithful service to him;  somuch, that in a short time, there was not a Souldier in his whole uards, but what was of his own Religion; Merit was no longer con∣der'd in their persons, he no more advanc'd any of them to the aces of Trust in the Kingdom; he put out those he had formerly eferred thereto; and he set forth divers Declarations, prohibiting em all kind of Offices, Arts and Trades, so that none but Papists ould exercise, or profess any; by which means, vast numbers of Pro∣estants were reduc'd to inevitable misery. He took their Colledges and Schools away from them, so that they ad no Master of their Religion, to teach their Children either to Read or Write. When he had done that, he then sent Troops of Missionaries into all the Towns, to gain, as many as they could, by cunning Tricks, or price of Money; and 'twas a strange thing to see the shameful Commerce this people made, of buying those whom ex∣tream poverty oblig'd to sell themselves. The misery was so great in some places, that they were forc'd to turn Papists; sometimes for ten Crowns, sometimes for five, sometimes for two, sometimes for a great deal less. These Missionaries walk'd about, every where, with Baggs of Money in their Hands, and for the space of two years together, one saw hardly any other Traders stirring up and down the Kingdom, but these Dealers for the Souls of men, who bought them according to their Profession, and the number of their Families. At the same time, Pensions, or Imployments were given to those, of any consideration, who would turn Papists. The King, by a Declaration, gave liberty to Children, at seven years of Age, to choose a Religion; and the Fathers of such Children as became Papists, were forced to give them yearly Pensions, and always more than what they were well able; by which means they seduced abundance of the youger sort, bringing mourning and desolation into many Fa∣milies, which for the most part of the time they utterly ruin'd. After this, they forbad their Minister to speak any thing of Con∣troversie, or of what pass'd against them; upon which prohibition, and divers others of the like nature, they daily made them say things
that had never entered into their thoughts: They hired false Wi∣nesses to depose against them, who were often reduc'd to avow the lying Testimonies; and 'twas frequently prov'd too, the Priest and others, and suborn'd them. But as their ruine was absolutel sworn, so nothing satisfy'd them; their Estates were confiscate their persons cast into prison, banish'd, or condemn'd to some othe shameful disgrace. There was no safety for any, they found way to bring the most moderate into trouble, and especially, to destroy those who were capable of giving some good Example to others. These are the degrees of the Desolations of this People, and of th tears they have been made to shed for about twenty five years la past; during which time, no body possess'd in peace what they had and every one were in perpetual unquietudes for themselves, and fo their Children. But these were only the beginnings of their Misery and the Essays of Popish fury and perfidiousness: Whilst on one hand they persecuted some, they assured others that the King had no de∣sign against their Liberty. In almost all the Edicts which His Maje∣sty set forth, he inserted some Article to lull them asleep: He said that not one Title of the Edict of Nantes should be violated: And he insinuated, that his intention was only to interdict the Religion and to stop there. The Elector of Brandenburgh having had the bounty to intercede for them, the King of France gave him an Answer, that is to be seen in many of the Protestants writings; by which he assur'd His High∣ness, That so long as he liv'd, no wrong should be done to his Sub∣jects of the Reform'd Religion; that he acknowledged them for good ones, and would maintain them in all their Priviledges. In the mean time, he had taken from them many of these Priviledges; and what is remarkable at the same time that he wrote this Letter to his Highness of Brandenburgh, he in the very self same instant caus∣ed many of their Temples to be Demolish'd, and others to be shut up; put the Ministers into Prison; oppressed private persons with heavy Injustices; and made those to mourn bitterly whom he said he would protect. He began a thing too, which had never been heard of in any Age, not even in the Savagest Nations, or the most
mote from Christianity; that is, He made Children to be taken from eir Fathers and Mothers, and to be put into Convents, with a strict arge not to let their Parents see them, not excepting even persons  the highest Birth, and of Families to which he had obligations that ght never to have been forgotten by him. He took away seven om the Duke de la Force, an Ancient Duke and Peer of the King∣om, the eldest not being then Twelve Years old. He did the like  all those of the Count de Roy, whom he had some time before per∣tted to go and serve the King of Denmark, in Quality of General  his Armies. In a word, at the same time that he promised to otect the Hugonots, he even then did all he could to ruine them, d there was nothing but Sighs and Tears amongst them; One saw ery where Souls afflicted to the very Grave; some bewailing the s of their Pastors and Temples; others the dispersion and ruine  their Families; others the carrying away of their Children; and ers trembled for fear of the same, or of greater Misfortunes. In e, do but mark now how far their Fraud and Cruelty went; that ict of Nantes was Revocked, which they had so often promid, d so often sworn should be inviolably observ'd; and this Fence ing quite broke down, all that great people was abandon'd to the ge and Fury of the Souldiers. But, what is yet more notorious,  push on the Cheat as far as the fraudulent Wit of Man could car∣ it, in the very Act for Cessation of the fore-mentioned Edict, this ng declared, that he was desirous that all people should live qui∣y in their Families; and that the Exercise of the Protestant Reli∣on being interdicted, every one might live in his own House, as he eas'd. But at the same time that His Majesty solemnly Swore this omise, he sent his Armies to surprize the Protestants in their Towns d Houses, with orders to Plunder, Burn, Demolish, Beat, and in ort, to make them suffer all manner of Evils could be devis'd, ath only excepted; which in this circumstance would have been ok'd on as a great Happiness. The King Usurp'd the Throne of d, and took upon him the Empire over the Conscience; and in  Name whole Towns were Summon'd, by puissant Armies, to turn ists, and upon refusal, they were abandon'd to pillage and ruine,
and to the same Fury as Enemy Towns are wont to be when tak by Storm. They seiz'd on all the Avenues, and brought back th to the persecutors, who had escaped out of their hands: They be ransack'd, violated, and made this people suffer a thousand Evi without distinction either of Age, Sex, or Quality, from the old  to the youngest, Male and Female, Noble, or Ignoble, all we equally at the discretion of the Souldiers: Blasphemies, Impiet and Blows were the Arguments of this Infernal Mission; and o may say, without exaggeration, that Hell seem'd to be let loose, a that the Devils were come to Preach up Popery on the Earth. Al Who can reckon the Tears were shed in this sad occasion? G alone knows their number, who doubtless has counted and gathe them all into his Bosom. The Air ecchoed every where with grie ous Lamentations; and I think, nothing more pittiful could be hea than the Crys and Groans of this people, whilst they were in  hands of their tormentors. They dragg'd many of these poor Creatures into the Po Churches by the Feet, by the Hair of the Head, or by Ropes ti about their Necks, they hang'd them up at the tops of Rooms,  out of the Windows, by their Heels, or by their Hands; th plung'd them into deep Wells, and stinking Mires, with Toads a and Serpents, where they left them according to the time of th Constancy; they lighted great Fires, and Roasted some till th had changed their Religion; if their patience was longer than  Cruelty of their Persecutors, then they basted their Naked Legs w scalding Grease, or boyling Oyl. Others they made to hold  hot Coals in their Hands; burnt the soals of their Feet; tore  Hair from their Beards, and the Nails from their Fingers, and T by the very Roots; larded their flesh all over with Pins, and thrash them with Sticks till they left them for Dead. If they were Si they beat Drums, and sounded Trumpets, Night and Day, in th Ears, for 'twas a general Rule to hinder them from sleeping, and set them in different Postures; sometimes standing upon one L holding up a Hand in the Air; sometimes down on their Knees, ∣ing the like, &c. If they changed Postures, through wearin
en they pinch'd and cudgell'd them till they were Black and Blue. metimes they tied all the people of a Family in a Room together, d in sight of one another, they beat and bruis'd the Men, and de the Women suffer a thousand indignities. They would often rry them separately into Chambers, to torment them, but so as ey might hear each others crys; and every one in suffering, suffe∣d for themselves, and for the rest of their Family, which they ei∣er saw in torments, or heard the crys thereof. In short, let any an but fancy to himself, what vast numbers of Souldiers, brutal, d let loose, are capable to invent and act in all manner of mischief d cruelty, and he will have an Idea of the method whereby the otestants of France have been taught to become Papists. O Tem∣a! O Mores! This great Fury made those that could save themselves, fly into e Woods, Mountains and Caves; they wandred in the Fields, ex∣sed to all the injuries of the Air, not having wherewith to live,  to cover themselves, and not daring to stir but in the Night, for ar of falling into the hands of their Enemies, Old and Young, Men d Women, all wandred in the Desarts; and all these were but me Members of sad Families, Fathers without Children, and Chil∣en without Fathers; Wives without their Husbands, and Hus∣nds without their Wives; a doleful spectacle, no doubt, to the es of Men. But this is not all, the fury was so excessive that the a-Ports were every where shut for to hinder their flight, and a∣ve 100000 Souldiers imployed to stop their passage on the Fron∣rs, besides all the Peasants whom they had made, and the Priests  joyn'd, to take up Arms against them; so that it was by great ovidence, if any could save themselves amidst so many Obstacles. nd I don't believe there was one in fourty but what was taken, after ving gone, sometimes two or three hundred Leagues, with all sort  misery and difficulty. The Prisons were all full of those poor gitives, and if any of them had ever changed their Religion be∣re, they were sent to the Galleys; a punishment in France, more gnominious and Cruel than any Death. One law every where in e Provinces, the Chains of these Confessors, which they dragg'd
along from one end of the Kingdom to the other: Tantaene Anim caelestibus irae. The Women were Shav'd, and carry'd away t Convents; nor were they put in there many times, till they had fir been at the mercy of certain people, worse than the very Dragoons, & who made them suffer things that modesty and civility permit m not to name: I shall only say that they shut several of them up fo many months together, with Murderers and Highway Men, an such like Cattle. Some were cast into deep Dungeons where the never saw day-light, and they cloath'd them with filthy Ragg taken from the noisom Carkases of dead persons, which they stripp' before their Faces. But the height of all Evils, and that which ha never entred into the heart of the wickedest of all the men Histor tells us of, was the sending whole Vessels full of them to the New world, to be sold to the Savages there; Men and Women, Youn and Old, Noble or others, all were treated equally alike. In some places they made Assemblies to pray to God, and the the Dragoons Massacred all they could light on, burnt the Hous to which the Fugitives retir'd, and those poor creatures with the Some they hang'd up on Trees, and others they precipitated fro the tops of high Rocks, and they broke those on the wheel, lim after limb, whom they called the heads of these Assemblies. But  would be endless to particularize all the various Tortures, and u heard of Cruelties, which the Papists practic'd upon the Protestan in France, for to force them to abjure their Religion: I will on say, that they carry'd them to all the excess of Fury and Inhumani that the Devils themselves were capable to inspire. So that conside∣ing this Persecution in all its circumstances, it may well be recko∣ed the greatest and blackest that ever was amongst Christians  any Age. After they had in this manner dispersed so many Families, ruin so many Houses, made so many Tears to be shed, and caus'd a g∣neral Desolation, they at length made a publick Spectacle and D∣vertisement thereof. The Kings Players Acted for many mont together in Paris, a Comedy, call'd, Merlin Dragoon; in whi the Persecutors and the Persecuted were the Persons Represente
nd inrt and People went in Crowds to laugh and divert them∣selves, at the Oppressions and Torments which the Protestants had uffer'd; and by this, as well as the rest, you may judge what share Piety had in that Work. Now though all these Frauds, Violencies and Cruelties, and in∣finite numbers more have been acted towards the Protestants of France, n the face of the Sun, before Millions of Eye-witnesses, and are known to be the greatest part of Europe; yet some are so unreason∣bly incredulous, that they will not be perswaded there has been any Persecution in that Kingdom; and others have been so disin∣geniously confident, as to maintain in their Oral and printed Dis∣courses, that there has been none. Amongst these latter, is the Bi∣shop. of Meaux, Monsieur Varillas, Father Thomasin, Monsieur Brueis, &c. persons of great Parts and Learning, though of very ittle Candor and Integrity. Nor indeed, is it any wonder to find such Sons and Champions of Popery, deficient in those laudable and Christian Vertues, since 'tis very difficult, nay, almost impossible, for a man to be of the Roman Church, and not have his Principles Vitiated, and his Morals-Depraved by her; so different are the Maxims and Doctrines she imposes, from those which our Saviour teacheth us in his Holy Gospel. But that which the Ingenious Au∣thor of the Apolog. Hist. urges, to prove the truth of the late Per∣secution against the assertions of Monsieur Brueis, and the rest, seems sufficient to convince the unprejudic'd World of the reality thereof, and to invalidate those Gentlemens Arguments, and all other what∣soever to the contrary. Above two hundred thousand persons, says he, of both Sexes, of all Ages, and of all conditions, the greatest part of which lived very well, at their ease, in their own Houses, and many of them possess'd rich Inheritances, considerable Imploys, fair Revenues, some to the value of three and four thousand pounds per Annum. These, says e, have left all, and are most of them gone out of France, in a manner, quite Naked. They have not only quitted their Houses and Estates, abandon'd their Countrey, their Friends, their Parents, Relations of all kinds, those that were nearest and dearest to them;
they have broke all the ties of Nature and Consanguinity; and  the most tender Affection; they have separated, if I may so say  from a part of themselves, from their own Bowels. In this crue separation, they have gone away from all they had most near and dear to them in the World, at the price of their Liberties and thei Lives. They have done it to go and wander in unknown Coun∣tries, in Climates extreamly different from those where they had receiv'd their Births, without having any thing certain, withou hoping for any other subsistance there, than what they could gathe from the charity of strangers. If this be not the effect of a violen Persecution, what is then that madness which has got into the minds of all, and made them take so unparellell'd a Resolution  How has this Fury communicated it self to so many people of all sorts, who lived very far asunder, and who had never known, o seen one another? How has it gain'd, in so short a time, all th Provinces of so great a Kingdom as France is, and in those Provin∣ces, almost all who were, or had been of the Reform'd Religion Men and Women, Young and Old, Rich and Poor, Noble and Ignoble? Let Monsieur Brueis now explain to us a little this unheard of Prodigy, if he will perswade us that there has been no Perse∣cution in France. But whatsoever men are pleased to say, and think of it, I may with truth affirm, that above two hundred thousand of the Kings most faithful Subjects, have voluntarily Banished themselves from his Kingdom to fly the Persecution; not to speak of many thousand others, persons, some of which have been condemned to the last punishments by the Judges; others have been Massacred by the Souldiers; others have died in the Galleys, others have been shut up in Convents; and others been embark'd and sent for America New Declarations more severe than the former are daily publish'd  fresh Oders are given for the Guard of the Frontiers; the new Converts are forc'd, with greater rigour than ever, to go to Mass to Confess, and receive the Communion. They continue to fil the Convents, Prisons and Galleys with Confessors; and they emp∣ty them from time to time by new Embarkments for America
There where the Assemblies continue, there they continue to Mas∣sacre them. The Dragoons perform their Mission with the same Zeal still; and the Judges cease not giving the same sights to the people of Bodies drawn about on Sledges, and cast Dead upon the common Highways; and of Martyrs conducted to punishment, and ending their Lives by the hands of Executioners. Such is now the face of France: Such is the Concord and the Union that reigns at present in this Kingdom: Such is the calm which the Church enjoys, and that happy Peace which the King has given it; according to the style of Monsieur Brueis: What Concord, O God! What Union! What Calm! What Peace! Truely no Patience is Proof against the base dishonesty of this Declaimer. Who can suffer such like impudence? But above all, who can without indignation read what he says in another place in the same Spirit? We see now, says he, that the VVise Conduct of this Great Prince has brought again into the Church, the fairest days of Christiani∣y, &c. Yes, these are, we know it but too well; these are the airest days, not of Christianity, God forbid! But of Popery, of he Roman Church; that cruel Babylon, which is never so satisfied, s when she can make her self Drunk with the Blood of the Saints and Martyrs of Jesus; looks on such Days, as her Days of Festi∣al, as her Days of Triumph. So it was that she heretofore look'd n that sad and dreadful Night of St. Bartholomew, wherein many housand Protestants were Massacred by the Papists in times of Peace, nd in cold Blood: One of her Orators made the Encomium there∣of, with a thousand Transports of Admiration and Joy, in a Speech which he pronounced before Pope Gregory the XIII, O Memorable Night, said he, and worthy to be Ingrav'd in large Characters in History, &c. That same Night, I think the Stars appeared more Bright and Glorious than ordinary; and the River Sene had swell'd its Waters, that it might hurry away with a greater rapidness, the dead Bodies of those Impure Persons, viz. of the Reform'd, and discharge it elf the sooner of them into the Sea. O! Thrice happy Woman, Katharine, Mother of the King! &c. O! Happy Brothers of the King! &c. O! Day, in fine, full of Joy and Pleasantness, wherein you, Holy Father,
having receiv'd this News, you assisted on foot at the Processions you ha order'd, for the rendring thanks for it to God, and to S. Lewis, & What more agreeable News could have been told you? And we, wh Happier beginning could we have wish'd for of your Popedom? Let any one judge by these Words of the Spirit of Popery, an of that of her Soveraign High Priest; and whether it be not th Spirit of the Impure and cruel Babylon, rather than that of the Church of Jesus Christ. I will now conclude, because I propos'd to my self to give you bu a little Abridgment, and an Idea, only of this great Persecution; doubt not but he, to whom Vengeance belongs, will sooner or late Revenge so many Evils. Lento quidem gradu Divina procedi ira, se∣tarditatem Supplicii gravitate compensat. Vengeance doth surely, tho' but slowly tread, And strikes with Iron, tho' it walks with Lead. You see, in this Relation, the Impostures and Treacheries  Popery, as to its Oaths and Promises; to which no credit ought eve to be given, because it certainly never Swears and Promises, but t be Perjur'd, and to break its Word upon the first occasion. Yo likewise see here the degrees of its Cruelties, and how by little an little it advances them, till it at length comes to the Effusion o Blood, and to open Violence. Farewell. I am SIR,  Your very Humble and Obedient Servant. FINIS.
