P3095 E1389_1 R209485 99868361 169903
SPIRITUALL EXPERIENCES, Of sundry BELEEVERS. Held forth by them at seve∣rall solemne meetings, and Conferences to that end. With the recommendation of the sound, spiritual, and sa∣voury worth of them, to the sober and spiritu∣all Reader, By Vavasor Powel, Minister of the Gospel. The second Impression, enlarged with the Experiences of forty two Belee∣vers, wherein is wonderfully declared Gods severall workings in the vari∣ous conditions of his chosen ones. To which is added: The manner of the discipline, and pra∣ctise of the gathered Churches, &c. London, Printed for Robert Ibbitson, 1653.
To the sober and spirituall Rea∣ders of this Booke. THe special, and unspeakable love, and care of our good Lord, and great Master, Jesus Christ, hath so ma∣nifestly appeared to his people (e∣specially of late yeares) that out of his fulnesse he hath communicated so bountifully, that many of them, (like good Scribes) out of their Treasuries have been able to bring things new and old, for the refresh∣ing, comforting, and supplying of ma∣ny poore souls, which otherwise had been in extreame want and distresse. Also amongst the various wayes of Gods teaching, Experience is one of the chiefest; for that is the inward sense and feeling, of what is out∣wardly read and heard; and the spi∣rituall and powerfull enjoyment of
what is beleeved. Experience is a Copy written by the Spirit of God upon the hearts of beleevers. It is one of Faiths hand∣maids, and attendants, and Hopes usher, Rom. 5.3. And when Christ is with-drawne within the vaile, and the wings of faith clipped, and the flouds of temptation over-flow, and over∣whelme the poore distressed, doubt∣ing, despairing, and drowning soule: this barke keepes, and holds up the soules-head above water, till the Arke returne. That Christian beleeves strongest, that hath Experience to backe his faith, and that Saint speakes sweetest and homest, that speakes experimen∣tally; for that which cometh from one spirituall heart, reacheth ano∣ther spirituall heart. Experience is like steel to an edged ol, or like salt to fresh meat, it sea∣sons
brain-knowledge, and settles a shaking unsetled soule. What hath been Printed of this nature, hath both been acceptable and profitable, to many precious Christians. I hope that this is published for that end, and it will finde the same acceptance, and produce the same effects with others of that nature; for herein you may see not only your owne hearts, but many hearts, and heart-knowledge, is both necessary and precious to sincere soules. I recommend this little Booke to you, judging it (as farre as I read) to be sound, spirituall, and savoury, and worth your buying, reading, and perusing. So committing you and it to the Lord and his blessing, I remaine, the truths, and all the Saints friend and servant, Va. Powel.
A Table of the Conversions of the severall Persons ex∣pressed in this Booke. T. A. Converted after three yeares terrour upon his Conscience, and then rowling himselfe on Christ, Pag. 1 T. P. The terrours of Hell laid hold on him, for offering wrong against the people of God, that he cryed out he was damned many yeares, p. 5 M. W. By a Sermon at Liverpooll and after great afflictions, with a peice of a Bible in a barne, p. 8 I. I. By waiting upon the ordinances, p. 18 E. C. After seven yeares temptation to kill her selfe, for neglecting to come to the ordinances, she threw her selfe upon Christ, p. 25 D. M. By a young infant, when she went to a Pond to drown her self, p. 33
AE. L. By being driven through af∣flictions to goe to the meetings of godly people, p. 43 I. B. By a Son, a little childe of six yeares of age, p. 51 A. I. By waiting on the ordinances after losse of a precious Husband, and that in affliction of spirit for neare a yeares time, p. 60 A. A. In the losse of Children, and great buffetings for sinne, by wait∣ing upon God by prayer, p. 68 E. C. By repulsing the Devill when he appeared to her, and tempted her, p. 77. A. O. By a quarter of a yeares de∣spaire, fearing that a Lye told knowingly had been the sin against the Holy Ghost, p. 87 M. M. By fearing Hell, and applying every crosse to be a judgement of God for sinne, p. 93 H. W. By much prayer night and day against a dead heart, and that God
would give him grace to live in a sincere conversation, p. 103 D. R. In feare of reprobation, seeing an emptinesse in her selfe, and cast∣ing her selfe upon God, as his work∣manship, to doe what seemed good to him, p. 111 A. O. In two yeares temptations to despaire, by seeking God by prayer, and waiting upon his ordinances, p. 134 M. W. When Satan tempted her, that she had committed the sinne a∣gainst the Holy Ghost, she protested before the Lord, though she should see nothing but Hell before her, yet she would trust in God, and stay her selfe upon him, and exalting free grace, and pleading Gods Promises, continued much in prayer, p. 140 H. C. By being perswaded she was an Hypocrite, p. 153 M. K. By a dreame of weapons to re∣venge by murder, and severall other
things that followed, p. 160 M. H. By consideration that some slips he fell into, being a Professor, brought dishonour to God, and scan∣dall to the Gospel, p. 217 L. P. By thoughts touching a childe in her wombe, when Satan tempted her to destroy her selfe, p. 229 F. P. By a dreame of the Death and Resurrection of Christ, p. 234 C. M. By trouble about some miscar∣riages towards her children, p. 241 T. H. From consideration that every one of his sins offended the Lord, & deserved his eternall curse, p. 244 E. B. By laying to heart that she had not served God as she ought to doe, p. 247 G. D. From trouble of spirit, that Sa∣tan was very busie with her, p. 258 A. B. From consideration in tempta∣tions, and of that destruction which would befall her, if she forsake her God, p. 254
W. C. Being satisfied with nothing in his soul but the Lord Christ, p. 258 A. C. By seeing her self undone with∣out Christ, p. 261 N. B. A Papist, by his being perswa∣ded to come into Protestant mee∣tings, p. 264 A. H. By terrour of Conscience, and fear that the Devill would fetch her, was converted from Popery, p. 272 D. C. From thoughts for offending so good a God, p. 276 A. H. By falling into a sin she feared, p. 278 F. D. By longing for Jesus Christ, p. 284 H. W. By his trouble for deadnesse of heart, p. 284 M W. By earnest prayer in trouble of spirit, p 290 I. H. By being throwne downe so low, that he thought it almost impossible for God to save him, p. 298 H. N. From his hearing of Pauls
words, That all might be damned who beleeved not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousnes, p. 297. W. T. From consideration of his sin∣full condition he wrastled with God by prayer, and would not let him go untill he found comfort, p. 300. T. G. By solemne ingagement to God, as he loved God, his word, or his own soul, to leave his sins, p. 308 E. D. By being much troubled, that she could not serve God as she should, p. 316. W. W. From the considerations of Gods gracious dealings towards him, and many deliverances, p. 320 A. F. By discovery of some particular sins when God took away severall near relations, p. 324 G. R. By being brought neare to de∣spaire for some things that touched her conscience, p. 327. J. G. By being troubled at that place
of Scripture, The wages of sin is death, which made him for a quar∣ter of a yeare, meet with temptati∣ons by Satan to despaire, but proved his conversion, p. 329 A. G. By Gods smiting the Consci∣ence from her sense of sin, p. 333 A. T. By so great sorrow as made his heart ready to breake, from the con∣sideration of the hardnesse of his heart, p. 335 S. P. By a Sermon at Norwich, p. 339 E. L. By following the hearing of the Word, though with a dead heart, un∣till God quickned her, p. 343 I. F. From the sense of her naturall condition, and her sins, and offen∣ding God, laying it to heart, p. 346 S. P. From his experience of Gods de∣liverance to him from his enemies, against which he had engaged in the field, p. 348 P. P. By outward streights, & afflicti∣ons,
and inward temptations of Sa∣tan, p. 352 M. T. By coming to heare with a ga∣thered Church, p. 355 E. R. By a dreame of Christ as a Childe, carrying her over Hell, when she lay under despaire for tel∣ling a lye, and was tempted of Sa∣tan to murder her selfe, p. 357 T. M. By a dreame of Christ like a Childe, and a Dragon, and other Beasts, p. 369 I. H. By hearing the Word, and his conference with a Minister, p. 376 I. H. By hearing Doctor Gouge, and prayer, &c: p. 382 T. R. By severall experiences of Gods deliverances to him, p. 385 I. S. By sense of a dead heart, p. 394 E. P. By outward crosses, p. 401 G. S. By coming to a private mee∣ting, p. 404
Beleevers Experiences. PART 1. 1 Experience of T. A. I Shall briefly give you my Experiences touching the graces of Gods Spirit in me. 1 Touching humiliation for sin, which I take to be for one to have the feeling of a burthen of sin lying heavie upon him, and throwing him∣selfe downe at the feet of Christ for mercy, with a broken heart. And it is not right, if it be only for feare of Hell, but in regard of sinning against the Love of God. For my selfe, I found the ter∣rour
of sinne upon me so, that in my apprehension I could not be fit to take part of any good thing with the people of God; and thus it was with me three yeares, so that I par∣tooke of no Ordinance with profit. I heard the Word, but with little joy, only sometimes some short flash∣ings, but could not be thorowly re∣solved; yet I was troubled, that God should so lovingly send his Son, and I be so vile a sinner. 2 Touching Repentance, which I thinke to be not only a sorrow for sinne, but a forsaking of it to a mans power. For my selfe, since my feeling of sin, God hath given me a heart to be carefull either of committing, or o∣mitting; I think a man cannot re∣pent before he have faith: A man must first taste of the love of Christ. 3 Concerning Faith, which I conceive it to be in a man, that
when God hath opened his eyes, to see the uglinesse of sinne, and shewes him his promises for poore soules to come to Christ, then he roules him∣selfe on Christ. For my part, it hath been the de∣sire of my soule, so to roule my selfe, and there to stick, hoping all my sins to be past by. The Promises I rest upon are: Come unto me all yee that are weary and heavie laden, and I will ease you. Behold, I stand at the doore and knocke, if any man will open, I wil come in. Him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out. Come, and buy wine and milke without money. This faith workes obedience, and so according to the Apostle, let us endeavour to worke out our salva∣tion with feare and trembling; and
workes great love in us, and a wil∣lingnesse to suffer any thing rather then to part from Christ, or any of his Ordinances. For my part, that I have found it so in some measure in my selfe is true, or else I could not speake this. And this love is not only to Christ, but to the members of Christ. There are other Graces, as Pati∣ence, &c. but I conceive love is u∣nanimous that sets the other on worke. I finde also, that Grace works in∣wardly upon the heart to reprove it, as well as outwardly to restraine words and actions, and outward offences. 'Tis about a yeare, since God brought me to some settlement of comfort upon the Promises afore∣mentioned, only some clouds of doubts sometimes interpose; but God is pleased to rebuke them, and
to assure me, his grace shall bee sufficient for me. T. A. Experiences of T. P. I Have had some thoughts concer∣ning my Spirituall condition, and made search into my Soule touching my estate in relation to GOD; and what testimony I can finde of my interest in God, and conversion to God; and I have found this to be the way of Gods working to bring me to himselfe, through his great mercy in the Lord Jesus. It hath pleased God ever since I was borne, to place me under the meanes of the Gospel, the neglect whereof hath been a great trouble and a griefe unto my soule; this
with many sins more, lay heavy up∣on my Conscience, especially some offence and wrong offered against the People of God, insomuch that the terrours of Hell laid hold upon me, and I began with Cain to cry out, that my burthen was more then I was able to beare; I was a dam∣ned creature, I was out of the pre∣sence, and out of the favour of God, and never like to see his face with comfort, ready with Judas to de∣stroy my selfe. I continued in this condition ma∣ny yeares. But God of his exceeding great mercy kept me from that great sinne, and at last I received some comfort, in that the Lord proclai∣meth himselfe to be the Lord God, gracious, mercifull, long suffering, in forgiving sinnes; and he sware, he desired not the death of a sinner but rather that he should live. And againe he saith, If our sins were as
red as scarlet, he will make them as white as snow, or wooll; Againe, I am the Lord, and change not, therefore ye Sons of Jacob are not consumed. These with many other promises of Free Grace and Mercy yeelded some comfort to my soule, yet for a long time I was troubled; if I prayed, I feared my prayers were an abomination unto the Lord; at last knowing the Lord heard the Nini∣vites, that were Heathens, I thought he was as able to save my soule. It hath been my care to wait up∣on God in the meanes, knowing that faith cometh by hearing the Word; and upon all occasions to search my owne heart, what part of the Word belongeth unto me, and what did not; I received some com∣fort with that promise, I will not breake the bruised reed, nor quench the smoaking flax; Come unto me all ye that are weary and
heavie laden; and I will give you rest; and, He that cometh unto me I will in no wise cast off. These gracious promises, cause me to desire to draw nearer to God in union, and in communion. T. P. Experiences of M. W. WHen I lived in Ireland, and was in fulnesse of outward enjoyments, I had my thoughts much taken up about the things of the World, but little seriously touching the salvation of my soule; but about nine yeares since, being in the Church at Liverpoole in Lan∣cashire, I heard a Sermon prea∣ched by Mr. Tompson; his Text was, Redeeme the time because the dayes are evill: Many things he
spake so home to my soule; that I was very much troubled that I had spent so many dayes in evill. That I have been covetous, and proud, and impatient in the former dayes of my life. Yet it pleased the Lord, that I had an Husband that was an honest man, and one that feared God, who had often before given me good counsell, and sometimes perswaded me to make him some promises of amendment; but I had Children, and Servants, and Cattell, and lived plentifully in Ireland, from whence I had lately come with my husband and family; and indeed there had been no reall conversion, though I had ofter thoughts towards God, and especially I was given much to impatiency, for which my husband had often reproved me: but still I went on in my sin, being not sensible of my sad condition therein, untill I came into England: After which
this Sermon of M. Tomsons did much humble me, and wrought upon my heart a very great sense of my sins. And I was afraid that I had commit∣ted the sinne of Blasphemy against God: as Job said his children per∣haps had done, some way; because I had sometimes cursed some body, or at some thing that had angred me, and in passion rapt out sometimes an oath; and many nights I watred my bed with my teares about it, and went to Mr. West a Minister, at the Park neer Liverpoole, and other godly people thereabouts, who used such meanes, as God led them forth to, for my comfort; but I was still af∣flicted in my soule, about the space of three weekes, and then I found much comfort from Mr. Tompson, and from my husband, who perswa∣ded me by good counsell to trust in God, which I did, and was heartily sorry for my sin.
And then my Husband was trou∣bled in minde himselfe, and the Lord made me an instrument to comfort him, as wel as I could. But about five months after, he had a∣boundance of joy and comfort, and expected death; saying, that hee was perswaded he should be killed, and so (presently after he was settled in his mind) it fell sadly out. For the Enemy took Liver∣poole, and killed my Husband, and a childe, both before my face, and stript, and wounded me, and a childe of five yeares old; and it was thought I could not live. And this was a strong tryall; and I was much tempted, my senses me thought were going from me, and my heart I thought would have melted in pie∣ces, yet I prayed, and the Lord heard me, I thought it was too much for me to beare: but I remembred my Saviours words, He that will not
forsake Father, or Mother, or Si∣ster, or Brother, or Husband, or Childe for Christ, is not worthy of him, and I desired to give glory to his name. I considered that I must part with all for Christ, I strove hard a∣gainst my owne weaknesse; and my heart said, that God was just in all his dealings with me. I thought, when I had considered of it, that I did but suffer as an evill doer my selfe; but our cause was Gods, and our Enemies Popish Rebels; Paul was ready not only to suffer, but to dye at Jerusalem for the name of Christ; so I took it patiently, giving glory to God, and beleeving that God, who was come so neare me, would not forsake me. I was assured with much joy, that the Lord would bring me to himselfe, and in this confidence did rejoyce with my wounded Childe, and a little daughter, in a Barn where
we were put, having gotten a peece of an old Bible; and then and since I have found much setlednesse in my faith from severall Promises of the Lord, revealed in his holy Word, some of which follow. John 15.7. If yee abide in me, and my words abide in you, yee shall aske what yee will, and it shall be done unto you. I trust in God never to depart from his Word, and therefore hope to finde comfort in the end, and doe finde comfort in the way, in that Christ abideth with me. Matth. 5.6. Blessed are they which doe hunger and thirst after righteousnesse, for they shall be fil∣led. Though the Lord hath thus emptied me of some worldly com∣forts, yet he hath given me an hun∣gering and thirsting soule after him∣selfe, and therefore I laid hold of this promise of blessednesse, as made to me.
Matth. 11.28. Christ saith, Come unto me all yee that labour and are heavie laden, and I will give you rest. In this I have been, and still am much comforted, in the greatest afflictions, that God hath laid upon me, in whom alone is true rest. And as further testimonies of my love to God, and evidences of my faith, I have these comfortable infe∣rences, which speake much peace to my soule. 1 My love to God and Christ, is more then to all things in the world. 2 I finde a great difference in my affections to God, and to the world, and the things thereof; so that my Children, which of all worldly things are most neare and deare to me, yet if God should take them from me, I could freely give them. 3 I finde the Spirit striving a∣gainst
my flesh, so that when I heard lately Doctor Holmes, speak∣ing of that still voyce, which a Be∣leever heares, as it were, from the Spirit, it did so inlarge my heart, that in joy and great comfort it made me weep, through the influ∣ence of the Spirit sensibly then up∣on my heart; and so at other times also, I finde much comfort in the Spirit of God, which is my greatest joy. 4 I doe rejoyce mightily in the Ordinances, and apply what I heare to my selfe, as well as I can, and when I heare any thing against any evill that I can apply to my selfe, the Lord drawes forth my heart fre∣quently to pray to God, that I may doe nothing that may displease him. And I thanke my God, I finde a full willingnesse in desire, and affe∣ction to submit to every truth of Je∣sus Christ.
5 When I heare comforts spoken of that concerns me, I am so joyfull that it fils my heart, and sometimes fetches teares from mine eyes, as par∣ticularly when Master Marshall said, That afflictions were a testimony of Gods love to his people, as La∣zarus was sorely afflicted, and dear∣ly beloved. 6 Since I heard Mr. Bond, and others, as also (suitable to my con∣dition) severall things laid open by Master Walker upon some cases of Conscience; I have been much affe∣cted to settle my selfe in all things so by the power of Christ, that I may finde peace in my conscience in all things before I dye, and have made it my chiefest businesse, and I have found much settlement in it, and much comfort in the meetings of godly people both since, and for four yeares before. 7 I blesse the name of the Lord,
my affections are loving to the peo∣ple of God, and I know I love them dearly, and my heart riseth to heare them spoken against; I had rather beare reproaches my selfe, then see any one of them wronged, or suffer. 8 I desire, as to live with God in glory in Heaven, so to lead my life to his glory here on earth in grace, and to live according to the rule of his holy Word, and the examples of the Saints therein expressed; and I could heartily wish, were it possible, that I might never sin more. And I have (I blesse God) a cleare discerning, through the power of the Spirit of Grace, that the Gospel is the word of truth to salvation. 9 When I come before the Lord, I see nothing but emptinesse in my self, and therefore trust in the fulnesse of Christ, in whose power and Spirit I finde much comfort, and desire al∣wayes,
that I may come prepared with that wedding garment that ne∣ver may be taken away from me; for of my selfe I can doe nothing, but through Christ, If he abide in me, and I in him, I shall doe all things. M. W. Experiences of I. I. VVHen I was in the mid∣dest of my wealth, and worldly enjoyments, I was vaine, covetous, and wholly had my heart taken up with the things of the world, little or nothing minding the things of God, or thinking of a change, but went on in a presumption, put∣ting the evil day farre off, minding only for the present what pleased the flesh; untill about eight yeares since, I had many outward crosses befell
me, and was in some want; and then being under that dispensation, I was much troubled, and full of griefes, I sought to the Lord, and begged deliverance from the af∣fliction of my distresses, as to out∣ward wants, but had not an heart to consider what was the cause, or to seek out the mind of God in it, untill about two yeares and an halfe since, I heard D. Holmes, shewing sin to be the cause of all our crosses. The consideration hereof did come close unto my spirit, and I had a clear con∣viction of my vanity, and foolish do∣ting on worldly things, which had justly provoked the Lord, (I hope for my good) to lay those crosses up∣on me, which, though they were for a time bitter, yet God hath since sweetned. But my sorrow was then doub∣led, and I was dejected, not only for my outward crosses, but more
especially for my carnall heart, and for my vaine conversation, where∣by I had stirred up the anger of the Lord against me: I went to the Or∣dinances, hoping to finde comfort from the Word; but the weight of my sins, and my sufferings pressed me so downe, that I found much heavinesse: My sinnes especially lay heavie upon me, and I saw little hope of comfort; yea the Lord was pleased to worke in my heart a loathing of sinne, as well as a trouble for the affliction it hath brought up∣on me. But about a yeare and an half since, I heard Master Walker prove by Scripture, in a Sermon (very effectuall to my comfort) that those who have been the greatest of sinners, if they doe heartily and really repent, and turne to God by faith in Christ, and lead a new life, the Lord will receive them to mer∣cy. Hereupon I argued with my
soule, that though I had been a great sinner, yet the Lord had wrought my heart to a loathing of those sins I loved; and of all sins; to turne to the Lord, and sincerely desire to serve him: That therefore there was hope of mercy for me: I heard Mr. Wal∣ker, and Mr. Masterson, and others at Sommerset-house, and other pla∣ces, and frequented divers other meetings, where I found much com∣fort. Those severall places of Scripture, in which I chiefly found comfort from the Promises of God are, Mat. 11.28, 29, 30. where Christ saith, Come unto mee all yee that la∣bour and are heavie laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learne of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall finde rest unto your soules: for my yoke is easie, and my bur∣den light. This made me to hope,
that as the Lord hath given me an heavie heart laden with the sence of sin, so Christ Jesus would give me comfort; for in the 12 verse of the same Chapter, it is said, a bruised reed shall hee not breake, and smoaking flax shall he not quench. And though I had dishonoured Christ, yet I had not blasphemed the Holy-ghost, and therefore had encouragement to beleeve from the words of Christ, Luke 12.10. who∣soever shall speak a word against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him, but unto him that blasphemeth a∣gainst the Holy-ghost, it shall not be forgiven. I was comforted to waite upon the Lord in hope, because the Lord had humbled my soule, and opened mine eyes to see mercy offered un∣to me, and this was strengthened from that example, Lamentations 3.20. to verse 26. My soul hath
them still in remembrance, and is humbled in me. This I recall to minde, therefore have I hope. It is the Lords mercy that we are not consumed, because his com∣passions faile not. They are new every morning: great is thy faith∣fulnesse, the Lord is my portion, saith my soule, therefore will I hope in him. The Lord is good unto them that waite for him, to the soule that seeketh him. And I was much incouraged from hence to seeke the Lord, and hope in his mercy. My conscience told me, I was a great sinner, and deserved death and Hell, but my hope was in God, and strengthened from that Promise, Ezek. 18.21, 22, 23. If the wicked will turn from all his sins, that he hath committed, and keepe all my statutes, and doe that which is lawfull and right, he shall
surely live, he shall not dye; All his transgressions that he hath committed, they shall not be men∣tioned unto him: In his righte∣ousnesse that he hath done he shall live. Have I any pleasure at all that the wicked should dye, saith the Lord God, and not that he should turne from his wayes and live? And the Lord was pleased to put into my spirit a very great resolution to serve the Lord for the time to come, and I praise my God, I have had since much joy in duties of Piety, and sucked much sweetnesse from the Word of God, and godly Ministers; I have no desire to en∣joy the pleasures and vanities of the world, as I have had, but my heart now takes delight in God, and communion with his people; the Lord hath given me an heart to dis∣cern a beauty, and desirablenesse, in
the wayes of God, which are more joyfull to me now, then ever sin was formerly; and when I come at the Ordinances, I often finde and feele such heavenly refreshments from the Lord upon mine heart, that it makes mee exceeding full of joy. There is such a love upon my heart to God, that I dare not willingly of∣fend him in any thing; I rejoyce to heare his Name spoken of, and his glory exalted; and I finde a very great affection drawn by the power of God from my heart to such as seeme to be his people. I. I. Experiences of E. C. ABout some nine yeares agoe at the birth of a Childe I had very great temptations, of destroy∣ing
my selfe, and have had oftentimes a Knife put into my hand to doe it, so that I durst not be left by my selfe alone; and when I had considered what the causes of it might be, my Conscience did hint most my neg∣lecting of duties, (the which I had many opportunities to have per∣formed) they being the Ordinances of God. Thus I continued till two yeares a goe I buried a Childe, which was a very great trouble to mee to part with, and then was I more fully convinced of sinne, which cau∣sed my burthen to be the greater, so that I could seldome have any other thoughts but of desperation; but the Lord kept me by his great mercy, so that sometimes I could pray with devotion, and di∣scerne the Lord to remove this great trouble from me, I did plain∣ly finde that those great temptations
were very much lessened, which was a great comfort unto my spirit; but yet this still was upon me, that I could reade the Promises, but I found none of them to me; I could not say, God was mine, or had discovered himselfe unto me, in pardoning my sinnes; yet this I had often thoughts of, that I would throw my selfe upon Christ, if I perished I perished; and not long since, I had a very great desire to joyne my selfe to that Socie∣ty which was truly godly, and Providence ordered it so, that I had my desire in it; which was of great use and incouragement unto me, in beleeving the Pro∣mise of the Gospel; and since, I blesse God, I have found some sa∣tisfaction in severall places of Scrip∣ture: As, First, in Mat. 11.28. Come unto me all yee that labour and are hea∣vie
laden, and I will give you rest. And feeling such a burthen then up∣on my soule, I relyed upon that true rest. Another place is in 1 John 2.2. And he is the reconciliation for our sinnes, and not for ours only, but for the sinnes of the whole world. I being one in the world, I applied this to my selfe; and in 1 John 4.14. The Father sent the Sonne to be the Saviour of the world. Another place of Scripture is, John 3.17. For God sent not his Sonne into the world to condemne the world, but that the world through him might be saved. And in vers. 35. He that beleeveth on the Son hath everlasting life. Upon this account I said, I beleeve, Lord, help my unbeliefe. And in the sixth Chapter of John, and 67. & 68. verses, Jesus said unto his Disci∣ples,
Will ye goe from me also? Pe∣ter saith unto him, Lord, whither shall we go, for thou hast the words of eternall life? So, that I will waite upon the Lord for a further manifestation of himselfe unto my soule; in the use of his Ordinances: although I have not in times past been fed with the Childrens bread, yet now I doe be∣leeve I shall not be denied those crums of Spiritual comforts, to nou∣rish and refresh my wearied spirit; for God saith, Isa. 55.1. Ho! eve∣ry one that thirsteth, come yee to the waters, and he that hath no money, come ye, buy and eate; yea, come buy wine, and milk without money, and without price. And I praise God, I have found of late a very great manifestation of Gods working a change upon my heart, and drawing me by true faith to himselfe.
1 About a quarter of a yeare since, I heard Mr. Bond, in a Sermon at the Abbey at Westminster, up∣on the Luke-warmnesse of the Church of Laodicea, shewing that the Lord would refuse none that come in to him in humblenesse of spirit, and sincerity of heart; then I thought surely I might make use of those full promises which was made to those that came to him; and it put me to search the Scrip∣tures, which I did, and found a greater influence upon my spirit in the understanding of the Word then before. 2 I am in all things that I doe, fearefull of offending God, and my desire is, to doe all things to his glory. 3 My love to God is so hearty, that I delight to be meditating of God, and have communion with God, and could wish that I might
be wholly, if it were possible, with God; and my heart is never so at rest, as when I am reading of his Truths, or hearing others speake of them. 4 I am so little affected to the world, that I account it nothing; I can willingly leave all for God, and I hope suffer any thing for God, if he should please to call me to it, so farre as I can judge of my owne heart, but herein trusting in the power of Christ. 5 Sinne is loathsome to me, so that the affections that I did beare to some evils are now gone, and I now loath them more then before I loved them. 6 I have many conflicts be∣tween the flesh and the Spirit, but I finde (in those strivings) my heart most cleaving to follow the minde of God, knowing that if I give way to sinne, Satan enters; and
with all my soule I desire, and de∣light to follow the leadings of Gods Spirit. 7 In all things the resolutions of my heart are for doing those things that may please God, and that without delay; being fearefull to offend God, which when through infirmity I doe, I have great trouble of spirit for it; and my resoluti∣ons are alwayes against every thing that may hinder my peace with God. 8. I finde in my heart so great a peace between God and my Con∣science, that should God now call me, I should be very well conten∣ted to goe to my Saviour. 9 I doe not doubt of Gods love to me, because he hath drawn forth my heart sincerely to love him. 10 My love hath been alwayes from a Childe to the people of God, and my heart hath been ever
troubled when I have heard them evil spoken of, 11 My affections are great to the Ordinances, and my heart long∣eth after them; and when at any time I come with a cold heart to duties, yet my heart is frequently warmed, and inlarged in those duties. E. C. Experiences of D. M. ABout forty yeares since, through many crosses increas∣ing upon me, like an armed man. I flew unto God to seek his mind by prayer, and he discovered to me that it was my sins, which were then set before me; which caused me to feele the hand of God by afflicti∣ons upon me, that sin was the cause
of my sufferings, which lay very heavie upon me, and terrified me, so that I thought I had been in the way to damnation: and that if I had been in the way to salvation, every affliction would not come so upon me, greater then I thought I could be able to bear. In particular, The Lord discovered to me, that I had too much loved my Husband in a fleshly love, making an idoll of him, and therefore he justly became a great terrour to my spirit, first he became an enemy to goodnesse, and so an hinderance to me in comming to Christ. And also, that while I thus doted on him, he went away from me: I feared, through the sence of that and other sins, together with the aggravation of my afflicti∣ons, that God did not love me; Yet it struck into my heart, that God did not strike willingly, and there∣fore I endeavoured to see what was
the minde of God in it, who had taken away my husband, goods, and all, from me; namely that he had done it, that I should not hang upon husks, but that I should love him. And I found that I had loved the world too much, and set my heart too much upon these Creature-com∣forts, and therefore the Lord tooke them away from me. This wrought upon me great troubles, and de∣spaire; that I cryed untill I was al∣most blinde: And I had great feare and trembling upon me, that I could not pray, nor heare with profit, but thought it was in vaine for me to pray, whom God loved not, and whom I had so offended. And about a quarter of a yeare after, I had a temptation by Satan to drown my selfe in a Pond neare Leeds in York-shire, whither the Devill led me, telling me that I might doe it there; it being a pri∣vate
place where no body could see me; and I was by him drawn out thither, and came to the Pond side, but by the providence of God, ha∣ving a great love to a young infant I had then, I tooke that childe in my armes; and when I came to the place, I looked upon the childe, and considered with my selfe, what, shal I destroy my selfe and my poor child? and cryed unto God, Lord, what wilt thou have me to do? and I had a sore conflict at that time with the Devill; But me thought at last, I heard the Lord saying to my soule, as he did to Paul, Trust in me, my grace is sufficient for thee. And then I found some com∣fort, which inlarged my heart, through the assistance of Gods Spi∣rit, to call upon the name of the Lord, for further assistance and com∣fort, and so I went away back with much joy, beleeving that
I should have the favour of God. And the Lord put it into my mind to goe to one E. B. that dwelt by a Moor side near Leedes, whom I knew was a godly woman, and she opened to me the troubles of David, and Job, and gave me sweet comfort, saying, God is by me, and I did not see him, as Job wished, so she wrought upon my hart to wish, O that I could see him, O that I could behold him; and my heart was full of joy, and I cryed, and was much grieved, with very great re∣pentance that I had been so seduced, and did so despaire of Gods mer∣cies, and had been so blinded. And the Lord set it upon my spirit, that though I had laid all aside, yet now I would come out of the Wilder∣nesse leaning on my beloved; and had a greater affection to the wayes of God then ever; and delighted in them more then ever.
Before they were a burthen to me, now they were easie and sweet. And being at Yorke, I heard a Minister there out of Hosea 2. preach that which wrought much comfort in me, in that Christ had promised to betroth himselfe to every beleever: And then, and since I have had much joy in the Promi∣ses of God, and can through the Spirit of God, which I finde and feele in my heart, lay hold by faith on them, as my particular inte∣rest. Rom. 10.4. Christ is the end of the Law for righteousnesse to every one that beleeveth. Christ by his Spirit hath wrought beliefe in me, both in his promises & threatnings, and to labour to live according to his word, therefore I conclude, that I shall be saved by the righteousnesse of my Saviour. Rom. 9.4. Who are Israelites?
to whom pertaineth the adoption, and the glory, and the Covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the service of God, and the promises? I know that every beleever is a true Israelite, and brought under the Covenant of grace by Jesus Christ, and that therefore the promises of grace and salvation belong to me. Rom. 3.21; 22. But now the righteousnesse of God without the Law is manifested, being witnessed by the Law and the Prophets, even the righteousnesse of God, which is by faith of Jesus Christ unto all, & upon all them that beleeve, for there is no difference: I being one whom God hath drawn to beleeve, it is manifested unto me, that I have an interest in the righteousnesse of Jesus Christ, to justifie me before God by his merits, which are made mine by faith. Hosea 2.19, 20. I will betroth
thee unto me for ever, yea I wil be∣troth thee unto me in righteous∣nesse, and in iudgement, and in lo∣ving kindnesse, and in mercies; I will even betroth thee unto me in faithfulnesse, and thou shalt know the Lord. I find great comfort from this promise, in that the Lord dou∣bles and trebles his Promises, and enlargeth himself, and offers him∣selfe so freely to the soule. And as testimonies of my reall conversion to God, and union with Jesus Christ, and that reconciliation is made between God and my soul, I find these reall evidences wrought by Gods blessed Spirit in me. 1 I finde in my heart great love to God, that when God saith, Seek my face, my heart joynes againe, saying, thy face Lord will I seek. And I finde nothing so deare unto me as the love of God, and if my heart deceive me not, I could beare
and suffer any thing to bring glory to God, accounting all things but dung and drosse below Christ. 2 When any thing of the flesh riseth against the motions of Gods Spirit to draw me from good, or to doe evill; I finde frequently the power of the Spirit to subdue my heart not to submit to the flesh, but to walke in his way, and yet I am so sensible of my infirmities, that all that I doe or can doe is nothing, but as filthy raggs; but I know Je∣sus Christ is my Saviour, and stands engaged for me; and when the flesh is weakest, I finde the Spirit thirst∣ing after God. 3 I finde in my heart a very great thirsting after the Ordinances, and a great inlargement of heart, and comfort in the Ordinances, my heart being delighted to be among the people of God, and full of joy in them.
4 When thoughts of want at any time arise, I finde a full satisfaction in God, so that I finde the better part, which never can be taken from me, which is my interest in Jesus Christ; And I finde in my Consci∣ence a great testimony of my Spiri∣tuall union with God, and that I am so separated from the world in my affections, that God hath drawne me to himselfe. 5 God who searcheth the heart, knoweth what is the minde of the Spirit, because he maketh intercessi∣on for the Saints according to the will of God, which will of God I finde a free submission to in my heart with joy; knowing, that all things shall work together for good to them that love God. 6 It is the chiefest desire of my heart, that God would keep me close by his side; and I have abun∣dance of joy in communion with
the Lord, which is more sweet to me, then my joy in any thing. 7 I delight much to speake of God, and of his wayes, and to use what meanes I can to comfort the Saints, whom I love dearly, and if possible to convert sinners. D. M. Experiences of AE. L. I Had about three yeares since, some great griefe upon my spirit about a Daughter, which was brought to great sufferings, and by reason of her going away in her affliction, I thought she had made away her selfe: God put it into my thoughts to remember my sinnes; and that God had laid this affliction upon me, for neglecting my duty to him, and not serving him as I ought. This caused
great sorrow in me, and aboundant∣ly to shed teares: my sins I thought was the occasion that the Lord made her so great a crosse to me, for which I had deserved it, so that both became a great griefe to my soule; and thus I lay languishing in very great sorrow: Then I began to thinke with my selfe that there is no refuge but only in Christ: and I con∣sulted my thoughts, how to goe to good company, and meetings, where I might find comfort from the peo∣ple of God. And about two yeares and a quarter since, one morning I came to Mr. Squibs to joyne with godly people that came thither to prayer, though with a great deale of di∣straction in my mind; and I shew∣ed my discontents and condition to him, which he was presently ca∣pable of: And he told me, that if I had but a mind to seek God, and to
repent, he was gracious, and would receive me to mercy: The thing that I did earnestly begge of God was, to know Christ Crucified for me; and he told me, that indeed was the best of all: And after some good instructions which he had gi∣ven mee, and some things from others, I was much delighted to frequent the meetings of Gods ser∣vants, and good Sermons; and I found many good operations upon my heart. And after very strong conflicts, which I had had thus for about three quarters of a yeare, lying in my bed, and waking all the night, and calling upon God, to direct me to aske at his hands those things which might bee for his glory, and my comfort, and begging that the Lord would give me a setled heart, that might not be dispersed to and fro with the things of the world.
In the morning I fell into a slum∣ber, with God still in my thoughts, in which I heard as it were a voyce from heaven speaking to my heart, and saying thus, Aske of God a perfect upright heart to walke in his presence; which when I was more fully awake, I tooke to be the motions of Gods Spirit upon my Conscience, which did fill me with much joy, provoking me to pray to the Lord to grant mee that grace. And about two yeares since, the Lord gave me yet a sence of my sins in a greater measure then before, and my repentance was greater for my sinnes, and more spirituall, and my hatred of sinne more reall. And I then found a sore combate betwixt the flesh and the spirit, being more sensible how I had lived from the rule of the Gospell, and did yet come short of my duty therein, and
it was a great griefe to my heart, that I could not live according to that which God had revealed of his will to me. And about this time, whilst I was thus troubled in spirit, I heard some things in everall Sermons preached by Master Bond, touch∣ing the sins of our naturall corrupti∣ons, and what holinesse God re∣quires of us. And I heard Mr. Car∣ter, shewing that we should strive to enter in at the narrow gate, so that it wrought in my heart a very great sence of my sins. And in these conflicts I met with many discouragements: and Satan did tempt me to despaire, but the Lord sustained me. I considered, that as a sinner I deserved nothing but Damnation, but my comfort was in Christ: and my griefe was interlaced with comforts: some∣times I was in sorrow two or
three dayes, and sometimes a week, and then againe found comfort, and still often prayed unto the Lord to lay no more weight upon me, then he would give me strength to beare, and I found the Lord to be my shield and buckler, and remembred many promises from the Lord, in which to this day, I blesse God, I have, and still doe find much com∣fort. Psal. 34.19. Many are the af∣flictions of the righteous, but the Lord delivereth him out of them all: I have had many afflictions for my sins, but none but Christs righ∣teousnesse is my comfort, in whom I trust for deliverance. Ezek. 33.11. As I live saith the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turne from his way and live: turne ye, turne yee, from your evill wayes, for why will yee
dye, O ye house of Israel. Matth. 11.28. Come unto mee all ye that labour, and are hea∣vie laden, and I will give you rest. Ezek. 18.30. Repent and turne your selves from all your trans∣gressions, so iniquity shall not bee your ruine. Esa. 43.25. I, even I am he, that blotteth out thy transgressi∣ons for my own sake, and will not remember thy sins. These and divers other promises, I praise God, I have had comfort from, and as the fruits of my faith, and my love to God, I have these Evidences wrought by his Spirit through faith in my heart, as a further manifestation of my interest in Christ. 1 I beleeve in the promises of the free mercies of God, in the me∣rits of Christ, and can apply them
with comfort to my owne soule as mine by faith. 2 My heart and my mind affects God over all the pleasures and joyes in the world, and when I thinke of the things of the world in relation to God, I thinke that without God all is but vaine and vanity. 3 When I thinke of my crosses and afflictions in the world, then I lift up my heart to God in Christ, and can say, Having thee, I have all things; if I have Christ, I have enough. 4 My heart rejoyces in duties, and my soule doth more rejoyce in hearing the word, than in worldly pleasures. 5 I have the peace of God up∣on my conscience, which is more to me than all things in the world, and makes me set the world at naught, and it is my prayer, that I may ne∣ver
be without that peace of God whatever befals me. 6 The Lord hath given me a contented minde in what condition, soever the Lord doth bring me to; and his Spirit worketh upon my heart, that I doe not repine against his will. AE. L. Experiences of I. B. ABout seventeen years since, a Childe of mine about six yeares of age, when I have bid him goe forth to play, he hath come in againe very solitary because other Children would swear, and some be deboyst; I would aske him, Ro∣bert, what ayleth you, why doe you not goe to play? he would an∣swer, That he had no fellowes to
play withall, but such as would swear, and the like, and they could not be (said he) Gods children. I would say, Why not Childe? then he would say, No Mother, though I am but a little way in my Booke, yet I have learnt, that God will not pardon such sinnes, as swearing; I have sometimes said, Yes Childe, I hope God will pardon them, else God helpe thy Father, and God helpe us all: Then he hath re∣plyed, Mother, with great repen∣tance God can forgive, for his mer∣cies are great; but good Mother, let us forbeare that which is evill. And many times I had such conference with that Childe, that seeing me troubled about it, he hath said; Good Mother be content, their Parents are such, and they must needs learn after them. I thought upon my Childes words, and having before often of∣fended
God, about gathering of Flowers in my garden on the Lords Dayes, and the thoughts of other failings in my conversation, it wrought great trouble upon my heart, so that I was much afflicted in soule, considering that my Childe, so young, should give me such in∣structions; which hath proved a blessing to me, to bring me home to him; I did then make some doubt whether God would for∣give me those sinnes, and about that time hearing Doctor Usher preach several Sermons, and par∣ticularly upon that Text, That we are but sojourners and travellers here; and shewing that wee are not at home, therefore we must keepe on in the streight way to Heaven, and take heed of the broad way, which leadeth to Hell, which then, as also other meanes since, did much throw me downe
low under the sense of sin, yet not without sometimes some refresh∣ments. And from a Sermon I heard preached by Doctor Usher, That the Lord is the shield and defence of those that trust in him; I had some comforts in my hopes in the Lords mercies, but I found many doubtings stil; yet about seven years and an halfe since, Mr. Tompson made a Sermon at Liverpoole, then besieged by the Enemy, shew∣ing, That we must lay hold on the Lord, and hold fast, and he would lead us through all troubles; and the Tuesday sen∣nit after it was lost, where many were killed and taken, I blesse God, I had no hurt at all, which did give me much comfort, that the Lord of his mercy had so de∣livered me; I did, and still do hope that the Lord had a further mind to
save me to come to him, to draw me more neare to himselfe; which together with some other delive∣rances of the Lords great mercy, I tooke great comfort in, so that when I had scarce bread and water, and I have been streightned since, yet I found still comfort from the Lord for my selfe, and to be an in∣strument to helpe others, who were prisoners by the Enemy. And the Lord then, and since hath by his Spirit comforted mee with severall promises, which I praise God I can apply to my par∣ticular interest and propriety, by which I have a testimony of my true beliefe, some of which are these which follow. Gen. 15.1. The word of the Lord came unto Abraham in a vision saying, Fear not, Abraham, I am thy shield, and thy exceeding great reward. I had found the
Lord to be my shield in those many deliverances he had wrought for me, and had taken away that dis∣trustfull feare, which before was upon me, and therefore I was, and still am confident he will be my ex∣ceeding great reward. Psal. 119.57. Thou art my por∣tion, O Lord, I have said that I would keep thy words. The same God wrought in my heart, to say with David, that I would keepe thy word, O Lord; (though I can∣not as I should, yet) my desire is to keepe it, my minde is to keepe it; therefore I presume with David to say, Thou art my por∣tion, O Lord. John 15.5. Christ saith, I am the vine, yee are the branches, he that abideth in me, and I in him, the same bringeth forth much fruit, for without me ye can doe nothing. I know my selfe to be
nothing without Christ, and there∣fore (though I have infirmities; yet) my heart abides in Christ. And therefore I hope to finde righ∣teousnesse and salvation not in my selfe, but in Christ, desiring also that I may bring forth fruit, as a branch in him. Rom. 8.1. There is therefore now no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not af∣ter the flesh, but after the spirit: I finde my selfe to be one of those, who walke in my heart after the wayes of God, to which I am led by his Spirit, and not after the flesh: though I cannot serve God so well as I would I do as well as I can; and am troubled in my spirit for my failings, and therefore I beleeve I shall never be condemned. And I have these testimonies of my conversion, and sincere love to God, as the fruits of my faith.
1 The Lord hath by his Spirit manifested to my soule, that the wisdome of the Spirit is life and peace, and the Lord hath wrought that peace in my heart, that I doe not desire in any way to breake from it, for any other enjoyments whatsoever. 2 This I desire to be built upon, that I may finde Christ for my life and peace. 3 I finde that the Lord hath greatly wrought upon mee, and my minde is fully affected with the Lord, out of whom I doe not care for any thing that is in the world. 4 My desire is wholly to serve God, and leave all things in the world as vaine, muck, and trifles for the injoyment of him. 5 My love is so much to Christ, and God in Christ, as that having him, I know I have all things,
and without him, I have nothing. 6 I finde that I have great com∣fort, and am much refreshed by Ordinances, a feeling of the Spirit is frequently wrought upon my heart therein, and I have received a great deale of comfort therein, when I have beene weake; and it hath been a refreshing to me, when food hath been scant. And parti∣cularly, from severall Sermons preached at the Abby at Westmin∣ster, by Mr. Whitaker, Mr. Mar∣shal, Mr. Carter, and others, as also Mr. Peters at Whitehall, Dr. Homes at Clarkenwel, Mr. Wal∣ker at Knightsbridge, and at o∣ther private meetings of godly people. 7 I find that the comfort of the Ordinances are more sweet to me, then all the pleasures, riches, or friends in the world; for they are contenting comforts, and so are not worldly things.
8 I could finde in my heart willingly to dye, and leave chil∣dren, brothers, sisters, and all the world besides, to goe to my Christ. J. B. Experiences of A. J. VVHen it pleased God to call my husband from mee, which was about eight yeares since, I was (for a time) exceedingly cast downe, and troubled, as I thinke any poore creature could bee; in which I was so overwhelmed, that I did not know which way to turne my selfe, nor what to doe, yet seek∣ing the Lord, to finde out what was his minde in the thing: I had lost a good estate, had no body to looke after my businesse, had many in∣jured
mee, and had lost (above the rest) a precious husband, whom I intirely loved, yet the Lord put it into my heart, that all this was to weane mee from my sinnes, and too much doting upon an Husband, and other worldly injoyments, which my heart was too much taken up with, therefore the Lord was pleased to strip mee of them in a great mea∣sure, to bring mee nearer to him∣selfe. I went to divers places to heare severall Ministers, by waiting upon the Ordinances to seeke af∣ter the Lord, if possible I might finde comfort, and satisfaction to my soule herein, but continued in much affliction upon my spirit, for neare a yeares time; but at last I heard Mr. Jenkins upon a Lords Day in the after-noone, preaching out of the 21. Chapter
of John the 18. and 19. verses, Verily, Verily, I say unto thee, when thou wast young; thou gir∣dedst thy selfe, and walkedst whi∣ther thou wouldest; but when thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou wouldest not. This spake he signifying by what death he should glorifie God. The consideration of which dispensation from God to him, drew forth my heart to bee contented with whatsoever the Lord should be pleased to lay up∣on me: and I was satisfied to suf∣fer or beare any thing, in that it was the Lords will to glorifie him∣self, by such dispensations towards the Saints. And the Lord hath since made me as he did David, to be con∣tented as well with his rod, as with his staffe; and then, and since,
I praise the Lord, I can say with Da∣vid, It was well for me, that I was afflicted. And I was comforted with that example of the woman in the Gospel, to whom it was said by Christ, that it is not lawful to take the childrens bread, and to cast it to dogs, in that I could say with her, truth Lord, but the dogs may licke the crums that fall from their masters table; and I remembred Gods dispensations towards Job and David, and re∣solved with Joshua, that I and my house would serve the Lord. And although it was a bitter pill to me to beare the crosse before, yet now my God hath made it easie; and I praise the Lord, through his grace, I can goe under it with a great deale of comfort; and hee hath now discovered to me the way of his working in those things, which before were wonderfull strange to me.
Many speciall promises I found great comfort in, some that I remember are these that follow, (viz.) 1 Pet. 5.6, 7. Humble your selves therefore, under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time. Casting all your care on him, for he careth for you. This promise I have found of a truth made good to me in some measure, I have applied it often, and have found the comfort of it. 2 Corinth. 1.29. My grace is sufficient for thee. From this place I found much comfort, knowing the fulnesse of so glorious a por∣tion. James 1.2, 3, 4. Count it all joy, when ye fall into divers temptati∣ons, knowing this, that the triall of your faith worketh patience. But let patience have her perfect
worke, that ye may be perfect and intire, wanting nothing, this admi∣nistred great joy to me against all temptations. Esa 55.1. Ho! every one that thirsteth come ye to the waters of life, and he that hath no money, come ye, buy and eat. This gave great comfort to my soul at several times, though it was never so much cast down. And that which gives mee great content and comfort is, the seale of Gods Spirit in my heart, giving evidence of peace in the blood of Christ, between God and my soul, by these testimonies. 1 My love to God is so, that I am confident (if the Lord keep me with this Spirit, which at this time he hath bestowed upon me) I could be content to part with any thing, or lay downe my life for his glory, if he should call me to it.
2 The Lord hath beene pleased so to inrich my soule with his Spi∣rit, that I loath the things of the world, when they would draw me, in any thing, from submitting to the motions of Gods Spirit in my heart: I once thought nothing could have drawne me from the love of the vaine things of the world, but now I doe as much dis∣daine them for God, and more than then I loved them. 3 I doe desire to follow Gods Ordinances, and finde great in∣largements of my heart to God, both to, and in the Ordinances: And particularly from Mr. Salo∣way, Mr. Strong, Mr. Walker, and others, as also at meetings from Mr. Valentine, and others, from whom many things have fallen that have much refreshed my soule, and I finde my heart in duties to God, more refreshed than in any thing.
4 I finde much peace in my conscience, because of a free sub∣mission which his Spirit hath wrought in my soule to all the commands of Jesus Christ; and I find comfort in that true circumci∣sion which is in my heart, wrought by his Spirit. 5 I finde every day so great a peace in my soule, and such com∣fort in God, that I could be wil∣ling, and I blesse God, finde in me a readinesse to dye every mo∣ment. A. J.
Experiences of A. A. ABout two yeares since, my Husband was sore wounded, which I tooke as a great triall, not having above a month to goe with childe at that time, and I was troubled at it. And about a quarter of a yeare after I was up, all my children were sicke together of the small pox. Yet all this did not worke upon mee inwardly so sensibly, as a∣bout a month afterwards, when one of my children dyed sudden∣ly, when I thought hee had beene neare well, then I said, the wages of sinne is death, thinking that the Lord had warned mee by threatnings fatherly before, but I
did not hearken to him, and there∣fore I thought he smote me now, by the death of my childe. But yet I could not enter into any particular sinnes that God should strike at, onely in generall; I sought the Lord, that God would lay open my sinnes to mee, I was very much troubled, that the Lord tooke my childe so suddain∣ly from mee: but I was comfor∣ted several times from Mr. Strong, in some Sermons preached from the words of the Church to Paul, going to suffer at Jerusalem, Act. 21.14. when he would not bee perswaded, we ceased, saying, The will of the Lord be done. So I was setled pretty wel in my thoughts, untill about a quarter of a yeare since, sudden∣ly the Lord stroke the elder of my two children then living, which was a Boy, my other,
which is a Girle, I did not so much value, but now I doe, and know Gods mercy in sparing her, but my childe that then dyed, was the chiefe comfort that my heart was fixed upon in this world, which hath beene so great a griefe to me, that I have slept few nights quiet since, I did desire to know the minde of God what he would doe with me. Sometimes I should have dis∣paired through great buffetings inwardly, but that the Lord su∣stained me. Sometimes I thought that the wrath of God was kind∣led against mee, thinking ne∣ver to have comfort in this world againe. But blessed bee the Lord for it, he hath often com∣forted mee in this, that I have thought he did it in love to mee; yet sometimes I have feared that I should despaire, and that the
hand of God was against mee in it, having beene sometimes troubled with thoughts, that I was the death of my children. Thus I have been between hope and dispaire, and could not finde what the will of God was in it towards me: and I have had ma∣ny feares that the hand of God is still against mee, for further pu∣nishment, because I have had many temptations upon mee, in low thoughts of God. But I have gone to prayer, and desired the Lord to deliver mee, and discover his minde to me, in every thing that I doe, and have found a willingnesse to part with any thing, even to cut off a limbe, or any thing if I could finde out what it was: and I blesse God I have found a good spirit resisting the bad. Yet I have beene under much feare, that I was not a childe
of God. But it hath pleased God to comfort me in this, that Pauls life was subject to tempta∣tions, and therefore I had hope to cast my selfe upon the mercies of God, resolving that then if I perish, I perish, never daring to of∣fend willingly in any thing, that I know to be a sinne; and yet I know I am a wretched sinner, but yet I humbly desire to doe the will of God, so farre as I am able. And in that I can say with David, Psalm. 42.1. As the Hart panteth after the water brookes, so panteth my soule after thee, O God. I finde comfort with him to say, Why art thou cast downe, O my soule? and why art thou disquieted within mee? hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise him, for the helpe of his countenance, verse 5. And I will looke unto the Lord, with the
Prophet Micha, I will waite for the God of my salvation, my God will heare me, Mich. 7.7. And I have found much comfort in apply∣ing severall promises to my soul. Matth. 5.4. Christ saith, Bles∣sed are they that mourne, for they shall be comforted: As God hath given me a mourning spirit for my sins, so I beleeve that in his time I shall be comforted, and I have tasted, I blesse God, of the comforts of his spirit in my soule. Isay 55.1. The Lord saith, Ho! every one that thirsteth, come yee to the waters, and he that hath no mo∣ny, come yee, buy, and eate, yea, come, buy wine and milke without mony, and without price. As the Lord hath made my soule to thirst for him, so I doubt not but to finde him. And the Lord sweares, Ezek.
33.11. As I live, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way, and live; I thank God, my heart and soule is turned from all things cheifly after the Lord. And as at other times, so in a speciall manner, I have found sweet evidences of my faith and interest in God through Christ; since, I had lately much comfort from a Sermon Preached by Mr. Strong, who shewed that af∣flictions did not make us low in the sight of God, though before men; as also from words at a conference by Mr. Valentine, That in the world we shall have tribulations; but in God rest. And, 1. I doe clearly find that my love is more set upon God then upon any thing. 2. I could more willingly leave the world now, then ever before,
and I could willingly dye, if God saw it good, in the mind I now am. 3 I find in my heart, that I doe so cast my selfe upon God, that I have peace with God. 4 In times of doubtings, I find comfort that I have a God to cal upon, and I finde much peace in my minde in returnes from God. 5 I do always find, when any evill thoughts arise, a power from God which subdues them, so that I never willingly give way to them. 6 I find my affections ready to go forth both to duties, & in du∣ties to God; and when I come to them with little affection, yet I blesse God I finde a great deal of comfort usually before I go away. 7 The most comfort to my spi∣rit is, when I am weeping for
my infirmities, or at prayer, or duties, in publique or private, me thinks I find such joy in them, that I could dwel there, having no comfort in the world like that. 8 I finde in my heart a reall love to all: if any have wronged mee, I doe not desire revenge, but that I may be at peace with all. 9 Whatsoever I finde to be a truth from God, and a motion of his spirit, I finde in my soule a willing submitting to it. A. A.
Experiences of E. C. ABout thirty years since, be∣ing about sixteen yeares of age, though I did not understand the word, yet I had a great desire to the word, and to go to heare, because they served God therein that did so, knowing that there is a God that ought to be served. And I sat often in corners study∣ing what way I might come to God, if I should dye, having a very great affection wrought by the Lord upon my spirit, pray∣ing as well as I could, that my selfe, and my father, and mother, and friends might goe to God, when we die. And I was very much set up∣on duties, thinking to finde
God there; but I afterwards li∣ved in a family, where I was much hindred from the Ordi∣nances, or partaking of any thing of God, which was a great griefe unto me. Yet sometimes I have had thoughts then towards worldly things, and pondering how to be rich or fine as others, but God wrought in my heart a remorse to check those tempta∣tions. And frequently the Lord laid some affliction or other up∣on me to wean me the more from such vaine thoughts, which hath brought my heart into a very sad condition many times, and sometimes I have wept day and night. And at other times, through griefe that I could not sorrow enough, I have fallen into a great measure of weeping. After, I had lived in several o∣ther families, where I had little
comfort. About twenty yeares since, hearing Mr. F. at his Lecture at Martins, and Mr. P. on Lords dayes at the same place, I found much comfort, and since also by Mr. Marshall, Mr. Peters, and o∣thers: and from the considera∣tion of the love of God in Christ, and the sufferings of Christ for us; as also of the woman that did but by faith touch the hem of Christs garment, was com∣forted and healed. And I had much comfort in private meet∣ings. But about five yeares since, seeing my other neighbours ma∣ny of them flourish and prosper in the world more then I, I be∣gan to doubt that I did but play the hypocrite, and that perhaps they did pray more at home then I, though I knew some of them went lesse to the publicke Ordi∣nances
then I. I was very much troubled and thought with my selfe, Lord, shall I still lye at the poole, and finde no body to put me in, that I may be heal∣ed? and I was much troubled because many of my neighbours hated me, for frequenting pri∣vate meetings. And I did for a∣bout a month spend much time in private prayer, and often in the night upon my bed, and went to hear onely on the Lords dayes. But then I had doubts upon me, that that was not pleasing to God, to pray unto him on a soft bed. Then the Lord put it in my heart, that he had promised, That where two or three are met together in my name, that I will be in the midst of them; This caused me to goe againe, as I had done be∣fore, to private meetings, and
hearing of Sermons on weeke daies. But still I found many reasonings and doubtings upon my spirit, whether I was elected or not, and was much cast down many times about it, and had some temptations of despaire, fearing that such a sinner, as I, could not be saved. Yet I had comfort in this, that though I was a sinner, yet God by his spirit had mortified mee. And though I am not so good as I should be, yet through the pow∣er of grace, I am not so bad as the flesh would bee; and finding much of the testimony of Gods spirit upon my heart, I had great comfort to hope, that I had marks and tokens of my be∣leeving. And about a yeare and a halfe since, one night, having for a∣bout halfe a yeares time before
used to goe to bed before I pray∣ed at night, and so that night also, being in bed with my hus∣band, thinking to pray to God, I had strange temptations upon me, to put God out of my mind, and I could not speake a word, nor scarce think of God, and if I did in some intervalles, I could not name God, or Christ nor speake a word to God for the present. And Satan then ap∣peared to mee in a most ugly shape, laughing and jeering at me, which did much affright me, and then I feared that I had played the hypocrite with God, and now should runne mad, to make good what some had re∣proachfully cast upon me, that I was an hypocrite. And I was ris∣ing up out of my bed, but it plea∣sed God that while I was rising, the Lord put it into my minde,
that Christ Jesus hath not given so much for soules, as he hath done, to let the Devill have them for nothing. And in the strength of the Lord I repulsed the Devill, saying, Satan, when thou in tempting Christ shewedst him the whole world, thou pro∣misedst him that which was none of thine owne; nor am I thine, and therefore avoid Satan, for thou hast nothing to doe with me, and then the devill departed from my sight. Then my heart was much filled with the thoughts of the goodnesse of God, and with a mixture of teares and joy, I had sweete comforts from the Lord. And though I have had many doubts upon my spirit sometimes, yet I have since found very great consolation through faith in the promises of God,
as in these, and divers others. Matth. 11.28. Come unto me all yee that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. I thanke God I have found much rest and refreshment by coming to Christ, and that his grace is sufficient for me. Matth. 5.6. Blessed are they which doe hunger and thirst after righteous∣nesse for they shall be filled. I have often laid hold on this promise with a thirsting desire after Je∣sus Christ, and he hath filled me with comfort. And the comfort wherewith Christ did comfort Peter, bid∣ing him not to feare, for he had prayed for him; hath been upon my spirit, and given mee great comfort, in that I know Christ is heard in all that he prayeth to the father. And to my great comfort I
finde these testimonies of my conversion to God, as satisfacti∣on to my soule, that I am a true beleever. 1 Though I do all that I can to serve God, as hee hath com∣manded mee, yet I finde a great imperfection, and utter unwor∣thinesse in my selfe, to deserve any thing of God. But my whole dependance and hope of salvati∣on is in Gods free grace in the blood and merits of my Saviour Jesus Christ. 2 I doe finde that the love of God in Christ constraines me to love God again, above all things in the world, and what ever I am about, my soule is delighted with God above all. 3 I find that the Lord drawes my heart to hate all evill com∣munication, and evill things, and not so much to feare the pu∣nishment
of the world for any thing, as to sin against God. 4 I am much delighted in the workings of Gods spirit, and it is a great joy and comfort to my soule, when my heart is inlarged towards God. 5 My heart is much affected to the Ordinances and Duties, and if Satan lay worldly thoughts to hinder me from du∣ties, I have called upon God, and found comfort, and when I have come to duties, with cold affections, I have been much re∣freshed in the duties though sometimes I have felt a pain in the distemper of my body, which I have thought Satan hath done to make me weary in duties, yet I have called on the Lord, and found comfort. 6 I find great peace and much comfort in the Lord, so that I
could be willing to dye, and it is a great joy to me, in that I ex∣pect to dye, that I may be delive∣red from the afflictions of the world, to enter into eternall joy with Christ for ever. E. O. Experiences of A. O. I Have been many yeares since very sensible of my naturall e∣state, and did lye long under the sence of my sins, which were so great a burden to me, that they made mee almost to despaire, in so much that I could scarce either eate or drink, but had my spirits dryed up with the an∣guish thereof, as a bottle in the smoak. For I was brought up under
the means, and from a child, to frequent the hearing of the word. And the first cause of my so great torment was, for that I once told a lye against my con∣science, which so lay upon my spirit afterwards, that I could receive no comfort; I went to hear the word, and did read the Scriptures, but all did but in∣crease my horror. Severall Ministers and godly people came to mee, and used great means to comfort me, but all in vain for a time; and when I read the Scriptures, I found e∣every threatning and judgement therein, that I fixed my thoughts upon, to speak terror to my soul; and my distraction was so great, that my friends said that I was mad, and kept the Bible from mee. For so often as I did read in it, I pored most upon that
dreadfull place, Matth. 12.31. All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men, but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, shall not bee forgiven unto men. I did not know what the sinne against the Holy Ghost was, but I had a perswasion, I had com∣mitted that sin, and feared that my sins could not be pardoned; and that I should never go to hea∣ven, but was cast off to be dam∣ned. Yet this the Lord wrought for me, and in mee, by his blessed spirit, to draw forth my heart, that I should still be often pray∣ing to God, in that poor doubt∣ing way my spirit could, by the Lords assistance vouchsafed to me, attain unto, for I yet thought it in vain, and that God would not heare me. Yet I continued sometimes
praying, and often cryed to God, not only in the day time, but fre∣quently in the night, and did rise out of my bed to pray to God to have mercy upon me. And I was sometimes a little comforted, in that I was perswaded to hope in the Lord, but yet it was dashed againe through feare, that I had committed the sinne against the Holy Ghost. And I thought that all victuals, and every thing, was too good for me, and that I was unworthy of all injoyments of good to me: thus I lay for some months in a sad agony wrastling with temptations, perplexed be∣tween hope and feare. But at last in hearing Mr. W. Minister of B. and reading a book called, the New birth, I found comfort, being better satisfied what the sinne against the Holy Ghost was, then before, since
which I blesse God, I have for some yeares past, found much comfort from the promises of God revealed in his holy word, some of which follow. Matth. 5.6. Blessed are they which doe hunger and thirst after righteous∣nesse, for they shall be filled. My cheif desires are after Jesus Christ, and to follow him in the rule of the Gospell, not doubting but that I shall bee blessed in that grace, which he communicates to mee from his fulnesse. Matth. 11.28. Come unto me all yee that labour, and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. This pro∣mise being to soules laden with dejections, and universall, to all that come to Christ, hath much comforted my heart, in that by his spirit he hath drawne forth my soule to come to him. And as a testimony of my love
to God and evidences of my faith, I blesse God I have these comfortable fruits of the spirit of grace in my soule. 1 Though I doe all that I can to serve God, yet in all things I find infirmities in me, so that all my trust is onely in the merits of my Saviour Jesus Christ. 2 Though I cannot be so holy as I should, yet I desire, and la∣bour to be as holy as I can. 3 When my heart is dul, cold, and out of tune to serve God, it doth much trouble me, and in going to God I find comfort. 4 When I am hindred from duties with the people of God, it is a great grief unto me. And the manifestation of the presence of God upon my heart, is the grea∣test joy I finde, and that which most fils, and satisfies my soul. 5 I find the want of any of all
Gods Ordinances to be a grief to me, & that I am at a losse therin. 6 I desire to serve God in all things, and have a real and hearty respect to all his Commande∣ments, and to do justly to all, and do find my heart cheifly drawne forth to holinesse, and in all things to keep a good conscience and live in the fear of God. A. O. Experiences of M. M. I Have many times had a desire to heare the word of God, when I have been imployed a∣bout my calling. But I then thought to my selfe, that I had no body to provide for me, but if God would bestow on me so much of these outward things, as upon others in the world, then
I would spend more time in hearing, prayer, and reading the word. And accordingly, as these outward things have ebbed or flowed, so hath my joy been lesse or more. But now God hath given me a sight of my sins, and why I had formerly no assu∣rance; It was because I had not faith in my heart. Before God wrought that in me, instead of making use of those comforts, which the word holds forth, I spent my time in mistrusting Gods providence, who therefore justly during that time, held the sence of his spiri∣tuall consolations from me. Sometimes I was in despair (so low) that I could not apprehend any thing to be my portion but hell. Every thing that fell not out according to my mind, I thought
was a judgement from God up∣on me. Yet I afterwards heard comfort by these inviting promises, Isay 55.1. Ho! every one that thirsteth, come yee to the waters, and he that hath no mony, come yee, buy, and eate, yea, come buy wine and milke without mony, and without price. And Ezek. 33.11. As I live, saith the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turne from his way and live: turn yee, turn yee from your evill ways, for why will yee dye O house of Israel? I had some comfort from these promises, but no assurance, my thoughts were various, and though betweene hope and des∣paire, yet I resolved to goe to God, knowing that hee is un∣changeable, and that whom hee loves, he loves to the end, and that at what time soever a sinner doth re∣pent
and turne to him, he will blot out all his sinnes and iniquities out of his remembrance. And it pleased God to bring this promise into my mind, and to helpe me by faith to lay hold on it, and apply it to my selfe, Ezek. 18.21, 22. If the wicked will turn from all his sins that he hath committed, and keep all my statutes; and do that which is lawfull and right, he shall surely live, he shal not die: All his transgressions that he hath committed, they shall not be mentioned unto him; in his righteousnesse, that he hath done, he shall live. And Christ saith, John 3.16. God so loved the world, that he gave his onely begotten Son, that whosoever beleeveth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. And this is life eternall, to know God, and Jesus Christ, whom hee hath sent.
1. I blesse God he hath made me now to beleeve, not onely in word, but to labour to bring forth the fruits thereof in a god∣ly life and conversation. 2. I cannot but admire the free love of God to me, that though I have given an eare formerly to the devill, and to the world, and to my own wicked heart; yet God hath been thus pleased now to call me out of darknesse into his most marvellous light. 3. And God hath been pleased to give me faith to believe, that though sin hath abounded in me, yet grace shall now much more abound. This makes me to see the free love of God without a∣ny desert in the creature. 4. I have formerly gone about to limit God, and be upon terms with him, that if he would give so much of these worldly things
as I thought needfull, then I would spend more time in those duties which he hath comman∣ded me. But this is contrary to the word of God, which teacheth me now First to seek the kingdom of God, and the righteousnesse thereof, knowing that all other things shall be added to me, that I want. 5. And now blessed be God, he hath made me to beleeve this, and all other promises, so that I can by faith call God my Father, who hath promised me that All things shall work together for good to me, because I love him. 6. I have found something from God, of hope of mercy, since I was a faithfull hearer of the word: Though the devil did before tempt me with objecti∣ons to drive me to despair for sin 7. I am now, I praise my God, comforted, in believing that God
will not mention my sins against me, Christ dyed for sinners, and the ungodly; and I know that al∣though I have been a great sinner, yet this hinders me not from lay∣ing hold on the promises. 8. I doe beleeve, that the Life I now live, I live by the faith of the Sonne of God; I see by faith, that Christ hath satisfied Gods justice for my sins in particular, & hath bid me to reckon my self in him. 9. Now being spiritually mar∣ried to Christ, all the priviledges of Saints and beleevers belong to me. And I can say, All is mine, and I am Christs, and Christ is Gods; Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It is God that hath justified me, Who is he that shall con∣demn me? Being now justified by Faith in Christ, I have peace with God. 10. I know when this earth∣ly
Tabernacle is dissolved, I shall have an abiding not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens; for Christ saith, I am gone to prepare a place for you, that is, for me & all believers. 10. All the promises of God in Christ, they are spoken to belee∣vers; and by faith I beleeve they are made to me, and because he lives, I shall live also; Now Christ hath made me free, I am now free in∣deed. 11. Christ hath done all for me, onely bids me to beleeve, which faith by his spirit he hath wrought in me. 12. I have formerly been stirred up to heare, pray, and read up∣on selfish consideration of feare, that otherwise I should goe to Hell. And I am ashamed to thinke how I have chosen rather what the devill hath said, then what
God and Christ hath said. But, blessed be the Lord, I now see it is free love that he forgi∣veth iniquity, transgressions, and sinnes, only because mercy pleas∣eth him; all that I can do, can∣not. 13. I am guilty before Gods Justice in my selfe, both by ori∣ginall sinne, which came by the fall of Adam, and much more by those many actuall sinnes, which I have Personally com∣mitted, but I am justified by Christ. 14. I desire to shew my duti∣full love in obedience to my fa∣thers commands, and my affecti∣ons according to the rule of the Gospel to Christ my Husband, with whom I am spiritually marryed. 15. The Lord saith, Come out from amongst them all yee my peo∣ple,
and be ye separated, and touch no unclean thing, and I will be your God, and ye shall be my people. And if I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear my pray∣ers. I take God to witnesse, who knowes the secrets of all hearts, that I desire to joyn in duties, not to the end that others should have a good opinion of me: I know I must leave all worldly relations, how soon I know not; but herein, I shall have peace, that I doe as my fa∣ther hath commanded me; and I rejoyce in Christ Jesus, putting no confidence in the flesh, but onely in the merits of my Savi∣our. M. M.
Experiences of H. W. WHen my God appeared, through his grace, to shine by his sacred spirit into my dark soul, my thoughts wer much taken up in consideration of my sad and deplorable condition under the curse by nature, yet so, that I did withal see enough in Christ to deliver me from all, if I did attain to true belief. But my perplexed soul drank deep of the bitter dregs of a sor∣rowful cup, before I could taste of the sweet cordialls my blessed Saviour had prepared for me; wherewith I have since been of∣ten refreshed. My conscience told me, that (if I ever expected deliverance
from sinne, death, and hell, and to have favour with God) I must devote my heart to him a∣lone. But yet I found the love of some worldly vanities rooted so fast in my affections, that I did often put God off, and had an ey to some worldly contents, which deprived me (for that time) of injoying peace in his pre∣sence. I often said, Lord such a day, I will leave all, and never seeke my selfe, but thy glory in all things; and then again, Lord, after such a merry-meeting, then I will shake hands with all tem∣porall delights; and again, now Lord once more, I will have but one day of pleasure, and then I will part with all that offends thee, and not seeke after any thing out of thee more.
But for a time all this proved but unfaithfulnesse to my Savi∣our, and wounds to my owne spirit, the sence whereof did sadly terrifie my consci∣ence. My soul was much cast down, and I sate up a great part of ma∣ny nights, when all the family, where I then lived, was in bed, and with an heavy heart, and floods of tears gushing from my sorrowfull eyes, I was ex∣ceedingly disquieted, pouring forth mine heart to my God, and begging mercy at the foot-stoole of the Throne of grace. And that which was the grea∣test horror upon my spirit, was, that I could not manifest my be∣lieving by a pious spirituall con∣versation in faithfull obedience according to the sacred rule
of the Gospel. When I have had resolutions for worldly pleasures to satisfie the desires of nature, it hath taken away the comfort of my heart from spiritual du∣ties in the interim. But I found in my soul a great conflict in wrastlings against those sad temptations, my con∣science convicting me how great an enemy I was to my soule therein: and testifying that it would be infinitely better to leave all the vain things of the world, then to live without the love of my Saviour. But when my God was pleased to bring my heart to a frame to resolve seriously never to delay with God a moment more, my heart was so fixed on my Savi∣our, that I saw a sufficiency in him under any dispensation: I tasted a greater sweetnesse in the
graces of his Spirit, then in any temporal pleasure. And I found much of the love, grace, spirit, and power of my dear Saviour appearing to refresh my trou∣bled soul. And I have found much com∣fort from divers promises of the Lord, and particularly, Isa. 49.8.9. I will preserve thee, and give thee for a Covenant of the people to establish the earth, and to cause to inherit the desolate heritages. That thou mayest say to the Prisoners, goe forth; to them that are in dark∣ness, shew your selves. Though I was before a Prisoner to world∣ly vanities, and shut up in dark∣nesse, yet Christ being sent to de∣clare the Covenant to such, I found good warrant to apply it to my self. Ezek. 34.22. Therefore will I save my flock, and they shall be no
more a prey. This salvation, I ap∣plyed as promised to me, consi∣dering that though I was a sin∣ful man, yet it was my comfort that the Lord was my God; verse 31 And ye my flock, the flock of my pasture, are men, and I am your God. Mat. 5.6. Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteous∣nesse, for they shall be filled. God having given mee an heart to hunger and thirst after my Savi∣our and my God above all things, I believe this promise was made to me, with many more, which gave much sweet comfort and consolation to my soul. And being justified by Faith, I have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, the testimony of which faith is feaed to my soule by his blessed spirit in
these Demonstrations. 1. I finde many evident te∣stimonies of the love of God to me, which hath drawne forth my soule to an high esteeme of him, and to love him above all things. 2. I see nothing but sinne in my selfe, and my trust is in my Saviours merits for justifica∣tion. 3. I feele glorious refresh∣ments from the heavenly gales of Gods blessed Spirit, breath∣ing his graces in my soule, which is the highest blisse I can desire on this side Hea∣ven. 4. I find much comfort from the Word and Ordinances. 5. My chief desire in all things is to glorifie God. 6. I find a very great affecti∣on in my heart to the people of
God, or any that I judge so to bee. 7. I desire to be at peace with, and doe all the good I can to all, especially those of the houshold of Faith. 8. I can heartily begge of the Lord to give me deliverance from, and strength against every sinne; though never so pleasing to my nature, or which I am most prone to. 9. I finde no such full joy in any thing, as I doe in com∣munion with my God. 10. I see a purity and glorie in the waies of God, and Gospel-duties above all things. 11. I desire no longer to live then to glorifie God. 12. All the dayes of my ap∣pointed time, I waite till my change shall come. H. W.
Experiences of D. R. IT hath pleased the Lord ever since I knew a difference be∣tweene good and evill, to give me a heart to seeke after those things which savoured most of God. And it was my delight alwaies to frequent the society of those whom I thought were truly Godly: And upon this account, I thought my selfe to be something, when being seriously weighed, I became no∣thing; for I knew God but as a natural man doth, even by way of discourse; I being, as I conceive since, much in the po∣sture of the proud Pharisee, I could say, I thank God, I was not such a person, as was given
to lewdnesse or ill vices, as o∣thers were: And being thus in my natural condition, I thoughr I had need of nothing, when I was as the Church of the Laodi∣ceans, wretched, miserable, and poor, and blinde, and naked, and that which was worst, I knew not that I was thus in ignorance, walking in darknesse till the Lord brought me forth into the light; First, by convincing mee of sinne. Secondly, Convincing me of righteousnesse. The first was (according to my remembrance) about seven or eight yeares since. I being in discourse with a friend, concerning something which did much displease mee, wherein my answering was ve∣ry crosse, and my words very full of anger; I began to e∣spie my selfe full of malice and
envy, the which did much re∣flect upon my owne heart, that caused a wonderfull griefe unto me; and having never taken no∣tice of any such thing before, it was so much the more strange to me; but calling my selfe to a strict examination, what Foun∣dation I had laid, when the Building began to prove so rot∣ten, it pleased the Lord, that thereby I grew more and more sensible of my owne miserable condition, as being in the state of nature, a child of wrath, finding my selfe a lump of sinne and un∣cleannesse, and at a far distance from the wayes of God, and to have probability of nothing so much as damnation, and ready to be cast into hell for my sins, and finding my selfe out of Christ, and not any comfort that I should ever gain an inte∣rest
in him; for I saw that without Faith, it was impossible to please him; and that without faith I could not think of any way to finde it, being lost in false wayes of my owne inven∣tion▪ And considering also, that Paul counsels the Corinthians to ex∣amine their selves whether they were in the Faith, and (saith he) Know ye not your own selves, whether Jesus Christ is in you, except you be Repro∣bates; and following this course, I could not otherwise judge, but that I was a Reprobate, and this condition was very burthensome unto my spirit, and neither in hearing or reading, could I for the time finde any ease of this my trouble; but still I did ap∣prehend the Lord as an angry Judge, requiring satisfaction of me for my sinnes.
Thus I languished, not know∣ing which way to steere my thoughts; but oftentimes crying out to the throne of grace, what shall I do to be saved? Some∣times I should perswade my selfe it was altogether impossible for me to think of being saved, or ever to gain so much faith, as to believe that Christ dyed for my sinnes, for this I thought would be a very great presump∣tion for me to attempt any such thing, having often had thoughts of destroying my self. It is my desire that I may ne∣ver forget the providence of God in keeping mee from all dangers in this my ex∣treame doubtfull condition; wherein I made not any one acquainted with my trouble but the Lord, whose worke it
was to deliver mee. In this my spiritual bondage, when I have heard godly men incouraging poore soules to beleeve in Christ, I have thought that others might, but I durst not presume, because I was no better qualified; for if I could find my selfe more holy, or more godly, or fuller of goodnesse, then there would be some hope that I might believe, and hope for the favour of God, and that Christ dyed for me. But afterwards, God put into my heart to consider, that seeing that By the deeds of the Law, no flesh can be justified; (for I thought before, I must have done something that should have proved meritorious) and begin∣ning to be acquainted with an emptinesse in my selfe, and an inability of my owne to do a∣ny
good, and finding that it must be given mee from the Lord, Christ being all in all, to the Saints. Upon this consideration, I did cast my selfe upon God, say∣ing, Lord, I am thy workmanship, doe with me what seemeth good unto thee: If thou dost damne me, I have deserved the severest of thy judgments; thou art just, although I am for ever justly miserable. And one day reading of Mr. Per∣kins his booke, treating of the smallest degree of saving-faith, the which did expresse, that a desire to believe was faith it selfe; I was something comforted to heare of this, knowing that none could more desire it then I did, and upon this (a while) I rested satisfied: but not long af∣ter I found it a reed, whereon I had leaned, and grew againe
very restlesse, and was beat off from this stay by having the op∣portunity of another Booke, which made me to understand that the poor man knew full wel that a desire to be rich, and to be rich indeed, were two seve∣rall things: And so a desire to beleeve, and faith it selfe, was not the same. For as all that di∣sire to be rich, are not rich; so all that desire to beleeve, do not beleeve. Being thus drove from my o∣ther principle, I began to see a more emptinesse in the creature, and a greater fulnesse in the Cre∣ator. And this last book was by the blessing of God, through his grace, in some force to in∣forme my judgement in many things, which were very comfor∣table to me.
As First, That the love of of God, was the cause Christ was given for sinners, and that he became a full satisfacti∣on to God for sinnes; and if we staid from Christ till we were full of good works, it might be a symptom we should never be∣leeve: For it shewed first, that we must be ingrafted into Christ by faith, before we could bring forth good fruits, for Without me yee can do nothing, saith Christ, And whatsoever is not of Faith, is sinne. These and many such like expressions in the Scripture, which God put into my minde, were very comfortable in the re∣freshing of my dull and weary spirit many times; but yet feares in intervalles possessed me, in not finding Christ to be made mine by faith. For I could not say (in particular) that God
was my God, nor see that there was a reconcilement made be∣tween God and my soul. Some∣times I would perswade my heart to venture to beleeve in Christ for the pardon of my sins: But presently objections would thwart my resolutions by con∣cluding that I was too great a sinner: And it was not absolute∣ly said, that Christ dyed for me. In this condition I was for four years or thereabouts, before I did thoroughly apprehend the love of God in Christ Jesus un∣to me: Yet the Lord was pleas∣ed at last, to worke effectually upon me, by many sweet pro∣mises out of his word, which did wonderfully rejoyce my soul. John 3.15, 16. Whosoever belee∣veth in the Sonne shall not perish, but
have everlasting life: this very word whosoever, did work so kindly, and with such a sweet efficacy upon my heart, that I was constrained to submit, having not any obje∣ction against it, for it compre∣hended all sorts of sinners, al∣though never so great, yet whoso∣ever believeth in this Sonne of God shall injoy such a sweet promise, no lesse then eternal life. In the 15. verse, God so loved the world, that he gave his onely begotten Sonne, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. And in Acts 10.43. That who∣soever believeth in him, shall receive remission of sins. Then in Galath. 2.20. I live by the faith of the Son of God who lo∣ved me, and gave himself for me; and Christ Jesus dyed for sin∣ners, of whom I am chief: Seeing
this application of Christ, that Paul made in particular to him∣selfe, who was a very great sin∣ner, it did much imbolden me in the like. Rom. 5.8, 9. God commendeth his loue towards us, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ dyed for the ungodly; and I was ungodly; therefore I beleeved Christ dyed for me; and when we were yet with∣out strength, in due time Christ dyed for sinners; I am a sinner, and therefore Christ died for me, and he was reconciled unto us, while wee were enemies; For the Lord to be thus reconciled to ungodly, to sinners, to enemies, this was more love indeed then ever I ex∣pected: Especially, that the Lord would have been halfe so graci∣ous to me: This turned all my former sorrowes into joy; cry∣ing out, what shall I render unto
the Lord for all his benefits that hee hath bestowed on me: For what was I, or any of my fathers house, that the Lord should bee so mercifull unto me? And I have these testimonies of my reall conversion to God. 1. The testimony of his spirit adopting me to be his child, Gal. 3.4, 5. God sent forth his Sonne to redeem those that are under the law, that they may receive the adoption of sonnes. And because you are sons, God hath sent forth the spirit of his son into your hearts, crying Abba father; Wherefore thou art no more a servant but a sonne: I was once under the law dead, I am now by Christ redeemed. And I blesse God for this pre∣cious priviledge, that I can call God my father. 2. Christ hath fulfilled the law, therefore I shall not be con∣demned
by the Law, but justified by Jesus Christ, without the deeds of the Law; there was a time when I was dead in sinne, and in ungodlinesse, being alie∣nated from the Common-wealth of Is∣rael, and a stranger to the Covenant of grace, having no hope, and without God in the world: But being made alive by Jesus Christ, I see my sins done away; and do beleeve that Christ hath borne on his own body all my sinnes, he being brui∣sed for our transgressions, Isa. 53. And the Lord laid on him the i∣niquity of us all, by whose stripes we are healed: So that I do beleeve that by one offering he hath perfected for ever all those that are sanctified, Heb. 10. And that Christ Jesus is become a full and perfect sa∣tisfaction for my sins, and that the Lord is well pleased with; and contented in this satisfacti∣on,
Matth. 3. This is my well-beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. 3. I am, in and through Gods free grace, what I am; not for any thing in me, or that I could do; but as in Titus 4.5. We our selves were sometimes foolish, disobedient, serving divers lusts; but when the kindnesse and love of God our Saviour appeared towards man, net by works of righteousnesse which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us: that being justified freely by his grace, we should be made heirs, according to the hope of eternall life: And in another place, 1 Tim. 1.9. Who hath saved us, and called us, with an holy calling, not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace in Christ Jesus, be∣fore the world began; therefore I be∣lieve, that God the Father loveth me in Jesus Christ. 1 John 4.29. We love him,
because he loved us first, John 14.14. Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, that you should bring forth much fruit. Isa. 43.25. I, even I am he that blotteth out all thy transgressions for my own sake, and will not remember thy iniquities, and he will have mercy, even because he will have mercy: the blood of Jesus Christ cleanseth us from all sin: I plain∣ly see it is the Lords doings, and it is marvellous in my eyes. As in Ephes. 2. You who were dead in trespasses and sins, hath he quickned together with him, by Grace ye are sa∣ved, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God. I find, that as Christ Jesus was a free gift to me, and for me; so was this saving grace of Faith a free gift also from the Lord to my soul, Romans 3.24. Being justified freely by his Grace, through the redemption that is
in Christ Jesus, to declare his righte∣ousnesse for the remission of sins; that he might be just, and the justifier of him that believeth in Jesus; so that all boasting of the creature is ex∣cluded by the law of faith. As by the disobedience of one, many were made sinners; so by the obedience of one, shall many be made righte∣ous. 4. I believe, that as there was no sin found in Christ, and yet a sinner by imputation; so I be∣being a sinner indeed, shall be made righteous by Gods impu∣tation; for it pleased God to make him become sin for us who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousnesse of God in him. 5. I have the seal of the spi∣rit, as Paul saith, The spirit of God beareth witnesse with our spirits, that we are the children of God, and if children, then Heirs of God, and
joynt-heires with Christ in this our freedom. 6. I do believe that God the Father loved me, and elected me for the Son to redeem; and that Jesus Christ loves me, as given of the Father for him to redeem, and manifests it to me: and the Holy Ghost loves me, as elected of the Father, and redeemed by the Son, and doth evidence it in me, which is the earnest of my inheritance; and there is an ex∣pression in John 3. last. He that believeth in the Son hath everlasting life. 7. I do believe that I have everlasting life already in posses∣sion. First, by the promise, Feare not little flock, for it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you a King∣dome. Secondly, In the first fruits,
for what is heaven hereafter, but a more full injoyment of what is begun here? What we receive now, is but a taste of what we shall receive; As 1 John 4.2. Be∣loved, now are we the sons of God and it doth not yet appear what we shall be, but we know when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. Thirdly, I do injoy it by my head Christ, who hath taken full possession of it already for me: therefore seeing I am not my own, I am bought with a price, therefore I desire to glorifie God with my soul and body, which are the Lords, saying with Ma∣ry in Luke 1. My soul doth magni∣fie the Lord, and my spirit doth re∣joyce in God my Saviour, who hath re∣garded the low estate of his hand∣maid. 8. Though formerly my
foundation was built upon the sands, and therefore easily over∣thrown: Yet now I trust in the Lord I am established by Faith, built upon that Rock, which is the love of God, my Saviour Christ being the chief corner stone, Isa. 28.16. Behold I lay in Zion a stone, a tryed stone, a precious corner stone, he that beleeveth shall not make hast. 9, I wait upon the Will of my heavenly Father in all his dispensations, for a more full injoyment of Jesus Christ in my soul, the which I do hunger and thirst after, and I have the pro∣mise of my God that I shall be filled, and having tasted, I have found the Lord is gracious, and more to be desired then thou∣sands of worlds. 10. I beleeve not upon others words, but as in John 4.42. as
some said to the woman of Sa∣maria, Now we beleeve, not because of thy saying, for we have heard him our selves, and know this is indeed the Christ the Saviour of the World. 11. As David saith, I had faint∣ed, unlesse I had believed to see the goodnesse of the Lord, and I beleeve, therefore have I spoken, for I was greatly afflicted; As the Apostle saith, ye are compleat in Christ, therefore I reckon my self in him. 12. The Lord having made it out unto me that I am a belee∣ver, I am confident that Christ Jesus did pray to his Father for me, in the 17. of John saying, I pray not for these only, but for them that shall believe through their word, that they may be one, even as we are one, therefore thou art my God, and I will praise thee, for thou
hast heard me, and art become my salvation. Thus in some measure I have weakly hinted out a reason of the hope that is in me, trusting in my God, that as he hath taken away the guilt of sin out of my conscience, so in his due time he will take away all sin from my conversation, and as he hath given me a pardon for sin, so he will over-power all my corrup∣tions, that I may live more to the praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he hath made me accepted in the Beloved, and that I shall become (over sin, Sa∣tan, self, and all things oppo∣site to grace) more then a Con∣queror through him that hath loved me, and washed me from my sins in his blood; for to him are all things possible, and he is the wise Master-Builder, who
will not onely begin, but will goe on to accomplish his owne work. The Lord having expelled that cloud of darknesse, which was vailed upon my heart, and brought me into his marvellous light, I had very strong desires in my own spirit to be joyned to a gathered people that was truly godly, having some incourage∣ment by reasons out of the word of God, as in Marke 8.38. Who∣soever shal be ashamed of me and of my words, in this adulterous generation, of him also shall the Son of man be a∣shamed, when he commeth in the glo∣ry of his Father: And on the con∣trary, in Matth. 10.32. Whosoever will confesse me before men, him will I confesse before my Father which is in heaven: The which did in∣courage me much in it. And seeing in the second of the Co∣rinthians
the sixth, Paul pressing them forward in the wayes of godliness, biddeth them to sepa∣rate themselves and come out from amongst the men of the world, and touch not their a∣bominations: and he backes it with a sweet promise from the Lord; And I will be your Father, and you shall be my Sonnes and Daughters, for what fellow∣ship have Beleevers with unbe∣leevers, and what communi∣on hath Light with dark∣nesse. D. R. Experiences of A. O. I Have undergone sad troubles of spirit for my sins; which I have had a great sight and sense
of, and shed many tears for, and desire to be truly sorry for them, and hate them, and to have no more communion with them. About five years since, and for some two years space I lay under very great temptations, and was ready to despair, and for seve∣ral nights could not take any rest in my bed; but was very weak with weeping, and much grieved for my evil thoughts, yet the Lord drew forth my heart to call upon him, and hope in him for mercy. But I had many sore conflicts, insomuch that I could not lie in the chamber a∣lone; I made what use I could of opportunities to desire comfort from such godly Christians as I could meet withal to counsel me in the wayes of God, and I laboured to hearken to them,
but found my heart very dul and heavy for that time, until about three yeares since, I began to finde comfort from some Ser∣mons that I heard, and bookes that I read, and some thoughts that the Lord settled upon my heart by his spirit, hoping that there was mercy for me. And I did believe that I had all the prayers of all the Saints in the world put up to the Throne of grace for me, and that my Savi∣our had satisfied for my sins, and through him God was reconciled to me, and in particular I found comfort from these and some o∣ther promises. John 6.35. Jesus said unto them, I am the bread of life, he that commeth to me, shall never hunger, and he that believeth on me, shall ne∣ver thirst. Verse 37. All that the Father
giveth me, shall come to me, and him that commeth to me, I will in no wise cast out. John 14.1. Let not your hearts be troubled, ye believe in God, believe also in me. Jeremiah 31.23 But this shall be the Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel; After those dayes saith the Lord, I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people. And I do find in my heart a testimony of my believing; and that I do love God; wrought in me by his blessed Spirit, by these particulars. 1. I do so love God, not through slavish fear, but for his name and glory, that I can leave all for him, and nothing is so dear and precious to mee, as the love of God; and nothing so
great a joy to me, as that Christ who dyed for me, hath not left me. 2. I find such comfort from the Lord, that he by his Spirit revives my drooping heart, and fills my empty soul, and when I am in my poor spirit even fain∣ting away, I find comfort from his glorious power and pre∣sence. 3. When I cannot come to Ordinances it is a grief to me, and when I am in duty, it is a grief to me, that I am so dull and finde no more inlargement; yet my affections are groaning after the Lord Jesus Christ in the duties, and I have a great longing to receive more of Christ. And I finde more com∣fort when my heart is inlarged in duty then in any other thing in the world, and I know that
all my comfort is from Jesus Christ. 4. What I desire to injoy, I seek to injoy it in God through peace of conscience, that it may be to the comfort of my faith, for God is pure, and it is a great grief to me that I can serve my God no better. 5. I do not fear death, for my faith is so settled in God, that I long to be with my Savi∣our, when he shall be pleased to call me to him; Christ hath dy∣ed for me, to take away the fear of the second death. A. O.
Experiences of M. W. I Have from my child-hood desired to serve the Lord, and to make his commandements my rule to walke by; and I thought once that I could have said with the young man in the Gospel, All these have I kept from my youth. But it pleased the Lord above three yeares since, to visite me with a grievous sicknesse, even unto death; and then my heart told me that I was a great sinner, and my conscience accused me, that I had loved the world more then I had loved Jesus Christ. Then I was afflicted in my spirit with fear, because I could
not believe that Jesus Christ had dyed for me. I besought the Lord by earnest prayer, that he would be pleased to spare me, for I found my selfe to be very unfit for death. I made promi∣ses to the Lord, that if he did please to spare me, I would lead a new life, and did resolve to walk more close to my God. The Lord was pleased (in mercy) to hear my prayer, and grant this request, to spare me a while longer to serve him in the land of the living. But notwithstanding my pro∣mises, and that great deliverance the Lord hath wrought for me in keeping me back from Hell, and the grave, I had soon forgot∣ten all. I began to love the world a∣gain, and lived as vainly as be∣fore. But the Lord smote my
conscience, and sorely troubled my spirit for this backsliding, putting me in mind of the pro∣mises I had made to him in my sicknesse. With great bitternesse of heart and griefe of soule, I mourned for my failing, and did againe resolve, for the time to come to keep more close to Gods Ordi∣nances, and set a close watch o∣ver my heart. But the more I looked into my heart, the more vile I saw my selfe to be, and was greatly trou∣bled that I had so often played the hypocrite with my God. I againe then besought the Lord, by prayer, that he would be plea∣sed, for Jesus Christ his sake to forgive all my sins, and backsli∣dings, which I then was grie∣ved for with loathing, more then ever before.
My conscience was so woun∣ded, and my soule cast downe in so great a conflict, that my spirits were almost dryed up, and my heart began to grow weary and faint with crying and groa∣ning after my Saviour. Yet the Lord was pleased to humble me still more and more, and to try me further, as gold is tryed in the fire. And my afflictions were dou∣bled upon me by Satans malice, who tempted mee with evill thoughts, which was grievous to my soule. When I had prayed (with a troubled spirit as well as I could) the devill put thoughts into my minde, quite contrary to the frame of a praying spi∣rit. When I had read the word of God, he tempted me with doubts and questions touching some
things therein, whether it was truth or not. And Satan followed his temp∣tation so close upon me, that as soon as the Lord had inabled me to repulse one temptation, the Devil assaulted me with ano∣ther, so that I had scarce time to fetch my breath, one temptation followed so close upon ano∣ther. Then being troubled much in my spirit in this condition, I was tempted to a discontent, that the Lord had not taken a∣way these temptations from me, and in anger fell into some great passions, even neer unto despara∣tion. And I was sorely buffetted by the Devil, in this my lowest ex∣tremity, who assaulted me with fresh temptations of blasphe∣mous thoughts touching God;
So that when in the bitter∣nesse of my soule I was groping after Jesus Christ, and had na∣med God, he would put into my minde the objects of bruite creatures; even whilst I was pow∣ring out my soule to the crea∣tour, and was pleading a pro∣mise, he brought a curse to my thoughts. Then was I repulsed in all du∣ties by Satan, terrifying my soul to perswade me, that it was in vaine for me to seek for salvati∣on, because I had committed the sin against the holy ghost (which God by his word hath declared shall never be forgiven neither in this world, nor in the world to come,) because I was disconten∣ted that the Lord after all my addresses to him had not deliver∣ed me from all my troubles. But the Lord gave me strength to re∣sist
Satan, and say in the bitter∣nesse of my soul, to my God, far be it from me, O Lord, to be of∣fended with thee. And the Lord wrought this resolution in my soule, that I did protest before the Lord, that although I should see nothing but hell before me, yet I would trust in him, and stay my self upon my God, untill the Lord be pleased to send me deliverance. I made my case known to a dear friend, who put me in some comfort; he told me, that the sin against the holy Ghost, was to sin wilfully, by perpetuall dispite against God. I found a clear testimony in my conscience, that I was so far from dispiting the spirit of grace, that I had not sinned wil∣lingly against God, for I found it to be an affliction to me to be
tempted with evill thoughts touching the Lord, though I consented not to them, and I found my soule grieved that I could not be freed from them. And then with aboundance of teares, by often prayers and supplications to the Throne of grace, I poured forth my sinfull soule at the footstoole of Gods mercy, exalting free grace, and pleading the unspeakable riches of the mercies of my God, that would appear in the conversion of such a sinner as I had been. Methought it seemed to exalt Gods mercy, and to be one of the greatest manifestations of free grace in the world, to the great glory of the Lord, and unspeaka∣ble comfort to my poor soule, if he would be pleased to bring me to himselfe. Now when (by the divine
power of God) my heart was thus resolved to trust in God, and to waite upon him, then the Lord was pleased to shew me (to my comfort) the example of Jesus Christ, who had no sin in himself, yet he was tempted of the devill. And likewise of Paul, how Sa∣tan sent a messenger to buffet him, who then prayed unto God, and the Lord said, my grace is suffi∣cient for thee, my power is made known in thy weaknesse. Then I began to be comforted, and to think if Christ himselfe was tempted, if the children of God who have been eminent ex∣amples had laine under tempta∣tions, and the Lord according to his promises had strengthened and delivered them, there was hope for me. And the Lord wrought faith
in my heart to beleeve, that he would strenghthen me, and keep me that I should not perish for ever. And I have since found great consolation in many pro∣mises, which the Lord hath re∣vealed in his Word, which I have pleaded before the Lord, some of which follow. Isay 50.10. Who is among you, that feareth the Lord, and obeyeth the voyce of his servant, that walketh in darknesse and hath no light, let him trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon his God. I applyed this promise thus, I had walked in darknesse and saw no light; but God had wrought in my heart to feare him, and a willingnesse to obey my Saviour, and a resolution to trust in the name of the Lord therefore I knew it was not in vaine to stay upon my God.
Matth. 12.20. (It is said by Christ) A bruised reed shall he not breake and smoaking flax shall he not quench, till he send forth judgement unto victory. The Lord having broken and bruised mee in the sense of sin, and drawn forth my heart to rely upon him, I belee∣ved that he would in the end give me victory through Christ. Isay 40.29. He giveth power to the faint, and to them that have no might he increaseth strength. This Promise I laid hold on, because Christ saith, Come unto mee all yee that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest, Mat. 11.28. When I had refreshed my spi∣rit by applying these and some o∣ther promises to my own soul, by faith in the Lord Jesus, I found an effect of my faith by that love to God, which by his holy spirit he had wrought in my soul, which
appeareth by these particulars. 1 I am grieved that I have been so unbeleeving towards God, and so impatient in my afflictions. 2 I am troubled to think that whilest I live here in this mor∣tall flesh, I cannot be quite freed from sin, but must live to offend so good a God, who hath wrought so great a deliverance for me. 3 I blesse the Lord, I can (through divine goodnesse, from the testimony of the blessed spi∣rit) say (with comfort) the Lord is my God, whereby I can cry Abba Father. I can (I hope) willingly deny my selfe in all things, and should the Lord call me to it) take up the crosse of my Saviour Jesus to follow him, and blesse God in all dispensations whatsoe∣ver. 5 I finde a totall desire, and
free willingnesse in my heart to surrender my selfe and conver∣sation to be led by Gods bles∣sed spirit, in all holinesse and pi∣ety, with perseverance, that I may live all my daies to the glo∣ry of my God. 6 My affections are more firm∣ly and really knit to God then to any thing, so that I can part with any thing for God; and I value my interest in God above all things, and I find more joy in God then in all things. 7 I am not now affraid to dye, should God call me, that I may go to be with my Saviour for ever. 8 I desire to bee in love and charity with all men, but in an especiall manner I doe love the godly, because in appea∣rance they are the children of God, and desire to feed upon
Christ by faith in his Ordinan∣ces, with the Saints. M: W: Experiences of H. C. AT the beginning of these late troubles I, as well as o∣thers, was much frighted; and when it was said that such a day the City should be destroyed, I was amazed, I had been a hearer (a great while) of very eminent Ministers in the City of London, yet profited very little by what I heard. For if they preached the mercies of God, I feared they did not belong to me, because I could not find those qualifica∣tions in me which I thought I ought to have, if I expected to
receive mercy. I could rejoyce in hearing of the promises, but could not lay hold on them as belonging to me; but still I went to heare though with much trouble of minde: That day wherein it was said, the City should be destroy∣ed, I began to call my selfe to account what should become of my soule, if it should be so: I was almost amazed, but did much desire of God that he would give me faith, and with the Publican I said, Lord I be∣leeve, helpe my unbeleife; I then resolved with my selfe, well, I will cast my soul into the armes of God, if I perish, I perish. And through beleif in him, I was qui∣eted in my spirit at that time: but my sense of peace was soon vail∣ed.
And I was afterwards sore af∣flicted with the sight of my sin, and I was fully perswaded that I was an hypocrite, and that all that I did was but for feare of hell; then durst not I be any where alone, for fear of the sight of the devill, and if I had been at prayer by my self, I durst not open my eyes. Thus was I perplexed with fear: I did perswade my selfe I should perish; my condition was very bitter to mee, I did much labour for a resting place for my soule. And being one day at a Funeral where one was to be buried, the Minister that preacht the Funerall Sermon, shewed the sufficiency of God, and the insufficiency of man and that all good came from God. He said, that it was as possible for that dead man to put life in∣to
himselfe, as for any man to gaine the least drop of grace of himselfe, for faith is the gift of God. Then I began to consider with my selfe, and to take no∣tice of the promises of God; and I would write them to keepe them about me: I then being a hearer at M. St. the Mini∣ster was much upon the affaires of the times, and I was much troubled about what I heard, for I found not my soule satisfied with that matter. When I came home, I told my Husband that my soule was not able to live with that food; Then it pleas∣ed the Lord to direct me to heare Mr. S. at A. and he was setting forth the free grace of God to poor sinners. And then I began to reason with my selfe, that in putting
all mercy from me, sure I did dishonour God, for he inviteth all to beleeve his promises. And I read that he said, As I live I de∣sire not the death of a sinner. And Christ saith, he came to save sin∣ners, and that the whole need not a Physitian, but those that are sicke: And God hath promised, Not to breake the bruised reed, nor quench the smoaking flax; and Christ dyed for the ungodly, and God is no respecter of persons. And Christ promiseth, That whosoever comes unto him, he will in no wise cast off. When I had con∣sidered these and other promises; And that place where it is said, That without faith it is impossible to please God, then I was earnest with God that he would give me faith and sincerity of heart. And that place did much refresh me, I will never leave thee nor forsake
thee. Yet again after all this, the sence of my own unworthinesse did much trouble me, and I was greatly grieved that I was so cumbred in the world, and I began to doubt, saying, sure I have not chosen the better part. For sometimes I should much rejoyce, and praise God being much satisfied from these places of Scripture, which say, He hath laid our iniquities on him, and he hath laid help on him that is mighty. And in another place, Ye are saved by grace, not of your selves, it is the gift of God: And, We have an Ad∣vocate with the Father, even Jesus Christ the righteous. And he was made sinne for us that knew no sinne, that we might be made the righteous∣nesse of God in him. And behold the Lamb of God that taketh away the sins of the world.
But after again in a short time I should loose all my sence of com∣fort, and then had I sad thoughts, musing what God would doe with me. In the depth of these conflicts, at last that place re∣freshed me, where God saith, I the Lord change not, therefore yee sons of Jacob are not consumed. Though before I was not sa∣tisfied that my faith was true, but doubted that surely I had but presumed upon false grounds, I was much perplexed in my mind. Yet now it pleased God in the midst of my distresse, that he brought to my minde these words, the spirit saith come, and the bride saith come, and every one that will come, come, drink of the water of life freely. I said of my selfe I cannot come: But I prayed, Lord draw me and I shall runne af∣ter
thee. And this word was cast into my soule by the Lord, My grace is sufficient for thee, only do thou beleeve. And God hath wrought faith in me, and by the testimony of his spirit hath sealed his love in Christ to me, working in my heart so to love him, that I have cast my selfe wholly upon him. H. C. Experiences of M. K. WHen I take a view of my life upon the stage of this world, I may very well compare it to a comicall Tragedy, or a tragical Comedy, or a labyrinth from one sin to another, from
one affliction to another. I was indeed the daughter of very godly and honest parents, who diligently brought up their chil∣dren in the feare of God. My mother who in her dayes was notified for a godly vertuous and religious Gentlewoman, shee, I say, from amongst twelve chil∣dren, chose me to set her love and affection upon, she told me, it was because she saw something a more tractablenesse and dili∣gence to please her then in the rest, which when I perceived, as then not being seven yeare old, I laid my selfe forth the more to give her content, who tooke great delight to instruct me, to heare me read, and aske her que∣stions. She alotted me a portion of Scripture every day, as like∣wise a part of Erasmus Rotterda∣mus upon the foure Evangelists,
wherein we both took great de∣light. About that time I had se∣rious thoughts concerning God the Father, Son and holy Ghost, who putting this part of Scrip∣ture into my minde, He that is ashamed of me before men, of him will I be ashamed before my Father which is in heaven; and who so denieth mee before men, him will I deny before the Angels which is in heaven; I then began to examin my self on this manner, what wouldest thou doe, if thou wert tempted, amongst diversities of opinions, to be ashamed of this profession wherein thy parents nurture thee? What wouldest thou doe, if thou shouldest be tempted to deny Christ, and be called to suffer for his sake, as some of thy kindred were in Queen Maries time? wouldest thou not deny thy Master? wouldest thou not run away from thy colours? I re∣solved,
that I would not; and if the Lord would be pleased to try me, he should see how va∣liantly I would fight under his banner, and what a faithfull souldier I would be; to this I did implore his helpe continu∣ally; whatsoever I was about, still my heart was praying, and I de∣sired that God would be pleased to awake me in the night, that I might rise out of my bed to prayer, which (many times) I did; After this manner I spent my dayes untill I was twelve yeares old, at which time it pleased God to take my mother from me, which was some sorrow to me, but being suddenly made my fathers house-keeper, so as it were a mother to ten children, a mistresse over six servants, none to doe any thing without my command or consent, being as
it were my fathers right hand, from whom I had this authori∣ty; it did not onely stop my sor∣row, but caused an exceeding joyfull pride, or proud joy to cease upon my heart, seeing my selfe as it were advanced, being respected amongst the chiefest of the Parish, who were my mo∣thers companions, I representing her person when I was amongst them; then began the cares of the world, and the deceivable∣nesse of vanities to cease upon my heart, and made me forget my former order, promises, and intentions; and thus I spent al∣most seven yeares, cumbred a∣bout many things, but quite neglecting that one thing which is needfull. About this time, it pleased God to take my father from mee, upon a sudden. I asked my heart, What was the
cause of my fathers death? It made answer thus, Because thou hast sin∣ned against God, thou hast not onely omitted much good, but thou hast com∣mitted much evill, thou hast spent thy time idlely and loosely, and for thy sake, all thy brothers and sisters are now made fatherlesse and motherlesse. This consideration made such a deep impression upon my spirit, that I refused all comfort for the space of halfe a yeare, crying out continually, My sins, my sins, woe is me my sins! Being deman∣ded by divers godly friends, and reverend Divines, what those sins were that so much troubled me? I told them, sins of omission, sins of omission, they would perswade me that I was young, and that I had not yeares enough over my head to be guilty of so many sinnes by omission that needed so much sorrow, I told
them I was old enough to offend God, and to provoke him to anger; in∣deed, I could not give so ready account of my sinnes, of evill committed, as of good omit∣ted, though they never tooke notice of my sins, yet my heart was witnesse a∣gainst me: Thus I wearied all my friends with my excessive sor∣row, who knew not what to do for me more then they had done. With one consent they sent me up to London, perswading me that the word of God was more plentifully preached there, which made mee willing to come. But missing of my brother to whom I was sent, to be pro∣vided for, and resolving to wait upon some Gentlewoman untill I could with conveniency re∣turne downe againe, God by his providence brought me to the wife of Doctour Page, Mi∣nister
of Deptford, from whom I received great comfort, but in a very short time God tooke him from us all, whose death was greatly lamented. I found such favour and love from all that knew me, and most especially from Mistresse Page, who for the space of three yeares and an halfe, would not suffer me to be away from her one day. At the end of which time I was married to her eldest son, then living; but the truth is, we had not beene long married, and my husband received his portion, but we tooke a house in West∣minster, intending to take some honest course for a livelihood, but there, God knowes, we fell acquainted with some company which did not onely cause much time to be spent in idlenesse, but also almost all our meanes. One
man espcially who gave his minde to drinking, and other vices more then any good, hee, I say, was never well contented without my husbands company. Seeing imminent danger to hang over our heads by reason of this course of life, I greatly desired my husband to refraine that mans company, or at least not to suffer him to come so often home to our house, this I beg∣ged upon my knees with teares, but could not prevaile, then did the devill set his foot into my heart, and perswade me that by the committing of one sinne, I should prevent many, and so stirred me up to murther him, to which suggestion I cowardly yeelded, and sought all oppor∣tunities to performe this wicked act. Here I runne away from my colours; here I denied my Ma∣ster
Christ. In the highest of this hatred (in my sleepe) I thought I was in a very large chamber, sitting behind a table covered with a greene Carpet, upon which lay all manner of Instruments which proclaime death; suddenly the man came into the chamber, whom so soone as I espyed to bee alone, catching up a weapon in my hand, I resolved there to com∣mit the horrid act of murther upon his body, but God who watcheth over his, whether they sleepe or wake, and worketh by meanes, and without meanes, which way he pleaseth, at that time put an end to all my re∣vengefull thoughts, and caused me to heare a voyce in my eare, saying, Vengeance is mine; to which voyce I answered aloud, And thou wilt repay, O Lord,
Then waking, hearing my selfe speake, I was in very good cha∣rity with him, and left my wrong to God, but reflecting upon mine owne heart, there I found not only these, but a whole nest of most Diabolicall and wicked intentions, which my God was pleased by his pre∣venting graces to smother in their birth, for I no sooner had concluded, that I would fulfill mine own hearts lusts, although I suffered all the punishments due for such and such like sins: wherin I ran away from my Cap∣tain, but for all this he had a fa∣vour towards me, and sent an Herauld after me to bring mee backe againe: But then began a fresh battle, for my God coming as it were, to see what use I had made of the talent that he had given me, he found it, not only wrapt
up in a napkin, but exceedingly abused; and searching my heart, what found he there, but a sinke of sinne, a Cage of uncleane Birds, a Den of Theeves, a place for Dragons, for the Scritchowl, and for the Satyre, these had ta∣ken full possession, there was no roome for my God, they kept him out, and what did they there, but made it like a troubled sea; First, telling me my sinnes were greater then could bee for∣given. Dost thou not know (said they) that thy thought-sinnes are sufficient to damne thee, although thou hadst never cammitted any actually? doth not the Scripture say plainly, If a man lust after a woman, he hath committed adultery? which Com∣mandement being broken, brings death. I then tooke a view of all the tenne Commandements written in the Morall Law, to
see which of them I had broken, and which of them I had kept, I found them all broken (and at the end of every one was written death) and not onely these, but those sweet commands of my Saviour Jesus Christ, wherein he bids us watch, and pray for your enemies, feed the hungry, cloath the naked, love one another, all which I had likewise broken, which made mee to see nothing to remaine for me but death and damnation. I argued then with my selfe on this wise, I have read, and I have heard, that Almighty God, which by his power made heaven and earth, and all there∣in, had sent his Sonne to die for sin∣ners, and that there was hopes through his death that I should get pardon; But I had no sooner cast mine eye upon my God and Sa∣viour, but I was dashed from all:
Mine enemy Satan thus posses∣sing my thoughts, suggested thus unto me, Fond foole (quoth he) why dost thou thus trouble thy selfe? take thy pleasure, doe what thou likest, thou shalt never be called to an account for any thing; for as the wise man dyeth, so dyeth the foole, and both rest in the grave together, there is no God to save thee or to punish thee, all things were made by nature, and when thou dyest, there is an end of all thy good and bad deeds; thou talkest of the Scripture, and of a God, and of a Jesus which thou hast heard of there; see thy simplicity now, how canst thou prove the Scriptures to be true? alas, they were made by mens inventions, there is no hold for thee to take there. Thus being unquiet, I spent many dayes and nights in tears and sighes, and groanes, some∣times
thinking with my selfe, If I shall be saved, why am I thus? Then againe, concluding that there was no heaven, no God, no Je∣sus, no good Angels, onely an hell there was, and devills to carry me thither, who waited in every corner, and be∣hind every doore to snatch me away: And I saw there was no reme∣dy, but the more I strove, the faster I stucke, I fainted; and laid downe mine armes, and co∣wardly yeelded to the enemy, arguing with my self, If I am a firebrand of hell, a childe of perdi∣tion, a limbe of Satan, and my portion is to be with the devill and his angels: why live I longer upon the earth? why goe I not to mine owne place? Thus content to perish, I wan∣dred about the space of halfe a yeare, no man nor woman was privy too, nor knew the least of all my thoughts; at the last con∣cluding
that the night ensuing would be my last night that I should stay here on earth, as one desiring to be at home, I care∣lesly left my family and went to bed, as it were, inviting the De∣vills to come and take their due; but marke, I pray you, the goodnesse of our God, who was with mee all this while, and I was not aware of it, for even that same night, The little dogge leaping upon the bed, I thought it was the Devils who was come then to fetch me away; I screamed forth aloud, but when I perceived it was the dog, and not the Devill, I began to thinke, That surely there was a God that had preserved me all this while. In a most grievous agony I spent that night weeping, and although it was Winter, yet I sweat that the water ranne
from off every part of my body. Being in this sad condition, I thought it was not right, but surely some meanes might bee used to get out of it. I rising the more early in the morning, went up into the highest roome that was in the house, and looked forth at the window to see if I could see God, there I beheld the Trees to grow, the Birds to flie, the Heavens how they hanged, and all things that were before me, then I thought they could not make themselves, no more then I could make my selfe, and that we must needs have a Maker, and this Maker must be strong and powerfull; Then I fell downe upon my knees crying out on this manner, O God, if there be a God, shew thy selfe to me a poore miserable wretch, that am at the point to perish; Then I thought I saw the Lord but with a frowning
countenance, hee looked upon me as if he had said, Thou hast displea∣sed me, and I will not heare thee, and turning his back went from me, which sight was as a dart thrust through my soul for the space of halfe an houre, divers thoughts entred into my heart, but before I rose from off my knees, I re∣solved to become an earnest suiter to him, and not to doe any thing more that should dis∣please him, hoping that he would be intreated for that which was past. But now, I beseech you godly Christians, to take notice of the wonderfull workings of our good God, whose judgements are unsearchable, and his waies past finding out, that hee had knocked many times at the door of my heart, and had but small and slight entertainment; but
now came violently and power∣fully to take possession of his own, and set me about his work in my selfe; then I beganne to thinke what I should doe, and whither I should goe to pacifie the wrath of this terrible and dreadfull God, by whose pro∣vidence, I was brought to the Parish Church in Westminster, where Mr. Dod, a very godly and reverend Divine, was preaching a Funerall Sermon, I went in, hoping to heare some comfort (giving attentive heed) his text was, With my dead body they shall arise; see here, my God did not onely make a scourge of small cords, and whipped out the buyers and sellers, but he did over-turn, and over-turne, and over-turne, for this Minister did not onely preach to the people, but shewed me as it were in a
looking-glasse mine owne con∣dition, and told me that by the gates of hell many times God was pleased to bring his servants to heaven; being hungry and thirsty, I was glad of a little food, and presently catcht hold of that word; Is it so thought I, then here is comfort for me, I wil about my worke, if it please God to assist mee: In his Ser∣mon he asked us divers questi∣ons, to which my heart made answer, so that I came home joyfull, longing to heare more of his doctrine, which so fell out as if it had been on purpose for my sake, for the space of a moneth, or five weekes, I did hear two, three, foure, or five Sermons from him constantly every weeke, wherein he bid me try and prove whether I had faith or no, whether I did hate
my sinnes or no, and what have been the signes and fruits there∣of: He likewise bid me search the Scriptures, for they are true, and compare my condition with the children of God there, but after he was sensible of my con∣dition, which I made knowne to him privately, he was very la∣borious to bring my soule out of the jawes of death, and to raise it to Jesus Christ, for which paines, I hope my God will re∣ward him to his everlasting comfort. But one thing I had almost forgot, When I was in the depth of my spirituall dejection, I was utterly denyed all outward comforts, my God hiding his face I was troubled, the Sunne, the Moone and the Starres, seemed in their courses to fight against me, my neighbours fell
out with me, and mocked me, my kindred deserted mee, my Captaine Christ offended, made me run the gauntlet, and every souldier had a lash at me, what∣soever happened unto mee, brought sorrow to my heart. But when I was perswaded that the Scriptures were true, I set my selfe to search them, to see what comfort I could finde there, beginning at the Alpha of Genesis, I found in the begin∣ning God created the Heaven, and the Earth, and all therein; well then, thought I, there is a God; but viewing a little fur∣ther, I found that God offen∣ded, and man in a lost condi∣tion, but presently a remedy promised; going on, I found the Paschall Lamb, the brazen Serpent, the bunch of Grapes, the scape Goate, and divers o∣ther
things to bee types of that promised Seed; I likewise took a view of the afflictions of Jo∣seph, David, and Job, that did much ease my griefe. Coming to that place where my God spake by his Prophet, Come, let us reason together, though your sinnes were as scarlet, I will make them as white as snow; though they were like crimson, they shall bee like wool; and though you had laine among the pots, yet shall you be like Doves wings, co∣vered over with silver; then I thought will the Lord reason with sinners? will he vouch∣safe a Parley? O that I were a∣ble to answer him one of a thou∣sand! O that these promises be∣longed unto mee! O that this God were reconciled unto me! how happy should I bee? how happy is that man whose trans∣gressions are forgiven, and whose
sinnes are covered? O, how bles∣sed is that man unto whom the Lord imputeth no sinne! I found the same Prophet prophesie of my Saviours birth, in his ninth Chapter, and in his fifty third hee lively sets forth his Passion, and in the fifty five, the Lord in∣viting me with a Proclamation; Ho, every one that thirsteth, come; then I answered, Lord, I would faine come, but how shall I come? I have nothing to bring to pacifie thine anger, O that I could see thee smile upon mee, as once I saw thee frown, how happy should I be: then I cal∣led to minde that I had heard, and read, that Jesus Christ shed his blood for sinners, and that whoso∣ever beleeved in him should be saved; I was something incouraged to petition in his Name on this manner.
Heale me O Lord, and I shall be healed; turne me, and I shall be tur∣ned; convert me, and I shall bee converted. O save me, my God, and I shall be saved; take away this stony heart of mine, and give me an heart of flesh; renew a right Spirit within me, restore me to those joyes that I was wont to finde in thee, for thy lo∣ving kindnesse is better then thou∣sands of rivers of oyle; O cast mee not away with whom thou hast had so much patience withall; O cast me not away whom thou hast bought with so deare a price, O forsake mee not in this my great necessity, O looke up∣on that ever streaming fountaine of thy Sonnes blood, which is poured forth for all them that beleeve; Lord I beleeve help thou my unbeleefe; O pardon, pardon I beseech thee, for∣give me all my sins, my Sermon-sins, my Sabboth-sins, my every days sins, my other peoples sins, my sinnes of o∣mission,
my sins of Commission, my sins of ignorance, my sinnes of know∣ledge, my sins of presumption, my sins of wilfulnesse; O Lord; forgive me my knowne and secret sins, O pardon the sinnes that I have committed this day, O speake the word onely and thy servant shall be healed, Amen. Thus when the Lord had o∣pened my mouth to speake unto him, I gathered a great deale of strength, and had much hope that he would be intreated; but not setting so great an esteeme on my Saviour Jesus Christ as I ought, I thought I must bring something with mee to pacifie my God, I thought I must make my selfe all faire, and beautifull before my God would love me, but how to doe this I knew not; for the space of eleven yeares I sought all opportunities to please him, yet when I exami∣ned
my wayes, workes, and actions, I found they were so farre from pleasing him, that they were rather motives to stir him up to anger, if he should be severe to marke what I did amisse; many times I thought upon the sad condition that I had been in, and how the Lord had restored me, then my heart was elivated, and over-joyed; I found a great deale of love in my selfe towards God, but was not sure of Gods love to me, which I esteemed above all the world; the honour of God was so deare unto me, that I could sometimes say unto him, Lord, if there be no way to bring honour to thy Name but by my confusion, then let me be confounded; but sure Lord, thou maist gaine more glory in saving me, then in damning me, the dead cannot so bring honour to thy Name,
for who shall give thee thanks in the pit? the living, the living they shall praise thee, as I hope to doe hereafter, Many times I prayed, and had my Petitions granted presently, and at other times I prayed, and was denied what I begged, but had what I desired in a better way; in all Dispensations I found my God with mee, either with his preventing, assisting, or supporting Graces; I recei∣ved innumerable favours from him, yet could I not bee per∣swaded that they came from his love, but that rather they were to augment my score; I was still labouring and enquiring how I might come to bee assured of Gods Love, which he was plea∣sed at length to shew me insome measure, on this manner; In the sixt of John I heare my Savi∣our Jesus Christ telling me, that
I cannot come to him except God our Father draw me, and if I come to him, he will in no wise cast me out, but will raise mee up at the last Day; I am perswaded that it was my God alone, that did draw me to my Saviour Jesus Christ, that wil re∣ceive me, and will raise mee up at the last Day. In the seventeenth of John, I heare him praying to his Father for mee, whose re∣quest I am confident shall not be denied. Nay further, by faith I see my Saviour Jesus Christ suffe∣ring for mee, nailed upon the Crosse for mee, wounded, buf∣feted, stript, and spit upon for me; dead, buryed, rose againe, ascended into Heaven, and sit∣ting on the right hand of his Father, and my God, making intercession for mee; which gives me assurance of my Gods
everlasting and unchangeable love, in, and through my Savi∣our Jesus Christ towards mee, and that not for any thing that was in me, but for his sake, he said unto mee, when I was in my blood live; and I know I doe be∣leeve and am regenerated by the Holy Ghost: 1 Because I find such an alte∣ration in my selfe, that whereas before I could not beleeve there was a God, now I am sure there is a Great and an Almighty God, and he is my loving Fa∣ther. 2 Before I durst not lift up mine eyes to Heaven, now I can with boldnesse cry, Abba, deare Father. 3 Before I did not regard the people of God, now all my de∣light is with the Saints that are upon the earth.
4 I love to heare my God wel spoken of, it grieves me to hear, or see him dishonoured. 5 I long to see my Saviour, and to kisse those wounds from which issued streames of Bloud, which pacified Gods anger to∣wards me. 6 I rejoyce when I thinke of death, knowing that it is swal∣lowed up in victory. 7 I often heare this voyce in mine eares, Arise ye dead, and come to Judgement; I rejoyce to heare this saying, He that shall come, will come, and will not tarry. 8 I desire a sanctity of Life, and helpe from my Father to discharge my duty in that Cal∣ling wherein God doth place me. 9 I long to heare him speake, who saith in the Omega of the
Revelation, Behold, I come quick∣ly, and my reward is with me; even so come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Amen, Amen. M. K. The end of the first part.
Beleevers Experiences. PART II. 1. Experiences of M. H. ABout 34 years agon, (I being in my youthfull age) it pleased God to give me an heart to take delight to hear the word preach∣ed at many places, but especial∣ly at Antholins at the morning Lectures, and this I did often for some time, until Satan did stir up many Instruments to call me Puritane, with many other re∣proachful tearms, that did make me ashamed to go in publick; but
like to Nicodemus by stealth, as it were, in the darke: But when after it pleased the Lord to con∣vince me of Satans wiles, that he was a deceiver from the first, and that in hearing the word preached, those that would be Soldiers in Christs school, must not be daunted for every foyl; and If I did look for salvation by Je∣sus Christ, I must manfully fight un∣der the Banner of Christ, and so to hold out to the end, if I would be saved. From the consideration here∣of, God was pleased to put cou∣rage into my heart, to hold on in the wayes of God, professing the Gospel, which I did, though with abundance of weakness and difficulties; and thus I did conti∣nually go on, (though darkly) until about some ten years since, when it pleased God to break
forth in his most glorious light by special providence I was brought to see an utter ruine to my soul without a Christ; and though I had heard much of Christ to the outward eare, yet had I no experimental knowledge of him, till about some ten years since the word of Christ shewed me, that my condition was such as Paul speaks of to the Ephesians, that I was dead in tres∣passes and sinnes, and except I was quickned by the Spirit and by Faith, did hath my soul in the blood of Christ, I was an undone creature, notwith∣standing all my long hearing the word preached. Having then weighed many circumstances, and had confe∣rence with many of the people of God, both Preachers and others, I was very much strengthened in faith, and had an assurance of the love of God in Christ Jesus,
whereby I did find much com∣fort to my soul; and about some five years since, hearing some able Ministers of the Gospel hold forth most precious truths, I found much comfort: And more particularly, hearing Mr. Bridges of Yarmouth opening that com∣fortable Scripture Psal. 42.11. Why art thou cast down O my soul, why art thou disquieted within me? trust in God, &c: His Doctrine was, That a godly man had no just cause to be discouraged, whatsoever his condition was, either sence of sin, or the temptations of Satan, or trouble, or afflictions; but that a man had cause to be humbled for the least sin, but not to be dis∣couraged at the greatest from trusting in God, but to rely upon the Lord by faith in Christ, whatsoever his discouragements were; which hath since caused
me to walk in a thankful posture towards God for his unspeaka∣ble mercy, and It is my great grief, that I can be no more thankful, seeing I have received so much mercy from God, whom I do daily offend; which hath made me with Paul to cry out, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? But that the next words produce comfort, Blessed be God through Jesus Christ. But yet after this, it pleased God to suffer me to fall into a sinful condition, by being too confident in my own strength, which fall did cost me abun∣dance of tears, and sighs, and sob∣bings of heart, even to that heavy sorrowing, that as David said, Even to the breaking and drying of my bones: It made me walk sad∣ly for many months together, even to despair of any helpe.
And seeing that I had brought so much dishonor to God, and scandal to the Gospel, and reproach to the Professors thereof, this did much presse my soul; Considering, that such a Professor as I was before, to stand for the glory of God, in opposing all gain∣sayers, and then for me to fall; Oh! this did make such gashes in my soul, that the consideration thereof; caused me to walk most sadly, and sorrowfully, and with so much shame, that I could not endure to go in the streets, But that urgent necessity forc'd me to go out for comfort. Then it pleased God by speci∣al providence to cast me under D. Homes his Ministry, and he treated on that subject concerning back-sliding, out of Jer. 14.7. O Lord, though our iniquities testifie against us, yet do thou it for thy Name-sake, for our back-slidings are many. &c.
Which Sermon was (by the wor∣kings of the spirit of God) effe∣ctual unto me, for I was almost under despair before now; yet the Lord was pleased to give me much comfort under this Doct∣rine, that Saints may be guilty of many back-slidings, yet they should not despair, for that was a greater sin. Then the Doctor made this Use, that If Saints might break their peace, Wicked and unregenerate men might break their necks. A second Use was, that A Saint should beware of back-sliding, and make all speed to go to Jesus Christ for more strength to keep and uphold him for the future. This did give me in some comfort, and caused me to set upon the work of seeking to Je∣sus Christ more earnestly, because Christ told Paul, that His grace was sufficient for him; I had rested
by all that little Mustard-seed-faith I had before, but now it did begin to spring and blossom, to the praise and glory of Jesus Christ, that he should (as it were) snatch my soul, as a Brand out of those burnings of Hell, and esta∣blish my poor soule by his free grace, to see all my iniquities laid to the charge of Christ, as Isa. 53.6. All we like sheep have gone astray, we have turned every one to his own way, and the Lord hath laid on him the iniquities of us all. Which Scripture being opened by a worthy member of that Church Mr. Feak, it did much strengthen my faith. In the Application, when I came to consider, First, That it was iniquity that the Lord Jehovah had laid on Christ. Secondly, That it was my iniquity that was thus laid on Christ. Thirdly, That it was
the Lord himself that did lay it on him. And Fourthly, That the Lord had done it already, it was not now to do. All these points did so much comfort me, that seeing they were so back'd by Scripture, and such a caution given by the Apo∣stle Paul Heb. 3.12. saying, Take heed lest there be found in you an heart of unbelief, &c. Which is a great sin and plague to any poor soul, this wrought much with me; but then the applying of several other Scriptures, to the everlast∣ing praise of Jehovah, and to Je∣sus Christ my Saviour: This Scripture was produced in Psalm 68.16. compared with the A∣postles word, speaking of Christ, Thou hast ascended up on high, and led captivity captive, and received gifts for men, even for rebellious ones; that the (Lord God) may dwell amongst
them. And that of Ezek. 16.7, 8, 9, 10. A precious Scripture for troubled souls, to be meditated on for comfort: That A man being in his filth and guilt, and all o∣ver with blood, nay when no eye would pitty him, that then was a time of love to their souls; Oh mercy and free grace indeed! Then again, considering The new Covenant, to open blind eyes, and to bring Prisoners out of Prison, to the glorious light and liberty of the sons of God, and with his Proclamation, Isa. 55. Ho every one that thirsteth come: And in that of John 6.37 Him that commeth to Christ, he hath promised in no wise to cast out. Though thy sins be as Crimson and Scarlet, yea of such a deep dye, as that with Paul I may say, to be chief of sin∣ners; yet it pleased God to give me in a refreshment stil from the same Scripture, where it is said,
This is a faithful saying, that Christ came to save such sinners as I was. Then some two years after I did begin to hearken out, how I might be joyned with the peo∣ple of God in Church-fellow∣ship, I had many invitations from loving friends to see the way, and walking under the Ordinances of Christ for the space of five or six years before, at several meetings, and in several places with people fearing God, (but yet much differing in judge∣ment) yet holding the funda∣mentall Truths of Jesus Christ. All this was in London; But a∣bout some two yeares since, or thereabouts, Providence was pleased to cast my lot at Westminster, where once I heard Mr. Henry Walker; and having observed many honest people, both at the hearing of the word
publick and private; at last, after I had sought to the Lord both publick and private, by earnest supplication and prayer, that God would be pleased to direct me in so great and weighty a work of being a Church-member; and that the Lord would so di∣rect me by his blessed Spirit, that my onely aymes might be for his glory, the good of others, and with comfort to my own soul: It pleased the Lord to direct my heart (notwithstanding all oppo∣sition of Satan, and the perswa∣sion of some others) to resolve to break through all opposition and difficulties to be joyned with this company of honest hearts joyned in fellowship together to worship the Lord God of our Fathers, and to walk in his wayes, according to the strictest rule of the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, held forth in his word. March 21. 1651. M.H. 2. Experiences of L. P. ABout some twenty years since (I being then with child) was much troubled at some thoughts, which God put into my mind, touching my con∣versation; which lay so sore and heavy upon me, that I could not tell what to do; Because I saw, though I endeavoured, as much as I could, to do my duty to my God, yet I was not able to live as I should; and then I began to know what the worme of con∣science meant, which before I was ignorant of; I then feeling, what untill then I was igno∣rant of: and the blacknesse of my spirit was such, with the
burnings of my troubled and af∣flicted soule, that I could at that time (for the present) take no comfort in any thing; and had I not been with child, and affected with natural inclination to the Babe in my womb, I had been in danger (had not God by some other means prevented me) to have destroyed my self, for I had some temptations that way; but my God strengthened me: yet before I was brought to bed, I found peace and comfort; and through grace had such settle∣ment in my spirit, that I could with joy night and day call up∣on my God believingly. But before I attained to this, I had many sore conflicts; until af∣ter some considerations that the Lord had put into my minde; as first, touching the child that I went with, because God hath
said, The just and innocent slay thou not; and thus considering the innocency of the childe, which the Lord put into my minde, it (through Gods mercy) became a meanes to stay my hand from laying violence upon my selfe. But for a time I was yet after∣wards much troubled in spirit, untill God gave me peace in my soule from these, and other Scrip∣ture-promises, that the Lord saith, Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorifie mee, Psa 50.15. Sin shall not have dominion over you, for yee are not under the Law, but under grace, Rom. 6.14. the te∣stimonies now of my conversion, and true beleeving, in which I hope I have a seale of my interest in the Lord Jesus are these, and others. 1 My love to God, which is
reall, sincere, and hearty, desi∣ring him above any thing else whatsoever. 2 My relying upon Jesus Christ, having nothing of my owne to rest upon, I fly to him, and rest on him for all, as my a∣lone Saviour and Redeemer. 3 My delight to read the ho∣ly Word of God, and to heare, or otherwise to partake there∣of, in which I finde much com∣fort. 4 The comfort which I finde by inlargement of my soule, when God comes in under the meanes in duties, and the loath∣nesse I have to be taken away from duties, or to be deprived of the ordinances. 5 The peace I finde with my God in my soule, which is sweet, though not without much hea∣vinesse of spirit for my failings
I doe not live without waines and changes in my Spirituall life, and faith towards the Lord, for sometimes I can trust God with all, and at other times I meet with some doubtings, yet (blessed be God) I finde still more and more, my doubtings asswaged, and my communion with Christ every day more sweet, and more full. 6 I doubt not, but the Lord Jesus Christ (my Redeemer) will so support me, through his Grace, that whatever my condition hath been, or shal bee here, that I shall not faile of salvation through Christ in hea∣ven for ever. L. P.
3 Experiences of F. P. I Have been troubled at the thoughts of Originall sinne, and at my corruptions, and wretched condition. I have formerly had some doubtings touching the Scrip∣tures, whether they were truth or not; but I have been since troubled, that I made those foo∣lish doubtings to question Gods Word, and was so wounded in my Conscience for my sinne therein, that I feared I should be damned for it, because I thought it was a sinne that God would not pardon. I have also strange thoughts about the sinfull wayes of un∣godly people, and considering
how loosely people live, I had temptations to perswade me, that surely there was some easier way to Heaven then the Scrip∣tures had laid downe, or then I had learned. But for these evill thoughts of mine, I have been so afflicted in my spirit, that I thought surely I was a damned wretch. I have been tempted by blas∣phemous thoughts against the Lord, which have so afflicted me, that sometimes I feared that the Devil would fetch me away, and carry me to Hell; and I have thought sometimes, that surely God could not in Justice pardon such sins as I have com∣mitted. I have also been tempted to make away my selfe, but the Lord God put it into my minde to consider, that that would not
give me ease or comfort, but be the way to enter into endlesse miseries. And thus I lay afflicted with a most sad and troublesome spi∣rit, for about the space of a whole yeare, yet (though with little hope of my present sence then) I had desires that God would save me, and some groa∣ings I had after him. And in his time (which is best) I be∣gan to finde some inlargement of heart from God, to a great longing for Christ, which en∣creased so much (through the working of his glorious power) that (me thought) I could have been content, to have gone through all the miseries in the world to have enjoyed him. And in my sleep in the night, I dreamed that I saw my Savi∣our the Lord Jesus lying in a
Grave, and after againe, I saw him risen from death; when I awaked, and had taken in some thoughts into my minde about my dreame, I found comfort in my soule, and begun more sweet∣ly to hope, that Christ Jesus hath dyed for my sins, and is ri∣sen againe for my justification; yet the Devil (who goes about like a roaring Lion, did still so tempt me, that I was againe ready to despaire for my former evil thoughts, and I was afraid that Satan would have me; and I doubted that God had no part in me, which caused me to weep much, and I was exceeding∣ly troubled, and sometimes thought, that verily I heard the Devil coming in a Whirlwind for me, and (so terrified was my Conscience, that from the thoughts of the wrath that I
feared, I could have wished my self a beast, a Dog, or any thing; because their misery would have an end. But after many comfortable discourses from friends, and my reading of some godly books that came to my hands, the Lord God in time delivered me from those temptations, and hath since comforted me with these promises, to the great joy of my heart, though sometimes since, I have not been without some doubtings. The Lord hath said, Be content with such things as ye have, for he hath said, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee, so that I may boldly say, the Lord is my helper, Heb. 13.5, 6. The Lord saith, Sin shall not have dominion over you. Rom. 6.14. That hath often given me much comfort, and kept up my soul
when I have been ready to de∣spair: And Christ saith, I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another comforter, that he may abide with you for ever, even the Spirit of truth, Iohn 14.16, 17. And I have this testimony of my interest in Christ, by faith wrought by his blessed Spirit in mee. 1. I see such a frailty in my flesh, that except the Lord send his holy Spirit to enable me, I cannot do any thing of my duty to God of my self; it is the spi∣rit of the Lord, and not any thing in me, that is the founda∣tion of my comfort. 2. I have had many times (if my heart deceive me not) clear testimonies and evidences that I do love God more then any thing else, and desire him above all.
3. I desire much to hear the Word, and am troubled that sometimes it doth not so pierce into my heart, as I desire. 4. I have sometimes such sweet comforts and enlarge∣ments in my soul, by Gods bles∣sed Spirit, that I finde much peace with God thereby; which I prize above all things in the world. 5. I desire to serve the Lord in all things, and am troubled when any thing obstructs those desires. 6. I hope for salvation and true blessednesse from Jesus Christ my redeemer, and from him alone. F. P. March 21. 1651.
4. Experiences of C. M. I Have had much sorrow for my sins, because I know God hath been displeased therewith, and my trouble of spirit hath been so great for them, that it hath often fetched teares from mine eyes, and it hath been the greatest trouble to my soul, that ever I had for any thing, And some particular things, wherein I was seduced, touching my children, that hath brought some trouble upon them, by my parting with them, hath much afflicted me, fearing that God would damne me for it, and this with my other offences against the Lord, hath often much grie∣ved me. But my hope is in my blessed Saviour, and that for his sake
God will forgive me, for he hath promised, Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and hee will have mercy upon him, and to our God for hee will a∣bundantly pardon, Isa. 55.7. Christ shed his blood for sinners, and he saith, his grace is sufficient for us; The Lord hath promised to save all sinners that repent and turne to him by faith, Ezek. 18.30. I am a great sinner, and God hath gi∣ven me sorrow and repentance for my sinnes, therefore I be∣leeve God will save me, and my iniquity shall not be my ruine. And as an evidence that I have faith, and thereby an interest in Christ, and that he hath given mee Experiences of his love to mee, I have these testimo∣nies. 1 I love the Lord better then
any thing in the whole world, without his love, whatsoever it is. 2 I blesse God, hee hath through his grace, so settled my heart in him, that I doe trust in God for my salvation, and for all; and could be willing to part with all for Jesus Christ. 3 I find my heart (drawn forth by God) to bee much affected with the hearing of the word, and partaking of the Ordinan∣ces, which doe more comfort me, then all my injoyments which I have all the week besides. 4 Blessed be the Lord, I find my heart in that quiet frame, and peace towards man, that I have no desire of evil against a∣ny one. 5 I hope that I am not decei∣ved in this; that the Lord is at peace, through Christ, with me,
and heares my prayers, and will save me through the Lord Jesus for ever. C: M: March 21. 1651, 5. Experiences of T. H. MY sins have much grieved me, and I have wept and been much troubled for them, so that sometimes I have thought it would burst my heart, in that I offended the Lord; and this hath often afflicted my soule, so that many times despairing thoughts have made me feare, I have been in danger to be damned for my sins: And I have been throwne down low, considering that eve∣ry sin deserveth death, and the eternall curse of God.
But I have since (through Gods goodnesse and mercy) had an eye to the Lords gracious promises revealed in his holy word to comfort poore sinners; as That salvation is to be found by those that by faith lay hold upon Je∣sus Christ; for by grace are yee sa∣ved, through faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God, as Paul saith, Ephes. 2.8. I have gone to Christ, and pleaded this pro∣mise with comfort. And God hath promised, that if sinners repent and turne to him, he will have mercy on them, in which, together with other promises, I have found much comfort. And I doe beleeve that the Lord in mercy will save me by the blood of Christ: And as a te∣stimony from God thereof, 1 I find in mine heart, that I love God farre better then any
thing else, and account the world, and the things thereof, as nothing in respect of him, who is the Creator and govern∣our of the world, and giver of all good things. 2 I can with all my heart (I hope) be content with any por∣tion in this world, so I have God to be at peace with me, and can say with Job, or at least desire it, if afflictions and losses should be fall me, to say as he said, The Lord giveth, and the Lord taketh blessed be the name of the Lord. 3 I finde my heart (I blesse God) much inlarged towards hearing the word, and to prayer and godly conference, and daily find more and more comfort in duties. 4 I desire to discharge my du∣ty with a good conscience to∣wards all men, in all things, and
submit to Gods will in crosses, desiring to injoy peace in my conscience, where I blesse God I do find much peace with God, that if I should presently dye, I make no doubt, but through Gods mercies in Jesus Christ to goe to heaven. T. H. March 21. 1651. 6 Experiences of E.B. I Have had trouble for sinne; and for that I have found in my heart and conversation that I have not served God; as I ought to doe, it hath been a great grief to me; and looking upon my selfe, as I am in my selfe, and my own strength, I can see no∣thing that is good, but that I
am a sinner, and I look upon my selfe as the worst of sinners, that can hope for salvation, and I see my self an undone wretch with∣out Jesus Christ. But (to God be all the glory) I have beene often comforted from divers sweet and precious promises, as that the Lord Jesus Christ saith, He will never leave me nor forsake me; and there is my comfort, and my rock where I hope to be safe, if I gaine Christ (as I trust I shal) to be my Savior for ever. Also Christ saith, Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousnesse, for they shall be filled, Matth. 5.6. I have thought of Gods love and his goodnesse, and have found my heart inlar∣ged in the pleading of this pro∣mise, and the Lord hath said, He will dwell with a broken and hum∣ble heart, to revive the hearts of the
humble and to revive the spirits of the contrite ones; from these and divers other promises I have found much comfort. And touching my propriety in Jesus Chrst, I have these te∣stimonies, sealed from heaven unto my soule. 1 I really love God with all my heart, and above all things, with all my soule, and with all my spirit; I value not any thing in the world in comparison of Jesus Christ, my Savior and my God. 2 My affection and delight is much in hearing of the word, and partaking of Ordinances, desiring to live more closely to the Lord Jesus Christ daily, and I finde much comfort in the word, and a joyfull fellow∣ship and union with the spirit of the Lord in duties.
3 I find a chearfulnesse in my spirit in the Lord in all my cros∣ses, so that through the com∣forts I finde in him (blessed be God) they are not crosses to me, because I find a sufficiency in the strength of the Lord to beare me up. 4 I finde peace in my con∣science (blessed bee my Sa∣viour) and I am fully perswa∣ded, that when ever I shall dye, I shall, through Christ, goe, to God Almighty, and injoy eternall life and salvati∣on▪ E: B:
7. Experiences of G. D. GOd hath given me a sence of my sinne, and it hath wrought such a sorrow upon my heart, as shall, I hope, never be repented of: worldly sorrow must be sorrowed over againe, but I hope Christ hath borne my sorrow for me, because it hath been for offending him. I have found much trouble of spirit, and Satan hath been very busie with me, and I have been much troubled in conscience, and the devill would have drawne me to desparation, but my God hath supported mee; and through Gods inlightning mee, I knew that despaire brought hell and destruction, but those that trust in him doe never miscar∣ry.
And I have found comfort from these promises, and divers others; Christ saith, Come unto me all yee that are weary and heavy laden, and I will give you rest. I have pleaded this promise with God; having found sinne my greatest burden, and nothing hath trou∣bled my spirit more. And I have found Gods grace and goodnesse given in to me in fly∣ing to this promise. Christ hath promised, That all that come to him, he will receive, and in no wise cast them out; And he chides us when we doe not come to him, that we may be saved; therefore in all humble obedience I have by faith relyed on the free grace and mercy of my God in Christ for salvation, and am greatly greived that I can serve him no better. And as a testimony of the ex∣periences
of my faith in Jesus Christ my Saviour, and my love to God, 1 I desire to incline my heart more to God then to any thing else. 2 The Lord and his name, is the cheifest object I have, aiming more at the glory of God, then at any thing in the world. 3 I have a great esire and thirsting after the Lord and his Ordinances, and finde that by faith the Lord giveth my heart great joy in receiving of the word. 4 There is no name under heaven by which I can be saved, but only by Jesus Christ, and he is my rock, and my hope. 5 I beleeve that the Lord is at peace with me. 6 The Lord hath inclined my heart to serve him, though I
come far short of my duty, and that troubles me. 7 My hope is in Gods mercy through Jesus Christ, and in him alone; to be saved in him, and for his sake. G. D: March 21. 1651. 8 Experiences of A. B. I Have had many conflicts and troubles, and many checks of conscience for my sinnes, which hath been so bitter to me, and the burden thereof so great, that I have had many temptations to despaire of Gods mercies, which did arise from the consideration of my neglect to serve the Lord as I should do; and in my pray∣ers and best actions I have had
wandring thoughts. My sin hath sometimes been so terrible in mine eyes, that I have often thought, that had God been severe in justice to∣wards me, I should have perish∣ed every moment, and been thrown to destruction. And these considerations cau∣sed many feares, and doubtings to arise in my thoughts, inso∣much, that because of sins, and also of my imperfections in prayer and duties, I have fea∣red that God would not heare me, so that sometimes I have thought it would be in vaine to pray, because I thought surely, God would not hear me, and every crosse that befel me (for I had many afflictions) I thought God laid them justly upon mee, for not performing my dutyes to God in that measure which
I should have done. Yet the Lord (by his grace) put me in minde to consider of that destruction which would befall mee, if I did forsake my God, and the Lord hath since given me a sight of sufficiency in Christ for me. And I have found comfort from these and other promises, That the Lord hath said, A brui∣sed reed shall he not breake, and smoa∣king flax shall he not quench, till hee send forth judgement unto victory, Matth. 12.20. And Christ hath bidden all that are weary to come to him, and promised that in him they should find rest, Come unto me all yee that labour and are heavy la∣den and I will give you rest, Matth. 11.28. And Christ saith, Him that commeth to me, I will in no wise cast out, John 6.37. I have found great comfort from God to my
soule in these promises, and I do verily beleeve, that I am one of those that Christ Jesus will save, and whom hee shed his blood for. And as a further testimony of my interest in God, by the effects of my faith, 1. I doe desire to spend my life to serve the Lord for the time to come. 2. I love God above all the world, with all my heart and soule, and could be content to leave all for his sake. 3. I doe chiefly desire of all actions in the world to be in du∣ties, and in communion with the Saints and people of God, and to partake of the Ordinan∣ces of God in a spirituall man∣ner, esteeming that comfort a∣bove all worldly delights. 4 Sometimes I have doubts upon
my spirit, and at other time my faith is more cleare, and my soule satisfied that God is at peace with me. 5 I doe beleeve that God doth love me in Christ, and will save me through him. A. B. March 21. 1651. 9. Experiences of W.C. I Have been so troubled in conscience for sin, that I have sometimes been in great despair, and it hath brought mee very low, finding nothing in me to sa∣tisfie me, but there is enough in Jesus Christ: But I have had many doubtings and troubles of spirit, and that for many years, fearing that Christ would not
save me, because of my own un∣worthinesse, and disability to serve God; and sin was a very great load upon my spirit. But I found comfort in these promises, and divers others, (viz.) That, whereby Christ Jesus doth invite us saying, Come unto me all yee that labour and are heavy laden and I will give you rest, Mat: 11.28. Also Christ saith, Let not your hearts bee troubled, yee be∣leeve in God, beleeve also in mee, John 14.1. And hee saith after∣wards, I will send you the Comforter: and I will pray the Father (saith Christ) and he shall give you ano∣ther comforter, that he may abide with you for ever, vers. 16. And Christ hath promised that he will save us, if we beleeve in him. Hee that beleeveth in the sonne hath ever∣lasting life John 3.36. There∣fore
with comfort I have trusted in Christ and applyed these pro∣mises to my soule, and I have found peace in God through my Saviour. And I have found these fruits of the spirit of God working in my heart. 1 In that I love the Lord my God with a greater love then all other things. 2 I have much affection to the people of God, and love them upon that account. 3 I take great delight in the Worship and Ordinances of God, and I finde much com∣fort from God in duties; and sweet refreshments from com∣munion with God in du∣ties. 4 I am troubled that I can∣not walke up more close to God, but I doe sincerely desire,
(in all things) to keep a good conscience, both towards God and towards all men. 5 In times of my afflictions and trouble, I finde much peace and content in God, and in all things I desire to submit to the Lords will. 6 I finde much peace in my heart, in that I beleeve God is at peace with mee, and will bring mee to heaven and glory through Jesus Christ. W. C. March 21, 1651. 10. Experiences of A. C. I Have had a trouble for my sinnes, which hath been very great, in so much that I had sometimes thoughts, that God would never pardon such a sin∣ner
as I was; but that he would surely damne mee; and when I looked or thought on my ori∣ginall sinne, there I saw no∣thing but the wrath of God a∣biding upon me; and I saw my selfe altogether undone without Christ. But after a great deal of trem∣bling for sinne, I did receive a great deale of comfort in these promises; As it is said, Blessed are the poore in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdome of Heaven, Matth. 5.3. And Christ saith, Hee that comes to mee I will in no wise cast out, John 6.37. And Christ saith Come unto mee all yee that labour and are heavy laden and I will give you rest, Matth. 11.28. In these and such like promises I have found a great deale of comfort when I was much troubled. And God saith, Call upon me in the day
of trouble, and I will heare thee, and thou shalt glorifie me, Psal. 50.15. And I have found this promise made good to me many a time, for when I have been very much troubled for sin, the Lord God (blessed be his holy name) hath brought me out of it. And I now doe beleeve, (I praise my God) that he hath re∣generated me by his holy spirit, of which I have these testimo∣nies. 1. My love to God, for I doe love him above the whole world, and I see such an excel∣lency in my Saviour, that it draws my soul out exceedingly to love him, and to have an high esteeme of him. 2 I am heartily willing to part with every thing that of∣fends my blessed Saviour. 3 It doth grieve mee that I
can serve God no better then I doe; because he so loved me, that he gave his onely begotten sonne, who dyed for me, So that herein is my great comfort, that Christ will not cast me out, though I am a vile sinner. A. C: March 21. 1651. 11. Experiences of N. B. WEE read in the eight of the Acts, that Ananias and Saphira his wife sold a pos∣session and laid part of the price at the Apostles feet, Rom. 5. to v. 7. But therein they dissembled with God (and Ananias forth∣with dyed) I shall not any way retain any thing that hath laine on my conscience, but empty
my selfe of my selfe, least that I now speaking in the presence of God, might be inflicted with the same punishment that Ana∣nias was. We also read in the 19. of the Acts 18, 19. ver: many that belee∣ved came confessing their deeds, and those which used curious arts burnt their bookes, &c. mi∣stake me not, my meaning is not, according to the Church of Rome, to thinke; that a bare auricular confession can bee satisfactory with the good intention of the party con∣fessed, or that a meer acknow∣ledgement in publike, in the outward Ordinance, can save the soul; but to give the Church satisfaction, I will unfold my selfe. I was born a Protestant, and in the pale of the profession of
England, and so continued till I was eighteen years of age, at which time, diversities in opini∣ons being in the Land, as con∣cerning Church-government, and the like, I knew not which party to take, but fell to the Church of Rome, in which I firmely continued for the space of four yeares or thereabouts; but at length, being marryed, by my wives perswasions, and frequenting the Protestant mee∣tings, I was somewhat softned, and then I began to contemplate with my self in what a most sad condition I was in: at last I be∣sought the Lord earnestly with prayers, but for a time felt no answer to my troubled spirit from him, which drove me in∣to, almost, a despairing conditi∣on; but such was the great good∣nesse of God, that with often
seeking to the Lord, I found, as it were, a certain assurance with∣in my selfe, that God would bee yet mercifull to me. Then I applied my self to the book of God, as to that oracle which should resolve my doubt∣ing, drooping spirit, where I found many sweete promi∣ses. John 3.14, 15, 16, 17. And as Moses lifted up the Serpent in the wildernesse, even so must the Sonne of man be lifted up. That whosoever beleeveth in him, should not perish, but have eternall life. For God so loved the world, that he gave his on∣ly begotten Son, that whosoever belee∣veth in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. For God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world: but that the world through him might be saved. Ezek. 18.21, 23, 32. where he
saith, But if the wicked will turne from all his sinnes and keepe my statutes, he shall live and not die, &c. In the 32. verse, For I have no pleasure in the death of him that dyeth, wherefore turne yee and live, Ezek. 36.25, 26, 27, 28. Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and yee shall be clean from all your filthinesse, and from your Idols, I will cleanse you, a new heart will I give you, &c. Isa. 55.1. Ho! every one that thirsteth, come yee to the wa∣ters, and he that hath no money, come yee, buy, and eate; come, buy wine and milke without money, and without price: Come unto mee all yee that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. But one place seem∣ed most remarkable to me, Acts 10.43. To him gave all the Pro∣phets witnesse, that through his name, all that beleeve in him, shall receive remission of sins.
Having beleeved these and ma∣ny other promises, my part I thought was to be done, which was, a true contrition for sinnes past; and sincere determinati∣on, never to commit the like sins in time to come, and to looke more narrower after my owne wayes: As Paul speaketh to the Corinthians, 2 Epistle 7.11. For behold this thing, that yee have been godly, so yee see what care it hath wrought in you, yea, what clearing of your selves, what indigna∣tion, yea, what feare, how great de∣sire, &c. Although I had this de∣sire, yet I still had some doubt∣ings, and conflicts within me, whether God would be merci∣full to mee, that ever had the injoyment of the Gospell, yet to be an Apostate, and fal from the truth.
But then I streight fled to God by these promises, as to a Physitian for a remedy: And such was the love of God to∣wards me, to rouze me from this bed of sin, wherein I lay, as it were, secure, and so might there, with that multitude have perished; but the lost sheepe is (blessed be God) brought back againe to the sheepfold, where∣of Christ Jesus is the Shepheard; and now I will with David say, What shall I doe, I am in a streight, (what requitall to make to God) I will, with David, take up the cup of salvation, and call on the name of my God, &c. My conscience is now satisfi∣ed by the effects that the word hath wrought in me, even 1 A newnesse of life, in rely∣ing on him whom my soule lo∣veth, Jesus Christ, without
whom there is no salvation; There is no other name under hea∣ven, whereby wee can bee saved, but by the name of Jesus. The Prophet saith, There is no peace to the wicked saith my God, But they are like the raging sea, cast∣ing up mire and dirt. 2. I thank God, that I have through Christ, found some peace with God, and am fully assured of his mercies unto mee in the Lord Jesus, that he wil save my soule, notwithstand∣ing all my sins past; and as the faithfull are one body in Christ, Rom. 12.5. I would not as Balam, desire to dye the death of the righte∣ous, and stil live impiously, but to his glory. And I desire, that I may walk with this Church so, in his feare, that when I dye I may dye in his favour, and so reigne
with him world without end. N. B. March 21. 1651. 12 Experiences of A. H. MY condition hath been ve∣ry sad; I have been drawn away to Popery, and have par∣taken of all their vilde Idolatry and abominable superstition, for about halfe a yeare, through the perswasions of the Papists; but afterwards I had a very great terror of conscience; and one night was fearfull to sleepe, least the devill should fetch me away. I was much distempe∣red in my minde, and in a sad condition; and after I had slept, I thought (upon my awaking) that I had bin dead & was risen
againe; when I was up, I was in a great amaze, and thought that when I saw the fire, that they would burne me in it; and I feared to eate any thing least they should poyson me: and the Devill appeared to me, and stood before me, and did excee∣dingly terrifie mee; And hee tempted mee to make away my selfe. And I was thus exceed∣ingly distracted for about six weeks, having in that time se∣verall temptations, by the de∣vill to murder my selfe, and sometimes to drown my selfe; but the Lord still hedged my way with thornes, and mightily preserved me, so that I may say, it is a wonderfull mercy that I was not destroyed in hell ma∣ny a time. But I afterwards found com∣fort in many promises: As
in that the Lord Jesus said, If thou canst beleeve, all things are possible to him that beleeveth, Mark. 9.23. And he saith, That the Son of man is come to save that which was lost, Matth. 18.11. And hee bids us, goe yee, and learne what that meaneth, I will have mercy, and not sacrifice; for I am not come to call the righteous, but sinners to re∣pentance; From these, and many other promises, I praise God, I found much comfort. And I have these evidences of my interest in God. 1 That my love is such to God that I would forsake all to follow him, and am resolved to waite upon him, and to bee content with any thing for him. 2 The Lord hath wrought in me a great affection to the hear∣ing of the Word, which workes
much upon my heart, and is sweeter then hony or the hony∣comb to me, 3 The love of God draws my heart to love him again; But I can do nothing of my self, but through him I can do all things. 4 Though I have many doub∣tings, yet sometimes I have more full assurance, and beleeve from my Experiences of God, that surely, if God did not in∣tend to save me, he would never have done so much for me, and even when I have doubted, God hath afterwards given it mee in, to conclude, that he doth it out of love to make me to cling the more close to him. A. H. March 28. 1652.
13. Experiences of D.C. I Have had great conflicts of soule for my sins, and against sinne, and have shed many tears by night and by day, I have been much troubled at the con∣sideration of such things, as have been at any time a clog to me to hinder me from injoying spiritual communion with God, which I have desired. It is the greatest griefe I have ever had, that I have offended so good a God; And indeed my sins have been a very great trouble to me, and especially, in that God hath given mee such a measure of knowledge, and I have not walked up to it, to live accord∣ing to the light I have received.
But I have received comfort in Gods promises; Christ saith, All that the father giveth mee shall come to me; and him that commeth to me, I will in no wise cast out, John 6.37. Wherefore come out from among them, and be yee separate, saith the Lord, and touch not the uncleane thing, and I will receive you, and will be a father unto you, and yee shall be my sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty; the Lord will receive us if wee repent and be∣leeve; and Christ cals, Come un∣to me all yee that labour and are hea∣vy laden, and I will give you rest, Mat. 11.28. And as a testimony of my re∣generation, I have these Expe∣riences, whereof to give account of the hope that is in me. 1. That all my desires are chiefly to seek God in Christ. 2. I finde much comfort in
duties, and to joyne with the Saints in Ordinances, and to partake of the things of God. 3. I finde my heart really at peace with all the world. 4. I beleeve that the Lord God is at peace with me, and wil save me for ever through Jesus Christ. D. C. March 28. 1652. 14. Experiences of A.H. ABout eight yeares since I was convinced of the sin∣fulnesse of sin, and of it in my selfe; and I was thereby much troubled in soule to see my e∣states therein, which did seem ve∣ry blacke and dolorous, to the terrour of my conscience, and
yet I used the meanes, and fre∣quently heard the word preach∣ed, but did not grow nor pro∣fit thereby; which caused me to walk very sadly for many years together, And Satan was so busie with me, that when I have gone into any roome alone, he hath so tempted me, that I have had it often in my mind to make my selfe away; But then hath that promise, and sweet saying, come into my mind, which Paul saith to the Church of Corinth, There hath no temptation taken you, but such as is common to man, but God is faith∣full who will not suffer you to be temp∣ted above that you are able; but will with the temptation also, make a way to escape, that yee may be able to bear it, 1 Cor. 10.13. And (through mercy) I went on using the meanes, though very heavy and sad, so
that about four yeares since, be∣ing much perplexed in my spi∣rit, and my condition being wavering, and not knowing what to do; I was at that time in a great feare of falling into a sin, which I then prayed against, and sought to God with many teares to preserve and deliver me from: And one night (in my sleep) being in a great perplexi∣ty of spirit, me thought I heard, as it were, a voyce that said un∣to me, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. And yet to my great shame, and sorrow, I fell into that sinne which I so much feared, which caused me afterwards to lye under so great horrour of conscience, that I could not rest night nor day, my load being greater, and more pressing on my spirit then before, so that
I could have no rest for a long time after. Yet at the last I found com∣fort from divers promises, as that Christ saith, Daughter, be of good comfort, thy faith hath made the whole, Mat. 9.22. And Jesus seeing their faith said unto the sicke of the Palsie, son, be of good cheare, thy sins be forgiven thee, Mat. 9.2. And he saith, I will have mercy and not sacrifice, for I am not come to call the righteous but sinners to re∣pentance, Mat. 9.13. I know I am a sinner, a great sinner, that there is no salvation to be had, but in Christ alone, and though I have had many doubts, yet I have hope in Gods mercies. And I have these Evidences of my regeneration, and testimo∣nies that God is at peace with me through Christ Jesus.
1 In that the Lord hath hi∣therto supported mee to beare all my so many, and so great troubles. 2 What ever troubles I have met withall, yet now after all I find peace in God, and in him a∣lone. 3 I finde my heart really to desire to love God above all, and am jealous over my selfe, least my child, or any worldly thing should withdraw my love from my God, to love some∣thing else too much, and him too little. 4 I finde that the Lord hath wrought in my heart a great de∣sire of affections to duties, and am much troubled for my dead∣nesse and dulnesse, which I finde to be a great burden to me. 5 I desire that the Lord would search, and reforme, and purge,
the bottome of my heart, and am glad when I find any truth of God piercing to my soule; I have found my heart too often deceitfull, and doe therefore desire, that every truth of God may discover it, and conforme me to his will. 6 I do beleeve that Christ dy∣ed for my sins, and do trust that hee will be my Saviour for ever. 7 I admire free grace, that God should snatch mee as a brand out of the fire of hel. 8 It is my soules desire to walk with those, who walk most close to the rule of the Gospel, least I should be drawne into er∣rours. A: H: March 28. 1652.
15 Experiences of F.D. I Have beene often smitten with sorrow for my sins, and am troubled that I cannot serve God as I should, I have no hope of salvation, but onely in Jesus Christ, whom I long for, know∣ing that I cannot be saved with∣out him. And I have found comfort from the promises in Gods word; The Lord saith, If the wicked turne from his wickednesse, and do that which is lawfull and right, hee shall live thereby, Ezek. 33.19. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts; and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will abundantly par∣don,
Isay 59.7. And Christ saith in the Gospell, Come unto me all yee that labour and are heavy la∣den, and I will give you rest, Mat. 11.28. And I have these Experiences of Gods grace and workings in me, by his holy and blessed spi∣rit. 1 God hath given mee an heart to desire God to forgive me my sins. 2 I desire God above all things, and to injoy God what ever becomes of the world. 3 I finde a trouble of spirit, that I cannot serve God better then I doe; And I desire the Lord so to dispose of me, that I may (in his strength and power) cast off all things that hinder my communion with him. 4 I have often called to mind
a covenant made with God in my sicknesse (upon deliverance) to walke more near to God then before, and I do often call upon the Lord to assist me, and lead me, and guide mee by his spirit. 5 I have often had much comfort in contemplation with God. 6 I doe rest on Gods mercy for salvation by Christ. F. D: March 28. 1652. 16 Experiences of H. W. HAving formerly given my Experience to that Church, from which I am by consent transmitted to you; I shall on∣ly adde this; that I am a sinner, I have been much troubled in
spirit for my sinnes, and I have much wrastled against sinne; I have had many slips, and fail∣ings; yea, and sometimes in some measure backslidings; I have been often troubled at the deadnesse of my heart, and my too much neglect of that obe∣dience I owe to God; and my not walking so close to the rule of the Gospell, as I have often promised. My sins have at sometimes caused teares, and at other times sorrow for want of tears. I am very sensible that I have beene the greater sinner, be∣cause I have mis-improved so many precious mercies, as I have done; And this hath been very tiresome to my troubled spirit, that I, whom divine providence hath done so much for, disco∣vered so much too, and hath so
much inlightned, should bee so unfruitfull. But the comfortable promi∣ses of God in his holy Word, have been cordialls to my droo∣ping soule, for the Lord saith, A new heart also will I give you; and a new spirit will I put within you; and I wil take away the stony heart out of your flesh, & I wil give you an heart of flesh; & I wil put my spirit within you, and cause you to walke in my statutes, and yee shall keep my judgements and do them, Ezek. 36.26, 27. also God saith, I will cleanse them from all their iniquitie whereby they have sin∣ned against me; and I will pardon all their iniquities, whereby they have sinned against me, and whereby they have transgressed against me. And it shal be to me a name of joy, a praise, & an honour before all the nations of the earth, which shall heare all the good that I doe to them, Jerem. 33.8, 9.
And, The Lord hath spoken it, and it shall be said in that day, to, this is our God, we have waited for him, and he will save us; this is the Lord and we have waited for him, we will be glad, and rejoyce in his salvation. Isa. 25.8, 9. And the Lord Jesus Christ cryeth saying, Behold I stand at the doore and knocke, if any man open to me, I will come in to him, and sup with him, and he with mee, Rev. 3.20. And as the fruits of my faith, I blesse God (though I have ma∣ny failings, yet) 1 My desire is, that so far as is possible, I may not sin. 2 God hath the chief seat in my heart. 3 My affections are great to du∣ties, and chiefly to be spiritual in duties, whereby the life of my faith appeareth the more cleare. 5 It is as meate and drinke to
my soule to doe the will of my father which is in heaven. 5 All my hope of salvation is in free grace by faith, in God alone through Jesus Christ. 6 I delight to do all the good l can to the people of God, and in things that tend to the glory of God. 7 My greatest trouble is for sin, and my greatest comfort is in my interest in God. H. W. Aprill 11. 1652. 17. Experiences of M. W. I Have been much humbled for sin, ready to despair, and ther∣in I had many temptations, and great troubles of spirit for those temptations, and many doubt∣ings, wrastlings, and conflicts;
l put up many prayers, and shed many tears, before I could find comfort; But through Gods mercy, I found a settled peace from his blessed spirit in his time, which is alwayes best. These promises did give mee much comfort, That, the Lord said to Paul, My grace is sufficient for thee, The Lord saith, He will not breake the bruised reed, nor quench the smoaking flax: Also, that he that indureth to the end shall receive a crown of life; and Christ saith, Matth. 5. Blessed are they that mourne, for they shall be com∣forted. Though I did then mourne, yet the Lord gave me faith to beleeve that I should be comforted; and I was comfor∣ted, I blesse God, in so much that the Lord hath discovered himselfe so fully to me, that I have much peace in my soule;
that I have said in mine heart, with good Simeon, Lord now let∣test thou thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen thy salvati∣on. And as a further manifestati∣on of the workings of God by his grace in me, I blesse God I can truly say, 1 I doe love God above all things. 2 I desire to deny my selfe in all things below and without Christ. 3 I desire to be wholly taken up with the love of Christ, and enjoy as full a communion with him as possibly I may. 4 My love to Gods people is in an especiall manner. 5 I desire to doe my duty both to God, and to all with a good conscience, that my heart may never reproach mee as long as I live.
6 I have great affections to holy duties, and (I blesse God) finde much comfort in them. 7 My hope is in Jesus Christ, and in him alone for salvati∣on. M.W. Aprill 11. 1652. 18. Experiences of J.H. I Am very unworthy that Al∣mighty God should deale so bountifully and graciously with me as he hath done: my sence of sin hath brought me so low, that I have thought it almost impossible for God to save mee, which wrought a great trouble and fear upon my spirit, and brought me to a very low, and begging condition; and I be∣sought
the Lord for grace, and for his holy spirit, to inable me to keep his commandements, I had an aking heart for my sins, which drew some teares from mine eyes, and the trouble here∣of lay very heavy upon me, and raised great doubtings in mee for about a quarter of a yeare; and I finde some part of that trouble yet remaining upon mee. But I have had comfort from severall promises out of Gods Word; as that, where Christ saith, He that commeth to me I will in no wise cast out; And he also saith, verily, verily, I say unto you, he that heareth my word, and beleeveth on him that sent me, hath everlasting life, and shall not come into condem∣nation, but is passed from death unto life, John 5.24. And it is said in the Revelations, The spirit and
the Bride say, come, and let him that heareth say come, and let him that is a thirst come; and whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely, Apoc. 22.17. From these and many other promises, I have found much comfort. And I have these evidences of my interest in Christ, as fruits of that faith which I have recei∣ved touching my interest in these promises, and in Christ my Saviour, in whom all the promises are yea, and amen. 1 God is in my love higher then all, not only because he saveth, but because he is gracious, and undefiled, and his wayes and word is holy. 2 I have also this testimony, that I doe love God, because I love the brethren, the children of God. 3 I looke upon all comforts
as flowing from Christ, and de∣sire to partake of them as mer∣cies from him. 4 I account holy duties so good to me, that my heart de∣sires to heare all good doctrine; and I finde my heart many times much ravished, when I heare of good things touching God, that I sometimes weepe for joy. 5 The hope of my salvation is in Christ. 6 I do beleeve and hope that God through Christ is reconci∣led to me, and at peace with me, through his free grace and mer∣cy in Christ Jesus my Saviour. J. H, Aprill 18: 1652.
19. Experiences of H.N. I Was for a time in a very sad and wildernes condition upon hearing of that place of Scripture 2 Thes. 2.12. That they all might bee damned who beleeved not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighte∣ousnesse, This so wrought upon me, that I was much, and sore troubled in my spirit. Yet at last the Lord made me to leave my old companions, and gameing on the Lords day, and other follyes, and God drew forth my heart to long af∣ter Christ. And I found comfort from the promises of the Gospell; It is said, God filleth the hungry with good things; and nothing in mine
eyes was comparatively to God and his grace, and I had com∣fort in that sweet text, where it is said in Esay, O thou hope of Is∣rael, and the Saviour thereof in the time of trouble. And that, where it is said, God so loved the world, that he gave his onely begotten Son, that whosoever beleeveth in him should not perish but have everlasting life, John 3.16. Then God gave me an heart to joyne to the society of godly people, and I found much com∣fort and a great deale of expe∣rience, passing many troubles in the Bishops Court in Wells, but the Lord appeared to my great comfort. And as a further testimony of my hope in God. 1 God inclines my heart so to love him, and my Saviour Jesus Christ, that I desire rather
to dye, then to live to dishonour God. 2 I have great affections to the people of God, and to doe good for them. 3 I find my heart so affected to depend only upon God, that I know whom I have trusted. 4 I have sometimes much comfort in ordinances in pub∣lique and in private, many ra∣vishments with God, and have received many returns of prayer. 5 I have sweet hopes of sal∣vation in Christ, and in him a∣lone, and all is nothing to me below Jesus Christ. H. N. Aprill 18. 1652.
20. Experiences of W.F. I Know we are alwaies in the presence of God, he knoweth the secrets of all hearts, for all things are naked and open to his all seeing eye, and therefore shall beg a beleefe, that what I here give in, is from the sincerity of my heart. And first, I blesse God, he hath given me a heart to forsake all my former evil waies, & to take up a full resolution to become a new creature; and to joyne my selfe in communion to a select number of the Church mili∣tant, the children and family of God: I confesse (if I looke up∣on my self, and upon my former life and conversation) it hath
been as if there were no God in heaven, only in a state of nature, having a form of godlinesse, but deny∣ing the power thereof in my life and conversation: But it pleased God of his free grace and rich love in the Lord Jesus to give mee a heart to consider of my conditi∣on, and to beget in me a love to the waies of holinesse; and to that end, with earnest and hearty prayer, and with many teares. I besought the Lord, and would not let him go, till I found com∣fort from him upon my spirit; I saw I could doe nothing as of my selfe, and therefore I made it my study to get an interest in Christ, to be ingrafted into him, For without him I could do nothing. I found many gracious promises, in the word of God, that Hee would not the death of a sinner, that he was stow to wrath, and abundant in
mercy and truth, he is gracious and ready to forgive, that Christ dyed for sinners, even when wee were dead in sinnes and trespasses then Christ dyed for us, by grace we are saved, this infinite love melted me into tears, that I rested not, striving with God, untill hee was pleased to assure my heart that all my sins were pardoned in the blood of the Lord Je∣sus. And this I found, 1. By the spi∣rit of God rejoycing and refresh∣ing my soule, witnessing unto my spirit that I was the childe of God, and this assures me of my adoption, and imboldens me to call God [father.] 2. Let the world value me at as low a rate as they please, if they say, my wisdome is folly; I can say Christ is my wisdome:
I have food to feede on which they know not of, when they shal want their huskes to feed on, I shall finde bread enough in my fa∣thers house, and love enough in my fathers heart to satisfie my eternall soule. 3 I blesse the Lord, I value my union with Christ above ten thousand worlds, & know there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus: I know God hath freely given mee Christ, and with him all things; the world is an addition and over-plus. 4 I rejoyce in my interest in the living God. Our God is a holy God, and therefore Christ by his love constraines the death of sin, and my heart is lifted up to live in the spirit. 5 It is the rejoycing of my heart, that I can behold my self an heire of glory, and co-heire
with Christ, and therefore am perswaded neither persecution, shame, reproach, or scorne of the world, or any thing what∣soever, shall be able to separate me from the love of God: and (if my heart deceive me not) I could suffer the losse of all, yea, even of life for Christ and his Gospell. 6 I am perswaded tis not du∣ties, Church-fellowship, Ordi∣nances, or any thing that wee conceive or propose to our selves, which can of themselves give a soule rest, without living upon God in the spirit. 7 Behold (saith the Apostle) what manner of love the father hath bestowed upon us, that we should bee called the sonnes of God; the con∣sideration of this infinite and unspeakable love hath wrought in me a holy jealousie over al my
ways, that therfore I have hum∣bly besought the Lord to keep my heart upright, that I might not at any time wittingly or willingly offend so gracious a God, that I might not dare to returne him evill, for all the good he hath done for my poor soule, that no wicked thoughts or corrupt communication should proceed out of my heart or mouth, whereby I should grieve that good spirit of God. 8 And as for things temporal, I confess, I have formerly bin very subject to distrust Gods provi∣dence to me, notwithstanding all my life long have I had ma∣ny signal testimonies of his love and care over me. But now the Lord hath been pleased to give me a heart to rest upon him, and he hath comforted me with this
and many other sayings out of his holy word, viz. The Lord is a sun and a shield, the Lord will give grace and glory, and no good thing will he with-hold from them that live uprightly, godlinesse hath the promise of this life, and of that which is to come, I know (saith David) that it shall goe well with them that love the Lord, It is grace in God that dispences all condi∣tions unto me. 9 I have a fountaine can ne∣ver be drawn dry; that God in all his dispensations to mee is my father, and I stand as a son in his presence, begotten by his own love in Christ. 10 And for all this exceeding kindnesse, I desire to declare my thankfulnesse, by an hum∣ble, just, and holy conversati∣on, and by a sweet contented∣nesse of spirit; he will assured∣ly
lead me by the hand in this my pilgrimage, and journey through the wildernesse of this perishing world; and having Christ I have all, I shall at last appear with him in glory. This life is but a moment, and yet upon this moment depends all eternity of good or evill, the darke clouds wee are under will be blowne over, and Christ the Sun of righteousnesse will break forth in his splendor and glory, and wee with him to all eter∣nity. 11. And now my hearty prayer to God is, that in life and death, I may wholly seeke to advance the glory of God, that I may walke closely with him, and have holy communi∣on with him all my daies, that my life may be a patterne of ho∣linesse unto others, that those
those that are without may bee won by our godly conversation; The hope of the righteous is gladnesse. 12 I could wish with Paul (if God saw it good) To be dissolved, and to bee with Christ, which is much better for mee then all I can injoy here. W. F: Aprill 18. 1652. 21. Experiences of T.G. IT hath pleased the Lord God of his owne free mercies and love in Christ Jesus to protect and keep mee ever since I was borne, from many thousand dangers, and yet I, like an un∣ruly colt have kicked at his fa∣therly protection, and runne in∣to
many grosse and vile sinnes. The first grosse one was, many kinds of unlawfull gameing, which held mee as a bondslave some thirty years or therabouts, to the great indangering both of my body and soule; but yet it pleased the Lord to look graciously upon mee, and to give me afterwards an hatred a∣gainst this vice, and withall, he put into my minde a resolution, which I confirmed with a vow as followeth: That as I loved God, his word or my own soule, I would never play at any game for money so long as I li∣ved. The Lord was pleased to ac∣cept of my good will, and bles∣sed me and mine in my lawfull calling many years, untill at the last, that old Serpent the devill, envying my happy proceedings
in this reformation. He drew me into a liking of Tobacco, and with it into ma∣ny other sins, which had almost brought me to as bad an end as the first. But the Lord out of the low∣est extremities gives in reme∣dies to his children, and he gave me an hatred against this vice al∣so, and a resolution, Never to take any Tobacco more; and I give God thanks for it, I have kept this vow ever since, which was, That as I loved Christ Jesus my Saviour, I would never take more Tobacco. Blessed be the God of my fa∣thers for ever more, Amen. But yet about two or three yeares afterwards (againe) that old enemy of mankind, Satan, that roaring lion seeking whom
he may devour, came again with turnings to destroy me, perswa∣ding me, that to drinke with my neighbours, was acceptable to God, (which may be used with restraint of excesse, but) I gave wil the ful reins, which brought me back againe from my former courses, and withall annexing wrath and anger with my house and family, perswading mee, that I must rule in my house, which had almost brought me besides my self, had not God hel∣ped, who never fails those whom he loves, and that put their trust in him: for presently upon this extremity, hee sent this remedy. First, a sight of my sins: se∣condly, a griefe and sorrow for them: Thirdly, a resolution to leave them: And fourthly, The Lord set mee, and carryed mee through a way to leave them, which was thus.
I began to call to mind what was the greatest thing I loved in this world, and in the world to come, besides those that I named before, which I set opposite to these two monsters: then I vowed before the Lord, desiring his assist∣ance, That as I loved the holy Ghost the comforter, or ever looked to have comfort from the blessed communion of the body and blood of Christ Jesus to clense my sins, so if I did remember or was in perfect sence, I would ne∣ver drinke above two reasonable glas∣ses, or cups of Wine, or foure cups of Beer in any one place, or at any one time, without any Equivocati∣on, And that when I came at any time into the doores of my house, if there were any controversie between my Mother and my Wife, or between the Servants and them, That then I would with gentle perswasions doe my best indeavor to end the controversie;
And this with Gods helpe I would performe. And I prayed, O Lord my God, blesse my hand and my heart to perform thy will, that when any temptation to game∣ing or drunkennesse, or lust shall assault mee, either by thought or any other meanes, that then presently I may flye unto thee in the name of Christ Jesus my Sa∣viour. And I doe still flye unto God, confessing and sorrowing for my sins, desiring the Lord to helpe and assist me to performe and keep all these, and in all things serve God as long as I live. I cannot be humbled for my sinnes so as I desire, yet I have had much trouble for sin, and have shed teares many a time, and I have been much troubled
that my heart cannot be broken enough; Yet I have had many crosses, and I know it is the hand of God, and I desire to lye low before him. When God first discovered my sins to mee, I was much ter∣rified and feared, as if every bush was a theefe. But I have found much com∣fort in that glorious promise, which God made when Adam had sinned, that The seed of the woman should breake the Serpents head, Gen. 3. And also that sweet promise declared by the Lord Jesus, Come unto me all yee that are weary and heavy laden, and I will give you rest, Matth. 11.28. And Peter declareth saying, Repent and be converted, that your sinnes may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord. I have
pleaded these and severall other promises with God, and have by faith trusted in God, who bids us to cast our care on him, and he will care for us, 1 Pet. 5.7. And I do be∣leeve in God, and cast my selfe upon him, knowing all the pro∣mises to bee yea, and Amen in Christ. And I have these effects of Gods gracious spirit, working regeneration in my soule. 1 In that the Lord (blessed be his holy name) hath so set∣tled my heart on himselfe, that I could leave all friends, relations, and all things for God. 2 I finde in my heart a reall affection and love strongly car∣ryed on to all the children of God, and I love to doe good to the people of God. 3 I take much delight to hear the word of God preached, and
to partake of duties with the people of God, and communi∣on with God in private du∣ties. 4 I am troubled when my heart is cold in duty, but much comforted, when my heart is in∣larged towards God. 5 I beleeve that God will save mee through Christ for e∣ver. T. G. Aprill 25. 1652. 22. Experiences of E.D. I Have had much sorrow, and been much troubled for my sins, and often craved pardon of the Lord: I know my self to be by nature a sinner, and so can∣not be saved but by Jesus Christ,
upon whom alone I depend for all the good I hope for. It is a great trouble to mee that I cannot serve God as I should doe, and I am troubled in my spirit that I cannot grieve more for sin, then I have done, and I desire a frame of spirit to serve God according to the rule of the Gospell, and that the Lord would be pleased to create in me a cleane heart, and renew a right spirit within me. But I have found comfort in the Lord through Jesus Christ, by applying of severall promises to my soule, and that as the word of the Lord saith, Psal. 51.17. The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit, a broken and contrite heart, O God thou wilt not despise. So, Behold the dayes come, saith the Lord, that I will raise unto David a righteous branch, and a
King shall reigne and prosper, and shall execute judgement and justice in the earth: in his daies Judah shal be saved, and Israel shall dwel safe∣ly, And this is his name whereby he shall be called, the Lord our righte∣ousnesse, Jer. 23.5, 6. And I have these Experiences of Gods graces wrought in me by his spirit. 1 I love God better then any thing whatsoever. 2 All my joy is in God, and I injoy what I partake of in him. 3 I love to partake of the Or∣dinances with the Saints. 4 My heart is much drawne forth by prayer to desire the Lord to strengthen me, to pro∣fit by hearing the Word, and that the Lord would print that which I doe heare in my heart. 5 In hearing the word and in
prayer, I often finde my heart inlarged and much comforted by Gods blessed spirit, revealing Jesus Christ in me. 6 When my heart is dead, I do much desire the Lord to send his holy spirit to quicken me, and I doe often finde a sweet re∣turn from God therein. 7 I beleeve God is at peace with me; and that all my sins are pardoned in Christ, on whom alone I depend for salva∣tion. 8 I doe highly value and e∣steem of the Church and people of God, knowing as David saith, A day in thy Courts (O Lord) is bet∣ter then a thousand, I had rather be a doore-keeper in the house of my God, then to dwell in the tents of wicked∣nesse, Psal. 84.10. 9 I have really given up my selfe to serve the Lord, desiring
his divine grace, that I may doe it in truth and sincerity, for Christ saith, except we be con∣verted and become as little children, we cannot enter into the kingdome of heaven. E. D: Aprill 25. 1652. 23 Experiences of W.W. HAving from my youth up∣ward tasted of the gracious dealings of God towards me, in his manifold deliverances of me from many eminent dangers both of soule and body; wher∣in the great tempter of mankind went about by his subtilties to destroy me, not being only con∣tent, as a malitious enemy, to draw me (by sin) into his delu∣ding
paths, the end whereof is nought but bitterness, and death for ever. I say, hee had no sooner per∣formed this his work, but find∣ing, as it were, an inclination in me, wrought upon my heart by the spirit of God, to return out of the shadow of death, and those abominable waies where∣in he had led me: He then im∣mediately, like a sharpe accuser, steps in upon my poor drooping soule, laying in her sight the wrath of God in his justice for sin, and with that testimony which the spirit declares in the 18 of Ezekiel, Surely, the soule that sinneth it shal dye, with many more judgements and terrours for sin, being in my spirit (for some time) very much dejected and brought low, laden with mine iniquities and over-pressed with
my sins, I cryed unto the Lord and he heard me in his most ho∣ly place, and was pleased in his most righteous love, to breake in upon my poor soule, even in these words of comfort; Come unto me all ye that are weary and hea∣vie laden, and I will refresh you: and Ezek. 18.21. But if the wicked will turne from all his sinnes that he hath committed, and keep all my sta∣tutes, and doe that which is lawfull, he shall surely live. Upon consi∣deration of these and some o∣ther Gospell-consolations, the Lord was pleased to give unto me a hungring and a thirsting after the meat that never perish∣eth; having that testimony of God within me, that I could owne the Lord Jesus Christ as my Saviour, taking up those words of the Apostle, Jesus Christ came into the world to save
sinners, whereof I am the greatest. And hereby finde we the love of God to us, because he laid down his life for us. And my desire is, that since the Lord hath dealt so graciously with me, as not only to give me a sight of my sins, but a sence of my sinnes, in humility I doe humbly implore his ayde, in the carrying out of my spirit to love him above all; and having this, I hope for blessed opportunities in the being planted with a people, whose hearts are towards God in a righteous way: my prayers shall be, That the strong may be in∣dued with those graces to beare with the infirmities of the weake, building each other up in the most holy Faith of the Lord Jesus, and shall con∣clude with that of the Prophet Daniel, O Lord doe good to Si∣on,
build up the walls of Jeru∣salem. W. W. April 25. 1652. 24. Experiences of A.F. THe thought of my sins hath much troubled my Consci∣ence, especially some parti∣cular actions which God disco∣vered to me, upon the losse of severall near relations, that God tooke away from me by death; and I mourned above seven yeares under great terrour of spirit for my sins, and was in danger to have despaired, had I not received comfort from God, in partaking of duties with the people of God. And therein God comforted
me with severall Promises, which he delivered to me out of his holy Word, who saith; Though your sins be red like scarlet, yet shall they be as white as snow; and though they be as crimson, yet shall they be as wooll, if ye be willing and obedient. And the Lord saith in another place, I will remember your sinnes and your iniquities no more. And againe, I will love you freely for mine owne names sake. And the Lord Jesus saith, that he is our Portion, our Interest, and our Advocate, if wee be∣leeve. And I hope I have an interest by faith in Christ; for, 1 I have an higher esteeme of God, and the graces of his Spi∣rit, then of all things; all the world is nothing to me in com∣parison of God. 2 I love Gods Ordinances,
and desire nothing more then the Word, and to partake of the Spirit of Christ in the Ordi∣nances. 3 I finde much comfort from the Word, and inlargement of heart by the Spirit of Grace, re∣freshing my soule in duties. 4 I love the people of God. 5 I rejoyce in the fellowship and society of the godly. 6 I hate the wayes of evill men, and it troubles me to the soule, when I see God disho∣noured. 7 I trust for Salvation in Christ, and in him alone. 8 I doe beleeve, That God is reconciled to me through Christ. 9 I am troubled when Satan puts evill thoughts before me, and in calling upon God, I find help and strength therein.
10 My chiefest comfort is in my communion with, and inte∣rest in God. A. F. May 2. 1652. 25. Experiences of G. R. THe Lord hath wrought sore upon my heart, and I have been brought nigh to de∣spair, for some things that have sorely troubled my conscience; I have wept, and been in a great agony, and did lye so dejected a∣bout halfe a yeare. But then, and since I have found comfort from severall promises, which have eased my soule by degrees, the Lord saith, Isa. 1.18, 19. Come now, and let us reason together, saith the Lord,
though your sinnes be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall bee as wooll, if ye be willing and obedient. And the Lord saith elsewhere, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. And as a testimony of my in∣terest in God, through Christ, I have these effects of my conver∣sion: 1 That the Lord hath set it upon my heart, to love God a∣bove all things. 2 I desire to serve him accor∣ding to the rule of his Word. 3 I love him because he loved me, and gave his Son, who shed his bloud for me; and because of his glory and holinesse. 4 I desire from my heart to partake of duties with the peo∣ple of God, and finde great joy and comfort in my heart in du∣ties,
and therefore doe desire more and more thereof. 5 I desire to be in fellowship with the Saints, not for any by-ends, but for Gods glory. 6 I beleeve that through Christ all my sinnes are done a∣way, and God is at peace with me; and I hope, that should I presently dye, I should be hap∣py, and my soule be received into blisse with my God, in Christ Jesus my alone Saviour. G. R. May 16. 1652. 26 Experiences of I.G. I Have been troubled at the consideration of that place of Scripture, The wages of sinne is death. Rom. 6. last, I then began
to be very sensible of my sinfull estate, and I thought that if I was not helped out of that con∣dition, that I must be damned unto all eternity. I also thought of that place where it is written, To be carnally minded is death, Rom. 8. and a∣bout two yeares since (for the space of about a quarter of a yeare) I was so troubled in my soule, that sometimes I could not rest upon my bed, and thought, that where I was, the Devill was with me, and when I did seek to fly to God, I found a temptation of great resistance to hinder me. But I after (through the goodnesse of God) found com∣fort in severall Promises; as first, that the Lord saith, I will take away your stony hearts, and give you an heart of flesh; and in this I
had very much comfort, yet I was tempted to lye in an unbe∣leeving condition, touching this promise, as to thinke that it was not the Word of God, but my owne word: but the Lord then gave in to me, that which he saith in Ezek. 16. I said unto thee when thou wast in thy bloud, live. I thought I was in a banisht condition, and that God had hidden his face from me, by rea∣son of sinne, but I finde comfort in that promise, where God saith in Esay, Though a woman for∣get her sucking childe, yet will not I forget thee. And as a further testimony of my faith in the Promises, as the effect of my communion with God, I can say (I blesse God) from my heart; 1▪ That the Lord is the chie∣fest
of ten thousand, the only object of my love, because hee hath so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Sonne, that whoso∣ever beleeveth should not perish, but have everlasting life. 2 I love the Lord for his great wisdome, and glorious holinesse. 3 I am much affected to ho∣ly duties, and communion with the people of God. 4 I find comfort in the brea∣things of Gods Spirit in duties. 5 I finde the testimony of Gods Spirit in my heart, that he will save me through Christ. I. G. May 23. 1652.
27. Experiences of A. G. I Have found sinne a great bur∣den to me, and the weight of it hath troubled me a great while, and I have had many tri∣als and troubles upon me; some∣times I have wept, and at other times I have been troubled that I could not weep, and I have had a long and great sorrow for my sins, and the sence of them hath so smitten my Conscience, that sometimes I have been very fearefull that I could not bee saved. But I have found much com∣fort and my spirit much setled from divers promises; as that the Lord saith, Thougb your sins be as scarlet, I will make them as
white as snow, and though they be as crimson, I will make them as wool, if yee be willing and obedient, Isay 1. Also the Lord saith, Though a woman forget her childe borne of her body, yet will not I forget you, and they that beleeve in Jesus Christ shal be saved, John 3. And I find this fruit of my re∣generation. 1 That my love is more fixed to God then any thing, and a∣bove all things. 2 I desire to partake of duties for the spirituall sweetnesse I find in them. 3 I love to be in the company of the people of God. 4 I finde many refreshments in hearing the Word preach∣ed. 5 I have content in God, and peace with him, which is sweeter then any thing in the world.
6 I desire to live above the world, and though I cannot as I should, yet I doe beleeve that Christ is my righteousnesse, and hath made up what is wanting in me for me. 7 I do beleeve that God is re∣conciled to me in Christ, and for his sake will pardon all my sins, and save my soule. A: H: May 23. 1652. 28. Experiences of A.G. THe sence of my naturall con∣dition hath been a great trou∣ble to me, and my sins are every day more and more grievous to my soule; while sin was plea∣sant, I was quiet; but since it came to bee a trouble to me, I
cannot rest without helpe there∣in. I am so troubled herein, that sometimes when I go to bed, it so grieveth me that I know not what to do; I have been sometime hearti∣ly sorry, that I could not be brought to weep, insomuch that sometimes my heart hath been ready to breake, from the consideration of my deadnesse and dulnesse to God, through the hardnesse of my heart. But I have been comforted out of Gods Word, who hath promised, That if a sinner turne from his sins, and repent from the bottome of his heart, he will blot them out of his remembrance: Christ saith also, Come unto me, all yee that are weary and heavy laden, and I will ease you; And the Lord saith, That whensoever two or three are
gathered together in his name, there he will be in the middest of them. And as a testimony of my ex∣periences of Gods love, and my interest in Christ by regeneration I praise God I can say without dissembling, or halting, 1 That I value▪ not the world, nor any thing therein, in comparison of God, and had rather be without all then with∣out God; and I desire only such enjoyments of the world as may help me, and not hinder me in my service to God. 2 My desire is so to follow God, and his Word, and to have communion with the peo∣ple of God, that I may thereby walke the more close to God. 3 I desire exceedingly to have my faith strengthened by the Spirit of God, to rest upon him, and to serve him, and to
use all meanes to be taught, and to practise the things of God. 4 Whatver I strive for in the world, I doe in a more espe∣ciall manner seeke to get to hea∣ven, and to be with God. 5 I have much comfort in prayer, in pouring out my soule to God. 6 I would part with Iife, or any thing for God, who hath done so great things for me. 7 I love God for his purity, and holinesse, and his com∣mands are pure, holy, and desi∣rable to me, because of that beauty and comlinesse which in my judgement I see, and by ex∣perience finde in them. 8 I hate all sin for the evill thereof, the thought thereof is hatefull to me. 9 And I doe beleeve, that though in my selfe I am a great
sinner, and deserve nothing but damnation, yet that God will save me, of his rich mercy and goodnesse, through Christ Jesus. A. T. May 23. 1652. 29. Experiences of S. P. THe bitternesse of the wrath of God for sinne is very sharpe unto me, and I do behold, as in a glasse, the odiousnesse of sinne in my Conscience, I was not once sensible of the sinfulnesse of sin for twenty foure yeares space, but walked loose, like a wilde Heifer; but in the yeare of our Lord, 1642. I was by a Sermon preached by Master Hall, then one of the Assembly, as I take it, when he was at Norwich, I was
brought to such a feeling of sin, that it wrought great sorrow, and I saw my selfe to be a vilde wretch, and undone without Christ, whom I could not finde, except I returned to the Lord, and that I had nothing but Christ to depend on for Salva∣tion. And I found comfort in some promises that the Lord put into my mind out of his holy Word, as Heb. 13.5. Be content with those things which yee have, for he hath said, I will never leave thee, nor for∣sake thee. And Heb. 10.23. Let us hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering, for he is faithfull that promised. And in the Psalmes David saith, Trust in the Lord, be strong and he shall comfort thine heart, and trust in him. And it is said, The mighty God casteth away none that
is mighty and valiant of courage. And the Lord hath so wrought by faith upon my heart, that 1 All my delight and glory is wrapt up in the love of God, through Christ. 2 All the world, and all af∣flictions, cannot, I hope, beat my heart off from God. 3 I enjoy an heaven upon earth in the enjoyment of God, in the graces and life of his Spirit. 4 I have passed many trials, but God hath kept me up. 5 I doe thirstingly, and joy∣fully, with a longing desire▪ thirst after duties in publick and in private, and am much troub∣led when I faile in any. 6 In duties I desire, that God would come in by his Spirit, knowing that I cannot hear sa∣vingly
except the Lord open my heart, nor aske any thing of God by prayer, except he speaks in me by his Spirit. 7 I have found such comfort in duties, as are to me tokens, and pillars to my faith. 8 I have found miraculous re∣turnes of prayer. 9 I have taken much comfort in the remembrance of those wonderfull things the Lord hath wrought for me. 10 The Lord alone is my stay. 11 I finde assurance of the love of God to me, testified by his Spirit in me. S. P June 9. 1652.
30. Experiences of E. L. I Had for a time profited but little under the meanes, and was very dead under the Word, and the Lord hath given me a sight and sence of my dulnesse, and of my sinnes, and throwne me very low under the sight thereof; I have been so troubled for my sins, that I feared I was not converted to God, in that I did follow the hearing of the Word, and profited so little; and the sence I have had of the great∣nesse of my sins, hath caused me to poure out many a teare to God, by humble and hearty re∣pentance, but in all this I have had hope, that God would come in by his grace in his
owne time to save mee. And my heart hath been much refreshed from the Pro∣mises that God hath revealed to me out of his holy Word, where Christ saith, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee; and, whosoever cometh to me (saith Christ) I will in no wise cast out. Also he calleth, Come unto me all yee that are weary, and heavie laden, and I will ease you. And I have found much ex∣perience of Gods love to me, and his grace wrought in me to aise me up, when I was lowest cast downe, and I have great te∣stimonies thereof. I My union with God in Christ is so firme, that I hope there is nothing will be able to separate me from the love of God. 2 My confidence is in the
Lord, whom I love above all. 3 I have a great desire after the Word, and Ordinances, and with great joy I doe embrace the Word. 4 I have a great affection to be among the people of God in du∣ties. 5 I finde great comfort and refreshment in the hearing of the Word of God, and the Lord Je∣sus Christ set forth in his glory; the joy of my heart therein I cannot expresse. 6 I doe beleeve, That the Lord Jesus Christ hath shed his bloud for me, and wil save me at the last Day; he saveth all those that trust in him, and I doubt not but I shall be saved by him, for I doe trust, and relye for Sal∣vation upon him, and him alone. E. L: June 20. 1652.
31. Experiences of J. F. I Have had many turmoilings in the world, but the sence of my naturall condition, and my sins, my offending God is my greatest trouble, the thing I would doe, I doe not; and what I hate, that doe I;) this troubles me, my sins scare me, and my corruptions stagger me; I groane under my spirituall burden, and was not God with me to hold me up, I should sinke under it and never rise againe. Yet I have comfort in many sweet promises, as that the Lord saith, I will not leave thee, nor for∣sake thee, when our parents and all leave us, he hath promised, then he will take us up, he hath promised
to be a God, to the humble, meeke, and lowly in spirit, and to binde up the broken hearted with his love; This broken heart of mine is not for worldly things, but for sinne, and as the fruits of my faith, 1 I wish that I could love God and Jesus Christ as I should doe. 2 I have a great willingnesse to partake of duties, and finde much of sweetnesse in duties, and am grieved that I cannot profit in them more. 3 I am a poor simple woman, and have nothing in my selfe but do trust in Jesus Christ; I know I can undoe my selfe, but cannot of my selfe doe for my selfe any good, Jesus Christ is all, and above all, and in us all. 4 I do cast my self down at the footstoole of mercy, and all my
comfort and hope is in Christ alone. 5 I could be content to give up my selfe and all I have to God, and for the honour of his name. 6 I am weary of sin, and de∣sire to serve God, not only with my lips, but in heart, and in my whole life, and that I may set the law of the Lord alwayes in my sight to love it and obey it. J. F. June 24. 1652. 32. Experiences of S. P. I Was called out to be a Soul∣dier, and having had much experience of Gods deliverance from enemies in the high places
of the field, it brought me to a consideration of my wayes, and of the evill of sinne, and the danger thereof; and what a sad condition it is to be in the state of sin, and the sence of my sins troubled mee very much both night and day, and it was a great griefe to me to consider, how I had trifled away my time, and neglected the wayes of God, and sinne was a great burden to me, and I was not sensible for the present, how I might get out of that condition. But I found comfort from the Lord, who refreshed mee with severall promises, Christ saith, Come unto me all yee that are weary and heavy-laden, and I will give you rest, and my yoke is easie, and my burden light, saith he, the consideration wherof hath been of great comfort to me.
And because I cannot come to Christ except the father draw me, therefore Christ hath pro∣mised in John, that He that com∣meth to him, he will in no wise cast out, but will raise him up at the last day; And it is said in the He∣brewes, that walking according to the rule of the Gospell, and being content with what we have, the Lord hath promised, that hee will not leave us nor for∣sake us, Heb. 13, And the Lord hath said, that hee that hideth his sinne shall not prosper, but hee that confesseth his sinne, and turneth to the Lord shall be saved: And I de∣sire not only to confesse, But 1 With all my heart to turn to the Lord from every sin, and to serve him in every duty. And the Lord doth beseech us, as the Apostle saith, by his free grace to be reconciled, and though the poor
creature can do nothing of him∣self, yet God accepts it, if there be but a real willing mind; and God workes that also in us both to will and to doe, so that all is of the free grace of God, By grace we are saved, and that not of our selves, it is the gift of God, we are all by na∣ture the children of wrath. 2 It must bee by a spirituall eye that we see God, and I hope God will teach mee, and give me faith to see him, and my in∣terest in him, there is a begin∣ning and a growth in grace, as well as in nature. 3 My desire is, with all my heart to seek after the truth that is in Jesus, the truth of the Go∣spell. 4 I desire in all things to de∣ny my selfe, and that God may be all in all, and above all, over me, and in me.
5 I desire by faith and repen∣tance to mortifie sinne daily in my members, and my sins make me many times to cry out, that if the Lord should enter into judgement with us what could we doe: But the promises and goodnesse of God are my stay and comfort. S. P, June 27▪ 1652. 33. Experiences of P. P. I Am a poore ignorant crea∣ture, and have so continued a long time, sinne is a burden to me, and I desire to lye low for it; I can doe nothing of my selfe, but I desire to waite up∣on the Lord, and to follow the rules of the Scripture. I have
been in very great streights and tryals by inward temptations, as well as outward afflictions, and Satan hath tempted me to low thoughts of God, and some∣times to despaire, so that I have been sorely perplexed. But God hath comforted me by severall promises, as that the Lord promiseth to strengthen the weake, the Lord hath also pro∣mised, to be found of them that seek him. And Christ saith, Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdome of heaven, and blessed are they that mourn for they shall be com∣forted, Matth 5. And I trust the Lord hath con∣verted me to him: For 1 I love God with all my heart, and it is my whole desire to be drawne nearer and nearer to him, and to lye at the foote of Jesus Christ.
2 I desire in all things to deny my self, that Christ may be all in all▪ 3 I have been much comfor∣ted, in that though Satan hath often tempted me, yet God hath not suffered him to overthrow me; I have been tempted to make away my selfe by a knife brought to me, and Satan hath appeared in a visible shape to tempt me, and promised me ma∣ny things; but then the Lord appeared, and said, is there not enough in mee? and so the Lord hath carryed my soule safe through all temptations, 4 I doe much delight in the word, and desire the spirit of the Lord to subdue sin, and mortifie lusts in me. 5 I beleeve in Christ, and through him alone, I hope to find salvation. P: P: June 27. 1652.
34. Experiences of M. T. I Have been much troubled for sinne, and have been more sensible of it, since I came to duties with this Church; and I have wept for sinne, and in the society of this Fellowship I have been smitten for sinne, and mourned for it, with great trou∣ble of my spirit. Nothing one way is greater in mine eyes then sinne, and yet another way nothing is greater in mine eyes then Gods mercy, who hath promised to my com∣fort, That at what time a sinner doth repent, and turne from his sins, he will receive him to mercy. And he saith, Call upon me in the day of trouble, I will heare thee, and thou
shalt glorifie me. And I have found much comfort from God in these promises to my soule; and moreover, 1 I love God above all. 2 I have nothing but that comes from God, whom I de∣sire to serve, that he may have the glory of all I have, and am. 3 I desire to serve the Lord, not for feare of punishment, but out of heavenly love, I would not offend so good a God, and Saviour. 4 I finde comfort from the Scriptures, and in duties. 5 I have had much comfort in God, since I have heard Mr. Walkers Ministry. 6 I hope for salvation only by Jesus Christ. M. T. July 11. 1652.
35. Experiences of E. R. I Was borne and bred up of godly Parents, yet Satan so farre tempted me to commit that detestable sinne of telling a Lye, about eleven yeares of my age, against a Sister of mine, and my Sister was shrewdly and severely corrected by my Pa∣rents for that fault, and that none of hers, but mine, and I had not grace at that time to lay it to heart; but within some three moneths after I had a fit of Sicknesse, and a grievous touch in my Conscience for that sinne committed against God, and my Sister, as that I saw nothing but desperation, and feared that the horrours of Hell-fire would
seize on my soule and body for this sin, and Satan told me, that there was no salvation for me, for God knew me not, neither would hee owne mee; but if I would either hang my selfe, or cut my throat, or take the bed-staffe to thrust down my throat, then I should never be torment∣ed more, but look how an Oxe dyed, so should I. Then I cryed out to my pa∣rents, and said, that I was dam∣ned, and that there was no sal∣vation for mee, but that I must goe to hell; then my parents watched mee, and did search narrowly to see what instru∣ments I had prepared: Then the devill did tempt me to rend the pillow, and pick out some of the feathers to swallow them downe, which I did, which had like to have cost me my life, for
I was very nigh dead by this means. Then it pleased God that my parents did send for a Doctor to administer some things to mee, which hee did, and after that, when I was a little recovered, my parents did send for Mr. Newstubs a Minister in Edmunds bury, and one Mr. Rogers another Minister of Deddam, who tooke a great deale of paines with me, and asked mee whom I did be∣leeve in; and I told them that I did beleeve in God that hee would damne me; and they as∣ked me, if God would damn me because I did beleeve in him; I answered no, but it was for that sin committed against God, and my innocent Sister; and they asked mee, whether I was not sorry for that act, and I told them yes, for I had cause e∣nough
to be sorry, for I must be damned for that sin; then they asked mee whether I was sorry with all my heart for my offen∣ces, and I told them I had great reason to be sorry, for by this, I had lost the love of God, and my interest in Jesus Christ; they replyed, that Christ had left sweet comforts for penitent sin∣ners, and they were to admini∣ster it unto them: But I replyed, it was not for such a sinner as I was; for there could be no sal∣vation for mee: And they told me Christ dyed for sinners, and such sinners as I was, for they said I was a penitent sinner; but I replyed, Christ never dyed for such a one as I was, neither could his mercy save me; then they bad mee have a care how I did presumptuously goe about to judge my owne soule, for
God did it, and that I was not fit to judge my selfe in that condition I was under, for they told me, that it was a greater sinne in so doing, then to com∣mit that sinne of Lying against God, for God was a God of mercy, but I had no mercy, thus so rashly to judge my owne soul. Then I replied, that they were as bad as I, for they came to help to carry my soule into Hell head-long; but they told me no, but they would ingage their soules for my soule, that I should finde comfort from them in Christ Jesus; with that I cri∣ed out, O happy day would that be that I might finde comfort before my departure; and they told me, that Christ was a Christ of tendernesse, that I was a be∣loved Christian, a deare Chri∣stian, and Christ was a prepa∣ring
comfort for mee, and it was Christ that had opened my eyes to see my sinne, and he would also open my heart to loath sinne, and he would par∣don my sinne; and yet I told them no, that he would never open my heart but with terror, for I was borne to be damned, and must be damned, and that Christ never dyed for such a sin∣ner as I was; this I spoke with great sighing, and they asked me what made me to thinke so, and I told them that I saw nothing but Death, and Hell, and con∣fusion of body and soule; and they asked me why I sighed, and wept, and groaned so sore; and I told them, because now I was a going into Hell, for the Devill with his chaines was ready to throw me into the utter pit of darknes; and they said, Where∣fore?
and I told them for of∣fending the Lord my Creator, and did wish my selfe to be in Hell, that I might be out of my misery, and that I might no longer see the vengeance of God; with that they went to prayers, each of them an houre, and when the last Minister pray∣ed I cried out, O Lord my God, my King, and Saviour, have mercy upon me a poore distres∣sed sinner; then Master Rogers came unto me, and took me by the hand, and said, That he was glad to heare me call upon the Lord, yet I said I should bee damned, for I was none of his, and that the Lord was none of my God. But yet the next morning, I had some comfort but that left me againe, and I was under the same condition of ebbings
and flowings for sixteen weeks together, before I had any as∣surance of my salvation; and ha∣ving taken no rest a long time, I fell into a slumber; and in my sleepe there did appeare unto me a little childe in white, with an apple in one hand, and a white wand in the other: and he car∣ried me until I came into a place where I did see much terrour of fire, & shreeking, and a great deep ditch where was nothing to hold by, yet there I must goe over that burning lake; and he tooke the white wand and laid it over the Ditch, and bad me to tread upon it, and feare not, but that I refused; then he came unto me, and tooke me by the hand and trundled his apple on the wand, which bowled over very levell, and with that I said, It is the Lord, therefore I will
venture, and did venture over with this Childe in my hand; and when I came to the shore I cried out with feare, my Lord, my God, and my Saviour, am I in Hell, or am I redeemed out of Hell? with that I awaked, b∣ing in a great passion and feare, and there being my friends a∣bout me, they told me, that I was redeemed out of Hell; and I asked, How could they tell? had they been there? for I told them that I had newly been there; then I cried out, Oh, where is that sweet Babe that was with me; and they asked me what Babe, and what was the shape of it; and I declared unto them as before, and they told me, That it was Jesus Christ that had appeared in the shape of a Childe, and that hee had overcome Death, and Hell,
for me; and I cryed out, and said, Blessed be Jesus Christ for evermore, and did intreat those people that were there with my Father, that they would goe to prayers for me, that those com∣fortable revelations which I had seen, and my faith in Christ, might never depart from me; yet for three yeares space after I had much foylings, and many ebbings and flowings, and much feare possessed me, that Satan would tel me that I was more a∣fraid of Hell, then of offending God; but boldly I sate up in my Bed, and told Satan, That he was a Lyer, and that I would rather be damned then to deny Jesus Christ, and so Christ did appear very comfortably to me all along, and hath, and doth de∣liver me out of very many trou∣bles very often, and how to
speake of them I doe know no end; yet Satan like a cunning Sophister hath been tampering with mee to despaire in Christ, yet it pleased the Lord to bring many promises into my minde, and that example also of Mary Magdalen, and also of the Wo∣man of Canaan beleeving; that as Jesus Christ had been graci∣ous to them, so he would also be to me; and Christ hath often times revealed unto me, that his grace was sufficient for me, as Christ said unto Paul; I can speake but little of Jesus Christ, but yet I am fully perswaded in my soule, that I should think my selfe very happy, if the Lord please, even to give up my life for the glory and honour of his Name, if the Lord would count me but worthy of such a favour, and I would not for all the
Kingdomes in the world, and the pomp thereof, be in such a condition againe; and now my soule doth desire to give up it selfe unto God, and to walke with the people of God in the strictest course that his Word doth prescribe, and for many years together I have had long∣ings to joyne with the people and Saints of God in a Church-fellowship, but still Satan hath been a meanes to hinder me, but now I am resolved, through the strength of Christ, to wade thorow all opposition, desi∣ring to be admitted into this Church. E. R. July 18. 1652.
36. Experiences of T. M. ABout the fourteenth yeare of my age I was put out to be an Apprentice, but was pla∣ced with a Master in whom I saw little of God, his wayes were contrary to the wayes of God, which was a great trouble to my spirit; and the more, be∣cause some rude people would drinke, sweare, and be very de∣boyst with him. About three or foure yeares after, there grew great Disputes amongst some persons about E∣piscopacy, Presbytery, Indepen∣dency, and the like, which made me question with my owne thoughts, which was the true way to worship God.
I applied my selfe to Mr. Till the Minister, and others, but was not satisfied, but after great perplexity of spirit, I medi∣tated with my selfe, and won∣dred what would be the end of my troubles, for they had been many, especially temptations to despaire of salvation. But afterwards being retur∣ned backe from my Master to my fathers house, lying downe once upon a bench I fell asleep, and dreamed that I was in a green Meddow, where I saw va∣rious formes of Creatures, some furious and fell, others very pleasing, yet all of them see∣med monstrous, and changed their shapes often. And beholding my selfe a∣lone in the middest of them, I was grievously troubled, and then there appeared a great
red Dragon; before it came at me, there appeared a little Childe, and it was put into my armes, which was so beautifull and comly that I admired it, and for the present was so taken with beholding it, that it put the feare of the Dragon for the present out of my minde. But the Dragon afterwards drew neere, and sorely affrigh∣ted me, but both my selfe and the childe were taken away, and carried up an high hill, and the Dragon pursued us; and being often ready to fall in running up the hill, I feared that the Dragon would catch me, but my strength being come to me, I got up to the top of the hill, and the Dragon made up the hill after me. When I was got to the top of the hill there appeared a bright∣nesse
from Heaven, which gush∣ed forth like a flash of Light∣ning, and split the Dragon in peeces, at which I rejoyced ex∣ceedingly. Then the Childe was put into my armes againe, and I asked it what was its name; it said, E∣manuel; I asked it, who was its father; it said, I am; I asked, who was its Mother; it said, Eternity; I asked, from whence he came, he said, from my Father out of Heaven; I asked to whom he came, and what was his er∣rant here; he said, to save that which was lost, and returne againe; I asked him, if he would dwell with me while he stayed, hee said, he could not be detained accor∣ding to that frame and figure he was in, but after death he would dwell with me in another frame; the thought of death grieved me,
but the childe bid me not to weepe at it, for in this world, that which is beauty must be destroyed, & that which is contemptible must be exalted. I saw my selfe very contemp∣tible, and poore, and troubled, and in these thoughts the childe was taken away from me. Then my father coming into the room made a noyse, whereat I awaked. I was after this much Distracted, and troubled in my thoughts, and so perplexed that I knew not what to doe, and the more, by seeking to under∣stand what I had seen; and the rather, because I knew not how to be satisfied, in some doubts that lay very sad and heavie upon my soule. But I have since found much comfort out of Gods Word, where Christ saith, Come unto me all yee that are weary and heavie la∣den,
and I will give you rest. And the Lord saith, I have called thee by name. And againe, he saith in another place, I will beare in thee a poore and afflicted people, and they shall serve me. And in Esay hee saith, I will gather my Lambs with my armes, and gently lead those that are with young. And he hath pro∣mised, That he will never lay more upon his people then he will inable them to beare. And I have these effects of my faith; 1 My heart is led out to love God, who is eternall, and invi∣sible, and incomprehensible, I love him in all his dispensati∣ons towards me, and in the meanest Creature, though never so despised; I desire to owne God where ever I see him. 2 I finde my heart very full in duty, yet I have been some∣times troubled by some chole∣ricke
distempers that have transported me in some disputes which I am very sorry for, and resolve to leave. 3 I love the Lord, who hath heard my prayer, and now at last satisfied me in every scruple of my conscience. 4 My desire is, to walke in fellowship with the Saints, desi∣ring to be a Member of this Church, resolving through Gods assistance to submit to the dis∣cipline of this Church, ac∣cording to the rule of the Gos∣pell. T. M. July 25 1652.
37. Experiences of J. H. THat about foure and thirty years agoe I had some yer∣nings after the truths of Jesus Christ, and I being in the Coun∣try, and hearing of Mr. Young a Minister at Cathey in Leicester∣shire, and hearing him preach twice a day, the word wrought so on my heart, that I took great delight to heare him; but being jeered by the people for a Pu∣ritan, I did leave off hearing for a time. And I living in the Towne neare Mr. Young, sometime as I went abroad I did meet him, and Mr. Young would aske me whether I did know Jesus Christ or not, and what I did thinke
him to be, I told him that I had read in the Scriptures, and they held him out to be the Sonne of God, and that he came to seeke and to save that which was lost: Then said Mr. Young unto mee, why doe you draw backe in not com∣ing to heare the word; I told him, it was because of the de∣ridings of the people; I but said Master Young, you must per∣severe, and that was to hold on in a continuance, and he open∣ing some Scriptures, as that of the Hebrewes, that being once en∣lightned and tasted of the good word, and of the powers of the world to come, if that soule should fall away, then there would be nothing but a fearfull looking for of the fiery indignation of God. And this did much trou∣ble me, that I was very fearfull to be damned. Then Mr. Young did open that
Scripture in 1 Thess. 1.4, 5. (You say that you know Jesus Christ to be your Saviour, therefore take heed, for Jesus Christ shall appeare in fla∣ming fire, against all those that know him not, nor obey not his Gospell;) This put mee in a great fear and horror, worse then before. Then I did intreate Mr. Young to tell me, what the Gospell was, and he bad me to read in the first of Matthew, and there it was this, that The Gospel was that glad tidings to the shepherds, that it was the good will of God to send Jesus Christ to save sinners, wherof, I did confesse with the Apostle Paul, that I was chief. Then Mr. Young at his parting with me, did give me these In∣structions, That I should bee very carefull of what company I did goe into, and that I should alwayes remember my Creator in the dayes of my youth, and this was
very fresh in my memory, and did strengthen me very much a∣gainst the temptations of Satan, and kept me from frequenting those companions that I did formerly use; and if that at any time, I should meet with their Company, and heare their idle words, then this Scripture did often come into my mind, Remember thy Creator in the dayes of thy youth, and this did very much cheare my spirits, and did carry me along for many yeares, untill it pleased God to bring me to London, and comming to Black-Fryers under the Mi∣nistry of Doctor Gouge, I was ve∣ry much built up for two years together. And then comming to live at Westminster, I did profit but lit∣tle againe, untill it pleased God to send Mr. Marshall and hea∣ring
of him speaking out of the fourteenth of Jeremiah, of the famine being in the outward man, but this was the famine of the Word of God at Westminster, which made me to be very at∣tentive to the Doctrine that Master Marshall did hold forth, and he complaining what a bar∣ren place Westminster had been, and now he did hope that the Word of God would take effect in the hearts of some of his Hearers, and truly so it did on my heart, for I was a constant hearer of him, and then going to a friends family, I did heare them repeat the Notes that they had taken from Master Marshall, and since I did continue with that Company of Godly people, and I could have been content to have been joyned to them, but that they did want the use
of the Ordinances, and having no Pastor I could not look upon them as a Church, but as a ga∣thered People to seeke the Lord, and this was my judge∣ment; therefore now it is the desire of my soule to have the fellowship with the Father and the Sonne, that my soule may thrive in Grace, and in the knowledge of that great love of God, that God, that so loved the world, that he gave his Sonne to dye to save such as I am, and that whoso∣ever doth come to him should not pe∣rish, but have eternall life; and now it is the desire of my soule to be joyned unto this Body to seeke the Lord, and to walk in a more close way then hereto∣fore I have done, for as the A∣postle saith, as he that is joyned un∣to the Lord is one Spirit, so he that is joyned unto a Church is
one Body, whereof Christ is the Head. I. H. August 1. 1652. 38. Experiences of I. H. ABout twenty years agoe I dwelt in Black Friers, and using to heare the Word ope∣ned by Doctor Gouge, though it was but seldome, by reason that I was a servant, yet the Word wrought so much upon my soule, that I saw my condi∣tion under sinne was very sad, and I knew not what to doe to be delivered, but that I heard much of the mercies of God un∣to poore sinners, and that with∣out I might partake of some drops of this love of God, my
soule was undone; then my soules desire and labour was, how to finde out a way to come closer unto the service of God; then I said, that I blessed God that he had given me a sight of my undone estate, and I did earnestly desire both in publicke and private to use my endeavours to seeke the Lord by prayer, for my sinne was a great burden un∣to me, and Satan did often tempt me unto sinne; but by the goodnesse of God I did begge, and intreat the Lord to keepe me, and not to leave me to my selfe, nor to Satans temptations, but by hearing of the Promises read, and held forth, I was com∣forted; as in that of the Hebrews, God said, that he would never leave mee, nor forsake me; and that Christ saith, All ye that are weary and heavie laden with sinne, come
unto me and I will give rest unto your soules. Many troubles I have had in my spirit, but I praise God that still he gave me an heart to pray, & that he would give me the assistance of his holy Spirit, to keep me in all his wayes, for I did finde that my sinnes were a great burden unto me, and then it pleased the Lord to give me still in some comfort in this, that I had great hopes his loving kindnesse should not be taken from me, and indeed I had many refreshments from the Spirit of God, which did carry me many times chearfully in the hearing of the Word, and I am still troubled in my spirit, that I cannot pray unto God as I ought to doe, but my desires are to doe better then I doe; I have been often amongst godly people, and I have had an earnest
desire that the Lord would make my way to be joyned unto Mr. Walkers Fellowship. 2. Because I have found much comfort un∣der his Ministry, and now I doe humbly pray, That I may be admitted into this Society, and to walk with this People, thus joyned together in the feare of the Lord. I: H: August 1. 1652. 39. Experiences of T. R. AT the Age of two and twenty yeares being in the Streights, I was taken by the mercilesse Turkes, and there kept Captive, but by the great power of the Lord I was delivered out of captivity by a miracu∣lous
way unexpected, the Lord giving me grace to call on him, gave me a gracious answer, That he would never leave me, nor for∣sake me. Experiences in a voyage to Gyne. In the time of our last War with France, on the Coast of Gyne, I was taken by the French Men of warre, wherein I was greatly afflicted, out∣wardly in body for want of food, and raiment, and other hard afflictions which they laid on me, to have turned to their Catholike Religion, yet the Lord still promised me, that he would give me a deliverance out of their mercilesse hands; who made good his promise to me in a short time, blessed be his holy name.
Experiences on a Voyage from Lishborne to Brasile in the yeare, 1648. For the Portugalls, in a Ship of London, and at our being there, and our ship laden, we did in∣tend for Portugall, but they de∣tained us one yeare, so that our ship was all eaten with worms, that we were faine to keep our Pump pumping for the space of nine moneths, but the longer the worse, for in our passage home-ward we could not tell which death to chuse, either to starve, or to be drowned, for our Victuals was so small, that for one yeare and more we had no bread in our ship, but wee did eate the roots of Trees, made into a substance like Oatmeale, and for Beefe, one ounce for a
man for a day, which stunke so, that none could have eate it but men in our case; for Drink, we were glad of a pint of water a day during the time of our passage, which was seventeen weekes; but in this passage we saw the wonderful worke of God, for he sent us for the space of three weekes, in seaso∣nable times, Fish called Dol∣fins, sometimes two or three in a day, and as we grew neare within three hundred leagues of the Coast of Portugall, and that provision we had neare spent, only three or foure dayes left, and all our men sick, and weak, and almost starved, it pleased God of his great mercy to send us a ship of Flushing, a Man of Warre, who proved to us as Jo∣seph to the Children of Israel, for they brought us victuals which
saved our lives, and after they had taken our ship, they were faine to put on board forty men to keep our ship from sinking, for it pleased God the next day after they tooke us, that we had a great violent storme, and a great Sea broke upon hee, that we thought she would never have recovered her selfe againe, for our goods did shut all to one side, and so she was faine to goe untill she came to Flushing, but we poore Creatures were in great perill and danger of our lives, and yet the Lord appea∣red unto me by his promise, That he would bring me to shore, and would deliver my life from death, and my eyes from teares; and he hath done graci∣ously with me above my de∣serts, and inabled me above my strength, and delivered me above
my hope, therefore will I praise him without measure, and mag∣nifie his name without end. Experiences of a voyage to Ire∣land of late, on the four∣teenth day of Janu. 1651. Being on the Coast of Ireland, it pleased the Lord to raise a violent storme, and in the mor∣ning by the dawning of day, we were so near the shore, that to mans judgement there was no∣thing but death approaching, for we knew no place of that Land by reason of the Fogge, and Raine that we had all the day, and knew not where to goe, but as the Lord, who is the Pilot of Pilots did carry us, untill foure a clock at night, which at that time a yeare is
darke, and then we came to a great high head-land, and a lit∣tle without that lay a great Sand, so that we could not goe any other way but betwixt them; so that then past all hopes of life, we forced her through the Sea, so that it brake over our heads, insomuch that we could not tell whether we were in the Sea or the Barke, but by our feet and hands, for we could not see for the violence of the water; only he that was at the helme: And yet in the space of a quarter of an houre we were in a safe place, newly taken out of the jawes of death. So that I of all men have great cause to be al∣wayes rendring thankes to my God, for his continuall and most sweet favours unto me, sin∣full wretched, and empty man, voyd of all spirituall goodnes.
Experiences on the Coast of Virginia. I being in a Ship of the bur∣then of three hundred tunnes, and lying on the Coast of Virgi∣nia, being wind-bound the space of seven weekes, it pleased God to visit our people with the Pestilentiall Feaver, and the Callenture, which is a violent Feaver, or Madnesse at first, and we had in our ship two hundred thirty five soules at that time, and of them it was the will and pleasure of God that we had a hundred of them sick at one time, so that we had but few to looke to the sicke; and we were in great want of provi∣sions, so that we knew not whi∣ther to goe, but it pleased God to raise a great storme, so that
we received a great Sea, that brake into our maine Saile, and we had two foot water between our Decks, so that our poore sick people cryed out, they were drowned, but within one houre after, by the mercy of God, we had faire weather, and faire wind, and within three or four dayes God set us safe on Land, to our great joy and comfort, that before were almost past all hopes, so that he caused us to say with the Prophet David, It was good for me that I was af∣flicted. And yet I have another choyse mercy, to make knowne what God hath done for me, for hee hath now called me out of the world, but not out of the Land, of the living; and he hath also opened my eyes, and made cleare my understanding, with
Mary, to chuse the better part; and whatsoever the world, or Satan can cast upon me, it shall all turne to my good; for I know that my Redeemer liveth, and him my soule desires to blesse and praise, which I trust I shall doe till my change cometh, and therefore my desire is to joyne with this Congregation, and walke humbly with them, as God shall inable me, and the Lord strengthen my faith. T. R. August 12. 1652. 40 Experiences of J. S. IT hath been so with me, that sometimes my spirits have been much cast down, and that the burthen of my sins is great
upon me, having lived carelesly in many great sins committing them with greedinesse; yea, many times knowne sins presu∣mingly: Yet hath God some∣times toucht my heart with re∣membrance and sorrow, in the sense of them, which afterwards againe, forgetting all good re∣solutions I have behaved my self perfidiously to God, and the in∣numerable account so terrifies me, even to despaire: But hav∣ing learned that God is good and gracious, and belee∣ving that he who hath com∣manded us to forgive seventy times our brother offending, will also pardon them that faithfully seek him▪ In my course of sinning I have continued hitherto without that due contrition for them, nor in the midst of great sins,
have I been able to seeke God, but rather in the forgetting them could sometimes pray, yet but with small fervency and no repentance, as I ought, which is a continual daily trouble to me, and cause that I cannot look up as I ought. In this my said most sad con∣dition, I cannot see any helpe but in Christ Jesus: I see I am in a lost condition without Christ, and I goe pressed downe by my sinnes; and it grieves me, but not sufficiently, that the troubles and cumbrings of the world doe too much put these things out of my mind, and I could wish that I could live with lesse troubles about the things of the world, that I might more mind the things of God. And it is a great trouble to
me that my heart is so dead and dull, and that I have not more knowledge of Gods commande∣ments, which I have cast behind me. And I doe much pray to the Lord to touch my spirit, and then I know I shall be inlight∣ned: The greatest part of my wickednesse is the least part that I can confesse: And my dead and dull heart hath not so quickened me as I could have wished; But I have had some comfort in flying to some promises, As Christ saith, Come unto me all yee that are weary and heavy laden, and I will give you rest; take my yoake upon you and learne of mee, for I am meeke and lowly in heart, and yee shall finde rest to your soules; I have desired to take up the yoake of Christ, for my sins are a burden, and so great a wound to me, that they
are putrified, and one soare pu∣trifies another; And crying for help, I am a poor languishing soul lying as quite dead, gasping for life. I would I could weep that I cannot weep. But I take com∣fort in the Apostles words, who saith, Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners, of which hee saith, he is chiefe. God said, walke before me, and be upright, and I will be thy God All-sufficient. And my comfort of hope in Jesus Christ is, from these things wrought by his spirit in me. 1 It is my desire faithfully to serve the Lord, for he is graci∣ous, and an infinite glorious God. 2 I desire that the Lord will take away my sins, and that the new birth may bee formed in me, that I may become obedient
to his spirit, and not unto the flesh. 3 I desire the Lord to give me faith and true repentance for all my sins, and it is my confi∣dence that God can clear up to me, and I desire from my soule, that he will say to me, thy sins are forgiven thee. 4 My love to God is such that I could give my body to be burnt, and my flesh to be mas∣sacred, were it for Gods sake, and I desire to draw near unto God, he hath been neare unto me: O that I could remember and be mindfull of his mercies! I desire to lay aside all to injoy God. 5 My resolutions (through grace) are chiefly to seek God above all things, and desire to serve him with my whole heart in all his commands.
6 I am a fiend of perfidi∣ousnes, because of former back∣slidings after weake resolvings. 7 My resolutions are through grace, that the Lord shall be my God, and to serve him to the uttermost I can, as he shall ina∣ble me, begging his Divine grace and strength therein. 8 My hope of salvation is only in Gods free grace in Jesus Christ. 9 I have found comfort from the ministry of Mr. Walker your pastor, and see such walking by this Church according to the rule of Gods word, that I doe much desire to bee a member with you; and the rather be∣cause I lived in a place where is much ignorance and prophane∣nesse, that so I may partake of your prayers, and fellowship, to the comfort of my soule, and
building mee up through grace in Jesus Christ. J. S. August 22. 1652. 41. Experiences of E. P. THat the trouble for sin hath been the greatest trouble I have had, that I have been so great a sinner against so good a God; That I have deserved all shame, misery and torment that can be inflicted on mee for my sins, and had despaired had I not hope in Gods mercies, that my heart hath been much hardened that I have not so grieved as I should, and I desire the Lord to soften my heart, that I may mourne for my sins more then I have done; and I have been much troubled that I
have been no more humbled for my sins, and that my conditi∣on would be sad if the Lord did not change my heart: but my hope is in God who giveth grace to all that he saveth; and I have, from the consideration of my outward crosses, been the more sensible of my sins, know∣ing that I have deserved many greater afflictions, and I hope that the Lord will give me in a larger portion of his grace, and make me an humble penitent. And I have found comfort in severall sweet promises, as that the Lord saith, Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will hear thee, and thou shalt glorifie mee; And Christ saith, Come unto mee all yee that are weary and heavy la∣den, and I will give you rest; And therefore I doe call upon God, and wait on him, beleeving that
he will heare mee, and that Je∣sus Christ will give mee rest, and Christ saith, Whosoever shall forsake Father, or Mother, or Wife, or Relation for his sake and the Go∣spels, shall receive of him much more. And God hath wrought in my heart a resolution to for∣sake all for Christ and the Gospell, and relye on God a∣lone. And I have these sweet seals from God, of my interest in Christ. 1 That my heart is willing and ready to obey Gods com∣mandements in all things, so far as a poor sinner can. 2 That I do rely wholly up∣on Gods mercy, and put my trust and confidence in him, and in him alone. 3 That the love of God hath wrought in my heart a love
to him, and a desire to Jesus Christ, and to know God in him. 4 That I have a love to the word and duties, and I desire nothing more then to find Christ in duties, and I find a joy and comfort in duties, and I wish to dwell with Gods people all the daies of my life. 5 That I hope for salvation by saith in Jesus Christ, and by him alone. E. P. Septemb. 17. 1652. 42. Experiences of G. S. THat I have had a great desire to serve Jesus Christ, and to serve God in truth as neare as I can, but I have had many occasi∣ons to keep me back, and I do see
that not to go forward is to goe backward; that I have a great burden upon my conscience for sin, & have bin much cast down, and I see by the troubles that are upon mee that the Lord doth humble me, and that I am resol∣ved to make or renew my repen∣tance, and flye to God whose mercy is above all; and I see that I am a great sinner, I have ever had a great desire to serve Jesus Christ, but I see I cannot doe it as I ought, but my soule longs after Jesus Christ, and without him I cannot live, that I have bin many times much troubled in conscience, but have found com∣fort from the word, in hearing the word preached. That I once received a very great comfort, a year since, in hearing a private conference amongst Christians, since which I have bin mueh af∣fected
with private meetings, & desired to walk with a Church. That I have received much comfort from severall promises, as that Christ saith, Come to me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will give you rest; also he saith, whatsoever yee shall aske the Father in my name I will give it you. And a∣gaine that he saith, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee. And this promise I have much stuck to, and found much comfort in. Al∣so he hath promised, Aske and yee shall have, seeke, and yee shall find, knock and it shall be opened to you. And the Lord saith, If the sinner returne unto me, I will have mercy upon him. And God hath further wrought upon my heart, so that 1 I see that I have much neg∣lected my duty to God, and have just cause to fear that God will
be angry with me; But I hope in his mercy. 2 That I love God. 3 That I love Gods word, and his Servants, as my life, and to heare the people of God derided and scorned is a great trouble to me, and a very sore griefe to my spirit. 4 That I had rather live with bread and water to bee with Christ, then to injoy the King∣domes of the world. 5 That I grieve and can weep to consider of those wayes that I have taken contrary to the word of God, for I know God will honour those that honour him, and despise those that de∣spise him. 6 That my resolutions are (the Lord inabling mee, with his grace and strength) to serve God constantly for the time to come.
7 I have had very great com∣forts in hearing of the word, and in my greatest afflictions have found such comfort with the people of God in duties, that I desire the sincere milke of the word, that I may grow thereby. 8 That I desire to walk with this Church, because I beleeve they be such as God ownes, who saith, that where two or three are ga∣thered together in his name, he is in the midst of them. 9 That I am confident, if I should dye, that I shal be found in Jesus Christ, who hath satis∣fied the justice of God. 10 That I desire to grow up in the grace of God, more and more, to perfection in Christ. G. S. Septemb. 24. 1652.
THE PRACTISE OF Gathered Churches IN The City of London, and other parts of England, sta∣ted: And proved to be right∣ly constituted according to the Rule of the Gospel: With a Covenant taken by each Member. And a Confession of Faith, Professed. With an abbreviate of their whole Practise. And some Papers presented by the Assembly of Divines to the Parliament, touching the right Constituting of particular CHURCHES. London Printed for R. Ibbitson.
THE PRACTISE of the Gathered Churches In the City of London, and o∣ther parts of England. THose that enter into Church fellowship, are to have some know∣ledge of each other, be∣fore they go about the work, that they are in the judgments of men fit materialls to make a Church, for how can they walk
together except they be agreed, Amos 3.3. When they goe about this great worke, it is the practise of the gathered Churches, first; to set a part a day of humiliati∣on to pray unto the Lord for his directions, and assistance there∣in; and for a blessing upon the worke, 1 King. 8.28, 29. Phil. 4.6, 7. Then they have consultations with severall Pastors, and the Members of other Churches that are rightly constituted, and have communion with the rest of the godly Churches. They have many debates in severall meetings; and put up many prayers in publicke and private, and send to the Churches to de∣sire their prayers also, Act. 15.41. Act. 16.4, 5. 1 Cor. 7.17. 2 Cor. 8.18.
After all which, so many of them as are satisfied in the god∣ly conversation, and piety of each other, set a part a day of humiliation, on which they make a register of their names, as persons propounded to enter into Church-fellowship toge∣ther; if they shall be fully sa∣tisfied, touching the piety, and experiences of each other, on a day appointed for that purpose; for which worke they propound a day, wherein to give up them∣selves, first, to the Lord, and then to one another by the will of God, and so become a Church by the conjunction of them, or so many of them as shall be sa∣tisfied, touching the conversati∣on of each other, in faith, utte∣rance, knowledge, and in all diligence and love, 2 Cor. 8.4, 5, 6, 7.
And againe, at another day of humiliation, they proceed to joyne themselves together in Church-fellowship some other Pastors, or members, or both, of other Congregations; being present, and bearing testimony of their conjunction. And after some time that day spent in prayer to God, and something spoken by the Offi∣cers or Members of other Chur∣ches then present, touching the occasion they proceed, thus. 1. So many of the persons, pro∣pounded before, as are fully sa∣tisfied touching the conversati∣on of each other, draw together, and choose out one amongst themselves, or some other Church-member present, to take their names, to which they all make answer one after another, that they are satisfied as to mat∣ter
of conversation touching each other, Ephes. 4.15, 16. 2. They then each of them, one after another, give an ac∣count of their faith and experi∣ences of the grace of God by his spirit wrought in them, 1 Pet. 3.15. Mal. 3.16. 3, So many of the said per∣sons approved for godlinesse of life as aforesaid, as shall receive such satisfaction touching each others faith, as that to them they appeare visible Saints, and such as God will save, they then proceed to enter into fellowship as a Church of Christ, Act. 2.47. 1 Cor. 1, 2. The Covenant of the Churches is in these or the like words. We doe promise and covenant in the presence of the Lord, that
the Almighty Jehovah shall be our God; we doe give up our selves to serve him in spirit and in truth, and doe promise to walke together as a Church, ac∣cording to the rule of the Gos∣pell, and to watch over one a∣nother, and continue in fellow∣ship together, and be helpfull to each other, as God shall enable us, according to our duties ex∣pressed in the word of God. Every branch of this Cove∣nant is grounded upon the word of God, as appears, Rom. 9.4. Act. 3, 25. 1 Cor. 3.8. 2 Cor. 8.5. Josh. 24.15. Prov. 3.1. 2 Thes. 2.13. 2 Thes. 1.1, 2. &c. 1 Tim 3.15. 1 Cor. 16.13. Mat. 18.15, 16, 17. Gal. 6.10. For the lawfulnesse of this way of gathering Churches, here unto is asserted severall papers presented by way of humble ad∣vice
from the Assembly of Di∣vines to the Parliament; and the places of Scripture, by them collected, for their proofe of the same. By the Assembly of Divines. Touching particular visible Churches. 1. Particular visible Churches, members of the general Church are held forth in the new Testa∣ment, Gal. 21.22. Rev. 1.4, 20. Rev. 2.1. 2. Particular Churches in the Primitive times were made up of visible Saints, viz. of such as be∣ing of age, professed faith in Christ, and obedience unto Christ, according to the rule of faith and life, taught by Christ, and his Apostles, and of their children, Act. 2, 38.41. Act. 2. ult. compared with 2 Cor. 9.13. Act.
2.39. 1 Cor. 7.14. Ro. 11.16 &c. Mar. 10.14 compared with Mat. 19.13, 14. Luk. 18.15, 16. By the Assembly of Divines. Touching Pastors of Churches. The Pastour is an ordinary and perpetuall Officer in the Church, Jer. 3.15, 16, 17. Prophe∣cying of the time of the Gospel, 1 Pet. 5.2, 3, 4. Eph. 4.11, 12, 13. It belongs to his office; To pray for, and with his flock, as the mouth of the people unto God, Act, 6.2, 3, 4. & 20.36. Where Preaching and Prayer are joyned as severall parts of the same Office, Jam. 5.14, 15. The Of∣fice of the Elder, that is the Pa∣stor, is to pray for the sick, even in private, to which a blessing is especially promised, much more therefore ought he to performe this in the publique execution
of his Office as a part thereof, 1 Cor. 15, 16. To read the Scripture pub∣lickly; For the proof of which; 1 That the Priests and Levites in the Jewish Church were trust∣ed with the publicke reading of the Word, as is proved, Deut. 31.9, 10, 11. Nehem. 8.1, 2. and 13. 2. That the Ministers of the Gospell have as ample a Charge and Commission to dispence the Word, as well as other Ordinan∣ces, as the Priests and Levites had under the Law, proved, Isa. 66.21. Mat. 23.34. Where our Savior in∣tituleth the Officers of the New Testament, whom he will send forth by the same names of the Teachers of the Old. Which Propositions prove, that therefore (the duty being of a morall nature) it followeth by just consequence, that the
publique reading of the Scrip∣tures belongeth to the Pastors Office. To feed the Flock by preach∣ing of the Word, according to which, he is to teach, convince, reprove, exhort and comfort, 1 Tim. 3.2. 2 Tim. 3.16, 17. Tit. 1.9. To Catechise, which is a plain laying downe the Principles of the Oracles of God, Heb. 5.12. or of the doctrine of Christ, and is a part of preaching. To dispense other divine my∣steries, 1 Cor. 4.1, 2. To administer the Sacraments, Mat. 28.19, 20. Mark 16.15, 16. 1 Cor. 11.23, 24, 25. compared with 1 Cor. 10.16. To blesse the people from God Numb. 6.23, 24, 25, 26. compared with Rev. 14.5. (where the same blessings and persons from
whom they come are expresly mentioned, Isa. 66.21. hereun∣der the names of Priests and Le∣vites to be continued under the Gospel, are meant Evangelicall Pastors, who therefore are by office to blesse the people, Deut. 10.8. 2 Cor. 13.14. Eph. 1.2. To take care of the poor, Acts 11.30. and 4.34, 35, 36, 37. and 6.2, 3, 4. 1 Cor. 16.1, 2, 3, 4. Gal. 2.9, 10. And hee hath also a ruling power over the flock as a Pastor, 1 Tim. 5.17. Acts 20.17. and 28. 1 Thes. 5.12. Heb. 13.7, 17. For the lawfulnes of visible Saints en∣tring into Church-fellowship, see these places of Scripture following, viz. Acts 2.47. 1 Cor. 12.18. Ephes. 4.1, 12, 13. Math. 28.19, 20. Isa. 59.21. 1 Tim. 4.14. Acts 15.2, 4, 6. Rom: 12.7, 8. 1 Cor. 12.28. Acts
6.2. Acts 11.30. Acts 15.4, 6, 22. Act. 21.17, 18. Act. 20.31. Act. 19.10.17, 18, 19, 20. 1 Cor. 16.8, 9. Act. 18.19, 24, 26. Rules for the Ʋnion and Peace of Churches. The Lord Jesus, gives an ex∣presse rule to act by, against dis∣orderly members, Matth. 18.15, 16, 17. The Apostle Paul hath laid down excellent rules to bee ob∣served for the orderly walking of Church-members, Rom. 12.
A Confession of Faith, Professed by the Church-Members at the Humiliation at Summerset-house Chappell. Approved of by all the Pastors and Ministers then present. I. WEE beleeve, That the Scriptures con∣tained in the Old and New Testa∣ment are the Word of God, written by the Prophets, and holy men as they were inspired by God, to be the rule of faith, and life, to his people.
II. We beleeve in God, the e∣ternal immence, incompre∣hensible Unity, who doth mani∣fest himselfe from eternity to e∣ternity by the Trinity. III. We beleeve, That God the Father is from himselfe the Al∣mighty, and excellent glory, creator of heaven and earth, and from eternity to eternity doth whatsoever he will. IV. Wee beleeve that Jesus Christ is the onely sonne of God begotten of the Father, and is the eternall brightnesse of his glory, and expresse image of his person, and in his divine nature, in all things equall with God the Fa∣ther. V. We beleeve, That the ho∣ly ghost is the eternall Spirit of glory, proceeding from the Fa∣ther, and the Son. VI. We beleeve, That through
the guilt and corruption of A∣dams sin, he and all his posterity, are by nature the children of wrath. VII. We beleeve, That there is an eternall Covenant, between the Father and the Son, carryed on by the spirit for the salvation of the elect. VIII. We beleeve, That God the Son tooke upon him the na∣ture of man, but without sinne, was conceived by the holy ghost, borne of a virgine, suffered for our sins, satisfied Gods justice due to us, bore the burden of Gods wrath in his soule by hea∣vinesse in his agony, and satis∣fied the justice of God in his body, which was crucified till he dyed; and was buried, and the third day hee rose againe from the dead, and having conque∣red sin, death, and hel for belee∣vers,
ascended into heaven, and is become a glorious mediator be∣tween God and Man, annointed of God to be an eternall King, Priest, and prophet to the Saints, and having made their peace with God, is sate downe on the right hand of the majesty on high; from whence he shal come at the last and dreadfull day to judge the world, when the Saints shall meet him in the clouds, and sit with him upon Thrones to judge all the hypocrites, wicked, and unbeleevers, to eternal dam∣nation, who shall be throwne with the devills to everlasting torment, both soule and body into hell: where the worme dy∣eth not, and the fire never shall be quenched. IX. We beleeve, That Christ hath a spirituall and invisible Church, gathered from all parts
of the world, into spirituall fel∣lowship with himselfe, consist∣ing of all Gods Elect; of whom hee is the Head; who shall sing praises and halalujahs to God with him (in blisse) in heaven to all eternity. X. Wee beleeve, that Christ hath particular Churches here upon earth, consisting of visible Saints in communion, who give up themselves by covenant, first to God, and then one to a∣nother, by the will of God, to serve the Lord and to walke ac∣cording to the rule of the Gospel unto whom Christ hath given the ministry, oracles and Ordi∣nances of God, for gathering and perfecting of the Saints, and doth by his owne presence and spirit (according to his pro∣mise) make them effectual to the elect, that at the day of the Lord
Christ he may gather those that beleeve into his Garner. XI. We beleeve, that the pro∣mise made to beleevers, doth give their children a right to Baptisme, by sprinkling cleane water upon them, as a seale from God, that he hath gathered them from the Idolatrous Heathen, and will certainly save them if they beleeve. XII. We beleeve, that through Christ Jesus our Redeemer and Saviour, and by him alone, with¦out any thing that wee can call ours, all our sins shall be for∣given us, our soules shall bee in blisse when our bodies are dead, and we shall reigne with him, at the day of Judgement, both in our soules and bodies (together with all the Elect) in eternal life, and blessednesse. Amen.
A Letter from a Church newly gathered (of their Constitution with the putting out of a scandalous Member) sent to other Churches. To the Churches of Jesus Christ, rightly constituted, according to the order of the Gospel, in and about the Cities of Lon∣don, and Westminster. The Church of Christ at  walking with their Pastor, sendeth greeting, Dearly beloved in the Lord Jesus, WE being by the grace of Christ, a new con∣stituted
Church body, setled with all Gospell Order, by testimony from other Church Officers, and in the presence of other Church Members (as Witnesses) with Electi∣on and ratification of the said  our present Pastor, and having by Gods goodnesse walked together  in much peace, love and mutuall edification. Wee thought it our duty, that having had just cause (to our griefe) to cast out from us  for his notorious crimes and disorderly walking, to give you advertisement thereof, least hee should creepe into your Communions, and there∣by
pollute your fellowship, and the holy things of God, subverting Gospell Order, and bolstring up himself in his sinfull obstinacy; which is the ground of this our send∣ing to you, who subscribe our selves Your Servants in the Lord Christ. FINIS.
