P3219 E20_4 99872201 130866
PREROGATIVE Anatomized: OR, AN EXACT EXAMINATION Of those Protestations and Professions, whereby she hath attempted and indea∣voured to preferre her selfe above the PARLIAMENT. By a Lover of Truth, Peace, and Parliaments. JOHN 7.24. Judge not according to the appearance, but judge righteous judgement. Multa videntur quae non sunt. Published by Authority. LONDON, Printed for John Wright, in the Old-Baily. 1644.
PREROGATIVE ANATOMIZED. THE Disputes between the King and Parliament are so high, the Declarations so numerous, the Prerogative-Protestations, and Pretences so plausible, though tending to publike destructi∣on; the Parliament proceedings so slow, so chargeable, so new, though just, no Parliament heretofore having power, or opportunitie, to maintaine the Kingdomes Rights, (the rod of dissolution being perpetually held over them) that the amazed People stand betwixt the King and Parliament, like the sillie Popish Priest between the blessed Virgin and our Saviour Christ, and know not which way to turn them, or whence to expect their salvation: I think it fit therefore to take the liberty of this scribling age, in setting down my sense of Prerogative, that the decei∣ved people understanding the nature and end of it, may see the necessi∣tie that lies upon them, now or never to lay hold upon this their day, to un-inslave their soules, persons and estates, from Ecclesiasticall and Prerogative tyrannie, by means of this present Parliament, so won∣derfully given and preserved to us by the divine providence and mercy. Prerogative therefore, in the native, proper, and originall acception and intention of it, is nothing else, but a necessarie, just, and innocent ac∣commodation of the Prince, to such a proportion of splendour, ho∣nour, and authoritie, as may inable him, without incroahment to
ballance the other two Estates, and beare himselfe in all things answe∣rable unto his Office: for, they exceeding in number, were to add weight to him, to make a flourishing and sweet compliance: but as it is distinguished from the onely end and bound of true Regality, (the good of the people) is a tyrannicall power, destructive to Religion, Property, and Liberty, yea and to Regality it selfe, by narrowing and shrinking up the heart of a publike person, to selfe-will, ends, and aimes. The truth of this description is evidenced, by the miserable fruits of Prerogative before the Parliament, which are now generally knowne, though not generally acknowledged: our Religion was over-grown with superstition and profanenesse, Popish opinions were publikely de∣fended in the Vniversities, and preached in Pulpits, Popes Nuntio's admitted into the Kingdome, Covents of Friers erected, publike Masse telerated, preaching, pictie, godly Preachers supprest, suspen∣ded, banished: As for our Property and Liberty, they were quite lost, and all the grievances that were singly introduced in the times of our predecessours, did joyntly, like a deluge, overwhelme us. For the re∣dresse of these pressures was this Parliament called, and cri'd up by the People, I feare, with as much, too much confidence in it, as the Jewes of old had in the Temple of the Lord, when they cried, Templum Do∣mini, Templum Domini, and in the mean time rebelled against the God of the Temple; and for this sin, amongst others, I doubt, the peace made with Scotland proves but a change of our adversaries, from them, to our selves: And yet, though the continuance of our miserie be very grievous, in my judgment, the state of the warre is much bet∣ter then it was, before the Parliament: For, now (whatsoever pretences are made) we conflict with our true enemie, the Popish par∣tie, and their adherents; whereas before we should have beene led hood wink'd for the service of our enemies, mutually to destroy our selves, and our Protestant Friends: And, me thinks, in this very thing, which drawes the greatest odium upon the Parliament, they de∣serve infinite commendations, that since they could not keep off a war from the Kingdome, they occasioned this happy divertion. Yet hence the people complaine, we hoped for help from the Parliament, and we are now in worse condition then we were before. So it fared with the children of Israel, after Moses appeared for their deliverance: their task was doubled, and Moses their deliverer is charged by them, to have
put a sword into the hands of Pharaoh to slay them. Thus all the e∣vills that by the adversaries of the Parliament have been mischievously multiplied, to hinder Reformation, are unjustly laid upon the Parlia∣ment; and thus God is dishonoured every way: for, when hopes of deliverance first appeare, we idolize the meanes; and when our deli∣verance proves not so sudden, nor so easie as we expect, then we de∣spise the meanes. By Gods goodnesse, for his own glory, the Parlia∣ment hath appeared, as it is, an arme of flesh, unable to save; and yet by the same goodnesse, the major part continues faithfull to him and the Kingdome, and God hath not left it without glorious testimony of his assistance, and good assurance to us, that God will give us the like successe he gave our Brethren the Scots, if we would yet follow their zeale, to  glory, and their unity amongst themselves; neither is it altogether to be contemned, that which is already effected by this Parliament: the Popish and Prelaticall party are wholly discounte∣nanced, and resolutely opposed, by the Parliament, by whom faithfull Ministers are incouraged, and the purity of the Gospell maintained, and such Lawes past, for the vindication of Property and Liberty, as better cannot be devised: and now the Scales are quite turn'd, Prero∣gative pleads nothing but Law, and conscience; Papists and Prelates defend the Protestant Religion, Delinquents the Law and Parliament: And the Parliament, cleane contrary, destroyes Religion, Property, King, Parliament, and Kingdome: and in a word, the Lion is turn'd Lamb, and the Lamb is turn'd Lion. But this is no new thing, we have an example of the first, Psal. 10. ver. 9, 10. He lieth in wait secretly, as a Lion in his den, he crowcheth, and humbleth himselfe, that the poore may fall by his strong ones. Whatsoever pretence the Lion makes of humility, his end is to devoure. For the other, we know there is no juster indignation then that which proceeds from patience abus'd, or love contemn'd; the meekest man upon the earth, will be kindled into rage, when an Idoll stands in competition with the God of all glory; or when the being of a King∣dom, and the Church of God are both indangered; in such a case as this, Moses tries what partie he can make in Israel, and commands them every one to slay his brother: if God or good men, cause any to be troubled, it is of very faithfullnesse, and for their good. But here it is objected: what danger is our Religion, Property, or Libertie in? 1. Prerogative will defend the true Protestant Profession, as it was in the dayes of Q. Elizabeth,
2 It will defend the Property, and Liberty of the People, according the old and new Lawes. 3 It will defend the just Power and Priviledge of Parliament. To the first: Prerogative will defend the true Protestant Religion, as it as in the dayes of Queene Elizabeth. How good a defender of the Potesta Religion Prerogative was before the Parliament, you had a little Breviat at the beginning, and how good a defence she is like to make for the future, we see by the instruments she chuseth to defend it; Papists, Enemies, and Prelates, Travtors to Religion: but her solemn Protestations must be believed. Well then, let us admit the utmost of those Protestations, and the result is this; The same Re∣ligion, and the same Ecclesiasticall Government, that was in the daies of Queen Elizabeth, is that pitch of Reformation, which Preroga∣tive will consent to, and maintaine, but one jot further it will not go; and why should not this content the Parliament, as well as the King∣dome? were not the times of Queen Elizabeth the happiest that ever England saw? To this the parliament, and all good men, answer, that in the heginning of Queen Elizabeths reigne, she chose such men to be Bishops (for the most part) as had suffered persecution for the telamonie of the Gospell in Queen Maries dayes, and by such suffer∣ings had, both evidenced their fidelity to Christ their Master, and learnt compassion toward the Church their Brethren: the succee∣ding Bishops were somthing worse, but civill authority was then so active to suppresse Popery, and incourage good Ministers, to do their duty, that a slender and insufficient Ecclesiasticall Government might not be much taken notice of: but now we have a Popish Queene, that hath a great influence into the Civill State; we have (for the most part) a dissolute, and degenerate Clergy, that hath once already be∣trayed and persecuted Religion, and yet now we must have no better guard for Religion, then the not unchast, because untempted Prelacy, in the time of Queen Elizabeth: It's hard usage, because I need not any cloake when the Sun shines, to keep it from me in a storme: or, because in time of peace, I walke unarm'd, to put me naked in the front of a Battell: surely in this (which is the greatest matter of all others) the Parliament is to be justified, that they seeke another man∣ner of defence for Religion now, then in the daies of Queen Eliza∣beth: and in that they set not any times, or persons, to be a standard of Reformation, but the Word of God, which is, and ought to be the
rule of all Reformation of the Church, both in Doctrine and Disci∣pline: and this I suppose is satisfactory to the first: we will proceed to weigh the two other promises of Prerogative. It will defend the Propertie and Libertie of the People, according to the old and new Lawes, and it will defend the just Priviledge of Parliament. To satisfie for this, we must alwaies direct our eyes, and fix them upon Prerogatives selfe, by considering what she is by nature, rather then what she speakes by art; and to discover the nature of Preroga∣tive, we must consider what her constant actions are, how she carries her selfe, when her motions proceed only from her own internall dis∣position, when she is a free agent, without any interposition of true necessity, feare, or danger; for then, and then onely, she acts her selfe: and how can you have a better and fuller discovery of her disposition, then by her constant course of proceedings, before this Parliament, set downe at large, in the Parliaments Remonstrance of the State of the Kingdome: for the keeping of which from the peoples view, there was so strong a partie made in the House of Commons (consisting, as we may well suppose, of that Prerogative-party which have now de∣serted that House) that the debate of publishing it was two severall times protracted ill midnight, the resolution curried but by 11. voices, and the printing of it  protested against; so dangerous a thing was it counted, to let the people understand their danger, and see the evills intended, lest the should look out for redresse, and indeavour for a re∣medy; nothing could be more contrary to the designes of Prerogative, who had formerly blinded their eys by suppressing preaching, and the Law; and Found their stands, by taking away Property & Liberty, that thus blind fold and bound, they might be carried at pleasure by their stand leaders, till both fell into the ditch. This opening the eys of the blind, was the sedition and faction of Parliaments; for this, after their for∣mer dissolutions, they were alwaies charged to be led by a few dange∣rously affected persons, pests and vipers: and for this they were dis∣solved, because they also would not become a grievance, by giving mony in the first place, with out redresse or speech of their grievances. Thus you see the nature of Prerogative: but it is answered, that the unparallel'd Acts of grace granted this Parliament, may justly chal∣lenge, not onely oblivion of these things past, but confidence for the time to come, that the very nature and judgement of Prerogative is
changed. From the good Laws granted this Parliament, this conclu∣sion followes verie naturally, that it is happie for the Kingdome when the King concurs with the advise of his Parliament, but I be∣lieve it will hardly follow from thence, that Prerogative is regene∣rate, there was somthing in the ballance of those gracious Grants be∣sides good nature: the presence of the Scotch Army which caus'd this Parliament, made it act more vigorously whilst it was here, then other Parliaments, but that Army being returned, and the Kingdome of Scotland setled, it was conceiv'd that the tame Kingdome of Eng∣land, which only Per Antiperistasin, had received a little heate from the North would quickly coole again, and be reduc'd to its former mal∣leablenesse. For the better effecting whereof Prerogatives first act was, notwithstanding the rebellion in Ireland and the just feare of Popish Assasinates, to discharge the Guard of the Parliament, and when they petitioned to have their Guard againe, one was set upon them under a Commander they could not confide in, so they chose rather to bee without. The next act of Prerogative was, to destroy the whole Parliament, by breaking the bundle, sticke after sticke, and this was attempted by an assault made up∣on the House of Commons, with an intent forcibly to have seized some of their Members, under the pretence of an accusation of high Treason, which was so much resented by the Kingdome, that all the Counties of England, though it necessary by numerous Petitions to present the pledges of their publick affections to the Parliament, and to declare their unanimous resolutions, to maintaine their Priviledges, amongst which well-affected people, very many that were neere hand, appeared in good numbers, voluntarily to guard the Parliament, some of them with all importunity, crying for Justice, and against Bishops, which last generall discontent occasioned the passing some more good Laws for publick satisfaction, though now, that Ebulli∣tion of publike affection is the pretended cause of all our misery, un∣der the name of tumults, which are so mightily declaim'd against, and so continually complain'd of by Prerogative, who was contented to whip the Kingdome till it cri'd, and now makes that crying, a maine argument of deserting the Parliament, and of bringing open force to destroy that, and the Kingdome: and indeed Prerogative had good reason to be incens'd against these officious Assemblies; for thereby not only all her designes were made abortive, but all hopes of effecting
any thing against the Parliament, in the Southern parts of the King∣dome wholly frustrate; therefore she must retire to a place of strength, where her servants (Fugitives and Traytors to the Parliament, and Kingdome,) may be avow'd and protected: and then, for the better effecting a division in the Kingdome, Prerogative begins to withdraw her partie from the Parliament; some by especiall Letters upon their Allegiance, others for feare of being put out of their Offices and ser∣vices, under His Majesty. In a word, all the trees were wind-shaken, and those that were not fast rooted, fell; who though they had stood out all the tumults, without danger or hazard, yet two moneths after they must withdraw themselves from the Parliament, as Prerogative saith, for feare of tumults, though themselves being summoned to re∣turne and give their attendance (according to their dutie) in Parlia∣ment, alledge only His Majesties command for their absence. After this a journey is pretended into Ireland, that an Army may be rais'd with lesse suspition: then His Majesty (that, in the greatest heat of discontent, went through London hunted at New-market; past through the whole Kingdome, secure and dangerlesse alone,) in the midst of that dutifull Country of Yorkeshire, proposed as a patterne of affection and loyalty to the Kingdome, must have a guard, which now (by the assistance of Papists and Delinquents, at home, and by meanes of forraigne supplies from abroad) is growne a royall Army, not only avowing His Majesties Servants, but open warre, against that trayterous Faction in both Houses of Parliament; and yet His Majesties soule abhorres the very thought of warre against his Parlia∣ment, and yet the Parliament are now declared abettors of that Facti∣on, against which the warre is maintained, and nothing, that will or malice can devise, held bad enough, sufficiently to asperse and blast their proceedings. Now after all this, he that can think Prerogatives nature changed, because of a few good words, and faire Protestations, let him think so; and he that will be deceived, let him be deceived; but wisdome is justified of her children: in vain shall we expect figs of thornes, or grapes of thistles; such as the tree is, such the fruit will be. Yet sup∣pose that Prerogative should really intend to performe her Protestati∣ons, and ingagements to the Kingdome, when this present Faction of both Houses of Parliament is subdued; though no man ought to que∣stion His Majesties personall goodnesse, yet no man can doubt, but that
this Army, thus composed, when it hath mastered the Parliament, will also give Law to His Majesty, as the Roman Army did to the Emperours, after the conquest of the Empire: and then, the questi∣on is not, Whether we will trust His Majesty? which no man will question; but whether we will subject our selves, with the most de∣sired, and best deserving Parliament that ever was, to Papists and De∣linquents? But here it is objected: The Parliament is as justly to be blamed, and there lie as cleere and manifold Objections against it, as against Prerogative. 1 It endeavours unnecessarily to perpetuate it selfe. 2 It seekes the alteration of the ancient frame of Government, and the abolition of the fundamentall Lawes of the Kingdome. 3 It destroyes Property and Liberty, as much as ever Preroga∣tive did. 4 They are seduced by a few factious Members, who are wholly transported with private ends and aimes. 5 They seek the ruine of the King and his Posterity. To the first: This Parliament endeavours to perpetuate it selfe un∣necessarily. Answ. I do not wonder that Prerogative is impatient of this check, and that it endeavours therefore to cut this Gordian knot, it cannot untie: but why the Parliament should not be infinite∣ly more desirous to be dissolv'd, then continue, if the Religion, peace, and prosperity of the Kingdome were once throughly setled, no wise man can give a reason. The Prelaticall Party proclaime every where, That if the Revenue of the Church be taken away (which is all they feare, though no man endeavours it) Religion and Learning will utterly decay; their very godlinesse will not stand without gaine: and why the Parliament should be so much in love with a gainlesse uncessant labour, I cannot devise. Oh, but every man is ambitious of power. Truly, power in a multitude, where all equally beare the burden, (but the most active carrie the most honour) will never be valued by the major part, whose private interests, and care of their family and estates, is nearer and dearer to them, then any other thing whatsoever, after their ingage∣ments shall be discharged to God and the publike. And therefore that the desired dissolution of this Parliament might be effected, it were much the readier way, to endeavour the setling the distractions of the
Kingdome, then by multiplying the dangers, to necessitate the conti∣nuance of the Parliament. But to the second Objection: The Parliament seeks the alteration of the ancient frame of government, and the abolition of the funda∣mentall Lawes of this Kingdome. Answ. Of the Ecclesiasticall Laws and Government it doth, for the reasons given before; and because it ought to obey God rather then man: but for the authority of the civill Magistrate, and the common Law and Justice of the Kingdome, it hath alwayes conformed to them, having never endeavoured any thing without the Kings consent, but only to preserve it selfe and the King∣dome, in such a case: and I doubt not, but this Position of theirs will be found very legall, That the Kings Authority, signified by his Courts, (especially by the high Court of Parliament, the representative Body of the Kingdom) is more obligatory to the Kingdom, then his personall Com∣mands, out of his Courts, though his personall Commands are alwayes to be reverenced, when they contradict not those Courts, and the Law: and therefore I assure my selfe, in conclusion, the loyalty and duty of the Parliament, and of that part of the Kingdome which obeyes the Par∣liament, will be found unblemisht. But to the third Objection: The Parliament invades the Property and Liberty of the Subject, as much as ever Prerogative did. An. When I consider, how often, and with how much art Prerogative inculcates this to the people, pretending great affection to them, and much care of their sufferings, together with much displeasure against the Parlia∣ment, for their oppression; I look upon this as the maine designe of Prerogative, to multiply the dangers and miseries of the Kingdome, thereby necessitating the Parliament to lay excessive charges upon the people, that the present sense of evills, which alwayes make deepest impressions in mens minds, might induce the people, whose love lies most in their purses, to desert the Parliament; but the wise will con∣sider, that the searching of a deep wound is more painfull then the ma∣king of it: yet he that searcheth my wound, to cure me, is more my friend, then he that makes it, onely to abuse me, and please himselfe. This is the true state of the case: Prerogative opprest the people be∣fore the Parliament, for her own pleasure, without any necessity, and laid the foundation of these present evills; the Parliament, at the ear∣nest desire of the people, undertake the cure: and, whilest they might operate without interruption, proceeded in the work, though with
much difficulty and charge, yet with much good successe, and generall satisfaction; setling peace with Scotland, and good Laws in England. But the Jesuitish Adversary, fearing, thereby, our happinesse, and their own ruine, stirre up that cruell and universall rebellion in Ireland, which might very well put the Parliament into Feares and Jealousies, ma∣king them expect whatsoeuer the malice of hell could inspire into their rage and fury, who in cold bloud could contrive a powder-plot. Yet for all this, the Parliament could not obtaine a Guard, but instead of that, hath been assaulted, and pursued, with those continuall mischie∣vous and wicked plots before recited. And now for the Parliaments taxing the Kingdome, to the twentieth part of their estates, and im∣prisoning those that oppose, is there not a cause? a just, a manifest, and a necessary cause for it? shall this be cal'd destruction of property and liberty? If the Parliament, intrusted for that purpose, may not imploy the estates and persons of the Kingdome, for the necessary de∣fence of it selfe; then let it be the wisdome of the Kingdome, to pre∣serve themselves a fat, full, and easie prey for their enemies, but by no meanes to preserve themselves from their enemies: Let the Physitian cure his patients, but let not them observe the prescriptions and ordi∣nances of the Physitian: let ill humours be purged, but let not the bo∣dy be weakened: put any impossibilities upon the Houses of Parlia∣ment; let them be accused of infidelity, if they doe not their best to deliver us: and let them be accused of oppression, if they do their best to deliver us. The Parliament hath a very happy time of it to serve such humours, and receive such incouragements: but the blessing of the Saints on earth is upon them, their way is with God, and their re∣ward in heaven. As for those that repine at this charge, Sodome and Gomorrah, Rome and Antichrist, at the last day shall rise up in judg∣ment against them, and shall condemne them. For, the Popish party spare for no cost, stick at no danger, venture all, both estates and life, for the Catholike cause: but we had rather our Religion, and all that's deare unto us, should be submitted to their cruell mercy, then contri∣bute the twentieth part of our estates for our own deliverance. And thus much for the third Objection. For the fourth: Their factious leaders are carried with private ends and aimes. Ans. Certainly, whatsoever their ends are, they that accuse them, are not so much of their counsell, as to know their ends; and as sure it is; they might have attain'd their private aimes, (if they
have any) much more speedily, by deserting the publick, as others have done, then by adhering to it, as they doe: but whatsoever their ends and aimes be, we will leave that to God and their own conscien∣ces; let their ends be what they will, the Houses of Parliament have no relations to them, or dependence upon them, that they should serve their ends, if at any time they consent to their opinion; they are convinc'd by publike reasons, and it very well beseems the honour of a Parliament, that he who speakes most reason, should rule the Par∣liament: I never heard that it was any disparagement, to the Apostles, and Church assembled in the first Synod, that they all submitted to the sentence of S. James, and out of his opinion fram'd the first Canons of the Church. The fifth objection is, They seeke the ruine and destruction of the King and his Posterity. To that the Parliament answers, That the force they imploy, to recover him and his children againe out of the hands of those wicked Counsellours; who have seduced him away from his Parliament and Kingdome, is a service to the King; as dutifull and loving, as it would be to indeavour the redemption of him by force, if he and his children were taken prisoners by Turkish Pirats, and detain'd by force. And for the hazard of His Majesties Person, and his Princely Children at Keinton Battell, had it been in the power of the Parliaments forces to have kept them out of the danger of that Bat∣tell, as it was in the power of that Army about the King, they would not have suffered him or his children to have ventured an haire of their heads. But perhaps the leaders of that Army will say, the Kings reso∣lutions were so strongly set, and his commands so peremptory, that they could not keep him from the Battell. Fidelity never made such a plea. To compell the King for his safety, is more loyaltie, then to obey him for his destruction: therefore the danger of the Kings life, that day, and of his childrens, let it lie (as it ought) upon that destructive∣ly obedient Army, which might have kept them from that hazard, and would not. But it is objected further: 1. The Houses of Parliament are favourers of Brownists and Ana∣baptists. 2. They have promised the Papists to repeale all the Laws-established against them, if they will joyne on their side. 3. Their reformation, will be a deformation.
4. They reject the Booke of Common Prayer. 5. They differ so much amongst themselves, that if they had their own minds, they know not what they would have. These Objections are with so much art and cunning interweav'd in the severall Declarations and Libells of the Prerogative-partie, and with so much confidence affirm'd, that a man who knowes assuredly the contrary, must have a good resolution, if he be not out-faced in his own knowledge: yet take these Objections nakedly, as they are sum'd up here together: how contradictory are they in themselves? how impossible some of them, how scandalous all? the very likeliest of them bare surmises, and propheticall conjectures: neverthelesse let the people be insnar'd by them and it is enough. But certainly, if the Prerogative pen-men did themselves believe them, they would put it to an issue, by procuring the Parliament their desired Synod, and then it would evidently appeare, what the persons are the Parliament affects, what opinions they incline to, and what reformation they intend. But I feare their consciences misgive them; the womb of this intended birth being declar'd to be the Word of God, the fruit can be nothing but the childe of truth, and therefore the surest way is to hinder the birth, and in the mean time make the people believe, the Parliament is in labour of a Moon-Calfe. But the Houses declare their intentions cleerly enough, to satisfie any honest man. 1 They say it is safer for Religion, that we concurre with other Protestant Churches in point of Discipline, then with the Papists, and it will beget a stronger mutuall confidence between us and them. 2 They do and have declared against the pressing of indifferent Ceremonies, (though estabished by Law) upon weake consciences. And hereby let all the world judge, whether their proceedings in all these things, be not pious, and moderate, and such as may be expected, from the representative Body of the Kindome of England. And now, O England, why haltest thou between two opinions? If Prerogative be turn'd thy friend, cleave to Prerogative: if the Par∣liament be turn'd thy enemy, desert the Parliament: nothing will sooner destroy thee, then this thy neutrality. I have declared unto thee my sense of both: the judgement is thine, resolve wisely and speedily: which soever thou choosest, it is either life, or death; God direct thee in thy choice, as may be most for his glory: for my part, I
think the Parliament may justly take up this insuing complaint, against all those that withdraw their confidence from them. Parl. We have forsaken father and mother, wife and children, houses and lands, for the Gospells sake and yours; we daily spend our selves, decay our healths, venture our lives, for your service: for your sakes we have walked craggie paths, and not beene wearied: the Lion hath roared against us, and we have not been terrified: mountaines of opposition have beene heaped one upon another, in our way, like Pelion upon Ossa, and we have not beene discouraged. For your sakes we are curs'd, reproach'd, kill'd all the day long, and yet for all this we complain not: That onely which breaks our heart is, that you, even you, for whom we have done and suffered all these things; that you, I say, should grudge to assist us, murmure against us, revile and hats us. God knows, we desire your good, as our owne soules, and all this unkindnesse of yours is not sufficient to turne our hearts from you, but we stand still, resol∣ved to spend, and be spent for you, though the more we love you, the lesse we be belov'd of you: God knows, we have no other intention, but for your good, to take away the drosse from the silver, Tradition from the Church, and wicked persons from the King: that the Worship of God may be established in purity, and the throne of the King in righ∣teousnesse; for the effecting whereof, we know no other way, but that. His Majesty (according to his own Proposition) follow the example of Queen Elizabeth, not in maintaining Prelates, but in esteeming Parliaments: She accounted them the Representative Body of the Kingdome, not a Faction: She sought their loves, not their lives: She called them often together, onely to see her good people, and to inquire of their grievan∣ces, that she might redresse them, and when returne was made, Omnia bene, and then Subsidies given, she refused their thank-offering, say∣ing, I seek not yours, but you. Then the blessing of God went along with the justice of the Prince, and the dutifull obedience of the People waited as a handmaid upon the eye of her Mistris: The love of Par∣liaments was that, and that onely (under God) which made the times of Q. Elizabeth happy: and the contempt of, and opposition against Parlia∣ments, is that, and that onely, (the secret judgements of God for our sinnes, being left to God) which is the visible cause of all our miseries. Therefore O King and People, if ye desire to attaine the happinesse of blessed Queen Elizabeth, and her prosperous times, observe but this one precept, Confide in Parliaments. FINIS.
