P3119 E434_1 99865401 117641
THE DECLARATION AND Resolution of Col. Iohn Poyer, Governour of Pembroke Ca∣stle, concerning the Kings Majesty, and both Houses of Par∣liament; and his Propositions to the Western party, touching his present proceedings. Together with a full and perfect Relation of the last great Fight, betwixt the Forces of the said Col Poyer, and Col, Fleming. With the manner thereof, And the taking of Tinby Castle by a party of Maj. Gen. Langhorns men. a cavalier on horseback London Printed for R. VV. and are to be sold neer Temple Barre, 1648
A perfect RELATION OF The great Fight at Pembroke Castle, betwixt the Forces under command of col. John Poyer, and the For∣ces under command of col. Flemming. Right Honourable, SInce my last unto you, of the 14. in∣stant, the worke for reducing of Pembroke Castle hath boene much retarded, and businesses have hap∣pened contrary to our expectation, for the insolent deportment of the Governour having awakence again a discontented party in this King∣dom, which began to fall asleep, and to acquiesce to the Orders of the Parliament, have now taken a resolution upon them to aid and assist the said Poyer, 2000. of
Major Gen. Langhorns men being joyned with him which came out or South-wale. But Col. Poyer having notice of their advance, forth∣with dispatched a private messenger from the Castle, to acquaint them, that upon their approach neer he was re∣solved to make a saily forth, and to fall vpon our For∣ces in their quarters, and desired that they would be in renesse to fal on upon the other side, which accor∣dingly they did, insomuch that our party were surroun∣ded; but immediatly receiving the allarm, they pre∣pared to receive them, and drew up into several Bodies, and charged the party commanded by Poyer himselfe, and had totally routed them, had not the new Revolters immediatly charged them on the Rear: However, col. Flemming and his party defended themselves gallantly, for the space of half an hour, and engaged themselves very much for the preservation of their Ordnance and Artillery, but being over-powred and unprovided for their comming were forced to retreat. They have slain divers, and a great many are wound∣ed, Col. Flemming himself is ssing, but it is hoped hee is not slain. Our men are all dispersed, and about 20 or 30 are carryed prisoners into the Castle. The number of those killed, is not yet certainly known but we hope not many, and that which supports out confidence therein, is their good appearance about Glo∣cester, and the to vns adjacent. The Commissioners that went thither are most of them taken. They have also taken the two great Culverins which Col. Fleming landed to maintain a Battery, and carryed
them into the Castle, together with all the Armes and Ammunition. Col Poyer hath taken Pembroke towne, and from thence victuals the Castle. Hee sends out parties dayly for the fetching in of provisions out of the Countrey: And that he hath a designe to fortifie the town of Pem∣broke, and to Garrison those that are come in for his assistance therein. We have likewise received further advertisements from South-Wales, That anothea party of Major Gen. Laughorns men are revolted from the obedience and command of the General, and hath taken possession of Tinby Castle, and do pretend to keep it for the King and Parliament, according to their former Engagement and Covenant. Here is great talk in these parts, of the rai∣sing of a new Army for the King, the Royal party gi∣ving out very high speeches; but we hope care will be taken for the sending of such a strength to South-wales as it is hoped will soon reduce those parts, and bring the new Revolters to condigne punishment. The insolent Colonel hath declared his Resolution to the Inhabitants of Pembroke, and hath sent a Decla∣ration and Propositions to the late Commander in chief of the Parliaments Forces, a Copy whereof, I have sent you here inclosed, and remain Your most obedient servant, John Wilson. Gloucester 28 of March 1647.
The Declaration and Propositious of Collonell Poyer Governour of Pembroke Castle, concerning his present proceedings touching the Kings Majesty and both Houses of Parliament. SIR, THE Order and Letter I read before your Drum to the Souldiers, they return this Answer. 1 That the Officers and Souldiers be paid part of their Arrears according to the proportion of others, and sufficient se∣curity for the rest. 2. That one thousand pounds be paid unto me, which I have disbursed, and my Arrears, as other officers ac∣cording to my place and time of my service; this gran∣ted, we are ready to surrender Castle and all that wee have in our possession; if not, we are resolved, with the assistance of the Almighty, to hold the Castle for the King and Parliament, according to the Covenant by us taken, untill such time that our Arrears, Disbursments, and Indemnity be assured us, Our trust is not in the arm of fiesh, but our hope standeth in the name of the Lord, and if bloud be spilt, judge who shal answer it at the dreadful day of judgment; such as seeks another mans
use to enjoy what is his right, or that man that stands in his defence to save what is his, we have be stowed our times to good purpose, to be preclaimed traytors and Rebels for demanding our own, and no more but what your selfe and those Mercenaries desires that you have brought to murther us, and to take the bread out of the mouths of our wivrs & children. I have no more but this, as David spake to Saul, when be hunted after has life, The Lord be Judge between us, whose heavenly protection, I am assured of, knowing our Cause to be just, I have not else to trouble you, but rest, Your humble Servant, John Poyer. Pembroke Castle 13, March 1647. The Answer of Colonel Fleming to the said Declaration. COlonell Fleming being willing of himself to doe all things with gentlenesse, and upon the advice and de∣sires of the Gentlemen of that County, promised to give him 200 l in ready money, and to enjoy the same terms for him∣self, and the Officers and Souldiers with him, as other super∣numeraries that are, or have been disbanded in other pla∣ces. Ne promised also that his arrears should be should bee audited, and security given him for the payment thereof, &c. But these fair offers could not prevail, for he hung out his flag of defiance, and refused to submit.
The General hath written to Col. Poyer, and I. col. Laug∣horn, That whereas he understands there is some disputes a∣mongst the Officers belonging to Major Gen. Laughornes, Forces concerning their disbanding, pretending to the Com∣missioners of Parliament appointed for that service, that they desire to be disbanded together, and other questions a∣bout the quantities of money to be paid upon their disband∣ing; That concerning the latter satisfaction is given by the Committee, by order from the Committee of Parliament for the Army: As for the other of desiring to be disbanded together, it is directly contrary to those rules his Excelency hath prescribed hitherto for disbanding, and therefore his Excellency expects, that the same obedience which hath bin yeelded by all others, be likewise by them, and that they do forthwith upon sight disband, Troop after Troop, and com∣pany after company, until the work of disbanding be fini∣shed. Imprimatur, G. M. FINIS.
