S3170 E365_10 99861781 113926
Profane Liberty Envious Hipocresie Iesuitecall Pollicie Three Grand Enimies to Church and State Sins captiue, grace abuser Couenant beaker soules deceiver Voyd of zeale filld with sin Given up to die therein To pretious truthes an enimie Filld with pride and cruiltie And fills larg Tracts with fowle disgrace Of truthes deare ones that hir imbrace Till Ante christ shall ruind bee Great combustions wee must see With errors shall the world be led But christ his spouse himselfe will guide
The times Displayed IN SIX SESTYADS: The first A Presbyter, an Independent. The second An Anabaptist and a Brownist The third An Antinomian and a Familist The fourth A Libertine and an Arminian. The Fift A Protestant and eke a Papist All these dispute in severall Tracts, and be Divulgers, as of Truth, so Fallacie. The sixt Apollo, grieves to see the Times So pester'd with Mechannicks lavish Rimes. Scribimus indocti, Doctique Poemata Passim. London, Printed and are to be sold by I. P. at his shop neer the Sessions house in the old Bayly. 1646.
To the Right Honourable Philip Herbert Earl of Pembrook. VOuchsafe great Lord, that art our Nations pride In whose rare Vertues, they alone conside To be the Patron, of my humble Muse Who doth thee onely, her Maecenas chuse: This work displayes the times, therefore tis meet I should present it, humbly at thy feet Who art no sever of the times, but thou Will serve thy Nation, and thy help allow For to maintain their Priviledges and be A propogator, of Gods veritie. To thee therefore great Lord, this work I give That I and it, may in thy favour live. Your Honours most obedient Servant, S. SHEPPARD.
An Anagram on the Name of the Right Honourable Philip Herbert Earl of Pembrook. EARLE PHILIP HERBERT Anagram Pear help all Libertie. Pear help all libertie, Great Lord we finde How well thy Name, hath suited to thy mind. When England was in danger slav'd to be Then thou great Lord, didst help all Libertie And by thy circumspect, and prudent wit Sawst evill coming and diverted it; To thee therefore a trophie I will raise And sing in Verse, that aye shall last (thy praise.)
THE TIMES DISPLAYED IN SIX SESTIADS. THE FIRST SESTIAD: The Argument, An Independent and a Presbyter Their severall Tenents, each do here prefer; And while they, pro and con do argue, we May judge of both, and which most erreth see. INDEPENDENT AND have we spent our bloods to gain no more We are as wretched as we were before When as the Lordly Prelates, ruld the Land Making Gods Truth, to stoop to your command O thou immortall Rector when shall we Be as we ought, and have our conscience free From mens Injunctions. PRESBYTER, "See mans nature is "Never contented, though he be in blisse. "He would have yet more joy, why knowst thou not, Or hath thy shallow memory forgot, What great immunities are purchased Since the great, little Prelate, lost his head
Are we not free from Papists lordly Reign Who ruld, Charls onely called Soveraign; Is not the throst of Inovation cut Are not our Enemies, in pinsolds that; Are not those Courts, that rackt the Commons purses "Receiving oft, their silver, with their curses Abolisht, i not that some fatall court Star Chamber cald, where six Lords could extort What they would from the Common, now put down And in the stead mercy and Justice shown. Are not all envious suckers. Independent He, whose this My utter enemy, I ween it is, As the ill boding Scrilch-owl I do hate Thy speeches, tell me art thou Consecrate, An Elder, whom I may dechipher thus Hodie Clericus, cr Luius: Thee and thy tenents I abhor and hate As errors, do all mischiefe properate Perhaps thou art an Expactant, luch there be Who waite Election, in the Presbytery I hold the Rule, of your Archi-synagogie To be a cruell, Rigorous Tyrannie Your high Sanhedrim, by which you undertake Your Fellow Commoners, meer slaves to make Your great Assembly is above all power And what you please, you turn, and change each houre So that I de rather chuse, a slave to be And vassaild, to the Bishops Hierchie Then unto you subjected, pray whence rose Your Reformation, but from Knox, and those Seditious ones Melvill and Lisley, and Peter Carmichael, who once did stund In open opposition gainst all Law In ordine ad Spiritualia.
Presbyter O Thou deluded, that art enemie To God, doth not the sacred verity Confirm, and eke command the Church should be Guided by a Judicious Presbyterie Thy Allegations are most false and naught, Such as the Feind into thy mind hath brought: Thou art a Libertine, and wouldst have none To govern thee, but thy false heart alone Woe be to England, hadst thou thy desire Whose thoughts are swords, whose actions are fire To ruin thine opposers, praised be To the Almighties Sacred Maiestie Our prudent Parliament, do now proceed To settle Independent. What they have decreed Theil finde when they have setled it most sure Tis built on sand, and cannot long indure. Presbyter. Well go thy wayes, let Sathan and his crue Theu most of your wicked ends persue, God will preserve his Church, and maugre all Will have his own will to be principall After so long obseurity, he now Is pleasd unto his servants light to shew, The true light of his face, the government, He gave to his Apostles, with intent They and the true Church, ever should observe Which having purchasd, grant Lord, nere swerve There-from, but us and ours imbrace it may Untill the last, and dreadfull Judgement day, The end of the first Sestiad.
The Second Sestyad. The Argument An Anabaptist and a Brownist here Ʋnmask themselves, and make the filth appear, The while the one contendeth for himself Averring he ought not baptize his elfe Till hees of age, the other worse deluded Saith, Godhath England from the Church exculded. Anabaptist. After so long a night, of woe and sorrow Behold a fair, and delicious morrow After so many years, when we opprest Were fin'd imprisoned, and could never rest For the Beast, Image, the hated Bishops (now) We openly, and without, dread avow Our tenents, dipping maids, and wives each day Their naturall concupicence to allay, And although some we drown, those drowned so Doe but by water unto heaven go, And— Brow. Ile not beleeve the Church of England is: A true Church, making my assurance this, When Bishops and their government did stand And Popery was used in the Land By singing, cringing, worshipping of tables Christning of bells, with many other Fables,
Twas then an The Brow nists hold our church to be Anti∣christian & Hereti∣cal; that becaus we have no Church, they are to sever themselves from us, that with∣out civil authority they are to erect a Church of their own. Antichristian Church, and now They seem those errors, for to disavow Instead thereof the English Parlament. Set up a worser, fiercer Government. The spawn of Bishops, now must rule, I gather The wandering issue, of a misled Father For the Presbyterie, the wise can tel We justly may with Bishops paralel, From them their Power's deriv'd Anabaptist, All hail to thee Dear Brother of our NONCONFORMITIE; Both thee and I, like Sampsons Foxes do Burn up Gods vineyard, work the Church much wo, Why then are we estranged each from other, Let mee imbrace thee, in my arms my Brother. Brownist. Stay good, my friend, and know twixt thee & me There is a very vast Antipathie, I do not hold that Beasts from death shal rise At the last day, nor yet in any wise Can I beleeve, that ere the Damned shall After some torments be released all, And plac'd in heavenly joys, for so you hold. Anabap. Why then my Friend thou hast the worst on's told By manifest *, that they may proved bee, Thou now recitedst, as an heresie, Scriptures And this assure thy self, who ere is not Of our Society, shal have his lot Amongest the Damned, evermore to dwel, Wailing his error, in the lowest Hel. Brownist. Rashly concluded, thus each Sect doth say He that treads not their paths, errs from the way. The end of the second Sestiad.
The third Sestyad. The Argument One of the Family of Love With an Antinomian meets And divers questions they do move Not parting without threats. Familist. A Mor omnia vincit, 'twas that which mov'd God for to come on earth, because he lov'd The sons of men, tis love that all creates Tis love that men and creatures propogates Did men but know the sweet society We do enjoy are of loves family They would reject their burthensome Estate And make themselves with us Incorporate, How many Queenes, and princesses of might To be made one of us, have tane delight, As Messalina, Cleopatra, FLORA She Romes vulgar honour as a Dietie Lais and Thais, O Ime ravished To think upon the pleasant Lectures read To us, when we in full Assembly met, The sisters on the brothers laps being set Nothing but love our harmelesse souls desire With love, each of our hearts is set on fire This love we cherish, by all wayes we may For tis good our loves should ought decay
And therefore Oysters, Lobsters, we prepare Eringoes tatoes, and such toyish fare, And this we do, to preserve love in us For sine Cerere & Bacho, friget Venus. Anti, My eares are blister'd; O what have I heard And art thou not thou beast at all afeard Of Hell, or thinkst thou the Almighty sleeps Why he a bedrole of thy basenesse keeps And will take vengeance on thee that dost make Religion cloak thy evills. Familist. Dost thou take In hand sin to reprove, whose sins are such That of thy blasphemies, there cant too much Be spoken, thou deniest, the Law was given To be mans Rule, although the Lord from heaven Girt in bright flames, with awfull Majesty The while the Trumpet sounded from on hie Denounced Death, to him the same should break And yet you dare with boldnesse for to speak And to divulge, you from the Law are freed And you of nought but faith do stand in need. Again, you teach, averring impiously Your sins are pardond, ere committed be Why then it seems Christ Jesus, to no end his heavenly pater noster did commend To his Disciples, bidding them desire Forgivenesse of their sins, as the just hire Of their forgiving others, some there be Of your sweet Sect, that do unanimously Conclude there is no strict necessity Of our receiving that holy Of the Lords Supper. mistery Of our salvation (Why are we tyed thus) Say they to shaddows, when Christ dwells in us Already, why on pictures must we feed When we possesse the substance.
Antinom. Twere indeed Agreivous crime in me, for to confer With one whose wayes, are so Irregular, Untie those bonds, do chain thy soul and be No more pertaker, of loves familie And were it not, that I have hope thou maist Converted be, ere thou of death do taste I would discover thee, Familist. And I but that I would not people draw to wonder at Thy self and me, I would unto thy wo First bang thee soundly, and then let thee go. The end of the third Sestyad.
The fourth Sestyad. The Argument A Libertine and an Arminian Each make known, your fond opinion; And by the stories, which they tell We may Judge both, are fit for hell. Libertine. GIve me the Joyes on Earth, and tell not me Of after hopes, future felicitie I tire to think on, the time present I Will spend in mirth, and pleasant jollitie Sit round my hearts, our heads with Ivie crownd Let quasse Lyeus, and the healths go round And singing pearls, unto Ceres, we Unto the Harpe, will foot it lustily While here I live, Ile spend my time in mirth Time is no more, when I am gone from earth This night Ile clip a beauty, would tempt Jove Equall to Juno, or the Queen of Love Away with this same fond Philosophie That tells, the soul lives to Eternitie Away with such vain fancies when we fall The soul dyes with the body, &c. It hath been foretold by the Prophets and Apostles that such men the latter dayes shall afford, and our own age hath verified, their speech unto us, and even for the main question of the Resurrection whereat
they stick so mightily. was it not plainly foretold that men should in the latter times say, where is the pro∣mise of his coming an level at this present time is there not exceprions taken against the Creation, the Ark, and divers other points, the ground whereof is superfluity of wit, without ground of learning, which may be truly termed, Mater eirorum et vitiorum nutrix, now the chief cause of Atheism is SENSUALITY, which maketh men desirous to remove all stops and impediments of their wicked life, among which, be∣cause Religion is the chiefest, so as neither in this life without shame, they can persist therein, nor if that be true without torment in the life to come, they whet their wits to annihilate the joys of heaven, wherein they see (if any such be) they have no part; and like∣wise the pains of hel, wherein their portion must needs be very great; they labor therefore, not that they may not deserve those pains, but that deserving them there may be no such pain to seize upon them, but what conceit can be imagined more base, then that man should strive to perswade himself, even against the se∣cret instinct (no doubt) of his own mind, that his soul is, as the soul of a beast, mortal, and corruptible with the body, against which barbarous opinion, their own Atheism is a very strong Argument. For were not the soul a nature separable from the body, how could it enter into discourse of things meerly spiritual, and nothing at all pertaining to the body; surely the soul were not able to con∣ceive any thing of heaven, no not so much as to dispute a∣gainst heaven, and against God, if there were not in it som∣what heavenly and derived from God, Thus much by the way.
Arminian. Theres no man shall, Perswade me, but man has, an Innate will Power of himself, to commit good or ill, I've set before thee, fire, and water, chuse, Saith God, ev'n which thou wils, which plainly shews Mans power's of himself, to take or leave, To take the good; or else the ill receive, POPE PIƲS, had a vision on a day As after Dinner on his couch he lay A glorious Angel did before him stand Bearing a graven Schedule in his hand On the right side, was in a figure placd The heaven of heavens with the Almighty gracd, While all his glorious angels standing round Loud Allelujaes, to the THRONE, resound: On the left hand was ORCƲS plac'd where sate Grim Pluto, placed in a throne of state, Foshiond of burning brasse, the Damned Crew Howling in flames, their forepast Acts did rew, Just in the midst, betwixt both these there stood A man wel shapt, and of proportion good, Before whom hung a tablet, in which words Of letter Capital, this sense affords; Behold, o man, before thee two ways lie, The one to joy, tother to miserie Doth lead; chuse which thou wilt, therefore tis sure Man may his sorrow, or his blisse procure By his own inclination; Ergo, I Will in this my opinion Live, and Die. THE AUTHOR. Ah do not so, trust not to thine own strength, For fear it plunge thee in Abisse at length. The end of the fourth Sestyad.
The fifth Sestyad. The Argument. A Papist on Pilgrimage he went Meets with a true beleeving Protestant, Twixt whom there divers propositions bee As bout the Masse and popes Supremacy, Til in the end, they both agree as one, And do extol the true Religion. Papist. Holy Saint Christopher be thou my guide And ayd my speed, that I by eventide May arive safely at Saint Francis shrine, That holy Francis that by ayd divine Conversing in the solitary wood Making wild fruits and water be his food, O be propitius Protestant, See it is my chance To meet with one will give me cause to advance Gods truth above the unwritten veritie, Worshipful Pilgrim, all hail to thee That wrapt in errors dost thy journey take Bare footed, while the sirly thorny brake Often draws blood. Papist. By Saint Sebastian I now have met a A Prote∣stant so termed by them, be∣cause they place their cheif con∣fidence in the Act of faith—. SOLIFIDIAN; Why thou deluded, how long wilt thou bee Unto the holy Church an enemie,
And still persisting in thy wed state Dye as an Heretick, excommunicate By Christs Vicegerent. Protestant. My good pilgrim hold, Enough and each too much, thou now hast told Ime not deluded, but with setled faith I tye my selfe, to what the Scripture saith Which in no place mentions the papall throne, That Septred Kings, must yeeld subjection To mytred Bishops, that false power do vaunt That Christum simulant, & contrachristum pugnat Nor do I weigh, how me, the pope shall handle No though, he curse me, with bel book and candle. Papist. The ayres infected, O that I had now Some holy water, for to crosse my brow O sire I blasphemy have heard thou soul Who art infected so, with errours foul, Tis hard to cure thee. Protest. Nor do I desire. Thou shouldst as my Physitian gaine thy hyre Which will be more, then all the world affords My precious soul, Papist. Although to bandy words With thee an Heritick, were fond and Vaine Yet so I see, thart learn'd Ile not abstain But I wil converse a while, know then that Rome Is the most ancient Church (where martyrdome) Diverse Apostles did receive, and there By Christs appointment, is S. Peters chair Where Christs Vice-gerent, Peters seat doth fill And what he doth Comand, even Christ doth wil He cannot erre in ought, for on this stone Christ builds his Church (all opposition) Shall not prevail against him, every state Al Kings on Earth to him subordinate; He to the glorious fun I may compare. Kings to the Moon, who of his lustre share.
Protest. I hear toomuch, although tis truth Rome was Once cald the mother Church, but truth did passe From Rome, drove thence by erring fallacies, By ground less fables, superstitious lies, When Gods love was relinquisht, and instead Thereof, was mans traditions honored. Nor is the Pope to sit in Christ his throne. For Christ himself doth rule his Church alone; Nor can we find by what our Savior said (To Peter) that on him alone he laid A charge to rule his Church, but when he spake To Peter, he did the rest his Partners make, And not on Peter, but upon his faith Christ builds his Church, when on this rock he saith Ile build my Church, and whereas you compare The Pope unto the Sun, you grosly erre, But rather we ful aptly render may The Pope as Moon, for as one wel doth say. —Fratri contraria Phabe Ibit & obliquum, big as agitare per orbem Indignata, diem poseit sibit totaque discors Machina convulsi, turbabit foe dera mundi. The Moon disdeigning of her rule by night Would needs rule Phabus Carr the day to light, And by this civil, and unnatural Jarr Inforced natures bands to fry in Warr. Even so at first, the Aspiring Popes of Rome, When they would Kings as wel as Priests become Layd claim, and urgd it their Prerogative For to dispose of Crowns, and those did strive For to make frustrate, Their so il Intent They presently deprivd of Government, And then being seated in the Suns bright Carr They streight involvd all nations in VVarr, And now the sole Incendiaries be For to set Crown and Crown at enmity.
Papist. I do find something in me prompts me now The Popes usurped power to disavow. Protestant. This man of sin doth hold the world in hand, He holds his Papal power by Christs command And lest the vulgar should into it pry He doth lock up the sacred Verity, And feeds the peoples minds with outward glosses. VVith pleasant musick, Images, and Crosses, VVith Pilgrimages, Offerings, and Oblations, VVith holy Rood days, and such recreations. VVith holy-water, wafer, cakes, and challices, VVith Copes, & Mitres, Crosiers, such like sallacies Bewitch the people so, they blindly run To all excesse of Superstition; Again, that he his Priests may magnifie To win them honor in the peoples eye Theyre told, when once the words of consecration Are uttred, just upon the elevation Of the bread God, 'tis very Christ even hee, VVho for their fins, did suffer on the tree, O horrid, that a mortal should create Even his Creator. Papist. I now see the state That I am in is wretched, and by thee O happy friend I am converted, see I am not as I was, I here lay by This weed of shame, and now intirely I VVil be a Protestant. Protestant. If so Thy tongue and heart in equipage do go, Come follow me, and thou wilt find theres none Of true Belief, but Protestants alone. The end of the fifth Sestyad.
THE SIXTH SESTYAD. The Argument. Apollo rageth that the noble bay Is worn by those that do not merit it, He and she Muses an amer cement lay On some, that trusting to their sor did wit Do undertake, of things most high to say, Yet cannot words unto the matter fit: Mean time Urania doth in tears deplore Her Quarles. Peets losse, whose like shal be no more. 1. HE that doth bear the silver shining bow Whose musick doth surpass, that of the sphears VVho slew great Ovids Metamoi. Lib. 1. Pythan, and did Vulcan show VVhere Mars and Vanus, were, to increase his fears. Jove and Latonas son, whom Readers know In heaven he of Sol, the title bears: In earth he Liber Pater called is, And eke Apollo in the shades of Dis. 2. One time, as on the spire of's * Temple hee At Delphos Did sit, he cast his most refulgent eye Towards Pernassus Mount, where he might see The sacred Nine, not now melodiously As they were wont, to chaunt in Jollitie Apolloes praise, and the great Jupiter Diety, That turnd IO to a Cow, but now they were VVith sorrow overcome, did joy forheare. 3. VVith speed to Hellicon he took his flight. VVhere being come, the Muses did arise And made obeaysance, as was requisite, To whom said A name of Apollo. Sminthus, why, with downeast eye, Are your fair Aspects clouded, and why dight In sable weeds, the reason I surmise,
VVhich doth afflict me more, then when my Phaeton. son By those unruly Steeds, to death was done. 4. Shal part of Daphne or the bay tree. her, whom once I lovd so dear, Be worn by those whose for did minds I hate; Why do I, for to shoot, the slaves forbear, And with my Arrows, their brests penetrate; Who for to claim the Lawrel do not fear. Due only unto those, whose happy fate Hath raised them, my Prophets for to bee, Or else can claim the same by victorie. 5. Each fellow now, that hath but had a view Of the learnd Phrygians Fables, groweth bold, And name of Poet doth to himself accrew; That M. P. Ballad maker too, is now extold With the great name of Poet, J. T. He that knew Better far how to row, then pen to hold, His sordid lines, are sweld to such a weight, Theyre able for to make, his Boat afreight. 6. The god of waves hath been my enemy, Else that base Fool, had Haddocks fed ere now. And Fennor might have wrote his Ellegy, (Another coxcomb) that his wit, to show Wrote many things, the best not worth the eye Of any schoolboy, doth his genders know; But while the Fools I rate, let me not be Forgetful of those writers lovd by me. 7. Although the Bard, whose lines unequalled, Who only did deserve a Poets name To my Eternal grief, be long since dead, His lines for ever shal preserve his Fame. So * his who did so neer his footpaths tread Samuel Danniel. Whose lines as neer as Virgils Homers came, Do equal Spencers, who the soul of verse In his admired Poems doth rehearse.
8. But ah whose this whose shade before me stands O tis the Man, whose Fame the earth doth fil, VVhose vertue is the talk of Forraign Lands VVhile they admire his Feats of Arms his skil In Poesic, while he bove all commands The Muses, who so waited on his Quil That like to Sidu; none ere wrote before His birth, not now hees dead shal ere write more. 9. See him whose Tragick Sceans EƲRIPIDES Doth equal, and with SOPHOCLES we may Compare great SHAKESPEAR ARISTOPHANES Never like him, his Fancy could display, VVitness-he Prince of Tyre, his Pericles, His sweet and his to be admired lay He wrote of lustful Tarquins Rape shews he Did understand the depth of Poesie. 10. But Drayton. thou dear soul, whose lines when I behold I do astonisht stand, of whom Fame says By after times, Thy Polyolbion. songs shal be extold And mentioned be as equalling my lays Thou who so sweetly EDVVARDS woes hast told VVhen other Poems; though of worth decays, Thine shal be honord, and shal aye subfist In spight of dark oblions hiding mist. 11. So * His that Divine PLAUTUS equalled Ben. Iohnson. Whose Commick vain MENANDER nere could hit, Whose tragick sceans shal be with wonder Read By after ages for unto his wit My selfe gave personal ayd I dictated To him when as Sejanus fall he writ, And yet on earth some foolish sots there bee That dare make Randolf his Rival in degree. 12. All hail eke unto Mr. May. thee that didst translate My loved LƲCAN into thine own tongue,
And what he could not finish snatcht by fate, Thou hast compleated his ingenuous Psalla. song Thy Fame with his shal nere be out of date Nor shal base Momus carpe thy glory wrong, But of mine own tree, Ile a garland frame For thee, and mongst my Propets rank thy name, 13. Mr Brown. So * thine whose rural quil so high doth sound Theocritus or Mantnans ere could bee So sweet and so sententious ever found As are thy Pastorals of Britanie, Thy fame for aye shal to the skies resound, And I pronounce Thy fluent Poesie Singing of shepherds is the best ere wit Invented, and none ere yet equalled it. 14 Nor thine O Heywood worthy to be read By Kings, whose books of eloquence are such Enough in praise of thee, can nere be sed Nor can my Verses, ere extoll too much Thy reall worth, whose lines unparaled Although some envious criticks seem to grutch Shall live on earth to thy eternall Fame When theirs in grave shall rot, without a name. 15 So eke shall yours, great Davenant, Sherley and Thine learned Goffe, Banmont, and Fletchers to With Mr Philip Massenger. his that the sweet Renegaddo pend With Mr Allen. his who Cressey sang, and Poycters to Your works, your names for ever shal commend Joyned with Mr Nabbs. his, that wrot how Scipie, Orethrew great Hanniball, his ingenious lines Shall be a pattern, for the after times. 16. Nor will I Mr withers. thee forget whose Poesie Is pure, whose Emblems, Satyrs Pastoralls
Shal live on earth even to Eternity, Nor * Thee whose Poems loudly on me cals For my applause, which here I give, and I Mr Randal Pronounce Mr Mills his merit, that so high tals The Muses, in his Night-watch, great to bee, And times to come shal hugg his Poesie. 17. But why, Ʋrania, hangst thou so thy head, What grievous loss hath rest thy Joys away; Quoth she, knows not Apollo QƲARLES is dead That next to BARTAS, sang the heavenlist lay, And who is he on earth, his steps can tread, So shal my glory come unto decay; At this she wept, and wailing wrung her hands, The Muses mourning round about her stands. 18. Quoth then Apollo, lay this grief aside, I do assure thee, that thy honor shal Not fade, but be far greater Amplified; Theres one who now upon thy name doth cal, Who hath by Clio formerly been tried, And by her wel approvd; He surely shal Succeed great Quarles, if thou not fâte to inspite And warm his Bosome with thy hottest fire. 19. Hereat she cheared was, and now a earst Apollo in the midst, the Mules Nine Began to sing, CLIO, Joves Deeds rehearst VVhen he the Gyants pasht, her song Divine Apollo shapt his tyre unto, where first I did set sorth I must again decline: What shallow fools shal prate I do not care, Fly Thou my Book to those that Learned are. Nunquam me Impune lacessit. The end of the sixth and last Sestyad. FINIS.
