S5800aA 99895777 153355
The two last Speeches of Thomas Wentworth, late Earle of Straf∣ford, and Deputy of Ireland. The one in the Tower, the other on the Scaffold on Tower-hill, May the 12th 1641. New revised by the perfectest Coppy, with some Ad∣ditions, which was formerly omitted; with his private prayer, or ejaculations to Almighty God. woodcut portrait of Thomas Wentworth, first earl of Strafford, bordered in black with memento mori Printed for Francis Coules. 1641.
His speech in the Tower to the Lords, before he went to execution. Right Honourable, and the rest, you are now come to convey mee to my death, I am willing to dye, which is a thing no more than all our Predecessors have done, and a debt that our Posteritie must in their due time discharge, which since it can be no way avoyded, it ought the lesse to be fea∣red; for that which is common to all, ought not to be intol∣lerable to any: It is the Law of Nature, the tribute of the flesh, a remedy from all worldly cares and troubles; and to the truly penitent, a perfect path to blessednesse. And there is but one death, though severall wayes unto it: mine is not naturall, but enforced by the Law and Justice: it hath beene sayd that the Lawes vex only the meaner sort of people, but the mightie are able to withstand them: it is not so with me, for to the Law I submit my selfe, and confesse that I re∣ceive nothing but justice: for hee that politikely intendeth good to a Common-weale, may be called a just man, but hee that practiseth either for his owne profit, or any other sini∣ster ends, may be well termed a delinquent person; neither is delay in punishment any privilege for pardon. And more∣over, I ingenuously confesse with Cicero, That the death of the bad is the safetie of the good that be alive. Let no man trust eyther in the favour of his Prince, the friendship and consanguinity of his Peeres, muchlesse in his owne wisdome and knowledge, of which I ingenuously con∣fesse I have beene too confident. Kings, as they are men be∣fore God, so they are Gods before men, and I may say with a great man once in this Kingdome, Had I strived to obey my
God as faithfully, as I sought to honour my King diligently, J had stood, and not fallen. Most happie and fortunate is that Prince, who is as much for his justice feared, as for his good∣nesse beloved: For the greater that Princes are in power a∣bove other, the more they ought in vertue to excell other; and such is the royall Soveraigne whom I late served. For my Peeres, the correspondence that I had with them during my prosperitie, was to mee very delightfull and plea∣sing, and here they have commiserated my ruine, I have plen∣tifully found, who (for the most generous of them) I may boldly say, though they have detested the fact, yet they have pitied the person delinquent; the first in their loyaltie, the last in their charitie: ingenuously confessing, that never any subject, or peere of my rank, had ever that help of Counsell, that benefit of time, or a more free and legall tryall than I have had: in the like whereof, none of my predecessors hath had so much favour from his prince, so much sufferance from the people; in which I comprehend the understanding Com∣mons, not the many headed monster, Multitude: But I have offended, am sentenced, and must now suffer. And for my too much confidence in my supposed wisdom and knowledge, therein have beene the most deceived: For hee is wise to himselfe, that knowes by others faults to correct his owne offences: to be truly wise is to be Secreta∣ries to our selves; for it is meere folly to reveale our intimate thoughts to strangers: wisdome is the most precious Gem with which the mind can be adorned, and learning the most famous thing for which a man ought to bee esteemed, and true wisdome teacheth us to doe well, as to speake well: in the first I have failed, for the wisdome of man is foolishnesse with God. For knowledge, it is a thing indifferent both to good and evil, but the best knowledge is for a man to know himselfe; hee that doth so, shal esteeme of himselfe but little, for hee considereth from whence he came, and wherto he must go, he
regardeth not the vaine pleasures of this life, hee exalteth God, and strives to live in his feare; but he that knoweth not himselfe, is wilful in his owne wayes, unprofitable in his life, unfortunate in his death, and so am I. But the reason why I sought to attaine unto it, was this: I have read that he that knoweth not that which he ought to know, is a Bruit beast amongst men: hee that knoweth more than hee ought to know, is a man amongst beasts: but hee that knoweth all that may be knowne, is a God amongst men. To this I much aspired, in this I much failed; Vanitie of vanities, all is but vanitie. I have heard the people clamour and cry out, saying, That through my occasion the times are bad, I wish that when I am dead they may prove better: most true it is, that there is at this time a great storme impending (God in his mercie avert it.) And since it is my particular lot, like Jonah, to bee cast into the sea, I shall think my life well spent, to appease Gods wrath, and satisfie the peoples malice. O what is eloquence more than aire? fashioned with an articulate and distinct sound, when it is a special vertue to speake little and well, and silence is oft the best oratorie; for fooles in their dumbnesse may bee accounted wise: It hath power to make a good matter seeme bad, and a bad cause ap∣peare good: but mine was to mee unprofitable, and like the Cypresse trees, which are great and tall, but altogether without fruit. What is honour? but the first step to disquietnesse, and power is still waited on by envie, neither hath it any privi∣lege against infamie. It is held to be the chiefe part of honor, for a man to joyne to his office and calling, curtesie and affa∣bilitie, commiseration and pitie: for thereby he draweth to him with a kind of compulsion, the hearts of the multitude. But that was the least part of my study, which now makes me call to mind, that the greater the persons are in authority, the sooner they are catcht in any delinquencie, and their
smallest crimes are thought to bee capitall, the smallest spot seemes great in the finnest linnen, and the least flaw is soonest found in the richest Diamond. But high and noble spirits finding themselves wounded, grieve not so much at their owne paine and perplexitie, as at the derision and scofs of their enemy: but for mine owne part, though I might have many in my life, I hope to finde none in my death. Amongst other things which pollute and contaminate the mindes of great spirits, there is none more heinons than Am∣bition, which is seldome unaccompanyed with Avarice: Such, to possesse their ends, care not to violate the Lawes of Religion, and Reason, and to breake the bonds of Mode∣sty and equity, with the nearest tyes of Consanguinity, and Amity; of which as I have beene guilty, so I crave at Gods hands forgivenesse. It is a Maxime in Philosophy, that am∣bitious men can bee never good Counsellours to Princes; the desire of having more is common to great Lords, and a desire of Rule a great cause of their Ruine. My Lords, I am now the hopelesse President, may I bee to you all an happy example: For Ambition devoureth gold, and drinketh bloud, and climbeth so high by other mens heads, that at the length in the fall it breaketh its own neck: therefore it is better to live in humble content, than in high care and trouble: For more precious is want with hone∣sty, than wealth with infamy: For what are wee but meere vapours, which in a serene Element ascend high, and upon an instant, like Smoak, vanish into nothing: or like Ships without Pilots, tost up and downe upon the Seas by contrary winds and tempests. But the good husbandman thinks bet∣ter of those eares of Corne, which bow downe, and grow crooked, than those which are streight and upright, because he is assured to finde more store of graine in the one than in the other. This all men know, yet of this, how few make use: The defect whereof must be now my paine: may my suf∣fering prove to others profit.
For what hath now the favour of my Prince, the fami∣liarity with my Peeres, the volubility of a tongue, the strength of my memory, my learning, or knowledge, my honours, or Offices, my power, and potency, my riches, and treasure, (all these the especiall gifts, both of Nature, and Fortune) what have all these profited mee? Blessings I ac∣knowledge, though by God bestowed upon man; yet not all of them together upon many: yet by the Divine providence, the most of them met in me: of which had I made happy use, I might still have flourisht, who now am forc'd immaturely to fall. I now could wish, (but that utinam is too late) that God with his outward goodnesse towards mee had so com∣mixed his inward grace, that I had chused the medium path, neither inclining to the right hand, nor deviating to the left; but like Icarus with my waxen wings, fearing by too low a flight to moysten them with the Waves: I soared too high, and too neare the Sunne, by which they being melted; I ay∣ming at the highest, am precipitated to the lowest: and am made a wretched prey to the Waters: But I who before built my house upon the the sand, have now setled my hopes up∣on the Rock my Saviour: by whose onely merits my sole trust is, that whatsoever becomes of my body, yet in this bosome my soule may be Sanctuaried. Nimrod would have built a Tower to reach up to heaven, and cald it Babel; but God turned it to the confusion of Lan∣guages, and dissipation of the people. Pharaoh kept the Chil∣dren of Israel in bondage, and after having freed them, in his great pride would have made them his prey; but God gave them a drie and miraculous passage, and Pharaoh and his hoast a watrie Sepulcher. Belshazzer feasted his Princes and Prostitutes, who drunke healths in the Vessells taken from the Temple, but the hand of God writ upon the wall, Mene, Tekel, Phoras, and that night before morning was both his Kingdome and life taken from him: Thus God lets
men goe on a great while in their owne devices, but in the end it proved their own ruine and destruction, never suffe∣ring them to effect their desired purposes: therefore let none presume upon his power, glory in his greatnesse, or bee too confident in his riches: These things were written for our Instruction, of which the living may make use, the dying cannot; but wit and unfruitfull wisedome are the next neigh∣bours to folly. There can bee no greater vanity in the world, than to e∣steeme the world, which regardeth no man; and to make slight account of God who greatly respecteth all men; and there can bee no greater folly in man, than by much Travell to increase his goods, and pamper his body, and in the inte∣rim with vaine delights and pleasures, to lose his soule. It is a great folly in any man to attempt a bad beginning, in hope of a good ending; and to make that proper to one, which was before common to all, is meere indiscretion, and the be∣ginning of discord, which I positively wish may end in this my punishment. O how small a proportion of earth will containe my bo∣dy, when my high minde could not be confined within the spacious compasse of two Kingdomes? But my houre draw∣eth on, and I conclude with the Psalmist, not ayming at any one man in particular, but speaking for all in generall: How long will you Judges bee corrupted? how long will yee cease to give true Iudgement? &c. Blessed is the man that doth not walke in the Councell of the wicked, nor stand in the way of sinners, nor sit in the seat of the scornfull, therefore they shall not stand in the Indgement, nor sinners in the assembly of the righteous, &c. About the houre of 12. a Clocke the aforesaid Lord of Strafford was conveyed to the Scaffold on Tower Hill, where was a Court of Guard made by the severall Companies of Souldiers of the City of London, and the Hamlets of the Tower on each side as he passed to the Scaffold: before mar∣ched
the Marshalls men to make way, then the Sheriffes of Londons Officers with their Halberds; after them the Kings Guard, or warders of the Tower: Next came one of his Gentlemen, bare headed, in mourning Habit, the Lord Strafford following him clad in blacke cloath, with divers o∣thers in the same habit, which were his attendance; then the Lord Bishop of Armagh, and other good Divines; with the Sheriffes of London, and divers honourable parsonages. The manner of his going from the Tower, to the Scaffold. woodcut showing the procession, with armed guard and clergy, of Thomas Wentworth, first earl of Strafford, from the Tower of London to the scaffold on Tower Hill When he came to the Scaffold, he there shewed himselfe on each side in full view to all people, and made this short speech, with as much alacrity of Spirit, as a mortall man could expresse, viz.
The Earle of Straffords laft speech on the Scaffold, and the manner how he shewed himselfe and spake to the people. woodcut showing the execution by beheading of Thomas Wentworth, first earl of Strafford, on the scaffold at Tower Hill MY Lord Primate of Ireland, (and my Lords, and the rest of these Gentlemen) it is a very great com∣fort for me to have your Lordship by me this day, in regard I have been knowne to you a long time, I should be very glad to obtaine so much silence, as to bee heard a few words, but I doubt I shall not, my Lord. I come hither by the good will and pleasure of Almightie God to pay that last debt I owe unto sin, which is death, and by the blessing of that God to rise again through the merits of Christ Jesus to eternall glorie. And hee being di∣sturbed by the people, hee said, What is the matter? and sate downe in a chaire: some replyed, The Souldiers kept most stir: If they, said he, would be quiet, all the rest would be quiet. I wish I had been pri∣vate,
that I might have beene heard, my Lord, if I might be so much beholding to you, that I might use a few words, I should take it for a very great courtesie: my Lord, I come hither to submit to that judgement which hath past against me, I doe it with a very quiet and contented minde, I doe freely forgive all the world, a forgive∣nesse that is not spoken from the teeth outward (as they say) but from the heart; I speake it in the presence of Almightie God, be∣fore whom I stand, that there is not so much as a displeasing thought in me arising to any creature, I thank God, I may say truly, and my conscience beares mee witnesse, that in all my services, since I have had the honour to serve his Majestie in any employment, I never had any thing in my heart, but the joynt and individuall prosperitie of King and people; if it have beene my hap to be misconstrued, it is the common proportion of us all, while we are in this life, the righ∣teous judgement is hereafter; here we are subject to errour, and apt to bee mis-judged one or another; there is one thing I desire to cleere my selfe of, and I am verie confident, I speake it with so much clearnesse, that I hope I shall have your Christian charitie in the be∣leefe of it, I did alwayes ever thinke the Parliaments of England, were the happiest Constitutions, that any Kingdome, or any Nation lived under, and under God the meanes of making King and people happie, so far have I beene from being against Parliaments; for my death J here a quit all the world, and pray God heartily to forgive them: and in particular, my Lord Primate, I am verie glad that his Majestie is pleased to conceive mee, not meriting so severe and heavie a punishment as the utmost execution of this sentence; I am verse glad, and infinitely rejoyce in this mercie of his, & beseech God to turne it to him, that hee may finde mercy when he hath most need of it; I wish this Kingdome all the prosperity and happinesse in the world: I did it living, and now dying it is my wish, I doe now professe it from my heart, and do most humbly recommend it unto every man here, and wish every man to lay his hand upon his heart, and consider seriously whither the beginning of the happinesse of a people should be written in letters of blood, I feare you are in a wrong way, and I desire Almighty God that no one drop of my blood may rise up in judgment agaynst you. My Lord of Armagh, I professe my selfe a Protestant, and a true and obedient Son to the Church of England, to that Church wherein I was borne and wherein I was bred; prosperity and happinesse be ever
to it: and whereas it hath beene sayd that I have enclin'd to Popery, if it be an objection worth answering, let me say truly, that from the time since I was one and twenty yeares of age, till this houre, now going upon nine & forty, I never had thought in my heart, to doubt of the truth of my Religion, nor to my best memory durst any ever profer it any kind whatsoever; and so being reconciled to the mercies of Christ Iesus my Saviour, into whose bosome I hope shortly to bee ga∣thered, to enjoy those eternall happinsses that shall never have end. I de∣sire hartily the forgivenesse of every man, both for any rash or unad∣vised word or deed, and desire your prayers; And so my Lords farwel, farwell all things of this world, Lord strengthen my faith; give me con∣fidence and assurance in the merits of Christ Iesus. I desire you that you would be solent, and ioyne in Prayers with me, and for me; and I trust in God that we shall all meet, and live eternally in Heaven, there to receive the a complishment of all happines, where every teare shall bee wiped from our eyes, and every sad thought from our hearts: And so God blesse this Kingdom and Iesus have mercy upon my Soule. Then turning himselfe about, hee saluted all the Noble-men, and tooke a solemne leave of all considerable persons on the Scaffold, giving them his hand. And after that hee sayd, Gentlemen, I would say my prayers, and I entreat you all to pray with me, and for me: then his Chaplaine layd the booke of Common Prayer upon the chaire before him, as hee kneeled downe, on which he prayed almost a quarter of an houre, then he prayed as long or longer without a booke, and ended with the Lords Prayer; then standing up, he spies his brother, Sir George Wentworth, and cals him to him, and saith; Brother, wee must part, remember me to my sister, and to my wife, and carrie my blessing to my eldest for, and charge him from me, that he feare God, and continue an obedient son of the Church of England, that he should approve himselfe a faithfull subject to the King, and tell him that he should not have any private grudge or revenge towards any concerning me, and bid him be∣ware that he meddle not with Church livings, for that will prove a moth and canker to him in his estate; and wish him to content himselfe to be a servant to his Countrey, as a Iustice of peace in his Countie, and not ai∣ming at higher preferments: carrie my blessing also to my daughters, Anne and Arabella, charge them to feare and serve God, and hee will blesse them, not forgetting my little infant, that yet knowes neither good
nor evill, and cannot speake for it selfe, God speake for it and blesse it. Then said he, Now I have nigh done, one stroke will make my wife hus∣bandlesse, my deare children fatherlesse, and my poore servants master∣lesse, and separate me from my deare brother and all my friends, but let God be to you and them all in all. After that, going to take off his doublet, and to make himselfe un∣ready, he said, I thank God I am no more afraid of death, nor daunted with any discouragement rising from any feares, but doe as cheerfully put off my doublet at this time, as ever I did when I went to bed. Then he put off his doublet, and wound up his haire with his hands, and put on a white cap, with his haire under it. Had the Depu∣tie lived till Friday follow∣ing, which was the 14 day of May there had dyed two No∣blemen in the same moneth, and the same place, though not for the same fact, which was the Earle of Caflle Ha∣ven, ten yeares since. Then hee called,Where is the man that should doe this last office? (meaning the Executioner) call him to me. When he came and askt him forgivenesse, hee told him hee forgave him and all the world. Then kneeling downe by the block, hee went to prayer againe him∣selfe, the Bishop of Armach kneeling on the one side, and the Mini∣ster on the other; to the which Minister after prayer, hee turned himselfe, and spoke some few words softly, having his hands lifted up: this Minister closed his hands with his; then bowing him∣selfe to the earth, to lay his head on the block, he told the Executio∣ner that hee would first lay downe his head to try the fitnesse of the block, and take it up againe, before he would lay it downe for good and all, and so he did: and before hee laid it downe againe, he told the Executioner that he would give him warning when to strike, by stretching forth his hands; and then layd downe his neck on the block, stretching out his hands, the Executioner struck off his head at one blow, then tooke the head up in his hands, and shewed it to all the people, and said, God save the King. His private Ejaculations. BEhold, O my Lord, I place my selfe before thine eyes, kneeling at the foot step of thy mercy seat, begging pardon of thee for the forgivenesse of all my sins; and O my good God, what sinfull soule can performe this act without the helpe of thy Divine Grace: It is thy mercy which now I crave, who am at the last period of my life. Lord therefore let thy hand of mercy be so fatre stretched out to me, that it may reach to the forgivenesse of all my transgressions, of what nature, condition soever they are or have beene, whether they have beene sins to please my selfe, or others: Heare me O Father of all pitty and compassion, and that for Iesus Christs sake, who at this time maketh intercession for all true penitents; Lord into thy hands I commend and commit my Spirit. FINIS.
