s6229 e935_4 99866742 119027
To ALL, Paupertatis ergò Nè peream famè To SOME. Gratitudinis ergò Ne peream infamiâ WHETHER It be better to turn PRESBYTERIAN, ROMANE, Or, to continue what I am, CATHOLIQUE In Matter of RELIGION? By Thomas Swadlin, D. D. LONDON, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by Michael Burges, at the little North Doore of St. Pauls Church. 1658.
I. Whether Presbyterian? IT is a Thriving way, and I am poor; the tentation there∣fore is strong, but better enjoy peace of Conscience, than the spoiles of violence; I shall yet propose some cases of conscience, and upon their true Resolves, I shall either shake hands with him, or continue what I am. 1. Whether I do not believe, That Christ taught his Apostles to pray, and say, Our Father which art in heaven? 2. Whether I do not believe, That the Apostles did pray, and say, as Christ taught them, Our Father which art in heaven? 3. Whether I have done well, to expunge and oblite∣rate that Prayer, Our Father which art in heaven? 4. Whether I do not believe, That Christ sent his A∣postles, as his father sent him? Joh. 20.21. 5. Whether I do not believe, That the Father sent Christ to be the chief Bishop of our Souls? 1 Pet. 2.25. 6. Whether I do not believe both these missions to be jure Divino? 7. Whether I do not therefore believe, Episcopacy to be Jure Divino? 8. Whether I do not believe , to be a different word from ? 9. Whether I do not believe Bishop to be the name of Office and dignity, Presbyter to be a name of order and duty? 10. Whether I do not believe Bishops are sometimes called Presbyters, because they were Presbyters before they were Bishops? 11. Whether I do not believe Presbyters qua Presbyters are never called Bishops?
12. Whether I do not believe, that St. Paul spake and did divinely, when he constituted Timothy Bishop of Ephe∣sus, and Titus Bishop of Creete, to over see and if need were to rebuke the Presbyters there? 13. Whether I do not believe St. Ierome spake piously, when he said, Nisi exors quaedam & ab omnibus eminens po∣testas Episcopo ducetur, tot essent Schismata, quot Sacerdotes, That unlesse an extraordinary and peerlesse preheminence were given to the Bishop, there would be as many Schisms as Priests? 14. Whether I do not believe King Iames spake poli∣tickly and prudently, when he said, no Bishop, no King? 15. Whether I do not believe the Primitive Church, and so the Church successively untill of very late years, one century and lesse than an half, was governed by Epis∣copacy? 16. Whether therefore I do not believe I have done very ill to shoulder out Episcopacy, that I might get into his Chair? 17. Whether I do not believe, That Thebulis and Ae∣rius were therefore called Hereticks, because they would have had an ecclesiastical parity, Bishop and Presbyter all one? 18. Whether I do not believe, The Canons of the A∣postles distinguished, the three degrees, of Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons, and gave the superiority to Bishops? Can. 4.6, 7. 19. Whether I do not believe Thebulis and Aerius did therefore phansie an ecclesiastical parity, because they could not be made Bishops, which they earnestly affected? Epiphan. Haeres. 75. 20. Whether I do not believe the Church of Jerusalem was called a Virgin Church, and never corrupted, untill by Thebulis because he was not made a Bishop? Eus. l. 4. c. 22.
21. Whether I do not believe Ignatius lived in the A∣postles dayes, and saw Christ in the flesh, and being yet a Presbyter, writ to the Antiochians, to remember Evodius their Bishop, who first from the Apostles received the supe∣riority above the Presbyters; and after being Bishop him∣self, and going to suffer under Trajan, writ to the Clergy and Presbyters there, That they would be diligent in fee∣ding their flock, untill God did show unto them, Him that should rule over them, after his death? And in ano∣ther Epistle ad Sard. thus, Presbyters be obedient to your Bishops; Deacons be obedient to your Presbyters; Laymen be obedient to all: And after all concludes thus: My soul for theirs that observe this order, The Lord be with them. 22. Whether I do not believe Aerius was the first that voted down all Fasts. Vigilantius the first, that voted down all Feasts appointed by the Church, both Hereticks; and therefore whether I may not fear, I am something He∣retical in following their steps? 23. Whether I do not believe, that St. James set out a Lyturgie or book of Common Prayer, for the Church in his time? St. Basil the like in his time? St. Chrysostome the like in his time? and so downwards untill Mr. Iohn Cal∣vins time? 24. Whether I do not believe, that Mr. Iohn Calvin himself thought well of Common Prayers, and particularly of our Common Prayer Book, when he said, Quod ad formam precum & Ritum ecelesiae; valde probo; ut certa illa extet, à qua pastoribus in sua functione discedere non licet; Concer∣ning a Form of Prayer, and Ecclesiastical Rites; I very well like, that they be a certain and constant one, from which the Pastors of the Church may in no wise depart or vary? 25. Whether I do not believe, That every word in the Common Prayer book is in the Bible, either literally or rati∣onally
deduced thence. v. g. for the Confession. Almighty God. Gen. 17.1. And most mercifull Father, Exod. 34.6. We have erred and strayed from thy ways like lost sheep. Psal. 119.176. We have followed too much the devises and desires of our own hearts, Jer. 18.12. We have offended against thy holy laws, Mat. 7.8. We have left undone those things which we ought to have done, 1 Sam. 15.24. And we have done those things which we ought not to have done, 1 Sam. 24.5. 2 Sam. 12.13. And there is no health in us, Psal. 38.3. But thou O Lord have mercy upon us, miserable offenders, Luk. 18.13. Spare thou them O God which confesse their faults, Prov. 28.13. Restore thou them that be penitent, Ezek. 18.31. Accor∣ding to thy promise declared unto mankinde in Christ Iesus our Lord; Mat. 11.18. And grant O most mercifull father for his sake, Joh. 16.23. That we may hereafter live a godly, righteous, and sober life, Titus 2.12. To the glory of thy holy Name, 1 Tim. 6.16. 26. Whether I do not believe the Absolution, Almighty God the father of our Lord Iesus Christ, be grounded upon, Joh. 20.23. 27. Whether I do not believe, the Lords Prayer with the Doxology, Thine is the Kingdom, Power, and Glory, is ver∣batim in Mat. 6. and without that Doxology in Luk. 11. 28. Whether I do not believe, those Versicles, O God make speed to save us, be not in Psal. 102.13. Open thou my lips O Lord. And my mouth shall shew forth thy praise, Psal. 51.15. I might be endless: to Answer therefore some of your grand Objections, I ask. 29. Whether I do not believe, Remember not Lord our Offences, nor the offences of our forefathers, is a sincere prayer for the living, and no sinfull prayer for the dead; viz. That God would not visit the offences of our forefathers upon us their children, and grounded upon Exod. 20. and Ezek. 18.
30. Whether I do not believe, From sudden death, good Lord deliver us, is a fervent ejaculation, no idle desire, that God would not take us away unpreparedly, untill we have made ready our accompts? 31. Whether I do not believe, for all them that travell by land or by water, all women labouring of childe, and is a charitable prayer, and answerable to the Apostles command Do good to all, Gal. 6.10. Pray for all men, 1 Tim. 2.3. 32. Whether I do not believe, By thy holy Nativity and Circumcision, by thy Agony and bloody sweat, &c. is obtesta∣tive, and the signe of our Faith, not affirmative and the signe of an Oath; desiring God by these effectuall means of the Actions and Passions of Iesus Christ, to deliver us from those punishments which are due unto us for our sins. 33. Whether I do not believe, the first prayer in the Office of Matrimony, That God would blesse this couple, as Isaac and Rebecca, proceeded rather from the holy Ghosts inspiration, than from humane invention; because if from man onely, he would have gone upon reason, and made the prayer thus, blesse them as Abraham and Sarah, or blesse them as Iacob and Rachel; for Abraham was Gods first friend; Iacob was Gods great freind; yet neither so, nor so, but as Isaac and Rebecca; because Abraham had his Hagar, one Concubine; Iacob had his Zilkah and his Bilkah two at least, Isaac never any but his Rebecca? 34. Whether I do not believe, That that prayer, Pre∣vent us O Lord, in all our doings, &c. be not absolutely a∣gainst those great points of popery, concerning work of preoperation and cooperation, grounded upon that of St. Paul, Eph. 2.8. and so no kin to the Mass book? 35. Whether I do not believe the Creed of the Apostles is every word in the Scripture, viz. I believe, Mark 9.24. in God. John 14.1. the Father, 1 Cor. 1.3. Almighty, Gen.
17.1. maker of heaven and earth, Gen. 1.1. and in Iesus Christ his onely Son our Lord, Rom. 1.3. which was concei∣ved by the holy Ghost, and born of the Virgin Mary, Luk. 1.35. suffered under Pontius Pilate, John 19.1. was Cruci∣fied Joh. 19.18. Dead Joh. 19.30. and Buried, Joh. 19.42. He descended into Hell, Act. 2.27. the third day he rose again from the dead, 1 Cor. 15.4. He ascended into Heaven, and sit∣teth at the right-hand of God, Mar. 16.19. From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. Act. 10.42. And in the holy Ghost, Mat. 28.19. The holy Catholick Church, the Communion of Saints, Ephes. 5.27. the forgivenesse of sins, Col. 1.14. The Resurrection of the Body, 1 Cor. 15.35. and life everlasting, Joh. 10.28. 36. Whether I do believe the Feasts of Christmass, Ea∣ster and Whitsuntide have been observed by the purest and Primitive Churches, and commanded upon us to observe the same? Clem. ep. decret, Telesph. p. 117. Cyprian de Na∣tiv. Christi, Nazian. Orat. 38. Chrysost. hom. in Nativ. Chri∣sti, The Church of Helvetias confess. c. 24. The Church of Bo∣hemia, c. 15. The Church of Bremen, Regist. 2. fine, The Church of Auspurge confess. act. 4. 37. Whether I do not believe, The Lord be with thee, and with thy Spirit, equivolent to Ruth. 2.4. 38. Whether I do not believe St. Paul spake Scripture, when he said, and bid us pray with the spirit and with the understanding, and whether I do not sometimes pray without the understanding, when I think I pray by the spirit? 39. Whether I do not believe, That therefore I have done very ill to excommunicate the English Common Prayer Book, which by most Divines hath been called optimum Breviarum, and instead of it, have set up, a Directory, which speaks nothing so much, as the sixt sence, and hath no bet∣ter
Derivation than from the Directarii? But I am in ear∣nest, and earnestly desire of Almighty God, that if the Pres∣byterian be determined to go on in his opinion; yet that we may joyn together in all Christian affaction, and so meet in heaven, in an everlasting Ʋnion; for till I am con∣vinced upon the former Queries, I am resolved never to be of their communion upon earth, though I wish them in∣crease of sanctity, while they live, and eternity of happines, when they dye, through Iesus Christ Amen. II. Whether Romane? I Am as far from Rome, as I am from Geneva; yet find∣ing the Romane possest with more of the water, and the Presbyterian with more of the fire, I hope some moderation may in time cement England and Rome into the Catholick, so strongly, as never hereafter to be dissolved, or melted by the fury of zeal; You and you onely I confesse have the face of a Church, and I hope you will not deny us the Form, and Bee∣ing of a Church: since I believe there is so much ingenuity and wisdome in you, as to distinguish betwixt a Church ex∣tinguished and eclipsed or persecuted, The Church of England I acknowledge is under a cloud and eclipsed; but the Candle is not quite out and extinguished? Wheresoever two or three (of the Catholick Church) are gathered together, there is Christ in the midst of them, so was his pro∣mise Mat. 18.20. And wheresoever a lawfull Priest or Pa∣stor of the English Church is with two or three of his Con∣gregation, I will not, I dare not doubt of the performance. If you have lesse charity, either in the taking or mistaking of it, I shall propose some few Queries in my own name, as one of
you, though I thank God I am none of you, nor ever intend to be in opinion, howsoever in affection, because you are my next neighbour; I therefore love you as my self. 1. Whether I do believe Romane and Catholick are Termini convertibiles? 2. Whether I do believe, I may be saved, if I pray as the Catholick Church doth, and was taught by Christ, Our fa∣ther which art in heaven; though I do not pray, as the Romane Church doth, and teacheth, O thou mother of God, St. Peter St. Paul pray for me? 3. Whether if I do believe as the Primitive and Ca∣tholick Church did and doth, and hath taught the Apo∣stles Creed, though I do not believe as the Romane Church doth, The Creed of the Councel of Trent, I may be saved? 4. Whether if I endeavour to live after Gods Com∣mandments, and obey him, though I do not endeavour to live after my superiors command, I may be saved? 5. Whether if I receive the Sacrament of the Eucharist as Christ Instituted and Commanded me to receive it, in both Kindes, Bread and Wine, Flesh and Blood, though I do not receive it as the Church of Rome hath abrogated it, and Commanded to receive, in one Kinde onely, I may be saved? 6. Whether my Conscience can be satisfied by the devise of concomitants That the Bloud is given in the Body, since in the Eucharist the Bloud is to be given as shed, not kept, as poured out, not contained in the Body? 7. Whether if I be born again, and made a Christian by true Baptisme, and afterward confirmed by a true Bishop, though I am not annointed with oyle, I may be saved? 8. Whether if I believe the Scripture, & frame my life
accordingly, though I do not equally believe Tradition I may be saved? 9. Whether if I serve and worship God in Spirit and in Truth, though I worship no images, nor God by ima∣ges, I may be saved? 10. Whether I may not be saved, if I believe in Gods mercies through Christs merits, though I put no confi∣dence in the merits of my own works? These Queries with a very few more by moderate and, unbyassed men, might be brought to a Reconciliation, and that they may be, I pray you let us joyn in one Prayer, till we joyn in all points. O Most mercifull God, who hast made all Mankinde of one; O most mercifull God, who hast contracted all the Elect of mankinde into one body, thy Church; and hast given thy whole Church but one Soul, thy Spi∣rit; and that Soul but one Life, thy Faith; and that Faith but one prop, one Gospel, one Baptism, one Lords Supper; and this one Body and one Soul, but one Head, thy Self, who art but one Lord, and hast again dispersed this Body into several Assemblies and Societies, and hast made each Society and Assembly but one; thereby in∣timating to us, that we should all have but one Heart and one Mind; In mercy we beseech thee look upon thy Church, and make her as thy Son did leave her, One; one in Opinion and one in affection, that she may be no lon∣ger Crucified betwixt Hereticks and Sismaticks, Thieves of thy Truth, betwixt proflygates and Hypocrites, thieves of thy Grace; betwixt Zealots and Superstitions, thieves of thy Honour; but by vertue of thy Sons Golgatha, dry up Aceldema, and for the merit of Calvary, Deliver, O de∣liver
her from all her present misery; Relieve her from Force without, and Fury within, both against her; Res∣cue her from civill Enemies and crafty Children, both which fall upon her; Suffer not Reeds any longer to be thy Scepters, nor Chaires thy Throne, nor Tricks thy Or∣der, nor Rudenesse in one part, nor Superstition in ano∣ther part, thy Service, nor miscreants thy worship∣pers, nor Confusion thy Religion, nor Wilde-fire thy Zeal, nor Lunaries thy Resolutions, nor Devillishnesse thy Spirit; but appear by her once more in thy own Spi∣rit, of Peace and Purity, of Sanctity and Sincerity, of Wisdome and Sobriety, that all men may know thy Church by thy Livery, which thou didst bequeath her, Love, Peace and Patience; and that thereby all men may be guided by thy One Church, in the right way of Truth into Heaven, through Iesus Christ Amen. In whose blessed Name and Words, we farther call upon thee, as he hath taught us in his holy Gospel, saying; Our Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name, Thy Kingdome come, Thy will be done in Earth, as &c. Give us this day our daily bread, And forgive us our tres∣passes, as &c. And lead us not into Tentation, but &c. For thine is the Kingdome, Power and Glory, &c.
Or 3d. continue what I am Catholike? I Desire so to continue, though I starve for it; For I have not took up this Religion upon Tradition or Education, but upon Judgment, and Deliberation; And instead of Quaeries, and Cases of Conscience, I offer to my self these Irrefragable Demonstrations: 1. If I pray aright according to the Pattern of Devotion Summ'd up in the Lords Prayer, I shall be heard. 2. If I repent aright according to the Prophets and A∣postles Direction, with the Contrition of my Heart, with the Confession of my Lips, and the Endeavour of my Life, I shall be forgiven: Joel 2. 2 Cor. 7. 3. If I do right according to Gods will in his Word, summ'd up in his Decalogue, or Ten Commandments, though not absolutely and Exactly, yet Ʋprightly and Evangelically, I shall be accepted. 4. If I believe aright according to Gods Gospel, Summ'd up in the Apostles Creed, without doubting, without dis∣trusting without disparing, I shall be saved. 5. If I receive Christs holy Sacraments, as he did Insti∣tute, and appoint them, not onely as Signes, but means of Grace, not onely as Assurances of Salvation, but Conveyan∣ces of Sanctification, I shall be glorified. And my Religion being so good, I desire not to change, but to continue as I am; and for that I praise Gods mer∣cy, and pray for Gods blessing. My Religion is Good, for it is Gods; my Calling is Law∣full, for it is of God; my Service is honorable, for it is for
God and my Saviour; my Message in which I am employ∣ed is Honourable, for it is of Peace, and to be an Instrument of Reconciliation betwixt God and his people, and my Proceeding in it, if it be as it ought to be, in Love, shall be acceptable; Joyfully I may do it, for God will reward it; Freely I may do it, for God will make it good; Boldly I may do it, for God will defend it; and incessantly I should do it, for first or last God will give a blessing to it. But who, who is worthy to do this weighty business? not the best of men, how much more unworthy am I the worst of men, and cheif of Sinners? Truely of my self I am as unworthy as unable, and unworthy to be enabled, if thou enter into Judgment with me, That thou maist not, I thus addresse my self to thy Throne of Grace. Look upon me O my God in the face of Jesus Christ I beseach thee, and for his sake assist me with thy Spirit, That I may speak thy Word, least I be guilty of Carelesness; That I may not speak before I Learne, least I be guilty of Rashness. That I may Learn and Speak, least I be guilty of Idlenesse; that I may not speak to the Eare, least I be guilty of Flattery; That I may speak to the Heart and so be a means of other mens salvation; and when I have Preacht to others, That I may not be a Cast away my self? Sanctifie me with thy Spirit I beseech Thee, That I may aswell Live as speak Divinity; Let thy glory be my Cheif, Thy peoples and my own safety my next Aime; That I may not bring a Woe to thy Flock, Give me Learning; That I may not bring Woe to my self Give me Diligence That I may not bring Dishonor to thee, Give me Descre∣tion; Deliver me from the Misery of Starving thy Flock, for want of skill, Deliver me from the Cruelty of star∣ving thy flock, for want of will, deliver me from a fruit∣lesse Industry in feeding thy flock, for want of Prudence;
make me painfull in my Study, Powerfull in my Pulpit; Fervent in my Piety, Holy in my Conversation, Succes∣full in all; That I may be discharged of the Bloud of all those Soules Committed to my Charge; It is a precious people; for thou hast purchased them at a dear rate, Even with Bloud, with thy Bloud, with thy precious Bloud: Let them be precious too in my Esteeme, That I may preach to them in Season and out of Season, not onely by Speaking well, but Living better: help their understand∣ings in my knowledge of Divinity, better their Wills in my Practise of Divinity; Supply them and my self for this Life and the next out of thine owne fullnesse, and Crowne my Labours with the Conversion of such Soules, as thou hast Ordained to Life Eternall▪ Thorow Jesus Christ: In whose most blessed name, and Words I far∣ther call upon Thee, as he hath Taught. FINIS.
