t3082 38875970 152464
A True Relation OR ACCOMPT OF The whole PROCEDURE BETWEEN The Corporation at CANTERBURY, AND Mr. John Somner, Concerning the NEW-MARKET-HOUSE there. Nihil charius aestimamus, quàm beneficium, Quod diu petimus: nihil vilius, cum accepimus. Seneca. LONDON, Printed. 1666.
The PREFACE. THAT the public and common good and be∣nefit of any place or Society is of every individual Member in particular; but more especially, of the Representatives of that So∣ciety in general, rather to be stu∣died, than their own private or particular ends or interests; none (doubtless) will offer to deny. And yet by sad experience what more frequently found true, than the quite contrary? Aswell whole So∣cieties,
as particular members too too often casting off all care of the Publick, and abandoning themselves to selfishness, and the study only of their own private commodity. How happy then (because so rare) is the condition of that Socie∣ty, where such a Genius, such a general concent in promoting the common good of the place universally obtains, and is diffused throughout the whole body! Where this fails, as most where it doth) the next happiness to it of this kind, is to find such a publick spiritedness in single and particular persons, (whe∣ther members of, or friends to such a Society) as makes them to be∣come examples to others of piety and
bounty, by acts of publick and com∣mon benefit to the place: And consequently, to what a kind and welcome entertainment, to what a return of gratitude, is that Society obliged, who are made the objects of such publick piety and beneficence! If so; how much then is that So∣ciety to blame, which is not only slack and backward to such acts of publick good themselves; but also to incourage and return thanks to those particular persons, to whom God hath given, together with ability, such a publick spirit and mind, as (in any eminent degree, at least) to become their benefactors! Whether there be such a Society, or not, at this day, let who so will he judge
that shall consult the following Mir∣rour, representing not the ill requi∣tal and unworthy usage of Arch-Bishop Abbot, the Founder of their noble Conduit, by a prevailing fa∣ction, (headed by a Peterling) among their praedecessors; but (that which cannot but revive the me∣mory of it) the unworthy Enter∣tainment of a new piece of benefi∣cence by a like faction in the pre∣sent Corporation: notwithstanding that foundation of gratitude, and better usage from them, but newly laid by the Benefactor, as being chiefly active and instrumental in procuring new Gates for the City; impiously robbed of their old by the Rebels, from the late Archbishop Juxon.
A true Relation or Accompt of the whole Proceedure between the Corporation at Canterbury and Mr. John Somner. THAT useful and antient Structure of Stone, of a circular form, graced with an ascent of several steps, for peoples accommo∣dation to sit upon, and expose their wares, and (for their better shelter from foul weather) covered over head with a plat∣form of Lead; the Market-Cross at Canterbury, built by the bounty and piety of a quondam wealthy Alderman, of grate∣ful memory, being in the late times of mis-rule and con∣fusion, beaten down and swept away by the avarice and im∣piety of a beggerly factious Alderman, of hateful memory, to the dishonour of the City, and detriment of Town and Country: and the Citizens (sensible of the want of such a piece, both of ornament and use) being, as I was, full of their wishes and longings for the day, when the generous and publick spirit of some good Benefactor, would pro∣voke and engage their gratitude by adorning and accom∣modating
their City with a new piece, another pile of that nature: and after a long and tedious time of expectation, none offering at the undertaking, I, though one of the meanest among the many naives of the place, yet impa∣tient of the Cities want of an accommodation, so useful as well as ornamental; and finding others more able than willing, gave leave and way to my will to out-vy my abi∣lity, rather than the place of my Nativity should any longer suffer under the reproch of such a great defect: not doubting of the encouragement of the virtuous underta∣king by the courteous acceptance of it from my fellow-Citizens: and the rather because of the publick good which from the beginning I propounded to my self, and made known to some of them in this affair. But it falling out otherwise; insomuch as my real intentions for resign∣ing all up to publick and pious uses, are now quite altered, I thought it not amiss (for their satisfaction who may in∣quire into the cause) to give them an accompt of the whole transaction, leaving it to them freely to judge at whose Dore the blame lies. Having therefore, by the Cities free permission, and with the expence of Four hunded pounds and upwards, e∣rected and completed a Market-house, (a piece of such Elegancy as much commends the Architect) consisting of a double Story, divided into two fair rooms a piece, with a Pavement of Stone underneath, very useful for walking, out of Market time; and all this (in my intentions) de∣dicated to publick and pious uses, without any jot of pro∣fit or advantage reserved either to me or mine: and think∣ing it now a convenient time to broach my designe, and make it openly known to the Corporation, I drew a pro∣spect of it in writing, and by the mediation of a very worthyMr. L. B. friend, (one of themselves) communicated it unto them under the term and title of Propositions of this tenor.
Certain Proposals, concerning the Market-House at the Bulstake in Canterbury, by me John Somner, the Sole Founder and Builder thereof, made to the right worshipful the Maior and the Court of Burgmote, October 24. 1665. upon their Sealing of my Lease. ALL things, according to mutual agreement between us, being accomplished, to the good content and satisfaction (I hope) of both parties; that is to say, on my part, the Market-house being erected, and nothing wanting to the completing of it, ac∣cording to my covenant, but what is now in hand, and with all convenient speed shall (God willing) be punctually perfected: and on your part, the Lease of the Superstructure, according to your Covenant being made and delivered me, whereby I am become the true and sole Owner thereof, and the thing in my free power to dispose of, during my Lease: To let you, and posterity after you, know and see, how in this work I have studied the publick good, ho∣nour and benefit of the City and Country, and the the encouragement of other persons of ability, by my example, to do the like in some kind or other, much and far more than my own private profit, or advantage, which the Searcher of hearts knows to be spoken without the least ostentation or desire of vain-glory or popular applause:  I do so far re∣nounce my own interest in that part of the Super∣structure which looketh Westward, as freely to per∣mit
and admit you to a participation with me in the use and accommodation of the Chamber there, at all times when you shall have occasion of meeting there together, or any Six or more of you, upon any publick accompt concerning the City; and that during my life time, and the life time of my Bro∣ther Mr. William Somner, if he survive me. Secondly, I do as freely grant and permit the use and accommodation of the said Chamber, to all and every of the six Companies of the City, viz. the Drapers, Taylors, Mercers, Grocers, Carpenters, Smiths, and Shoo makers, for their and every of their meeting there together, upon any occasion concerning their Companies Affairs, during the term aforefaid. And after mine and my said Brothers Decease, I abso∣lutely give, resign up, and relinquish the said room to you and them in perpetuity, for the uses and pur∣poses abovesaid. Thirdly, In Charity to the Poor, I presently give up unto you and your Successors, the Garret or Up∣per Story over the Chamber at the East end of the said Market-house, for a Store-house and place of Stowage, for a Stock of Corn for the Poor of the Six out-patishes of the City, Westgate, St. Dunstan, Northgate, St. Pauls, St. Mildredt, St. Georges, and of one of the In-Parishes (because I was born there) St. Alphage. And to handsell the place, and become (as I hope) as a leading, so a lucky ex∣ample of Charity in this kind to others, I do en∣gage at my own charge, to lay in there, for that use, Twenty Seams or Quarters of Wheat assoon as the room can be made ready, and fitting to receive it: intending it shall lye and be kept there (as in a Store-house) against a Time, or Year, of Dearth or Scarcety, and then be delivered out at such rates and
prizes as the Stock may thereby be renewed with such ad∣vantage as the Mayor and Aldermen for the time being shall think fit. And if, by Gods goodness and mercy, no such dearth shall happen in the mean time, it shall be in the power of the then Mayor and Court of Al∣dermen, at 3, 4, or 5. years end, and so from time to time for ever, to sell and put off the said 20. Seams of Wheat; provided that within 12. moneths time next following, they shall be bound to renew and recruit the Stock with as much new Wheat, and, if it may be, with advantage. And I hope, the room being of a capacity to receive twice as much Corn, this example of mine will (which God grant) invite and encourage those of more ability to add unto the Stock. And should it please God to stir up such a number of charitable Bene∣factours as that the Room will not be able to bear so great a Stock of Corn, (for I would have care taken it be not over-burthened:) I shall freely part with the other Store-house also, that I mean opposite unto it, at the West end of the said Market-house, for the same use; so as the Corn be sent in within 12. moneths next ensuing the Date hereof. Fourthly, as there is room under the first stair-case, the Rent whereof will serve to pay for the cleaning of the Market, and turning of the Corn, so I as freely give it up and put it over to you the said Mayor and Aldermen and your Successors, for that intent and purpose, with full power to hire or rent it out for the best advantage. This and all the rest, I freely conferre and bestow as aforesaid, yet with and under these limitations and conditions here ensuing, and not otherwise, viz. First, that you the Mayor and Aldermen be obliged to perform and do what on your part is required to be performed and done, as touching the ordering and ma∣naging of the Stock of Corn for the Poor.
Secondly, that both you, and the six Companies shall ingage for the keeping the whole Market-house afore∣said, from time to time in good adn needfull repair, at your and their costs and charges. Thirdly, That the Door-keeper of the Chamber, Store-house, or Store-houses aforesaid shall be left to the nomination and appointment of my self, during my life, and after my decease to the nomination and appoint∣ment of my said Brather, if he survive me, during his life. Fourthly, That the Market there shall from hence∣forth for ever be made a Free-Market for Town and Countrey. Fifthly, That no Huckster be permitted to buy any thing there, to utter and sell again there; which is a com∣mon thing, but indeed a very great abuse; as I have observed since the Market-house was in building. Sixthly, That the Countrey people coming with Provision to the Market there to sell, may have what room the place will afford (for which end it was chief∣built) and not be turned out or excluded (as they now are, many of them) by those that sell Herbs, Roots, and such kind of Huck-stry-ware, to the dishonour of the Town, and Market. All which Conditions and Limitations I conceive to be so reasonable, and (if well lookt after and observed) so honourable and advantageous to the City, (as tend∣ing only to the publick good, and no more to my own private benefit than in common with others) as that I cannot doubt of your readiness, in all particulars here propounded, to close with (Right Worshipfull) Your humble Servant JOHN SOMNER.
Upon further consideration, That I may clear my self to all the world of self-ends, or designing any private advan∣tage to me or mine by this Work, wherewith many male∣volent and unthankfull persons have been apt and for∣ward to blast, and (if they could) to discourage, my pub∣lick undertaking; I do now further declare my self, that I am also willing to forgo the whole benefit (before reser∣ved to my self) of that other part of the first Story, the Ea∣stern Chamber of the Market-house aforesaid: offering and leavihg it to the choice of the present Mayor and Al∣dermen and their Successors, whether I shall employ and hire it out to the best and most advantage my self, or leave it to them so to do: but so as in either case the whole yeerly Rent and Revenue thereof, which I cannot reckon at less than 5. l. per annum, shall go to the relief of the ten Inbrothers and Insisters of East-bridge Hospital for ever, as an augmentation to their poor and beggarly maintenance. And so Gods blessing be upon the Work, and those that shall take example by it; whilest, with sincerity of heart, I shall take up that of the Prophet David: Not unto us, O Lord, &c. Upon the communication of this Paper, the whole House of Burgmote (who till then had me in some suspition for aiming at matter of private advantage to my self, so far at least as untill I were reimbursed) was so exceedingly, not only satisfied, but taken with my Proposals, as after an unanimous approbation and ap∣plause, they voted and gave out in writing under their Town-Clerks hand, an Order for a Committee to give me a meeting in the new Market-house, for consider∣ing, consulting, and concluding a way for setling the whole affair according to my own desire, as by this fol∣lowing Copy will appear.
Civitas Cantuar.Cur' Burgomati tenta ibidem die Martis, scilicet, septimo die Novembris, anno Regni Domini nostri Caroli Secundi nunc Regis Angliae, &c. Decimo sep∣timo. Whereas John Somner Gent. out of a further desire and intention of the publick good, honour, and be∣nefit of this City and Country, hath been pleased to present unto this Court certain good proposals concer∣ning the Market-house at the Bulstack; thereby declaring his mind and good intent touching the same: It is or∣dered by this Court, that the said proposals and every of them shall and are hereby accepted and approved of. And to the end that the said Market-place, and other the Superstructures and things in the said Proposals men∣tioned, may be the better settled and established by this Court, according to the desire, mind, and intent of the
said John Somner; and for the better satisfaction of the said John Somner, It is though fit, and ordered by this Court, That the Maior of the said City, or any five or six of the Alder∣men, whereof the Maior to be one, or any Ten of the Common-Councel, whereof the Recorder to be one, shall meet together on Fryday next at Two of the Clock in the Afternoon, at the said Market-place called the Bul∣stack-Market, and shall confer with the said John Somner about the same: and what shall by them be thought re∣quisite and necessary for the ordering, serling, and establishing of the said Market-place, and other things in the said Proposals mentioned, shall certifie at the next Burghmote. Lovelace. One thing which I principally designed and expected to be gratified in by the Town (although of no par∣ticular advantage to my self) was, a Free-Market.
By long observation and experience I had found the want of it, and the dishonour and damage both re∣dounding to the City by the contrary. For, through the over-rigorous exacting of Tole by the Clerk of the Market, (who gave the City but a short accompt of it, and is besides, a person who stands branded by themselves upon Record, for several miscarriages in his place) the Sellers were and are wont to hide up a good part of their wares, and not bring them forth into the Market, but by parcels, whereby the Buyer can not have his choice, but must take what he finds at the Sellers price, or be gon. Hereof a multitude both in Town and Country daily complaining, I could not but study the remedying of it. This (the Free-Market) went down with the Cor∣poration very well at first, and because their Clrk (if the Market were infranchised and set free) might suffer somewhat in the matter of his livelyhood, they were very forward to declare themselves contented (for the Publicks sake) to be put upon the seeking out some expedient (at their own charge). for making him a compensation, and (by some overtures from me) soon found that a small matter would do it. But not long after, by his endevours with the Chamberlaine, (than whom none more forward for a Free-Market, when the house was setting up) and some other of the Leading par∣ty in the House, (a sort of private vulgar spirited men, whereof no Society was ever yet free) this Trifle, this inconsiderable retrenching of their pre∣sent Market-Clerks income, must carry the name of a just occasion for altering their minds, and put∣ting a stop (as it did) to the business; so that at the time and place appointed, I giving them a meeting to treat of a way of Settlement, such doubts were cast, and objections made, (in that particular especially)
that I plainly perceiving they were quite and clean gon off from their former votes, and intended nothing less than a settlement of the business according to my Proposals and their own Votes, could not but shew my self sensible of the disappointment; and thereupon in some discontent, desired a dissolving of their Meet∣ing, and went my way. They perceiving it, and thinking it somewhat too early to break off with me so soon, (as the malevo∣lent party more than seemed willing enough to do) consulted and found an expedient for removing this impediment, and mastering this difficulty; but not un∣til by my profers and condescentions I had yeilded to them so far in the qualifying and regulating that matter of a Free-Market, as fully to satisfie all op∣posers, by my consenting to the tolling of all things in a manner, excepting only that which is not the third part of what things are tollable, Piggs and Poul∣try. And now the matter (of Settlement) was afresh propounded in Burgmote, where (after thanks retur∣ned me for my condescensions) it was then agreed to proceed, and writings voted to be drawn up between us, to settle it accordingly. And drawn they were, whereat upon perusal I taking some exceptions, as finding them not according to my propositions, in se∣veral particulars, I made the Burgmote acquainted with them; who by Mr. Recorder satisfying me, as to the main of my exceptions, so as we were arrived at a right understanding of each others meaning, I was now ready for a close with them upon their own terms; and by the mediation of the same hand that before, signifying so much unto them at the next Burgmote after, they once more resumed the business, and en∣tred into a fresh debate about it.
By this time (by the means of a pragmatical men∣ber of the House, who looking AWRY both on the Founder and his Work, and from the first taken all occasions to evidence his dis-affection and dissant) the opposite party was grown so strong, that the re∣sult of this debate was not only a dissent and protest against their proceeding with me, but a casting off the business with a plain and uncivil jeer. For in regard the repairs were to be cast on the Corporation (a burthen nevertheless so inconsiderable as cannot a∣mount to 20 s. per annum, for an age; or rather no burthen at all, in regard the benefit of a room un∣der the Stair case, which was offered them, would more then recompense it:) they would none of it, they would not (forsooth) take a house to keep it in repair, for me and my brother to walk in. Truth is (by the Propositions) a reservation there is of mine and my brothers interest in one of the rooms during our lives, in common with the Corpo∣ration, and yet (as they were assured) but at spare times only when the Corporation had no occasion to use it themselves. And besides, we are (they know) persons well in years, and (unless they fear our Ghosts may haunt the place after we are dead) can∣not probably trouble them long with our walking there; our walk being now down the hill, and by course of nature neer an end. See by the way (courteous Rea∣der) how studious these men are to find and cast ob∣structions in the way of their own advantage, and to ward and stave off an intended boon! And on the contrary, how willing I have been to remove their obstructions, and how loth to be put upon turning that to my private emolument, which I intended for a publick good!
To summe up their objections: 1. They must abridge their Clerk of the Market of some inconsiderable part of his profit, which he may very well spare: how un-advised else was that Townsman, whose offer, though refused, was, if he might have the place, to do all the duties of it; to admit of a Free-Market, and yet to pay the City 5 l. per annum? 2. They must be at perhaps 20 s. charge per annum in repaires; and have more than recompense for it by that room un∣der, the Staires. 3. They must permit the Founder and his Brother (ancient men both) to inter-common with them in the use of one of the rooms, at spare times. How trivial, how ridiculous, how insignificant, and empty are these exceptions, shall I call them, or these cavils! What little or no detriment or discom∣modity doth or can attend them, compared with the great commodity and advantage which by the Propo∣sals, if embraced, would redound (in point sof ac∣commodation) to the Magistrates and the Companies, for Meetings and Treatments; and (in point of Cha∣rity) to the Poor, by a constant stock and provision of Corn there to be stored up for them, towards which and for seconding me in my intended handsell, divers Gentlemen and others (who now will do nothing) had declared their forwardness in such a bountiful way of contribution, as probably both the Store-houses, (the two upper rooms) capable of Fourscore quar∣ters of Corn, would shortly have been full? What a shame must it needs be the whilest to the City, and how can they answer it to posterity especially, to suffer so publick, so pregnant and permanent a boon and benefit to their Corporation and the Poor, not easily to be matched in a case of this nature, all the Kingdom over, for ever to miscarry and be lost, ra∣ther
than accept it upon conditions so easte of por∣formance; so very easie, I say, as being now refu∣sed, they can never, whilest the memory of this in∣gratitude doth last, reasonably expect to be tried with the same, or the like again? Yet refused them they have. And since they have had no more reason, I am resolved (without hearkning to any further treaty with them, after so much baffling) to shew that I have not so little, as to obtrude, squander, and cast away all my cost, my kindness, and my charity (wherein I had it in my mind to have proceeded, by doing somewhat towards the Cities ac∣commodation and supply with, what is much wanting to it, more Water,) upon such unworthy, ungrateful objects: or to woo them to accept of that, which, if they had any courtship, they had reason to imploy it in perswading me to part with. But since what, like a good Citizen, I once intended for the Cities pub∣lick commodity, is rejected, I shall, like a good husband, take it home and convert it to my own pri∣vate advantage, all but the Corn, which I shall be∣stow where it may be better accepted. And in so doing, whether I be to blame or not, I am willing to refer to the judgement of any but such thankless persons as those (the malevolent vulgar party among them, I mean; for them only I brand, which, yet, it seems, are the more prevalent party) I have had to deal withal: a sort of men that have no sense of the Cities either ornament or honor; no regard to the Poors, either relief or prayers; study∣ing only matter of present profit to themselves, and thinking that cannot be a good work or thank-worthy, which requires any whit at all of contribution from themselves, to complete or maintain it: but are ready, with Judas, to reckon all as wast, that goes beside
the bag: nothing to be acceptable, but what is pro∣fitable: All but trash that brings no cash to the Cham∣ber. But having appealed unto others for their judge∣ment, I may perhaps be blamed for anticipating it with mine. If so, I crave pardon, and, with full submission, cast my self upon the verdict of any but those who have dealt so unthankfully and unworthily with The humble Appellant John Somner. FINIS.
