T459 E453_47 99863700 162008
The Fooles of Fate: OR, The unravelling of the PARLIAMENT and ARMY. Fate (for our crimes) permitted us To grumble 'gainst each thing, Next for to be tumultuous, And fight against our King. He, downe to have those bore our eares, We our Reformers made To be sole Authors of our feares, And to make War a Trade. They fearing we have found their slie And villanous projction, Have rais'd an Army, and will trie To force us yeeld subjection. Their Army are the peoples hate, Both they will now pull down, And now behold the Fools of Fate Fall dead by Charles his Crowne. Printed in the Yeer. 1648.
The Fooles of Fate, or the unravelling of the Parliament and Army. SEnators, Citizens and Souldiers have been ever noted as of different powers, so of different tempers, each party never imagining a parity for the Senator to measure out the Lawes by the City-yard, the Citizen to pin his faith upon the Senators sleeve, or the Souldier to fight in a Gowne with the City-Charter in his hand, is as monstrous as the Chaos of Presbyte∣ry, or a King on the stoole of repentance. A sweet Conjunction fure, an Omen good, When Senate, City, Army joyne in blood, While Martin, Warner, Cromwell do commix To ruine King and Kingdome by their tricks: While that these sonnes of mischiefe, though they hate Each other, can meet and procreate New brats of mischief, and their Bastard Heires Must be maintained by the Kingdomes feares; Fidessa and Speranze all the graces Doe with Astrea, flie to heavenly places: Bellona vile Duessa, hell and night Doe bring their monstrous birth to the worlds light. Yet how dar'st thou thou sawcie Muse, to question the acts of those mechanick Princes? Knowest thou not that Martin may belch in thy face, (the steeme of his hot breath being of a more suffocating efficacie to men, then the lake Avernus to birds) and blast thee with Naamans Leprosie? Fearest thou not that War∣ners Worship, (that excellent City-Patriot, whose innocency is such that he scarce discernes his right hand from his left, or a Ge∣neva Bible from the Holy Writ) the true and undoubted Mayor of London, Stilo novo, will not summon thee before his Non∣senseship, and having expostulated with thee a long time in the Barbarian tongue, send a Tipstaffe with thee to Tullianum? may not Cromwell (if his Grace be yet mortall) command his Journev∣men at Westminster to call thee before them, and to passe their doom upon thee, as an opposer of the Saints, and an abuser of his
Nose? Yes, yes, it is worth thy feare, were it not that thou art now non-resident, sometimes at Westminster to the terrour of the Junto, sometimes at Guild-hall, and then M. Warner starts, as if he saw the glimps of his Majesties sword, sometimes at the Court of Guard, before Colchester, and then Tom halts from be∣fore thee, as if the pockey humour in his toe had forsaken him: the truth is, thou art prying every where, constant no where, &c. And 'tis but requisite when Rebells gape, When Lewis that fell wolfe, Leechman that Ape, And Hunscot that same Otter hunt about, And with a full cry trace the royall Rout. But I stand too long at the gate, now I will enter the inchanted Castle, and skirmish a while with Devills and Centaurs, i. e. with the Junto and Army; I am in the round House of Yeas and Noes, even in the House of Commons, it is fit therefore I prostrate my self on my maribones, & supplicate their high & mightinesses thus: All haile most high and mighty Sots, Who England do divide by lots, To whom all Rebells ever were, Were puny rogues, whose wit or feare Deterr'd them from your monstrous acts, And plowing hell with horrid facts. Inhumane Vipers hatch'd to be The Midwives of our miserie, Where is your King? see how a red Dide deep doth o're their faces spread: Is there Law, Gospell, is there sense 'Mongst Mortalls? or hath impudence Surpriz'd the Organs of the mind? It hath, as truth by you we find; Our eyes of Treason we accuse, Because they lead us to peruse Your damned Votes, such Legends are Not in Baronius Occular: Shall Charles be mewd up in a cage, While you injoy the golden Age? He sent to the extreamest bounds, Where night Hyperions sonne confounds,
Sitting the pole so farre beneath, He scarcely heares the windes that breath, While you (brave Jovialists) command Like Gods of clay, by Sea and Land, Resigne, resigne, ere it be too late, Proceed not for to tempt your Fate: Tom cannot save you, he is lame, Nois gon to Hell, from whence you came: Let not your lying Prophets be The oracles of destinie, In your esteem, till sent by us Unto profoundest Tartarus. Lillies a Lyer, each man sees By his owne Ephimerides: And Booker, hath mistook the starres, While he proposd all peace, no warres: Though you perhaps, like Fooles of Fate, A while yet longer may be great, Yet know your ruine is decreed By heaven and men; then look to bleed. Look for Platoes yeare, or for Mahomets Elizium say they, as soone as to behold our downfall; delude your selves with vaine hopes to the last minute; it will be the more ample Justice & com∣pleat revenge: in the mean time, 'twere fit that the people were throughly perswaded of your wickednesse, & that they no longer worshiped the God of Heaven & of Eckron at once, nor like Bu∣gesse the counterfeit Doctor of Pauls, halt between two opinions, one while inveigh against Sectaries, another advance the gifts of private Saints, & Button-makers, you have assumed the impu∣dence to name your selves a Parliament; are you so — look how Weaver gnasheth his teeth at me, (the Rogue sure hath got an a∣gue in his Jawes) see how Scot bends his rough front (which to me seemeth some barren rock inhabited by Serpents, and over growne with withered mosse) sirra, all thy invectives against his Majesty will not availe; the King must live to behold thy pernici∣ous soule dismissed by torture, the time will come (when thou that hast often urged to thy fellow Ravilliacks, that his Majesty ought to be brought to legall triall for his life, and to be hang'd) shalt be hanged up alive in chains & not die till thou beholdst the fowles of the aire to fetch away thy limmes
by parcells. Doe you stare Devills, doe you stare? I say, you that have the impudence to name your selves a Parliament, and your Pamphleters roar out the name of Lords and Commons as∣sembled in Parliament, with such a bellowing noise, that the whole Land ecchoes againe, while in the mean time, your selves laugh at the fooles that divulge, and all those that are so mad to believe it, your selves well knowing that you are no more a Parliament, then I am a Round-head, that Pembroke is knowing or Say loyall; you well know, that you are but a part of a part, a handfull of cunning Conspirators, a Parliament being an intire Body, consisting of his Majesty, the Lords spirituall and temporall, to a head, and a Commoner for every particular Shire, not a parcell of Peers some twelve in number, that shew in their Chaires when their House is fullest, like so many scabbey sheep upon a vast mountaine: you are a meer Conventicle of Regicides, your House, is that Augaean Stable which must be purg'd by that Hercules, whose hands are yet tied behinde him, King Charles. I will shew you how and in what sense you are a Parliament. If to be damn'd, Dissemblers to pretend To act a good, yet no such thing intend, If to be sacrilegious Theeves, to sweare, To covenant with hell Sans wit or feare; For to rebell against your King, to plot How to draw in the soone deluded Scot Joyntly for to ingage, and so to hell Send two Nations at once; if lies to tell, And buz into the credulous peoples eares, So to stirre up their stomacks with their feares; If to clap up your King a prisoner, And so alive his person to inter; Or if to use all waies to take his life, Banish his children and his loyall wife: If to o'rethrow and quite root out all Law, To cherish vice, and vertue over-awe: If to permit all Errours for to swarme Unto the Kingdomes, most the Churchees harme; If to pursue and prosecute with spite, All those who of your evill acts do write; If to be perjur'd persons, to contemne,
And trample on the Royall Diadem, If for to act against all sense and reason, The deepest mischiefe, and the highest treason: If to defraud a Nation of their goods, And on the ground, like water spill their bloods, If to be curst on all the world may make yee A Parliament, be so; the Devill stake yee. But I pray tell me, are you resolv'd now at last to treat with his Majesty? dare you look him in the face whom you have so horribly abused, and whose Rovall Righteous soul you have so inhumanely vexed, that had not God, whose Vicegerent he is (and whom the world may see he respects as the apple of his eye) preserved him beyond humane expectation, you by this time might have triumph in his fall, and this poore Nation have been for ever lost by his death; Alas we all know that this is but your old trick to deceive the People, you dare aswell be tryed by the known Lawes for all your forepast actions, as admit of a Personall Treaty with his Majesty; the one brings on tother as sure as Death; ti's good pollicy I confesse now that the vulgar are so mad against you, and have declared that they will have their King out of prison with honour, or pull you out of your house with horror, to stop their mouthes with sugar-plums if they will prove of that babelike temper, as to be led by the nose with such a spinners thread, and fooled so egregiously after all their butling? You would faine stave off the loyall cittizens, with this reed, till Skippon hath listed a sufficient number of horses, that may if need be fall upon those that lately manifested their desires for a Treaty, or shall dare to doe it hereafter, to the plundering of their lives and persons, or till Colchester shall be taken in. But all these curst devices must not doe, It is decreed, and you will find it true; That Colchesters brave lads will neyer yeild: That the Scots Army having tane the Feild, Mixt with fierce Langdales force, Tom must withdraw And post to Lambert for to help the Daw: Meantime with those in Colchester will side All those in London, who abhorre your pride: Then downe, downe, downe, downe, the hill, Then you that have lov'd blood shall quaffe your fill:
And if your Army moulder away in the North as they are like suddenly to doe if they dare to ingage, since the Scots and Eng∣lish  there now joined together make up no lesse then four  thousand a e men, who have a cause able to make  valiant, and to pt a pirit into the most pusillanimous Therfites, that Army who nave all this while backt you in all your ungodly and wretched designes, will then smart for all their per∣nicious practises, their plunders masscres and outrages, such as no historie can paralll, or any old Romance produce the like, and if the old Saints be once totally supprest where will your high and mightinesse make up such annother Army of plunderers, your nurseries will so much respect their own safety, as not to haz∣zard their persons for a decaying cause, the cittizens now have found their error, and resolve to keep the little money they have left, since the publike faith is like shortly to take its pro∣gresse with your selves into some forraigne climate, you have a tast of their intentions and resolutions, by their late petitioning, for a speedie Personall Treatie. Then when your Rakeshames of the Army faise, And your sworne enemies each where prevaile. Whenas the Scots and English shall make war And force their way even to Colchester: When London, Westminster, shall both unite Against their Independent foes to fight, Whenas Prince Charles shall land, King Charles be free, Then woe unto you for your Treacherie. Thus you Fooles of Fate, for all your big hopes built upon such slender grounds (that no man possessed of sense, but would count himselfe capable of Bedlam Colledge, if he credited them) you cannot avoid your dire and most inevitable Destinie; your stalk∣ing Champion Skippon is lookt upon by the cittizens even with as gracious an eye as Fairfax was when he brought the plunde∣rers into Southwark; they will not permit him to list forces. Then know you cannot scape, as you can hope, For there stands Derrick, and there lies the rope. FINIS
