W1427 E368_3 99861796 113941
Die Lune 7. Decembr. 1646. ORdered, by the Commons Assembled in PARLI∣AMENT, that sixe hundred Copies and no more, of the Advice of the Assembly of Divines presented to this House, Concerning a Confession of Faith, be forthwith Printed for the service of both Houses and the Assembly of Divines, and that the care of the printing thereof be referred to the Assembly of Divines. And the Printer is injoyned (at his perill) not to print more then sixe hundred Copies of them, or to divulge or publish any of them. It is further Ordered, that no person presume to Re∣print, Divulge, or publish the said ADVICE or any part of it, till further order be taken herein by both or either of the Houses of Parliament. H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.
The humble ADVICE OF THE ASSEMBLY OF Divines, Now by Authority of PARLIAMENT sitting at Westminster, Concerning a Confession of Faith, Presen∣ted by them lately to both Houses of PARLIAMENT. A certain number of Copies are Ordered to be Printed only for the use of the Mem∣bers of both Houses and of the Assembly of Divines, to the end that they may advise thereupon. LONDON, Printed for the Company of STATIONERS.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT. The humble Advice of the Assembly of Divines, now, by Authority of PARLIAMENT, sitting at WESTMINSTER. Concerning a Confession of Faith. CHAP. I. Of the Holy Scripture. ALthough the light of Nature, and the works of Creation and Providence do so farre manifest the Goodnesse, Wisdome, and Power of God, as to leave men un∣excusable; yet are they not sufficient to give that knowledge of God and of his Will, which
is necessary unto salvation. Therefore it pleased the Lord, at sundry times, and in divers maners, to reveale him∣self, and to declare that his Will unto his Church; and afterwards, for the better preserving and propagating of the Truth, and for the more sure establishment and comfort of the Church against the corruption of the flesh, and the malice of Satan and of the World; to commit the same wholly unto writing: which ma∣keth the Holy Scripture to be most necessary; those former wayes of Gods revealing his Will unto his peo∣ple, being now ceased. II. Under the name of Holy Scripture, or the Word of God written; are now contained all the Books of the Old and New Testament, which are these: Of the Old Testament. GEnesis Exodus Leviticus Numbers Deuteronomie Joshuah Judges Ruth I. Samuel II. Samuel I. Kings II. Kings I. Chronicles II. Chronicles Ezra Nehemiah Esther Job Psalmes
Proverbs Ecclesiastes The Song of Songs Isaiah Jeremiah Lamentations Ezekiel Daniel Hoseah Joel Amos Obadiah Jonah Micah Nahum Habakkuk Zephaniah Haggai Zechariah Malachi Of the New Testament: The Gospels according to MAtthew Mark Luke John The Acts of the A∣postles Pauls Epistles to the Romans Corinthians I. Corinthians II. Galatians Ephesians Philippians Colossians Thessalonians I. Thessalonians II. To Timothy I. To Timothy II. To Titus To Philemon
The Epistle to the He∣brews. The Epistle of James. The first and second Epistles of Peter. The first, second, and third Epistles of John. The Epistle of Jude. The Revelation of John. All which are given by inspiration of God, to be the Rule of Faith and Life. III. The Books commonly called Apocrypha, not being of Divine inspiration, are no part of the Ca∣non of the Scripture; and therefore are of no autho∣rity in the Church of God, nor to be any other∣wise approved, or made use of, than other humane Writings. IV. The Authority of the Holy Scripture, for which it ought to be beleeved and obeyed, dependeth not upon the Testimony of any man, or Church; but wholly upon God (who is Truth it selfe) the Author thereof: and therefore it is to be received, because it is the Word of God. V. We may be moved and induced by the Testimony of the Church to an high and reverent esteeme of the holy Scripture. And the heavenlinesse of the Matter, the efficacy of the Doctrine, the majesty of the Style, the con∣sent of all the Parts, the Scope of the whole (which is, to give all glory to God,) the full discovery it makes of the only way of mans salvation, the many other incompa∣rable Excellencies, and the intire perfection thereof,
are Arguments whereby it doth abundantly evidence it self to be the Word of God: yet notwithstanding, our full persuasion and assurance of the infallible truth, and Divine authority thereof, is from the inward work of the Holy Spirit bearing witnesse by and with the Word, in our hearts. VI. The whole Councel of God concerning all things necessary for his own Glory, mans salvation, Faith, and Life, is either expressely setdown in Scripture, or by good and necessary consequence may be deduced from Scripture: unto which nothing at any time is to be added, whether by new revelations of the Spirit, or Traditions of men. Neverthelesse we acknowledge the inward illumination of the Spirit of God to be necessary for the saving understanding of such things as are reveal∣ed in the Word: and that there are some circumstances concerning the Worship of God, and Government of the Church, common to human actions and Societies, which are to be ordered by the Light of Nature and Christian Prudence, according to the generall Rules of the Word, which are alwayes to be observed. VII. All things in Scripture are not alike plaine in themselves, nor alike cleare unto all: yet those things which are necessary to be known, beleeved, and observed for salvation, are so clearly propounded and opened in some place of Scripture or other, that not only the Lear∣ned, but the unlearned, in a due use of the ordinary means, may attain unto a sufficient understanding of them. VIII. The Old Testament in Hebrew (which was the Native Language of the people of God of old,)
and the New Testament in Greek, (which at the time of the writing of it was most generally known to the Nations) being immediatly inspired by God, and by his singular care and providence kept pure in all Ages, are therefore Authenticall; so as, in all Controversies of Religion, the Church is finally to Appeale unto them. But, because these Originall Tongues are not known to all the people of God, who have right un∣to, and interest in the Scriptures, and are commanded, in the feare of God, to read and search them, therefore they are to be translated into the vulgar Language of every Nation unto which they come, that the Word of God dwelling plentifully in all, they may wor∣ship him in an acceptable manner; and, through patience and comfort of the Scriptures, may have hope. IX. The infallible Rule of Interpretation of Scri∣pture is the Scripture it selfe: and therefore, when there is a Question about the true and full sense of any Scripture (which is not manifold, but one) it must be searched and known by other places that speak more clearly. X. The Supreme Judge by which all Controversies of Religion are to be determined, and all Decrees of Councels, Opinions of Ancient Writers, Doctrines of men, and private spirits, are to be examined; and, in whose Sentence we are to rest; can be no other but the Holy Spirit speaking in the Scripture.
CHAP. II. Of God, and of the holy Trinity. THere is but one only, living, and true God: who is infinite in Being and Perfection, a most pure Spi∣rit, invisible, without body, parts, or passions, immuta∣ble, immense, eternall, incomprehensible, almighty, most wise, most holy, most free, most absolute, work∣ing all things according to the Counsell of his own im∣mutable and most righteous will, for his own glory; most loving, gracious, mercifull, long-suffering, abun∣dant in goodnesse and truth, forgiving iniquity, trans∣gression, and sin; the rewarder of them that diligently seek him; and withall, most just and terrible in his judgements, hating all sin, and who will by no means clear the guilty. II. God hath all life, glory, goodnesse, blessednesse, in, and of himself; and is alone in, and unto himself all∣sufficient, notstanding in need of any creatures which he hath made, nor deriving any Glory from them, but only manifesting his own Glory, in, by, unto, and upon them: He is the alone Fountain of all Being, of whom, through whom, and to whom are all things; and, hath most Soveraigne Dominion over them, to do by them, for them, or upon them whatsoever himself pleaseth. In his sight all things are open and manifest; his knowledg is infinite, infallible, & independent upon the creature, so as nothing is to him contingent, or uncertain. He is most holy in all his counsels, in all his works, and in all his commands. To him is due from Angels and men,
and every other creature, whatsoever worship, service, or obedience he is pleased to require of them. III. In the Unity of the God-head there be Three Persons, of one substance, power, and eternity; God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost. The Father is of none, neither begotten, nor proceed∣ing: The Son is eternally begotten of the Father: the Holy Ghost eternally proceeding from the Father and the Son. CHAP. III. Of Gods Eternall Decree. GOd from all eternity did, by the most wise and holy Counsell of his own Will, freely, and un∣changeably ordaine whatsoever comes to passe: yet so as thereby neither is God the Author of sin, nor is vio∣lence offered to the will of the Creatures, nor is the Liberty or contingencie of second Causes taken away, but rather established. II. Although God knows whatsoever may, or can come to passe upon all supposed conditions, yet hath he not decreed any thing because he foresaw it as fu∣ture, or as that which would come to passe upon such conditions. III. By the Decree of God, for the manifesta∣tion of his glory, some men and Angels are prede∣stinated
unto everlasting life, and others fore-ordained to everlasting death. IV. These Angels and men thus predestinated and fore-ordained, are particularly, and unchangeably de∣signed, and their number is so certain, and definite, that it cannot be either increased, or diminished. V. Those of man-kinde that are predestinated unto Life, God, before the foundation of the world was laid, according to his eternall and immutable purpose, and the secret Counsel and good pleasure of his Will, hath chosen, in Christ, unto everlasting glory, out of his meer free grace and love, without any fore-sight of Faith, or Good-works, or perseverance in either of them, or any other thing in the creature, as conditions, or causes moving him thereunto: and all, to the praise of his glorious grace. VI. As God hath appointed the Elect unto glory; so hath he, by the eternall and most free purpose of his Will, fore-ordained all the means thereunto. Where∣fore they who are elected, being fallen in Adam, are redeemed by Christ, are effectually called unto faith in Christ, by his Spirit working in due season, are justified, adopted, sanctified, and kept by his power through faith unto salvation. Neither are any other redeemed by Christ, effectually called, justified, adopted, sancti∣fied and saved; but the Elect only. VII. The rest of man-kinde God was pleased, ac∣cording to the unsearchable counsell of his own Will,
whereby he extendeth, or with-holdeth mercy, as he pleaseth, for the glory of his Soveraigne Power over his creatures, to passe by; and, to ordain them to dishonour and wrath, for their sin, to the praise of his glorious ju∣stice. VIII. The Doctrine of this high Mystery of Pre∣destination is to be handled with speciall prudence and care, that men attending the Will of God revealed in his Word, and yeelding obedience thereunto, may, from the certainty of their effectuall Vocation, be as∣sured of their eternall Election. So shall this Doctrine afford matter of praise, reverence, and admiration of God, and of humility, diligence, and abundant consola∣tion to all that sincerely obey the Gospel. CHAP. IV. Of Creation. IT pleased God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, for the manifestation of the glory of his eternall power, wisedome, and goodnesse, in the beginning, to create, or make of nothing, the World, and all things therein, whether visible or invisible, in the space of six daies; and all very good. II. After God had made all other creatures, he created man, male and female, with reasonable and immortall souls, indued with knowledge, righteous∣nesse and true holinesse, after his own Image; having
the Law of God written in their hearts, and power to fulfill it: And yet, under a possibility of transgressing, being left to the liberty of their own will, which was subject unto change. Beside this Law written in their hearts, they received a command, not to eat of the tree of the Knowledge of good and evil, which whiles they kept, they were happy in their Commu∣nion with God, and had Dominion over the Crea∣tures. CHAP. V. Of Providence. GOd the great Creator of all things doth uphold, direct, dispose, and governe all creatures, actions, and things, from the greatest even to the least, by his most wise and holy Providence, according to his infallible fore-knowledge, and the free, and immu∣table counsell of his own Will, to the praise of the glory of his wisedome, power, justice, goodnesse, and mercy. II. Although, in relation to the fore-knowledge and decree of God, the first Cause, all things come to passe immutably, and infallibly: yet, by the same Providence, hee ordereth them to fall out, accor∣ding to the nature of second causes, either necessari∣ly, freely, or contingently. III. God, in his ordinary Providence maketh use of meanes, yet is free to work without, above, and against them at his pleasure.
IV. The almighty power, unsearchable wisedome, and infinite goodnesse of God so farre manifest them∣selves in his Providence, that it extendeth it selfe even to the first Fall, and all other sinnes of Angels and Men; and that not by a bare permission, but such as hath joyned with it a most wise and power∣full bounding, and otherwise ordering, and govern∣ing of them, in a manifold dispensation, to his owne holy ends: yet so, as the sinfulnesse thereof pro∣ceedeth onely from the creature, and not from God, who being most holy and righteous, neither is, nor can be the Author or Approver of sin. V. The most wise, righteous, and gracious God doth oftentimes leave for a season his owne children to manifold temptations, and the corruption of their own hearts, to chastise them for their former sinnes, or to discover unto them the hidden strength of cor∣ruption, and deceitfulnesse of their hearts, that they may be humbled; and, to raise them to a more close and constant dependance for their support upon him∣selfe, and to make them more watchfull against all future occasions of sin, and for sundry other just and holy ends. VI. As for those wicked and ungodly men whom God, as a righteous judge, for former sinnes doth blinde and harden, from them he not onely with∣holdeth his grace, whereby they might have been in∣lightened in their understandings, and wrought upon in their hearts; but, sometimes also withdraweth the gifts which they had, and exposeth them to such ob∣jects as their corruption makes occasions of sin; and withall, gives them over to their own lusts, the
temptations of the world, and the power of Satan: where by it comes to passe that they harden them∣selves, even under those meanes, which God useth for the softning of others. VII. As the providence of God doth in generall, reach to all Creatures; so after a most speciall man∣ner, it taketh care of his Church, and disposeth all things to the good thereof. CHAP. VI. Of the Fall of Man, of Sin, and of the Punishment thereof. OUr first Parents being seduced by the subtilty and temptation of Satan, sinned, in eating the forbidden fruit. This their sin, God was pleased, ac∣cording to his wiseand holy counsell to permit, having purposed to order it to his own glory. II. By this sin they fell from their originall righte∣ousnesse and communion with God, and so became dead in sin, and wholly defiled in all the faculties and parts of soul and body. III. They being the root of all man-kinde, the guilt of this sin was imputed, and the same death in sin and corrupted nature, conveyed to all their posterity descen∣ding from them by ordinary generation. IV. From this originall corruption, whereby we are utterly indisposed, dis-abled, and made opposite to all good, and wholly inclined to all evil, do proceed all actuall transgressions.
V. This corruption of nature, during this life, doth remain in those that are regenerated; and, although it be, through Christ, pardoned, and mortified, yet both it self, and all the motions thereof are truly and pro∣perly sin. VI. Every-sin, both Originall and Actuall, being a transgression of the righteous Law of God, and con∣trary thereunto, doth, in its own nature, bring guilt upon the sinner; whereby he is bound over to the wrath of God, and curse of the Law, and so made sub∣ject to death, with all miseries spirituall, temporall, and eternall. CHAP. VII. Of Gods Covenant with Man. THe distance between God and the Creature is so great, that although reasonable Creatures do owe obedience unto him as their Creator, yet they could never have any fruition of him as their Blessednesse and Reward, but by some voluntary condescension on Gods part, which he hath been pleased to expresse by way of Covenant. II. The first Covenant made with Man, was a Co∣venant of Works, wherein Life was promised to Adam, and in him to his Posterity, upon condition of perfect and personall obedience. III. Man, by his Fall having made himself unca∣pable of Life by that Covenant, the Lord was plea∣sed to make a Second, commonly called the Cove∣nant
of Grace; Wherein he freely offereth unto sin∣ners Life and Salvation by Jesus Christ, requiring of them Faith in Him that they may be saved, and promising to give unto all those that are ordained unto Life, his holy Spirit, to make them willing, and able to beleeve. IV. This Covenant of Grace is frequently set forth in Scripture by the name of a Testament, in reference to the death of Jesus Christ the Testator, and to the everlasting inheritance, with all things belonging to it, therein bequeathed. V. This Covenant was differently administred in the time of the Law, and in the time of the Gospel: Under the Law, it was administred by Promises, Prophecies, Sacrifices, Circumcision, the Paschal Lamb, and other Types and Ordinances delivered to the people of the Jews, all fore-signifying Christ to come: which were, for that time, sufficient and efficacious, through the ope∣ration of the Spirit, to instruct and build up the Elect in Faith in the Promised Messiah, by whom they had full remission of sins, and eternall Salvation: and is called, the Old Testament. VI. Under the Gospel, when Christ, the substance, was exhibited, the Ordinances in which this Covenant is dispensed, are the Preaching of the Word, and the Administration of the Sacraments of Baptisme, and the Lords Supper: Which, though fewer in number, and administred with more simplicity, and lesse outward glo∣ry; yet, in them, it is held forth in more fullnesse, evi∣dence, and spirituall efficacy, to all Nations, both Jews and Gentiles; and, is called the New Testament. There are not therefore Two Covenants of Grace, differing
in substance, but one and the same, under various dispen∣sations. CHAP. VIII. Of Christ the Mediator. IT pleased God, in His eternall purpose, to choose and ordain the Lord Jesus, His only begotten Son, to be the Mediator between God and Man; the Prophet, Priest, and King, the Head, and Saviour of His Church, the Heir of all things, and Judge of the World: Unto whom He did from all eternity give a People, to be his Seed, and to be by him in time Redeemed, Called, Ju∣stified, Sanctified, and Glorified. II. The Son of God, the second Person in the Tri∣nity, being very and eternall God, of one Substance, and equall with the Father; did, when the fullnesse of time was come, take upon Him mans nature, with all the Es∣sentiall properties, and common infirmities thereof, yet, without sin: being conceived by the Power of the Holy Ghost, in the womb of the Virgin Mary, of her substance. So that, two whole, perfect, and distinct Natures, the Godhead and the Manhood, were insepa∣rably joyned together in one Person, without Conver∣sion, Composition, or Confusion. Which Person, is very God, and very Man, yet one Christ, the only Mediator between God and Man. III. The Lord Jesus, in his humane nature thus u∣nited to the divine, was sanctified and anointed with the holy Spirit, above measure, having in him all the trea∣sures
of wisdome and knowledge; in whom, it pleased the Father, that all fullnesse should dwell; to the end, that being holy, harmlesse, undefiled, and full of grace and truth, he might be thorowly furnished to execute the Office of a Mediator, and Surety. Which Office he took not unto himself, but was thereunto called by his Father, who put all power and judgement into his hand, and gave him commandment to execute the same. IV. This Office, the Lord Jesus did most wil∣lingly undertake; which that he might discharge, he was made under the Law, and did perfectly fullfill it, endured most grievous torments imme∣diatly in his Soul, and most painfull sufferings in his Body; was crucified, and died; was buried, and remained under the power of death; yet saw no cor∣ruption. On the third day he arose from the dead, with the same body in which he suffered, with which also he ascended into Heaven, and there sitteth at the right hand of his Father, making intercession, and shall return to Judge, men, and Angels, at the end of the World. V. The Lord Jesus, by his perfect obedience, and sacrifice of himself, which he, through the eternall spi∣rit, once offered up unto God, hath fully satisfied the Justice of his Father; and purchased, not only reconci∣liation, but an everlasting inheritance in the Kingdom of Heaven, for all those whom the Father hath given unto him. VI. Although the work of Redemption was not actually wrought by Christ till after his Incarnation, yet the vertue, efficacy, and benefits thereof were communi∣cated unto the Elect in all ages successively from the be∣ginning
of the world, in, and by those promises, types, and sacrifices, wherein he was revealed, and signified to be the seed of the woman which should bruise the serpents head; and the Lambe slain from the beginning of the world: being yesterday, and to day the same, and for ever. VII. Christ, in the work of Mediation, acteth ac∣cording to both Natures, by each Nature doing that which is proper to it self: yet, by reason of the unity of the Person, that which is proper to one Nature, is sometimes in Scripture attributed to the Person deno∣minated by the other Nature. VIII. To all those for whom Christ hath purchased Redemption, he doth certainly, and effectually apply, and communicate the same, making intercession for them, and revealing unto them, in, and by the Word, the my∣steries of salvation, effectually perswading them by his Spirit, to beleeve, and obey, and governing their hearts by his Word and Spirit, overcoming all their enemies by his Almighty Power and Wisdome, in such manner, and wayes, as are most consonant to his wonderfull and unsearchable dispensation. CHAP. IX. Of Free-Will. GOD hath indued the Will of man with that na∣turall liberty, that it is neither forced, nor by any absolute necessity of nature determined to good or evil. II. Man, in his state of Innocency, had freedom, and
power, to will, and to doe that which was good, and well pleasing to God; but yet, mutably, so that he might fall from it. III. Man by his fall into a state of sin, hath wholly lost all ability of Will to any spirituall good accom∣panying salvation: so as, a naturall man, being al∣together averse from that good, and dead in sin, is not able, by his own strength, to convert himself, or to pre∣pare himself thereunto. IV. When God converts a sinner, and translates him into the state of grace, he freeth him from his naturall bondage under sin; and, by his grace alone, inables him freely to will, and to do that which is spiritually good; yet so, as that by reason of his remaining corruption, he doth not, perfectly, nor only, will that which is good, but doth also will that which is evil. V. The will of man is made, perfectly, and immu∣tably free to good alone, in the state of Glory only. CHAP. X. Of Effectuall Calling. ALl those whom God hath predestinated unto life, and those only, he is pleased in his appoint∣ed and accepted time, effectually to call, by his Word and Spirit, out of that state of sin and death, in which they are by nature, to grace and salvation by Jesus Christ; inlightning their mindes, spiritually, and sa∣vingly to understand the things of God; taking away their heart of stone, and giving unto them an heart of
flesh; renewing their wills, and by his almighty power determining them to that which is good, and effectually drawing them to Jesus Christ: yet so, as they come most freely, being made willing by his grace. II. This effectuall Call is of Gods free, and speciall grace alone, not from any thing at all foreseen in man, who is altogether passive therein, untill being quickned and renewed by the holy Spirit, he is thereby inabled to answer this Call, and to imbrace the grace offered, and conveyed in it. III. Elect infants, dying in infancy, are regenerated, and saved by Christ, through the Spirit, who work∣eth when, and where, and how he pleaseth: So also, are all other elect persons who are uncapable of being out∣wardly called by the Ministry of the Word. IV. Others, not elected, although they may be cal∣led by the Ministry of the Word, and may have some common operations of the Spirit, yet they never truly come unto Christ, and therefore cannot be saved: much lesse can men, not professing the Christian Religion, be saved in any other way whatsoever, be they never so diligent to frame their lives according to the light of Nature, and the Law of that Religion they doe professe. And, to assert and maintain, that they may, is very perni∣cious, and to be detested. CHAP. XI. Of Iustification. THose whom God effectually calleth, he also freely justifieth: not, by infusing righteousnesse into
them, but by pardoning their sins, and by accounting and accepting their persons as righteous; not, for any thing wrought in them, or done by them, but for Christs sake alone; nor, by imputing faith it self, the act of beleeving, or any other evangelicall obedience, to them, as their righteousnesse, but, by imputing the obedience and satisfaction of Christ unto them, they re∣ceiving, and resting on him and his righteousnesse by faith; which faith, they have, not of themselves, it is the guift of God. II. Faith, thus receiving and resting on Christ and his righteousnesse, is the alone instrument of Justificati∣on; yet is it not alone in the person justified, but is ever accompanied with all other saving graces, and is no dead faith, but worketh by Love. III. Christ by his obedience, and death, did fully discharge the debt of all those that are thus justified, and did make a proper, reall, and full satisfaction to his Fa∣thers Justice in their behalf. Yet, in as much as he was given by the Father, for them; and, his obedience and sa∣tisfaction accepted in their stead; and, both, freely, not for any thing in them; their Justification is on∣ly of free grace; that, both the exact justice, and rich grace of God, might be glorified in the justification of sinners. IV. God did, from all eternity, decree to justifie all the elect, and Christ did, in the fullnesse of time, die for their sins, and rise again for their justification: neverthe∣lesse, they are not justified, untill the holy Spirit doth, in due time, actually apply Christ unto them. V. God doth continue to forgive the sins of those that are justified: and, although they can never fall from the state of Justification; yet, they may by their sins,
fall under Gods fatherly displeasure, and not have the light of his countenance restored unto them, untill they humble themselves, confesse their sins, beg pardon, and renew their faith and repentance. VI. The Justification of Beleevers under the old Testament, was, in all these respects, one and the same with the justification of Beleevers under the new Te∣stament. CHAP. XII. Of Adoption. ALl those that are justified, God vouchsafeth, in, and for his only Son Jesus Christ, to make par∣takers of the grace of Adoption: by which they are taken into the number, and enjoy the liberties and priviledges of the children of God, have his Name put upon them, receive the spirit of Adoption, have accesse to the Throne of Grace with boldnesse, are in∣abled to cry, Abba, Father, are pitied, protected, pro∣vided for, and chastened, by him, as by a Father; yet, never cast off, but sealed to the day of redemption, and inherit the promises, as heyres of everlasting sal∣vation.
CHAP. XIII. Of Sanctification. THey who are effectually called, and Regenera∣ted, having a new heart, and a new spirit created in them; are further sanctified, really, and personally, through the vertue of Christs death and resurrection, by his Word, and Spirit dwelling in them: the Domi∣nion of the whole body of sin is destroyed, and the se∣verall lusts thereof are more and more weakned and mortified; and they, more and more quickned and strengthened in all saving graces, to the practise of true holinesse, without which no man shall see the Lord. II. This Sanctification is throughout, in the whole man; yet imperfect in this life, there abiding still some remnants of corruption in every part: whence ariseth a continuall, and irreconcileable warre; the flesh lusting a∣gainst the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh. III. In which warre, although the remaining cor∣ruption, for a time, may much prevail; yet, through the continuall supply of strength from the sanctify∣ing Spirit of Christ, the regenerare part doth overcome: and so, the Saints grow in grace, perfecting holinesse in the fear of God.
CHAP. XIV. Of Saving Faith. THe grace of Faith, whereby the elect are inabled to beleeve to the saving of their soules, is the work of the Spirit of Christ in their hearts; and is ordinarily wrought by the Ministry of the Word: by which also, and by the administration of the Sacraments, and prayer, it is increased and strengthened. II. By this Faith, a Christian beleeveth to be true, whatsoever is revealed in the Word, for the authority of God himself speaking therein; and, acteth differently upon that which each particular passage thereof con∣taineth; yeelding obedience to the Commands, trem∣bling at the threatnings, and imbracing the Promises of God for this life, and that which is to come. But the principall Acts of saving faith, are, Accepting, Recei∣ving, and Resting upon Christ alone for Justification, Sanctification, and Eternall life, by vertue of the Cove∣nant of Grace. III. This Faith is different in degrees, weak, or strong; may be often and many waies assailed, and weak∣ned, but gets the victory; growing up in many to the at∣tainment of a full assurance through Christ, who is both the Author and finisher of our faith. CHAP. XV. Of Repentance unto life. REpentance unto life, is an evangelicall grace, the Doctrine whereof is to be preached by every Mi∣nister
of the Gospel, as well as that of faith in Christ. II. By it, a sinner, out of the sight and sense not only of the danger, but also of the filthinesse and odiousnesse of his sins, as contrary to the holy nature, and righteous Law of God; and, upon the apprehension of his mercy in Christ to such as are penitent, so grieves for, and hates his sins, as to turn from them all unto God, purposing and endeavouring to walk with him in all the wayes of his Commandements. III. Although Repentance be not to be rested in, as any satisfaction for sin, or any cause of the pardon there∣of, which is the act of Gods free grace in Christ; yet is it of such necessity to all sinners, that none may expect pardon without it. IV. As there is no sin so small, but it deserves damna∣tion; so there is no sin so great, that it can bring damna∣tion upon those who truly repent. V. Men ought not to content themselves with a gene∣rall repentance, but it is every mans duty to endeavour to repent of his particular sins, particularly. VI. As every man is bound to make private confession of his sins to God, praying for the pardon thereof; upon which, and the forsaking of them, he shall finde mercy: so, he that scandalizeth his Brother, or the Church of Christ, ought to be willing by a private or publique con∣fession, and sorrow for his sin, to declare his repentance to those that are offended, who are thereupon to be re∣conciled to him, and in love to receive him.
CHAP. XVI. Of Good Works. GOod Works are only such as God hath comman∣ded in his holy Word, and not such as, without the warrant thereof, are devised by men, out of blinde zeal, or upon any pretence of good intention. II. These good works, done in obedience to Gods Commandments, are the fruits and evidences of a true and lively faith: and, by them, Beleevers manifest their thankfullnesse, strengthen their assurance, edifie their Brethren, adorn the profession of the Gospel, stop the mouthes of the adversaries, and glorifie God, whose workmanship they are, created in Christ Jesus thereun∣to; that, having their fruit unto holinesse, they may have the end, eternall life. III. Their ability to doe good works, is not at all of themselves, but wholly from the Spirit of Christ. And that they may be inabled thereunto, besides the graces they have already received, there is required an actuall in∣fluence of the same holy Spirit, to work in them to will and to doe, of his good pleasure: yet are they not here∣upon to grow negligent, as if they were not bound to perform any duty, unlesse, upon a speciall motion of the Spirit; but, they ought to be diligent in stirring up the grace of God that is in them. IV. They, who in their obedience, attain to the greatest height, which is possible in this life, are so farre from be∣ing able to supererogate, and to doe more than God re∣quires, as that they fall short of much which in duty they are bound to doe. V. We cannot, by our best Works, merit pardon of
sin, or eternall life at the hand of God, by reason of the great disproportion that is between them and the glory to come; and, the infinite distance that is between us and God, whom, by them, we can neither profit, nor satisfie for the debt of our former sins, but, when we have done all we can, we have done but our duty, and are unprofi∣table servants; and, because, as they are good, they pro∣ceed from his Spirit; and, as they are wrought by us, they are defiled, and mixed with so much weaknesse and imperfection, that they cannot endure the severity of Gods judgement. VI. Yet notwithstanding, the persons of Beleevers being accepted through Christ, their good workes also are accepted in him, not as though they were in this life wholy unblameable and unreproveable in Gods sight; but that, he looking upon them in his Son, is pleased to accept, and reward that which is sincere, although accompanied with many weaknesses and im∣perfections. VII. Works done by unregenerate men, although, for the matter of them, they may be things which God commands, and of good use both to themselves, and o∣thers: yet, because they proceed not from an heart puri∣fied by faith; nor are done in a right manner, according to the Word; nor, to a right end, the glory of God; they are therefore sinfull, and cannot please God, or make a man meet to receive grace from God. And yet, their neg∣lect of them is more sinfull, and displeasing unto God.
CHAP. XVII. Of the Perseverance of the Saints. THey, whom God hath accepted in his Beloved, ef∣fectually called, and sanctified by his Spirit, can neither totally, nor finally, fall away from the state of Grace: but shall certainly persevere therein to the end, and be eternally saved. II. This Perseverance of the Saints, depends not upon their own free-will, but upon the immutability of the Decree of Election flowing from the free and un∣changeable love of God the Father; upon the efficacy of the merit, and intercession of Jesus Christ; the abiding of the Spirit, and of the seed of God within them; and the nature of the Covenant of Grace: from all which, ariseth also the certainty, and infallibility thereof. III. Neverthelesse, they may, through the temptations of Satan and of the World, the prevalency of corruption remaining in them, and the neglect of the means of their preservation, fall into grievous sins; and, for a time, con∣tinue therein: whereby they incurre Gods displeasure, and grieve his holy Spirit, come to be deprived of some measure of their graces and comforts, have their hearts hardned, and their consciences wounded, hurt, and scan∣dalize others, and bring temporall judgements upon themselves. CHAP. XVIII. Of the assurance of Grace and Salvation. ALthough hypocrites and other unregenerate men may vainly deceive themselves with false hopes,
and carnall presumptions of being in the favour of God, and estate of salvation; which hope of theirs shall perish: yet, such as truly beleeve in the Lord Jesus, and love him in sincerity, endeavouring to walk in all good con∣science before him, may, in this life, be certainly assured that they are in the state of grace, and may rejoyce in the hope of the glory of God, which hope shall never make them ashamed. II. This certainty is not a bare conjecturall and pro∣bable perswasion, grounded upon a fallible hope; but, an infallible assurance of faith, founded, upon the divine truth of the promises of salvation, the inward evidence of those graces unto which these promises are made, the testimony of the Spirit of Adoption witnessing with our spirits that we are the children of God: which Spirit is the earnest of our inheritance, whereby we are sealed to the day of redemption. III. This infallible assurance doth not so belong to the essence of faith, but that a true beleever may wait long, and conflict with many difficulties before he be partaker of it: yet, being inabled by the Spirit to know the things which are freely given him of God, he may, without extraordinary revelation, in the right use of ordinary meanes, attain thereunto. And therefore it is the duty of every one, to give all diligence to make his calling and election sure; that thereby his heart may be inlarged in peace and joy in the holy Ghost, in love and thankfull∣nesse to God, and in strength and chearfullnesse in the duties of obedience, the proper fruits of this assurance: so farre is it, from inclining men to loosenesse. IV. True beleevers may have the assurance of their sal∣vation divers wayes shaken, diminished, and intermitted; as, by negligence in preserving of it, by falling into
some speciall sin, which woundeth the conscience, and grieveth the spirit; by, some sudden, or vehement tempta∣tion, by Gods withdrawing the light of his countenance, and suffering even such as fear him to walk in darknesse and to have no light: yet are they never utterly destitute of that seed of God, and life of faith, that love of Christ and the brethren, that sincerity of heart, and conscience of duty, out of which, by the operation of the Spirit, this Assurance may, in due time, be revived; and by the which, in the mean time, they are supported from utter despair. CHAP. XIX. Of the Law of God. GOD gave to Adam a Law, as a Covenant of Works, by which he bound him, and all his poste∣rity to personall, entire, exact, and perpetuall obedience; promised life upon the fullfilling, and threatned death upon the breach of it: and indued him with power and ability to keep it. II. This Law, after his fall, continued to be a perfect rule of righteousnesse, and, as such, was delivered by God upon Mount Sinai, in ten Commandments, and written in two Tables: the four first Commandments containing our duty towards God; and the other six, our duty to man. III. Beside this Law, commonly called Moral, God was pleased to give to the people of Israel, as a Church under age, Ceremoniall Laws containing severall typi∣cal Ordinances, partly of worship, prefiguring Christ, his graces, actions, sufferings, and benefits; and partly, holding forth divers instructions of moral duties. All
which Ceremonial Laws are now abrogated, under the new Testament. IV. To them also, as a Body Politique, he gave sundry Judicial Laws, which expired together with the State of that People; not obliging any other now, further than the general equity thereof may require. V. The Moral Law doth for ever binde all, as well justified persons as others, to the obedience thereof; and that, not only in regard of the matter contained in it, but also in respect of the authority of God the Creatour, who gave it: Neither doth Christ, in the Gospel, any way dissolve, but much strengthen this obligation. VI. Although true Beleevers be not under the Law, as a Covenant of Works, to be thereby justified, or con∣demned; yet, is it of great use to them, as well as to o∣thers; in that, as a Rule of life informing them of the will of God, and their duty, it directs, and bindes them to walke accordingly; discovering also the sinfull pollu∣tions of their nature, hearts, and lives; so as, examining themselves thereby, they may come to further convi∣ction of, humiliation for, and hatred against sin; together with a cleerer fight of the need they have of Christ, and the perfection of his obedience. It is likewise of use to the Regenerate, to restrain their corruptions, in that it forbids sin: and, the threatnings of it serve to shew, what, even their sins, deserve; and, what afflictions, in this life, they may expect for them, although freed from the curse thereof threatned in the Law. The Promi∣ses of it, in like manner, shew them Gods approbation of obedience, and what blessings they may expect upon the performance thereof; although, not as due to them by the Law, as a Covenant of Works. So as, a mans doing good, and refraining from evil, because the Law
encourageth to the one, and deterreth from the other, is no evidence of his being under the Law; and, not under grace. VII. Neither are the forementioned Uses of the Law contrary to the grace of the Gospel, but do sweetly comply with it; the Spirit of Christ subduing, and in∣abling the will of man, to do that, freely and chearfully, which the will of God, revealed in the Law, requireth to be done. CHAP. XX. Of Christian Liberty, and Liberty of Conscience. THe Liberty which Christ hath purchased for Beleevers, under the Gospel, consists, in their free∣dome from the guilt of sin, the condemning Wrath of God, the Curse of the Moral Law; and, in their being delivered from this present evil World, bondage to Sa∣tan, and Dominion of sin; from the evil of afflictions, the sting of death, the victory of the grave, and everla∣sting damnation; as also, in their free accesse to God, and their yeelding obedience unto him, not out of sla∣vish fear, but a Childe-like love and willing minde. All which, were common also to Beleevers under the Law. But, under the New Testament, the liberty of Christians is further inlarged, in their freedom from the yoke of the Ceremonial Law, to which the Jewish Church was subjected; and in greater boldnesse of accesse to the Throne of Grace, and in fuller communications of the free Spirit of God, than Beleevers, under the Law, did ordinarily partake of.
II. God alone is Lord of the Conscience, and hath left it free from the Doctrines and Command∣ments of men, which are, in any thing contrary to his Word; or beside it, if matters of Faith, or Worship. So that, to beleeve such Doctrines, or to obey such Commands, out of Conscience, is to betray true Li∣berty of Conscience: and the requiring of an im∣plicite Faith, and an absolute and blinde obedience, is, to destroy Liberty of Conscience, and Reason also. III. They, who upon pretence of Christian Li∣berty, do practise any sin, or cherish any lust, do thereby destroy the end of Christian Liberty, which is, that being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, we might serve the Lord, without fear, in holiness and righteousness before him, all the days of our life. IV. And because the Powers which God hath ordain∣ed, and the liberty which Christ hath purchased, are not intended by God, to destroy, but mutually to up∣hold and preserve one another; They, who upon pre∣tence of Christian Liberty, shall oppose any lawful Power, or the lawful exercise of it, whether it be Civil or Ecclesiastical, resist the Ordinance of God. And, for their publishing of such Opinions, or main∣taining of such Practises, as are contrary to the light of Nature, or to the known Principles of Christianity, whether concerning Faith, Worship, or Conversation; or, to the Power of Godliness; or, such erroneous Opinions or Practises, as either in their own nature, or in the maner of publishing or maintaining them, are
destructive to the external Peace and Order which Christ hath established in the Church, they may law∣fully be called to account, and proceeded against by the Censures of the Church, and by the Power of the Civil Magistrate. CHAP. XXI. Of Religious Worship, and the Sabbath Day. THe light of Nature sheweth that there is a God, who hath Lordship and Soveraignty over all, is good, and doth good unto all, and is therefore to be feared, loved, praised, called upon, trusted in, and served, with all the heart, and with all the soul, and with all the might. But, the acceptable way of Worshipping the true God, is instituted by himself, and so limited by his own revealed Will, that he may not be Worshipped according to the imaginations and devices of men, or the suggestions of Satan, under any visible representation, or any other way not prescribed in the holy Scripture. II. Religious Worship is to be given to God, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and to him alone; not, to Angels, Saints, or any other Creature: and, since the Fall, not without a Mediator; nor in the media∣tion of any other, but of Christ alone. III. Prayer, with Thanksgiving being one special part of Religious Worship, is, by God, required of
all men: and, that it may be accepted, it is to be made in the Name of the Son, by the help of his Spirit, according to his Will, with understanding, reverence, humility, fervency, faith, love, and perseverence; and, if vocal, in a known tongue. IV. Prayer is to be made for things lawful, and for all sorts of men living, or that shall live hereafter: but, not for the Dead, nor for those of whom it may be known, that they have sinned the sin unto death. V. The reading of the Scriptures with godly fear; the sound Preaching and Conscionable Hearing of the Word, in obedience unto God, with understanding, faith, and reverence; singing of Psalms with grace in the heart; as also, the due administration, and worthy receiving of the Sacraments instituted by Christ; are all, parts of the ordinary Religious Worship of God: Beside Religious Oathes, Vows, Solemn Fastings, and Thanksgivings, upon special occasions, which are, in their several times and seasons, to be used, in an holy and religious maner. VI. Neither Prayer, nor any other part of Religi∣ous Worship, is now under the Gospel, either tyed unto, or made more acceptable by any place in which it is performed, or towards which it is directed: but God is to be Worshipped every where, in Spirit and Truth; as in private Families daily, and in secret, each one by himself; so, more solemnly, in the publique Assemblies, which are not carelesly, or wilfully to be neglected, or forsaken, when God, by his Word or Providence, calleth thereunto.
VII. As it is of the Law of Nature, that, in gene∣ral, a due proportion of time be set apart, for the Worship of God; so, in his Word, by a positive, Moral, and perpetual Commandment, binding all men, in all Ages, he hath particularly appointed One Day in Seven, for a Sabbath, to be kept holy unto him: which, from the beginning of the World to the Resurrection of Christ, was the last Day of the week; and, from the Resurrection of Christ, was changed into the First Day of the week, which, in Scripture, is called the Lords Day, and is to be continued to the end of the World, as the Christian Sabbath. VIII. This Sabbath is then kept holy unto the Lord, when men, after a due preparing of their hearts, and ordering of their common affairs before hand, do not only observe an holy Rest, all the Day, from their own works, words, and thoughts about their worldly imployments, and recreations, but also are taken up the whole time, in the publique and private Exercises of his Worship, and in the Duties of necessity, and mercy. CHAP. XXII. Of lawful Oathes and Vows. A Lawful Oath is a part of Religious Worship, wherein upon just occasion, the person swearing, solemnly calleth God to witness what he asserteth, or promiseth; and to Judge him according to the truth, or falshood of what he sweareth.
II. The Name of God only, is that by which men ought to swear; and, therein it is to be used with all holy fear and reverence. Therefore, to swear vainly, or rashly, by that glorious and dreadful Name; or, to swear at all, by any other thing, is sinful, and to be abhorred. Yet, as in matters of weight and moment, an Oath is warranted by the Word of God, under the New Testament, as well as under the Old; so, a lawful Oath, being imposed by lawful Authority, in such matters ought to be taken. III. Whosoever taketh an Oath, ought duly to consider the weightiness of so solemn an act; and therein to avouch nothing, but what he is fully per∣swaded is the truth. Neither may any man binde him∣self by Oath to any thing but what is good and just, and what he believeth so to be, and what he is able, and resolved to perform. Yet is it a sin, to refuse an Oath touching any thing that is good and just, being im∣posed by lawful Authority. IV. An Oath is to be taken in the plain and com∣mon sense of the words, without equivocation, or mental reservation. It cannot oblige to sin: but, in any thing not sinful, being taken, it bindes to per∣formance, although to a mans own hurt. Nor is it to be violated, although made to Hereticks, or Infidels. V. A Vow is of the like nature with a Promissory Oath, and ought to be made with the like Religi∣ous care, and to be performed with the like faith∣fulness.
VI. It is not to be made to any Creature but to God alone: and, that it may be accepted, it is to be made voluntarily, out of Faith, and conscience of Du∣ty, in way of thankfulness for mercy received, or for the obtaining of what we want; whereby we more strictly binde our selves to necessary duties; or, to other things, so far, and so long, as they may fitly conduce thereunto. VII. No man may Vow, to do any thing forbid∣den in the Word of God, or what would hinder any duty therein commanded; or which is not in his own power, and, for the performance whereof, he hath no promise of ability from God. In which respects, Po∣pish Monastical Vows, of perpetual single life, profes∣sed Poverty, and Regular Obedience, are so far from being degrees of higher Perfection, that they are su∣perstitious and sinful snares, in which, no Christian may intangle himself. CHAP. XXIII. Of the Civil Magistrate. GOd, the supreme Lord and King of all the World, hath Ordained Civil Magistrates, to be, under him, over the People, for his own Glory, and the Pub∣lique good: and, to this end hath armed them with the Power of the Sword, for the defence and incou∣ragement of them that are good, and for the punish∣ment of evil doers.
II. It is lawful for Christians to accept and exe∣cute the Office of a Magistrate; when called there∣unto: in the managing whereof, as they ought espe∣cially to maintain Piety, Justice, and Peace, accord∣ing to the wholsom Laws of each Commonwealth; so, for that end, they may lawfully now, under the New Testament, wage Warre, upon just and necessary occasion. III. The Civil Magistrate may not assume to him∣self the administration of the Word and Sacraments, or the power of the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven: yet, he hath authority, and it is his duty, to take or∣der, that Unity and Peace be preserved in the Church, that the Truth of God be kept pure, and intire; that all Blasphemies and Heresies be suppressed; all cor∣ruptions and abuses in Worship and Discipline pre∣vented, or reformed; and all the Ordinances of God duly setled, administred, and observed. For the bet∣ter effecting whereof, he hath power to call Synods, to be present at them, and to provide that whatsoever is transacted in them, be according to the minde of God. IV. It is the duty of People to pray for Magi∣strates, to honour their Persons, to pay them Tribute and other Dues, to obey their lawful Commands, and to be subject to their Authority, for conscience sake. Infidelity, or difference in Religion doth not make void the Magistrates just and legal Authority, nor free the People from their due obedience to him: from which, Ecclesiastical persons are not exempted; much
less hath the Pope any Power and Jurisdiction over them, in their Dominions, or over any of their People; and, least of all, to deprive them of their Dominions, or lives, if he shall judge them to be Hereticks, or upon any other pretence whatsoever. CHAP. XXIV. Of Marriage, and Divorce. MArriage is to be between one Man and one Wo∣man: neither is it lawful for any Man to have more then one Wife, nor for any Woman to have more then one Husband; at the same time. II. Marriage was ordained for the mutual help of Husband and Wife, for the increase of mankinde with a legitimate issue, and of the Church with an holy seed; and, for preventing of uncleanness. III. It is lawful for all sorts of people to marry, who are able with judgement, to give their Consent. Yet, is it the duty of Christians to marry only in the Lord: And therefore such as profess the true reform∣ed Religion, should not marry with Infidels, Papists, or other Idolaters: Neither should such as are godly, be unequally yoked, by marrying with such as are no∣toriously wicked in their life, or maintain damnable Heresies. IV. Marriage ought not to be within the degrees of
Consanguinity or Affinity forbidden in the Word; No can such incestuous marriages ever be made law∣ful by any Law of man or consent of Parties, so as those persons may live together as man and wife. The man may not marry any of his wives kindred, nearer in blood, then he may of his own; nor, the woman, of her husbands kindred, nearer in blood, then of her own. V. Adultery, or fornication committed after a Con∣tract, being detected before marriage, giveth just oc∣casion to the innocent party to dissolve that Contract. In the case of Adultery after marriage, it is lawful for the innocent party to sue our a Divorce: And, af∣ter the Divorce, to marry another, as if the offending party were dead. VI. Although the Corruption of man be such as is apt to study arguments, unduely to put asunder those whom God hath joyned together in marriage: yet, nothing but adultery, or such wilful desertion as can no way be remedied, by the Church, or Civil Magistrate, is cause sufficient of dissolving the bond of marriage: Wherein, a publique, and orderly course of Proceeding, is to be observed; And, the persons concerned in it, not left to their own wills and dis∣cretion, in their own Case.
CHAP. XXV. Of the Church. THe Catholique or Universal Church which is in∣visible, consists of the whole number of the Elect, that have been, are, or shall be gathered into One, under Christ the Head thereof; and is, the Spouse, the Body, the Fulness of Him that filleth all in all. II. The Visible Church, which is also Catholique or Universal, under the Gospel (not confined to one Nation, as before, under the Law) consists of all those, throughout the World, that profess the true Religion; and, of their Children: and is, the King∣dom of the Lord Jesus Christ, the House and Family of God, out of which, there is no ordinary possibi∣lity of Salvation. III. Unto this Catholique Visible Church, Christ hath given the Ministry, Oracles, and Ordinances of God, for the gathering, and perfecting of the Saints, in this life, to the end of the World: and doth by his own presence and Spirit, according to his promise, make them effectual thereunto. IV. This Catholique Church hath been somtimes more, somtimes less visible. And particular Churches, which are Members thereof, are more or less pure, according as the Doctrine of the Gospel is taught and imbraced, Ordinances administred, and Publique Worship performed more or less purely in them.
V. The purest Churches under Heaven are subject both to mixture, and error: and some have so de∣generated, as to become no Churches of Christ, but Synagogues of Satan. Nevertheless, there shall be al∣ways a Church on Earth, to worship God according to his will. VI. There is no other Head of the Church, but the Lord Jesus Christ; Nor can the Pope of Rome, in any sense, be head thereof: but is, that Antichrist, that Man of sin, and Son of Perdition, that exalteth himself, in the Church, against Christ, and all that is called God. CHAP. XXVI. Of the Communion of Saints. ALl Saints, that are united to Jesus Christ their Head, by his Spirit, and by faith, have fellowship with him in his graces, sufferings, death, resurrection, and glory: And, being united to one another in love, they have communion in each others gifts and graces, and are obliged to the performance of such duties, publique and private, as do conduce to their mutual good, both in the inward and outward man. II. Saints by profession, are bound to maintain an holy fellowship and communion in the worship of God, and in performing such other spiritual services as tend to their mutual edification; as also, in relieving
each other in outward things, according to their seve∣ral abilities, and necessities. Which Communion, as God offereth opportunity, is to be extended unto all those, who, in every place, call upon the name of the Lord Jesus. III. This Communion which the Saints have with Christ, doth not make them, in any wise, partakers of the substance of his Godhead; or, to be equal with Christ, in any respect: either of which to affirm, is impious, and blasphemous. Nor doth their Com∣munion one with another, as Saints, take away, or infringe the title, or propriety which each man hath in his goods and possessions. CHAP. XXVII. Of the Sacraments. SAcraments are holy Signes, and Seales of the Co∣venant of Grace, immediately Instituted by God, to represent Christ, and his benefits; and, to confirm our interest in him; as also, to put a visible difference between those that belong unto the Church, and the rest of the World; and, solemnly to engage them to the service of God in Christ, according to his Word. II. There is in every Sacrament a spiritual relation, or Sacramental union, between the Sign and the Thing signified: whence it comes to pass, that the Names, and effects of the one, are attributed to the other.
III. The Grace which is exhibited in, or by the Sacraments rightly used, is not conferred by any power in them: neither doth the efficacy of a Sacra∣ment depend upon the Piety, or Intention of him that doth administer it: but, upon the work of the Spi∣rit, and the word of Institution, which contains, to∣gether with a Precept authorizing the use thereof, a Promise of benefit to worthy Receivers. IV. There be only two Sacraments ordained by Christ our Lord, in the Gospel; that is to say, Bap∣tism and the Supper of the Lord: neither of which may be dispensed by any, but by a Minister of the Word lawfully Ordained. V. The Sacraments of the Old Testament, in re∣gard of the spiritual things thereby signified, and ex∣hibited, were, for substance, the same with those of the New. CHAP XXVIII. Of Baptism. BAptism is a Sacrament of the New Testament, Ordained by Jesus Christ, not only for the solemn Admission of the Party Baptized, into the Visible Church; but also, to be unto him a signe, and seal of the Covenant of Grace, of his ingrafting into Christ, of Regeneration, of Remission of sins, and of his giving up unto God through Jesus Christ, to walk in
newness of life. Which Sacrament is, by Christs own appointment, to be continued in his Church until the end of the World. II. The outward Element to be used in this Sacra∣ment is Water, wherewith the Party is to be Baptized, in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, by a Minister of the Gospel, lawfully called thereunto. III. Dipping of the person into the Water, is not necessary: but, Baptism is rightly administred, by powring, or Sprinkling water upon the Person. IV. Not only those that do actually profess faith in, and obedience unto Christ, but also the Infants of one, or both beleeving Parents, are to be Baptized. V. Although it be a great Sin, to contemn, or neglect this Ordinance, yet Grace and salvation are not so inseparably annexed unto it, as that no Person can be regenerated or saved, without it; or, that all that are Baptized, are undoubtedly regenerated. VI. The Efficacy of Baptism is not tyed to that moment of time, wherein it is administred; yet, not∣withstanding, by the right use of this Ordinance, the grace promised, is not only offered, but really exhibi∣ted, and conferred, by the Holy Ghost, to such (whe∣ther of age, or infants) as that Grace belongeth unto, according to the Councel of Gods own Will, in his appointed time.
VII. The Sacrament of Baptism is but once to be administred unto any person. CHAP XXIX. Of the Lords Supper. OUr Lord Jesus, in the night wherein he was be∣trayed, Instituted the Sacrament of his Body and Blood, called the Lords Super, to be observed in his Church, unto the end of the World, for the per∣petual Remembrance of the sacrifice of Himself, in his Death; the sealing all benefits thereof unto true Beleevers, their Spiritual nourishment and growth in him, their further ingagement in, and to, all duties which they owe unto him; and, to be a bond, and pledge of their Communion with him, and with each other, as members of his mystical Body. II. In this Sacrament Christ is not offered up to his Father; nor, any real Sacrifice made at all, for remis∣sion of sins of the quick or dead; but only a Comme∣moration of that one offering up of himself, by him∣self, upon the Cross, once for all: and, a spiritual Oblation of all possible praise unto God, for the same: So that, the Popish Sacrifice of the Mass (as they call it) is most abominably injurious to Christs one, only Sacrifice, the alone Propitiation for all the sins of his Elect. III. The Lord Jesus hath, in this Ordinance, ap∣pointed
his Ministers to declare his word of Institu∣tion to the people; to pray, and bless the Elements of Bread and Wine, and thereby to set them apart from a Common to an Holy Use; and, to Take, and Break the Bread, to Take the Cup, and (they communica∣ting also themselves) to give both to the Communi∣cants; but, to none who are not then present in the Congregation. IV. Private Masses or receiving this Sacrament by a Priest or any other, alone; as likewise, the denial of the Cup to the people, worshiping the Elements, the lifting them up or carrying them about for adoration, and the reserving them for any pretended religious use, are all contrary to the nature of this Sacrament, and to the Institution of Christ. V. The Outward Elements, in this Sacrament, duly set apart, to the uses ordained by Christ, have such relation to him crucified, as that, truly, yet Sacramen∣tally only, they are sometimes called by the name of the things they represent, to wit, the Body and Blood of Christ; albeit, in substance and nature, they still remain, truely, and only Bread and Wine, as they were before. VI. That Doctrine which maintains a change of the substance of Bread and Wine, into the substance of Christs Body and Blood (commonly called Tran∣substantiation) by Consecration of a Priest, or by any other way, is repugnant, not to Scripture alone, but even to common Sense and Reason; overthroweth
the nature of the Sacrament, and hath been, and is, the cause of manifold Superstitions; yea, of gross Idolatries. VII. Worthy receivers outwardly partaking of the Visible Elements, in this Sacrament, do then also, inwardly by faith, really and indeed, yet not carnally and corporally, but Spiritually, receive, and feed up∣on Christ crucified, and all benefits of his death: The Body and Blood of Christ being then, not corporally or carnally, in, with, or under the Bread and Wine; yet, as really, but Spiritually, present to the Faith of Believers in that Ordinance, as the Elements them∣selves are to their outward senses. VIII. Although ignorant, and wicked men receive the outward Elements, in this Sacrament: yet, they receive not the Thing signified thereby; but by their unworthy coming thereunto, are guilty of the Bo∣dy and Blood of the Lord to their own damnati∣on. Wherefore, all ignorant, and ungodly persons, as they are unfit to enjoy communion with him, so are they unworthy of the Lords Table; and, cannot with∣out great sin against Christ while they remain such, partake of these Holy Mysteries, or be admitted thereunto.
CHAP. XXX. Of Church Censures. THe Lord Jesus, as King and Head of his Church, hath therein appointed a Government, in the hand of Church Officers, distinct from the Civil Magistrate. II. To these Officers, the Keys of the Kingdom of of Heaven are committed: by vertue whereof, they have power, respectively, to retain, and remit sins; to shut that Kingdom against the impenitent, both by the Word, and Censures; and to open it unto penitent sinners, by the Ministry of the Gospel, and by Abso∣lution from Censures, as occasion shall require. III. Church Censures are necessary, for the reclai∣ming and gaining of offending Brethren, for deterring of others from the like offences, for purging out of that Leaven which might infect the whole Lump, for vin∣dicating the honour of Christ, and the holy profession of the Gospel, and for preventing the wrath of God, which might justly fall upon the Church, if they should suffer his Covenant, and the Seals thereof to be prophaned by notorious and obstinate offenders. IV. For the better attaining of these ends, the Officers of the Church are to proceed by Admonition; suspension from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper for a season; and, by Excommunication from the
Church; according to the nature of the crime, and de∣merit of the Person. CHAP. XXXI. Of Synods and Councels. FOr the better Government, and further edification of the Church, there ought to be such Assemblies, as are commonly called Synods or Councels. II. As Magistrates may lawfully call a Synod of Ministers, and other fit Persons, to consult and ad∣vise with, about matters of Religion; So, if Magi∣strates be open Enemies to the Church, the Ministers of Christ, of themselves, by vertue of their Office; or, they, with other fit persons, upon delegation from their Churches, may meet together in such Assemblies. III. It belongeth to Synods and Councels, ministe∣rially to determine Controversies of Faith, and cases of Conscience, to set down Rules and Directions for the better Ordering of the publique Worship of God, and Government of his Church; to receive Com∣plaints, in Cases of Male-administration, and, authori∣tatively, to Determine the same: which Decrees, and Determinations, if consonant to the Word of God, are to be received with reverence, and submission; not on∣ly, for their agreement with the Word, but also for the Power, whereby they are made, as being an Or∣dinance of God appointed thereunto in his Word.
IV. All Synods or Councels, since the Apostles times, whether general, or particular, may erre; and, many have erred. Therefore, they are not to be made the Rule of Faith, or practise; but, to be used as an Help in both. V. Synods and Councels are to handle, or con∣clude nothing, but that which is Ecclesiastical: and are not to intermeddle with Civil Affairs which con∣cern the Commonwealth; unless by way of humble Petition, in cases extraordinary; or, by way of Advice, for satisfaction of Conscience, if they be thereunto required by the Civil Magistrate. CHAP. XXXII. Of the State of men after death, and of the Resurrection of the dead. THe Bodies of men, after death, return to dust, and see corruption: but, their Souls (which neither dye, nor sleep) having an immortal subsistence, im∣mediately return to God who gave them: the Souls of the Righteous, being then made perfect in holi∣ness, are received into the highest Heavens, where they behold the face of God, in light and glory, waiting for the full Redemption of their Bodies. And the Souls of the wicked are cast into Hell, where they remain in torments and utter darkness, reserved to the Judgement of the Great Day. Beside these two Pla∣ces, for Souls separated from their bodies, the Scrip∣ture acknowledgeth none.
II. At the Last Day, such as are found alive, shall not dye, but be changed: and, all the Dead shall be raised up, with the self same bodies, and none other, although with different qualities, which shall be united again to their Souls for ever. III. The Bodies of the unjust, shall, by the power of Christ, be raised to dishonour: the Bodies of the just by his Spirit, unto honour; and, be made conforma∣ble to his own glorious Body. CHAP. XXXIII. Of the last Iudgment. GOd hath appointed a Day, wherein he will judge the World, in righteousness, by Jesus Christ, to whom, all Power and Judgement is given of the Fa∣ther. In which Day, not onely the Apostate Angels shall be judged, but likewise all Persons that have li∣ved upon Earth, shall appear before the Tribunal of Christ, to give an Account of their Thoughts, Words, and Deeds; and, to receive according to what they have done in the Body, whether good or evil. II. The End of Gods appointing this Day, is, for the manifestation of the Glory, of his Mercy, in the eternal salvation of the Elect; and, of his Justice, in the damnation of the Reprobate, who are wicked, and dis∣obedient. For, then, shall the Righteous go into ever∣lasting life, and receive that fullness of Joy and Re∣freshing,
which shall come from the presence of the Lord: but, the wicked, who know not God, and obey not the Gospel of Jesus Christ, shall be cast into eter∣nal Torments, and be punished with everlasting destru∣ction from the presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of his Power. III. As Christ would have us to be certainly per∣swaded, That there shall be a Day of Judgement, both to deter all men from Sin, and for the greater conso∣lation of the Godly in their Adversity; so, will he have that Day unknown to men, that they may shake off all carnal Security, and be always watchful, be∣cause they know not at what hour the Lord will come; and, may be ever prepared to say, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, Amen. Charles Herle, Prolocutor. Cornelius Burges, Assessor. Herbert Palmer, Assessor. Henry Robroughe, Scriba. Adoniram Byfield, Scriba. FINIS.
