4068 S113331 99848567 13656
decorative border ¶ A most necessary & frutefull Dialogue, betwene ye seditious Libertin or rebel Anabaptist, & the true obedient christiā, wherin, as in a mirrour or glasse ye shal se ye excellence and worthynesse of a christiā magistrate: & again what obedience is due vnto publique ru¦lers of al thē yt professe Christ yea, though ye rulers, in ex¦terne & outward thin∣ges, to their vtter dampnaty∣on, do otherwyse then well: translated out of Latyn into Englisshe, by Ihō Veron Se¦nonoys. Romaines .xiii. chapter: Whosoeuer resisteth ye power, resysteth ye ordinaunce of God, but they yt resyst shal receiue to them selues dampnation
❧ The contentes of thys boke. i That a christian, contrarye to the per∣nitious opynion of thanabaptistes or seditious Libertins, may lawfully exe∣cute the office of a Magistrate. ii That ye offyce of a Magistrate, is not onely profitable, but also most necesa¦ry to a Christian commune weale. iii That we are all bounde to obeye ma∣gistrates and rulers, in externe & out∣ward thinges, but if they commaund any thing against god, and his worde better it is to obey god then men: Yet not to resiste violently. iiii Whether it be lawfull to resist ye ma∣gistrate, where we do wryte againste them that do rebell against magistra¦tes and rulers.
¶ To ye right worshipfull Syr Ihon Gates, Knight, Ihon Veron wis¦sheth peace, grace, & health, both of soule and body, with increase of diuine know∣ledge and vnderstandynge, from god the father, throughe oure Lorde and Sauyour Iesus Christe. CAllyng to remembraūce right worshipfull Syr, ye great inconuenyences & harmes, that lately dyd chaunce to this most illu¦stre & florishing Realme by the disobedient rebellyon, of certayne vngodly and wycked persons, which ca∣sting god and his word behind theyr bac¦kes, did seke nought els, but an vtter con¦fusyon of all thynges: I can not but la∣ment and mourn, that yet so great blind¦nes & ignoraunce doth,When pro∣phecie, yt is to say, true mini¦string of god∣des word shal ceasse, thē shal the people be scattered saith the scripture. for lacke of trew preachers and ministers of goddes word (without the which beyng purely & syn∣cerely preached, no trewe obedience, nor duety can be learned, whatsoeuer the e∣nemies of the truth do babell and prate) reygne emong the commons and inha∣biters of this countrey, that they beinge wrapped in all kyndes of errour, do not
knowe, nor yet vnderstande, that to ryse for any maner of cause, against the Ma∣gistrates,Thre thinges ye rebelles do incurre by their rebellion rulers & high powers, is moste dampnable too theyr soules, most paryl∣louse to theyr naturall countreye, and to theyr bodyes (for whose sake, they, lyke brute beastes, styrre vp all this hurly bur¦ly) most hurtful and daungerous. Whi∣che three thynges, I wyll here proue by the word of god, and examples of ye scrip¦tures, puttyng before theyr eyen, howe sore god doth abhorre and detest al rebel¦lious insurrections and tumultes: to the intent, yt they being taughte and instruc∣ted oute of goddes worde, waye leaue of and ceasse from theyr rasshe and vngod∣ly enterpryses.Rom. xiii. cha Rebelles doo purchase vnto theym selues euerlastinge dampnatyon.Fyrst and formest let them loke vpon the .xiii. Chapter to ye Romaines. Where Paule speaketh after this maner: Who∣soeuer resisteth the power, resisteth ye or∣dynaūce of god: but they that resist, shal receiue to them selues euerlasting damp¦nation. Here in these few wordes of the blessed apostle and chosen vessell of god we do learne, that we ought in no wyse to resist the high power. And why? Be∣cause he is the ordynaunce of god. Who
can, I pray you, O brayneles Libertins resyst the ordynaunce of god, and escape vnpunisshed? Noo man truelye. For the holy ghoste sayth, that they that resyste, shall receyue to them selues dampnatyō Thys were ynough to proue that to rise agaynst the hygh powers, is most damp¦nable to the soules, excepte some were e∣monge theym, moste craftye and subtile whyche by and by, wyll make an obiec∣tyon, and saye.  Is the power of tyran∣nouse and vngodlye Prynces of God? Noo man (saye they) wyll ryse agaynst a godlye Prynce, whych without doubt is of god. But we do ryse agaynst most wicked & vngodly rulers, whiche dailye do so sore oppresse vs, that we can suffer noo longer, excepte we and oure chyldrē wyll go hereafter a beggyng.  To whom we doo aunsweare wyth Saynct Paule There is noo power but of God. All the powers that bee, are ordeyned of God. Syth then that there is no power but of God, it foloweth by good consequence that the tyrannycal power is of god, and that whosoeuer doth resist it,The tiranny∣call power is of god, as pes¦tylence, hayle vnseasonable wethers, & o∣ther lyke pla∣gues. doth resyst ye ordinaunce of god, therby purchasing vnto him selfe euerlasting dampnatyon.
But I will tell the howe the tyrannicall power is of god, euen as pestilence, haile vnseasonable weathers, and other lyke plagues, which are by the righteous iud¦gement of god, sente vpon vs, for our sin¦nes. Whiche thinge we maye well se of Pharao in Hieremy,Esai. iij. chap and of Sennache∣rib, kyng of the Assirians, in Esaie ye pro¦phete, yea, the lord saith him selfe: I will geue chyldisshe men to be your Princes and gouernours, scornefull or womanly or effeminate persons shall beare rule o∣uer you.Mark ye this oh rebelles, & acknowledge ye wicked ru∣lers, are a rod sent of god, to punish youre synnes. The lord doth make the wic¦ked to reygne for ye sinnes of the people. Ye shal also be pilled and polled and one shall euer be doing violence and wronge to an other. The boye shall pre∣sume against the elder, and the vyle per∣son agaynst the honorable. And whye? Because that both your wordes & your counsailes are againste the lorde, to pro∣uoke the presence of his maiestye, vntoo anger. By these wordes of the holy pro¦phete, it is easy to vnderstande, that oure synnes are the chief causes why ye Lorde god aboue, doth sende vngodly and wyc¦ked rulers. But thys, we will not se nor heare, our eyen are so fixed vpon the faul¦tes of the high powers, and gouernours that we do vtterlye forget our owne, we
can espie a mote in theyr eye,Mat. vij. cha It is the pro∣pertye of fo∣lyshnesse too forget hys owne, and to se other men∣nes synnes. but ye beam that is in oure owne, that wyll we not se We blame them for couetousnes, & wee our selues, are an hundreth tymes more couetouse in our heartes, then they are, we blame them for theyr pryde, and no man is so proud, so high mynded, so stub¦burne & hawte of corage, as we are oure selues, we blame them for theyr gay ap∣parell, and costly fare, and we our selues if we were as able as they, woulde go a thousand tymes more gay, & fare a thou¦sand tymes more costly then they doo. I do appele to your own consciences, whe¦ther it be not so as I say. Truly though ye dissemble neuer so muche,Psalme. vij. and clooke that poison that lieth hidden in your her¦tes, neuer so craftely, yet almighty God which is the searcher of the heartes, and of the loynes, knoweth what beaste ye nourysshe and beare aboute with you in your heartes. Which thyng shall be ma¦nifest and open,How we mai deliuer our sel¦ues from mise¦ry and calami¦tye. whē the lord shal reuyse the secretes of euery mans hearte. Wyll ye then be rydde from the myserye that ye are wrapped in? Will ye be deliuered from extorcion, tyrannie and oppressyō? Remoue and put awaye the causes. Let
vs put awaye these enorme synnes, that we are drowned in, I meane, vnfayth∣fulnes, murmurynge agaynste GOD, ingratytude and vnthankefulnesse. Let vs banysshe from emonge vs vncleane∣lynes, fornycatyon, adulterye, dronken∣nes, backbytynge periurye, vntrue dea∣lyng, vnlawfull othes, and blasphemous swearynges. Thys done, let vs boldelye flye vntoo the Lorde, and wyth earneste prayers, procedynge from a trewe and an vnfayned faythe, call vpon hym for ayde and succoure, and wythout doubte he wyll heare vs. For the truthe it selfe dyd saye:Psalme. l. Call vpon me in the day of thy trouble, and I wyll bothe heare and de∣lyuer the, that thou mayest gloryfye my name. Marke thys well, he dothe notte saye: In thy trouble, that is to say, when thou art afflycted and oppressed, runne into the fyelde, and there mutter, & make vnlawfull assembles agaynste the magi∣strates, but he sayth. Call vpon mee, ad∣dyng a most comfortable promyse, that he wyll bothe heare and delyuer thee. Seeke then the meanes that the Lorde hath appoynted the, and folowe not thy carnall and flesshelye affectyons, for
they are blynde,Carnal  ¦ly affec are blynde. and wyll brynge the in∣too all kyndes of calamytye and myse∣rye, whereas yf thou doest obeye god∣des worde, and suffer pacyentelye the wronge, if any were done vnto yt, by the hyghe powers and rulers, thou mayest be sure that he wyll deliuer the at length thoughe it be not so soone, as thou wol∣dest haue it. For it is wrytten.Psalme. ix. The poor shall not be forgotten alwayes, the pacy¦ente abydynge of the meke, shall not pe∣rysshe for euer. Oh, that thys doctryne were prynted in all mennes heartes, thē shoulde we haue lesse tumulte and sedy∣tyon,Tumult & se∣dition dothe come of plain ignoraunce of gods worde. whych truely doth ryse of nothing elles: but of playne ignoraunce of gods worde, and heauenlye truthe. Were not the chyldren of Israel, the chosen and e∣lected people of God, a longe season in Egipt, beyng by the space of foure score yeres and more, so sore afflycted and op¦pressed by that cruell tyraunte Pharao,Exo. i.ii. cha. that besydes all other myseryes, where∣wyth they were there ouerwhelmed, they were fayne to se all theyr men chyl¦dren as soone as they were borne, too be kylled afore theym, or elles before theyr yen, to be drowned in ye riuer of Nilus?
And yet we doo not reade, nor heare, though they were six hundreth thousand men, besides women and chyldren, that there was euer anye mutteryng, any in∣surrectiō or vnlawfull assembles emong them;Exo. xiiij. cha. but dyd abyde styll pacientlye the helpynge hande of the Lorde, whiche at lengthe, when they did call earnestly vp on hym, dyd deliuer them so mightely, yt without any sweard drawing they were reuenged of their enemyes, whyche op∣pressed them. Let vs doo the same, let vs abyde paciently the helpyng hande of ye Lord, let vs put away vice, and embrace vertue,Praiers are ye armure & wea¦pons of ye chri¦stians in afflic¦tion. Psalme. ix. callyng night and day vpon oure heauenly father. (For praiers are the ar¦mour and weapons of ye christians, whē they are in affliction and trouble) & wee maye be sure that he wyll not forget vs, the holy Prophete Dauid, saying: God forgetteth not the complaynt of ye poore But yf we go about, by vnlawfull mea∣nes and wayes, to delyuer our selues, be¦sydes that we shall runne (as the late ex∣perience taughte vs) intoo farther thral∣dome and bondage, we shall without all doubt, purchase vnto oure selues, euerla∣styng dampnatyon. For why? We doo
resyst the ordynaunce of god. Which to do is most dampnable, as the holy Apo∣stle doth testifye.Rebelles goo aboute too bring their na¦turall coūtrey to vtter desola¦tyon. Mat. xij. chap Nowe let vs se intoo what parell and ieopardye, these brayneles and vngodly folkes, do most vnnaturally bryng theyr own natural countrey. Do not they, as much as in them lyeth, by theyr sedity∣ous tumulte, go about to bryng it to vt∣ter desolatyon? Christ our sauyoure, the euerlastyng wisedome of the father, and eternall truth, sayth: Euery kyngdome deuided agaynst it selfe, shall be brought to naughte. And euerye Citie deuided a∣gaynst it selfe, shall not stande. Wherby it may be gathered, that they that seke or make anye diuision within a Realme or countrey, do intend nothing els (though they falsly pretende an other thyng) but to brynge the same Realme or countrey to naught. It is vnpossyble that ye wor∣des of our sauyour, whych is the truthe it selfe, shuld be false. Whych to be most true and infallible,What Real∣mes & cōmun weales didde fall to decaye by dyuysyon daily experience doth suffycyently teache vs. For, what thing I pray, did bryng the florysshynge com∣mune weale of the Assirians to naught? Diuision. What thing did make ye Me∣des,
Persians, and almoste all Asia, soo weake, that they could not withstande a handfull that came out of Macedonia? Diuision. What thinge did subuert and turne vpside downe, that goodlye and well ordered common weale, of the Lace¦demonians, whych in vertue and manly¦nes dyd farre excede all other men? Dy∣uision. What thyng did bring the Athe∣nienses, which were rulers of al Grecia and lordes of the seas, to so greate thral∣dome, seruitude and bondage, that they could neuer get them selues into libertie agayne? Diuision. What hath broughte the Romaynes, whyche by theyr pro∣wesse, had conquered al the wholl world into soo base a state, that the lesse kyng∣dome of Europa, is able too compare wt them, whyche afore made all the wholl world to tremble and quake at ye dynt of their sword? Diuisiō. To be short, what thyng did in tymes passe, encourage the Danes and Normans, too inuade thys countrey, almost to the vtter vndoynge and confusyon of thys noble and florys∣shing Realme? Diuision. That I should in the meane season let passe, and speake nothynge of the common weale of the
Iewes and Israelites, whiche after that they were ones deuyded agaynste them selues, were neuer able to resyst theyr e∣nemyes. In so muche, that at lengthe, they were brought into perpetuall capti¦uitye and thraldome. Read the holy Bi∣ble, reade Iosephus, Herodotus, Iusti∣nus, Titus Liuius, Sabellicus, and for the historyes of Englande, Polydorus, Virgilius. Ye may se nowe that by stir∣ryng vp of diuision, ye did brynge your owne naturall countrey, into as great a paryll as myghte be.God was the defender of this realme in the tyme of insurrction. For onlesse God had beene a stronge Bulwarke, vntoo thys moste victorious Realme of Eng∣lande, and a moste fauourable father, pro¦tectoure, and defendoure vntoo oure Virgyn kynge, (for whose sake onelye thoughe all thinges, yea and your owne liues had bene taken from you, ye ought to haue suffered, and too haue refrayned from suche deuelisshe enterprises) it had beene vnpossyble but the forenne naty∣ons hadde come vpon vs. Prayse and lande bee gyuen vntoo the for euer, O mercyfull father, that thou dyddeste of thy mere mercye, wythoute anye de¦seruynges or demerites of ours, preserue
our illustre and noble kyng, with all hys dominions and Realms, in this most pa¦rillous tyme of insurrectyon and tumult which these children of Belial, dyd so vn¦godly styrre vp. For what wyll ye haue vs to call you? Good felowes? Maynte¦ners and defenders of ye common weal?Why I was loth at ye first that these tu∣mult & insur∣rectyon ma∣kers, shuld be called rebels and traitours By lykelyhode ye woulde be soo called Nay, nay, I was full loth at the fyrst (I haue many to bear me record of ye same) that ye should be called rebelles or tray∣tours, because I thoughte those names to be to heynouse for you. Agayn, I had a good hope that ye would be wonne, & reclamed by some fayre and gentle mea∣nes. (For who would haue thoughte so muche stubburnesse in you?) Farther∣more, I was afrayd that your rageouse madnes shoulde rather be set on fyre by suche wordes, then asswaged. It was, I say, sore agaynst my wyll, that so horry∣ble and odyouse names, should be giuen vnto you at the fyrst: but syth now that ye dyd persyst, and some of you doo yet furyously persyst in geuyng the occasy∣ons of suche most deuilysh interpryse, be¦ing perswaded by noo maner of reason: What may we ryghtly call you, but re∣belles
and traytours, and most extreame enemyes of the commune weale? For, all that ye go about, is to vndo this no∣ble and florysshyng Realme, and moste vnnaturally to betray your owne natu∣rall countrey, vnto forenne nations and Princes. I say vnto you, that all youre mortall enemyes yt compasse you round about (set them all together, Frenchmē Scottes, Danes, Turkes) culd not haue founde or ymagined a more ready waye to destroy Englande, then ye Englyshe men dyd. For as a Realme, be it neuer so small, is inuincible, yf the subiectes of it, beyng knitted in loue, do holde toge∣ther: so, if they be once deuided agaynste them selues, it is vnpossyble, but that the same lande & countrey,Scilurus king of ye Scitians. must be brought to vtter desolation. Whych thyng Scilu¦rus, a Kynge of the Scitians, did moste liuely set furth, by a goodlye exaumple & Apophthegme, which I woulde it were bothe written and paynted vpon euerye wall, that men myghte learne thereby how strong a thing concord and vnytye is. This kinge,Maruail not yt thys kynge had so many sonnes, for it was lawfull vnto them, to get childrē vp¦on many wo∣men. as the histories do testify had .lxxx. sonnes, whom a litle afore hys deathe, he dyd call altogether, biddynge
them, to bryng euery one of them an a∣rowe. Whych thing beyng done, he cō∣maunded that all the arowes shoulde be fast bounde together, and so delyuered ye bondell of arowes, beyng thus fast boūd to euery one of his sonnes, bydding thē to breake the arowes, as they were faste bounde together in one bondell. Which thynge, because it was vnpossyble, they refused to doo. Then the kyng cōmaun∣ded the arowes to be vnbounde, and did geue to euery one of them an arowe too breake, whyche they did lightely. Then the kyng exhorting his sonnes to vnitye and concord, did saye to them after thys maner:By concorde small thynges do growe, but by discorde great thinges are broughte to naughte. If ye agre wythin youre selues, and holde together, ye shal be inuincible no man shall be able too ouercome you, but if ye disagre and fal out emong your selues, ye shall be both weake and easye to be ouercomen. Shall not this heathē & ethnike kinge, rise in the day of iudge∣ment, & condempne you, yt so vngodly do breake ye vnitye, peace and concorde of your owne naturall countrey? Oh how many of ye heathen, which neither knew god, nor his word, did offer them selues manfully to die for the welfare & preser∣uatyon
of their owne naturall contrey, & these vnreasonable beastes (to call them christians, I am ashamed) do go aboute and study all that they can to destroye it, to betraye it, and moste trayterouslye to bryng it to naught. Oh what may I say now vnto you? Repente for goddes sake, and come to your ryght mynd againe, for yf ye go on thus by vnlawfull meanes to shake of & put away the plague and scorge, that god hath sente to you, for your detestable sin∣nes, besides euerlasting dampnation, and vtter vndoing of your own naturall con¦trey,Rebelles doe alwaies come to a shamefull ende, & death of their body∣es. ye shal incurre a most shameful deth of your bodies. Reade all ye histories both prophane and holy, that euer were writē since the begynnyng of the world, and ye shal your selfes fynd, that alwaies rebels haue had a shamefull ende. And no mer∣ueile, for they do resiste the ordinaunce of god. I myghte here repete and reherce ye hystory of Corah,Num. xvi. cha Dathan and Abyram which with their wiues and children and xiiii. M, and .dcc, that held with them, did horrybly peryshe for theyr rebellyon,Iudi. xii. chap I myght allege how Ephraim made insur¦rection against Iephtha, whom god had
raised to be iudge ouer Israel, of ye which Ephraites .xlii. M. were miserably slain? What nede I to bringe here the horrible tragedie of Absalon,ii Reg. xviii. chapiter. and of Siba, ye sonne of Bocheri. Loke ye your selues vpon the bookes of the kinges, and of Paralip∣pomenon,ii. Reg. xx. cha or Chronycles, and ye shall there fynde, that the one beinge hanged vp by the lockes of hys heares in an oke, was thristed thorough with .iii. spares, wt whome .xx. M. of the people were slaine and loste, and yt the other beyng pursued by Ioab, and besyeged wythin Abel and Bethmaaka, was by the councell of a wise woman beheaded & his heade thro∣wen ouer the wal to Ioab. Dyd ye people therfore, that rebelled wt hym, escape vn∣punished?ii. Reg. xxiiii. chapiter.  No, no, The lord god hater of all rebellion & tumult, did afterwardes so sore plague Israel wt pestilence, yt in three daies, ther dyed .lxx. M. But yu wilt say: This was because that Dauid had num∣bred ye people of Israell and Iuda,  & had not obserued ye lawe. Let the scripture an∣swere for me, which saith. And again the lord was wroth against Israel, & moued Dauid against thē. Al ecclesiastical writers do agre, yt this was for the synne of rebe¦lion yt is to saye, because yt they wt Siba,
rebelled against Dauid ye annointed of ye lord. Oh ye the same noble Historiograph Iosephus, were traunslated in to Eng∣lyshe, for your sakes. There, there, should ye reade & se, how many. M. of ye Iewes were disconfited, ouer throwen and slayn at sundry tymes, because yt they rebelled against ye Romaines. But what nede we straunge and forenne examples?We maye lerne at home how rebels do spede. we may learne at home, how they spede euer, that resist the ordinaunce of god takyng most vngodly vpon them selues, ye thinge whi∣che belongeth only to the lord & to his a∣noynted. Sith then ye god doth punish so greuously al rebels, here in this world, wt fyer from heauen, wt pestilence & sword & in ye other world wt euerlasting tormentes of hell: any childe may se and vnderstand how sore god doth detest and abhorre all rebellyon. Therfore if ye tender the helth of your own soules, if ye tender ye weal of your own natural countrey, yf ye tender your bodies, & liues leaue of betimes, cease from such deuillish enterprises, & in thys your trouble & afflictiō, which doubtlesse doth happē vnto you eyther for your sin¦nes or else for a tral of your faith & pacie¦ence) call vpon the Lorde with a contryt heart, and he wyll (be ye sure therof
For he hath so promysed) eyther molyfy the hearts of those tirantes, that oppresse you, that they shall be very fathers vnto you, or else he wil shortly root thē out of ye earth, & put into ye hertes of ye powers, to shortē their armes,Oure godlye yonge kynge whiche maye wel be compa¦red wyth that godlye kinge Iosias, shall shortlye dely∣uer his people from extortiō and oppressiō. & to rule his electe people wyth iustyce & equytye, Beare a while thinke not longe, we haue a moste godly Prince toward, which wtin a short space, shal comfort vs, as concerning our sorowfull trouble and afflictyon, he shall wede out of hys Realme and dominions with the swerde of equitie, al those bloud suckers, that now, as gredy horsleches do sucke ye bloud of his people, & louing sub∣iectes, in the meane season, quiet, and pa∣ryfye your selues, & let euery man accor∣dyng to his vocation, laboure to lyue tru¦ly in this world, to the mayntenaunce of the common weale. Geue no more occa∣syon, for ye tender loue of god, which so lo¦ued vs, yt he gaue his only begottē sonne for vs, geue no more occasion I saye, by your vnquiet behauiour to these worlde∣lynges, to blaspheme the gospell & word of god.All tumultes and insurrecti¦ons, are layde vpon goddes word, and the ministers ther¦of. Do ye not both heare and se, that al the insurrections tumultes and sedity∣ons yt haue now chaunced in our tymes
are by them adscribed and layd to ye word of god (which by some of them is called new lernyng) & the ministers therof? Ve¦rely it hadde bene better for you, to haue bene cast wt milstones aboute your necke into ye depe of ye sea, & there to haue bene drowned, then by your sedycious tumul¦tes, to haue ministred such an occasion of offence: for sayth the truth it selfe: Wo,Mat. xviii. ch yt is to saye, euerlasting dampnation han∣geth ouer ye manne, by whom the offence doth come. This one thyng (if we were trewe christians) shuld be enough to fray vs from all vprores and insurrections. Obiection. But me thinke I heare yet some emong you which do grudge and saye. Who in this world, were he neuer so pacient, could refrayne hym selfe, for besydes the many folde wronges, that we suffer dayly and hourely by thē, they do so bitterly reuile vs, at eueri second word most despitfully calling vs peysauntes, and vilaines, yt no man can holde hys handes from theym. Whom I am compelled to answer after thys maner. Are ye Chrystans,  or not (I knowe yt yf any man shuld say vnto you yt ye are no christians, ye wold be angrye wt him) Yf ye are christians that is to say
the disciples of Christ, do ye not thinke yt it is enough, and sufficyent for you, to be as your maister?Math. x, cha- But they dyd call your maister and sauioure, Belzebub, whiche is a thousand times worse,These .ii. wor¦des Paysant and Villayne are trewly & accordinge to the right syg∣nifycatyon of them expoun∣ded. then Paysant or Villayne, whiche wordes if they were well vnderstanded, are nothyng at all re∣prochfull. Here in thys matter, plaine ig¦noraunce doth blynd you. For paysaunt beynge deriued of this laten worde, Pa∣ganus, dothe properly betoken in Eng∣lysh, a man of the countrey, or that dwel¦lethe in villages or vplande. And ye other word, Vilayn doth also come of this lat∣tin, vocable, Villanus, and signifyeth none other thinge, in our mother and vulgaire tongue, but a fermer, or fearme holder, or else ye dwelleth in villages. Lo good peo∣ple these be ye reuilyng & oprobrious wor¦des for the which ye do styrre vp al these enorme, and greuous tragedies. But go to what & if they were, the most reproch∣full wordes that euer could be spoken wt mouthe: or thought with heart (howe be it to tell the verye truthe, I woulde that these frenche tearmes hadde bene lefte to the french men, and that he that brought them fyrst ouer into Englande, thereby
to offende hys weake brethren, had bene better aduysed) oughte yee not to haue borne them pacyently for hys sake why∣che for your saluation, and helth of your soules, dyd besydes all kyndes of ygno∣minie, opprobriousnes and reproche, suf∣fer the most cruell and shamefullest death that euer in thys world coulde be ymagi¦ned or thought.Anabaptistes and Libertius doo alwayes boste & crake of their perfec¦tion.  Trulye ye wold be lothe to suffer death for hys sake, sythe that ye can not abyde wordes. Where is nowe that perfectyon, that some of you do ne∣uer cease to boaste and crake of emonge the symple and ignoraunte people. A dygression Heare, must I somewhat digresse from my purpose, and declare what kynde of people they be that make thys busynesse and styrre vp contention in thys Realme and common weale.The Anabap¦tistes do seke & hunte after a carnall liberty in the gospell. There be a sorte of men whych nowe at thys present houre that the euaungily call doctryne, is pure∣lye and syncerely preached, do seeke no∣thynge else in the scriptures and gospell, but a carnall and fleshly lybertye, goyng aboute with their craftye and subtyll rea¦sons and textes of the scriptures, halfe al¦leged, to perswade the ignoraunt people yt they are not bounde to obey temporall
rulers & maiestrates. These men syttynge vpon there ale benches, whersoeuer they dare vtter theyr poyson conueniently, do inculcate and beat into mens heads,The errone∣ous opynyon of the anabap¦tistes, concer∣nyng the ma∣gistrates. that no christian can laufully exequute ye office of a maiestrate. Which offyce of a maies∣trate, say they, is neyther profytable, nor yet necessary to a christiā common weale Wherfore, away with these tirantes, kyl them, rote them out of the earth, ye contra¦rye to Christes word & doctrine, do most presumpteously take vpon them, to be ru¦lers, or rather tyrantes ouer the people of Christ, to whom he dyd, so derely, with ye shedyng of hys most precious bloud, pur¦chase a perpetuall fredome and lyberty. Thys is done commonly in those places where ye pure sede of ye gospell,The anabap∣tistes wyll al∣wayes come too those pla∣ces, where the gospel is prea¦ched. Mat. xiii. cha. The anabap∣tistes & Liber∣tins, do go a∣boute to per∣swade men, yt the magystra∣tes maye not kyll wyth the swearde. What they be ye styrre vp commotyon, where ye Gos¦pell is not pre¦ched. The oratyon of ye papystes too the simple & ignoraunte, to stirre them vp to tumulte & commotion hath bene dyligentlye sowen. For there the deuyll whiles men are a slepe, is moste busye to sowe in his cockle & darnel. Which wold god, it were diligently weded out by the maiestrates and rulers, yt these most pesty¦ferous Anabaptistes & Libertins, mighte ones both feele and know, yt they do not beare the sword, delyuered vnto them of of god, in vayne. In other places where they do yet for ye most parte, syt in darke¦nesse
of ignoraunce and shadow of death ye popes darlynges are ye styrers vp of al myschief. For they, by there hypocrysye blandiloquence and flattery, are so farre sunke in to mens stommackes, that they can easely perswade them, yt both ye kyng and al his honorable counsell, are vngod¦ly, yea & starke heretikes. Haue they not (wyl ye shauelinges say to the poore sym¦ple folkes of their countrey) taken away & broken our godly ymages? Haue they not abolyshed our holydayes, put doune our ceremonyes, and disanulled the holy & blessed Masse? Loke howe vnreuerent¦lye they do vse ye blessed sacrament of the Aulter. Doo they not also goo aboute to plucke doune all our holy Aulters. Who hauing a christian harte could abide such impiety, & vngodlynesse? Come on ther∣fore neighboures, better it were for vs, to dye a thousande deathes, then to se thys blasphemy. Let vs fight for ye holy church & rytes thereof. We may be sure that we shall lyghtly ouercome these ranke hery∣tykes. And if we chaunce to haue ye ouer∣throwe our selues (whiche thinge is not lykely, syth that we fyghte in gods qua∣rell) & dye in the fyeld, who wolde doubt
but that we shall go straighte way vp to heauen?Oh false doc∣trine. For Christ (whose blessed body and bloud, made by the holye handes of the prieste, these false heritikes do treade vnder foot) hath said,Math. x. cha- Yet this texte as all other is falsely aleged of them. yt whosoeuer loseth his life, for hys sake and the churche, shal fynde it agayne in the resurrection of the deade. With suche mistes and iuggelyn∣ges of wordes, these cleane fyngered gē¦tlemen, do vtterlye subuerte the mindes of the simple and ignoraunt people, whi∣che elles, if they had trew pastours, and good minysters,Yf the people had true pas∣toures they wlold embrace gladlye gods worde. woulde wyth all meke∣nes and due obedyence, receyue the hea∣uenlye doctryne, mynystred so fatherlye vntoo them, by the Kynge, and hys ho∣nourable counsayle. They woulde notte mutter, nor open their lippes against the kynges moste godlye procedinges, butte would gladly wyth the other subiects of this realme, embrace the wholsome doc∣trine of their saluation, and acknowlege that they haue bene hetherto ledde in er∣roure and blyndnes,Who they be that prycke the people forwardes to tumulte and insrrection. by these false Anty∣christes and Pseudoprophetes, whome they nowe accepte and embrace, as god∣des. Too be shorte, these twoo sortes of men, I mean the Libertins and papistes
are they, that do pricke ye people forwar∣des (whyche elles of theymselues, are ready inoughe to suche thynges, and es∣pecially now,By greadye mammons. that they are so on euerye side, pilled and polled) too tumultes and insurrections, too the vtter confusyon of them selues, and vndoing of this honou¦rable countrey, and Realme. Therfore,An exhortatiō to the maie∣strates against the libertins & Papistes. O ye magistrates and rulers whom god hath appointed ouer his cho¦sen and elected people, with the swearde of equitie, to defende the widdowes and fatherles, to maintain ye good and righte¦ous, and to punisshe the euil and wicked doers: it is your parte and duetye to seke oute suche runne agates, and withoute a∣ny fauoure or mercye, to punysshe them that all other may take example by them Put away in this case all folish pitie: for as the cōmen prouerbe is, folish pytye le¦seth ye countrey, & besides yt, better it is ye ii. or .iii. be thus extremely punished, thē thousands,All foolyshe pitye is to be ut awaye. should through their wycked counsails & entisements, most miserably and to the great losse of the countrey, pe¦risshe. Picke out these rauenynge wol∣ues, and for goddes sake, fauour the peo¦ple as muche as may be, haue that noble
capteyn Ioab alwaies before your eyen whych as sone as that trayterous rebell Absalon, was by ye righteous iudgmente of god,ii. Regū. xviii. Chapter. most shamefully slayne, dyd by & by blowe to the retrayte, and commaun¦ded to spare the people. Do the same and ye shal hyghly please god. Call ye ye pore vnto you, and heare their complayntes paciently, o ye gods (for, so the scripture dothe call you, because that ye are in the stede and roume of god) here ye the com∣playnte of the poore (I saie) and redresse those thynges that are amysse. Know of them ye causes, why they are now contra¦rye to their old wont and custom, An apte simili¦tude. so bent to insurrectyon and tumult. Yf a phisyci∣on wold go about to heale any disease or syckenesse, and not serche out the causes therof, wolde not all men, and ye by good ryght, call him an vnkunning phisition. The whole body of the common weale is sore sicke, it canne in no wise be healed except the cause of this disease and sycke∣nesse, be bothe searched out dilygentlye, and taken awaye. Suffer no longer, the louynge subiectes of thys moste victo∣ryous countrey, whych by our moste so∣uereygne Lorde the kynge, are commyt¦ted
vnto your charge, custodye and pro∣tectyon (Verelye it is you whyche be heare in the earthe lyeutenauntes and vicayrs of god,The magistra¦tes are Gods vycares in ye earthe. that shoulde reuenge the wronges and iniuries of the people) too be eaten and swalowed vp, by these gre∣dye Cormorauntes, which neuer beynge contente till they haue the deuill brought to them in a sacke, ioyne house, to house, lande to lande (but woo be to them, saith the prophet) although they should dwel alone vpon the earthe,Esai. v. Chap One of them hath a thousande mens liuinges in hys hands and yet can he scantelye suffer his poore neighbour to dwell in a poore cotage be∣sides hym. All that he hath is to little as longe as he seeth any poore man, to haue any thinge by him. What should I saye A whole shiere is not enough to satisfye his couetouse and vnsasiable minde. And why, I praye, is all thys? forsoth that he his wyfe, and his children, maye go gaye and fare dayntely. Yf he can haue that, it maketh no matter, how many thousand do go a begginge or storne for hunger by him. Ah worldlinges, worldelinges, the hande of god is stretched furth to plague Haue ye forgotten what the holy pro∣phet
saythe?Hiere. vii. cha Because ye are from the lowest vnto the hiest, geuen to couetous∣nesse and fylthy lucre: I wyll gyue your wyues, vnto other, and your fyldes vnto straungers, to possesse. Hath the lord god geuen you riches, to confound the poore therwith, to oppresse them, and to treade them vnder fete, and not rather to helpe and succour them? Ye are not the lordes but the stewardes and dyspensatours of riches. Se thē that ye be faithful in your stewardshyp, or elles youre stewardshyp shall be taken from you, and gyuen vn∣too an other. The Lorde god hath giuen you, and dothe daylye gyue you warnin¦ges ynowe, but ye are soo blynded with worldelye couetousnesse and prosperitie that ye wyll not see,Why the worldelinges will not take ye warnynges yt God giueth them daylye. Pro. xi. chap. Soph. i. chap. ye are soo pufte vp wyth pryde and hautenesse of mynde, yt ye thynke that no maner of thing in this world, can, or is able to bring you doune Marke and note therfore, what the scrip¦ture of God, dothe saye: Theyr ryches shall profyte them nothynge in the daye of wrathe, and he yt trusteth in hys world¦lye substaunce, shall haue a fall. Neyther theyr golde nor syluer shall, be able too delyuer theym, in the daye of the wrathe of
the Lorde. Dothe not the exaumple of the ryche glutton, make you afrayde? Doo not hys cruell paynes and tormen¦tes in hell,Luk. xvi. chap make youre heartes to quake and tremble for feare of lyke punishmen¦tes?The rich glut¦ton was dam¦ned, for vnmer¦cifulnes. And yet he was dampned for ye sinne of vnmercifulnesse onely. For we canne not fynde nor reade, that euer he came by hys goodes vniustly, or that he gatte hys ryches by hooke or crooke, as the moste parte of you doo. Therefore loke for a thousande times more greuous pu∣nysshementes, then he had. For not one¦lye, ye dydde not feede Christe, when he was an hungred, gyue hym drinke whē he was a thyrste, clothe hym,Mat. xxv. cha when he was naked. &c. but also, ye did spoile him ye dyd pille and polle hym, ye did robbe him, and most tyrannously oppresse him But I know that ye will saye wyth the vngodly:  when dyd we any suche thyng vnto Christe? Verelye I saye vnto you,  that in so muche, ye dyd it too the poore neady members of Christe, ye dyd it too hym, and therefore ye shall heare that dreadfull sentence at length: Depart ye from mee, O ye cursed creatures, intoo euerlastynge fyre, whyche is prepared
for the deuill and his aungels. A godly pray¦er. O mercy∣full and heauenlye father, graunte I be∣seche the, that all men puttyng away frō their heartes, worldly couetousenes, and pryde of mynde, wherwyth they are hol¦den blynde, may haue grace, to see howe they came into this world, and so too vse the ryches, wherewith yu doest indue thē too thy glorye, and saluatyon of theyr soules. Nowe therfore, O christyan magistra∣tes, be ye stronge in the lorde, take righ∣teousnes for your shield, & weapon your selfes with vpright and vncorrupted iud¦gemente,God hath or∣deined magis∣trates too re∣uenge ye wron¦ges of ye poore and hauing the fear of the lord for youre guyde, reuenge manfullye the wronges and iniuryes of the poore (for therfore hath the lord god ordeined you) Let them both feale and knowe, that ye beare a fatherly affection towardes thē, and that ye will not se them to suffer any such vilany at these worldlinges handes. Se an order (for this is your duetie) yt the riche maye be contente wyth the poore, and that the poore maye be suffered too lyue by the riche. Seke out the causes of this narre, that is nowe betwene the no∣bilytie and the commens, cutte of, wyth the
swerde of equitie al occasion of strife and debate,The gentyll¦men, and com¦munes of this realme, beyng knitte in loue are a wall too the countrey that the gentilmen and commons of thys Realme, being knytted in loue a∣gayne, maye be as afore tymes a stronge bulwarke and wall vnto this most victo∣ryous countrey of Englande. Ye can no better deserue of the common weale then so. And yf in the meane season ye fynd a∣ny of those wicked Anabaptistes & Liber¦tines, or anye of those obstynate papistes that go about to subuert, seduce, intoxy∣cate, and poyson the myndes of the peo∣ple, persuadyng them, that they may law¦fully rise against theyr maiestrates, spare theym not, roote oute those pernicyouse wedes from amonge the people. Bet∣ter it is that fewe doo peryshe, then that all the whole countrey shoulde through theyr wycked perswasion, be brought to naught. These be they that are the trou∣blers of the common peace.Math. vii. Chapter. Therfore be¦ware of thē, O christiā brethren, for they come vnto you in shepes clothing, but in¦wardly they are rauening wolfes. Trust them not, suffer not your selues in anye wyse to be persuaded, that ye maye for a∣ny maner of cause, ryse against the maies¦trates. All that they go about, is to bryng
you to vtter confusyon. For though the maiestrates were come to that madnesse impietye, & vngodlynes, that they shuld commaund you to do thinges, contrarye to gods lawes, and his holye worde (as ye marked monsters of Antichriste,Reade ye Acts of ye Apostles, and all whole Eusebius and yu shalt fynd yt alwayes ye dis¦ciples of christ dyd defende them selues wt gods worde. do go aboute to make you to beleue) yet ought ye in no wise to resiste them. None other swerd ye haue to fyght agaynst vngodly maiestrates, but gods word, with ye same wepon ought ye alwaies to defend your selues, against all kindes of vngodlynes & yet it must be done, wt such sobrietye & mansuetude, lenitie & gentlenes, yt alwais christian lyke obedience, toward the ordi¦naunce of god, shall shine & apere in you. Marke now this: Yf we may not wt ma¦teriall swerd resiste ye maiestrates, for ye de¦fence of godlines & trew relygyon, what shall we say by them, which for the main¦tenaunce of false religion, do bringe all ye world, vpon ye neckes of godly maiestra∣tes? It was not for noughte, O christan rulers, yt the godly kynges of ye old Tes∣tament when they dyd put doune Idola¦try & superstition, dyd sley and kyl al the priestes and sacrificators of ye ydols & fals gods, weding out ye false prophetes from
emonge the people to the intente, yt they should not bryng againe, the simple and ignoraunt into errour. What I do mean any man that hath wit, may vnderstand. How be it, I wold not haue them to be put to death nor slaine, onlesse they be o∣uer stubburne and obstacle, or go aboute some tumult or nouation of thinges, but I wold haue thē to be kepte so short tyll they depart hence in peace, yt they might do no harme in ye meane season. As for ye other, I mean ye Libertines & Anabaptis∣tes they ought in no wise to be spared, ex¦cept we wyll haue the countrey by their tumultes & insurrections, to be brought to vtter desolation, Agaynst whom, yt ye may ye better herafter be fēced & enarmed in this point, yt is to say, cōcerning ye trew obedience toward magistrats & rulers, I haue here traunslated out of Laten into Englysh .iiii. small dialogues,That famous clerke Bullin¦ger, is the au∣tur & maker of these dia∣loges. betwene ye rebell Libertin or anabaptiste, & the trew obedient christian. Wherin ye shall learne fyrste, that a christian, contrarye to theyr most erroneous doctrine, may lawfully ex¦ecute the offyce of a maiestrate. Second¦lye, that a Christyan Maiestrate is not onely profytable, but alsoo necessarye
to a christian common weale. Thyrdly, yt we are bound to obey the maiestrates in all externe and outward things. Fourth¦lye, that we ought in no wise, nor for any maner of cause, to resyste the rulers & go∣uernours, where we do write largelye a∣gaynst them, whiche rebell agaynste the maiestrates. Which smal laboure of myne, I thought no man in this cuntrey, so worthy to haue as your righte worshipfull mastershyppe First because of the good reporte, that is geuen you of al the countrey about, both for the feruent zeale that ye haue to gods word, and maintenaunce of trew religion and also because that ye vse your selfe al∣waies emong them, as a most louing and tender father, sekyng not your owne pro¦fyte, but onely the profite and welfare of them that are vnder your gouernaunce & ruledome. Oh that all other gentylmen wolde imitate and folowe you, both in ye same thinge, and also in kepyng of hospi∣talitie, then shuld we haue shortly a mery England. The second cause that moueth me, to dedicate, this litle worke vnto you is that ye are by the deuine prouidence of god and the kinges maiestie, placed in au¦thoritie
for this our countrey of Essex, in the which, many of these Libertines and Anabaptistes, are runnyng in hoker mo∣ker, emonge the symple and ignoraunte people, to impell and moue theym, to tu∣multe and insurrection agaynste the ma∣iestrates and rulers of thys Realme. Whom I trust (if ye ones knowe them) ye will soone wede out of the countreye, to the greate good & quiet, of the kinges subiectes, of the same countye and shiere Nowe ryght worshipfull Syr, though I be not knowen, nor yet acquainted wyth your maistershyp, wherfore it may perad¦uentur seme to some to be a bold act, or in¦terprise for me too offer, or nuncupate a∣nye maner of booke vnto you: yet not∣withstandynge the greate facilytye and gentylnes, that all men, women and chil¦dren do depredycate and saye, is in you, dothe put me in verye good hope, that ye wil take this my rude laboure in good worth. Which thinge if ye doo, hereafter paraduenture greater and more seryous thynges shall ensue, god wyllynge, who of hys infynyte mercye and bounteous goodnesse, vouchsafe wyth his holy spy∣ryt, so to rule and guide your heart, wyth
that godlye Ladye youre trewe louynge spouse and wyfe, that what soo euer ye shall do or thynke, in all your affayres maye be to the glorye of god, the common weale of the Realme and the salua∣tion of your soules. AMEN.
The Dialogue. That a Christyan maye execute the office of a maiestrate. The interloquutours. IOIADA the trewe and obe∣dient Christian, and SIMON the Libertine or Anabaptiste. IOIADA. GOd spede Simon, yu comest betyme, I se that thou art desirous of the truth, wher¦fore I haue a good hope, yt thou shalt obteyne & come by that thynge, whiche thou desireste so greately. Touching ye magistrate, where vpon, we were determined to haue rea∣soned, I doute not, but that I shall satis∣fye the in al thinges. But tell fyrst what thy iudgement is. SIM. Thyne opy∣nion is that a christian maye execute the offyce of a Maiestrate, but I do thynke that both the word & example of Christe repugneth to thys opynyon. For when they wold at a certeyn tyme choose him to be a kyng, he did runne awaye. Ihon vi. Which thing he wold not haue done yf it had not bene against all godlynesse. And in the .xxii. cha of Luke. Christ with
expressed wordes speketh to his disciples after this maner: The princes of gentiles do beare rule, and they that haue power are called benefyciall, ye shall not so, but he that is greatest emonge you, shal be ye least, and he that is chyfest, shall be as he that mynistreth. By these wordes it is manifeste and playne, that it becommeth not chrystyans to execute the offyce of a maiestrate. It is lawfull for the heathen and infidels, for Christ saith. The princes of the gentiles.Christe came to redeme the world wt hys bloud. IOIADA. Christ came not to take awaye the publyke magistra¦tes, much lesse to execute their office, but to redeme ye world, wt hys bloud. Wher¦fore he doth runne away, not consenting to the affections of ye people, for he could not haue taken vpon hym the offyce of a king, without commotion, the Romains not permitting it, which were thē rulers But who euer so gathered his argument Christ was neuer a baker, ergo, no Chris¦tyan,The folysh ar¦gumente of the Libertins or Anabaptis∣tes. canne be a baker? Why then do ye make this argument: Christ neuer execu¦ted ye office of a maiestrate, ergo, it is not lawfull for a christyan, to be a maiestrate or beare rule. In the .xxii. of Luke Christ doth warne the apostles of their dutye &
forbyddeth that they should not be busye in other mens matters, for they had stry¦ued by the waye, who should be greatest emonge them after the death of Christe. For they dyd ymagin, that there shoulde be such a power and rule emong them, as the bisshop of Rome hath vsurped in the latter daies in the church. He doth plucke from the minds of his disciples this soure disease of ambitiō, & desire of honor, know¦inge wel that this should be the chief dis∣truction of Ecclesiasticall prelates. Ther¦fore he vsethe these wordes: The princes of nations, &c. As if he shoulde say: The princes & gouernours of nations, are ap¦poynted to rule & to gouerne, as for you, ye haue an other offyce gyuen you. Yet notwithstandyng, the offyce of a magi∣strate is not abolysshed by these words, but it may very wel stand by the apostle¦shyp, as it is most manifest by the words of Christ. But this doth begyle & deceue the, yt thou doest take this word, Gentium for the heathen & infideles. For they are here, by a maner of speaking, called prin∣ces, and kynges of nations, whyche do gouerne and bear rule in ye world, which power (as the apostles do testifye) is or∣deyned
of god, whych thing Christ doth expresse by these words.Why princes and rulers are called euerge∣tae, yt is to say, beneficiall. They are called Euergetae, that is to saye, beneficyall, be∣cause that they are ordeyned to do good to them that are good & vertuous. SI. By this reason and meane, I maye cast of whatsoeuer can be layde agaynst me, oute of the scriptures, saying: This was said to the apostles, it perteineth nothing to vs: But Christe teacheth vs an other thinge in the .xiii. chap, of Marke: These thynges (sayth he) that I tell you, I do tel to al. This word then, where he sayth (But ye shal not do so) perteyneth vnto al them yt are godly, and not onely to the apostles.How ye place of the .xiij. cha of Marke, oughte too be vnderstanded. IO. Thou dost passe thy boun¦des, my Simō, and dost not abide in the matter that was propouned, our commu¦nication is of the magistrate. In the .xiij. chap. of Marke, which thou dost aledge, Christ doth exhort his apostles to sober∣nes and watchinge, & we do gladly con∣fesse yt thys was sayd to al them that are godly. For sith yt the day of ye lorde shall come as a thief, being vnknowen vnto al men, and yt the same dredeful iudgement of Christ, before whose iudiciall seate, all men must apere, doth indifferently hang
ouer al men, he doth well in the apostles warne, monish,The libertins & anabaptists do alege ye tex¦tes of the scrip¦tures, by hal∣fes. & exhort al men to watch Thou dost bring the text of ye euangelyst vnperfit & mutilate. For these be the wor¦des. Watche ye therefore, for ye can not tel when ye lord of yt house wil come, whe¦ther it wil be in ye euening, or at midnight or when ye corkes crow, or in ye morning lest if he come sodenly, he doth fynd you sleping, That which I say to you, I doo say it to al mē. Thou canst not deny, but ye certain things are so set furth by Christ ye in a maner, they perteine to al men, but not wtout a dyfference,An apte and meet deuision of all thinges ye are commaū¦ded vs in the scriptures and word of god. as when Christe saith: Ye are the salt of the earth. Ye are ye light of the world. For these things do so pertain to all them yt professe ye religiō of Christ, that in ye meane season they do chiefly belong to the bisshops, and theyr successours: yea, & to the magistrates. A∣gayn, certayn thyngs are equally & gene¦rally cōmaunded to al men: as he al ye pre¦cepts of mutual charitie & loue, & of forgi¦uing our brethrē their offences. Finally, certayne thynges are soo spoken, that they doo pertaine onely to the apostles, and to theyr successours, the bysshoppes and Pastours, as: Goo ye throughoute
al the world, and preache the gospel to al creatures.We ought not to make the perticuler precepts, vni∣uersall com∣maundemen∣tes. Therfore, it is not lawfull too make the singulare preceptes, generall & vniuersall commaundementes. For he yt reasoneth on this maner: What soeuer is sayd to the apostles, is sayed to al men, it is sayde to the apostlles, go intoo all the world, and preache: ergo, the same is said to all men, doth reason foolyshlye. For Paule sayeth, yt al be not apostles. Ther∣fore, that, where he sayeth. But ye shall not do so, is a perticulare or singular pre¦cepte, & perteyneth onely to the apostles and their successours. Thou haste not yet proued then, that a Christian may not ex∣ecute the offyce of a magistrate. SIM. By what argumentes, canste thou thy selfe proue, that a Christyan maye lawe∣fully execute the offyce of a magistrate? IOIA. Of the election of the magistra¦tes we fynde wrytten in the .xviii.Wold god al maiestrates & rulers, had al¦waies this place of the scripture be∣fore their eien chap. of Exodus, after this maner: Prouide or choose out of al people, wyse men, which fear god, in whome the truth is, & whych hate couetousnesse, and make of them, heades ouer the people &c. I do suppose and thynke them, to be ryghtly chosen, which are chosen & elected by them, whō
it belongeth too,How maies∣trates and of∣ficers be wel & trewly chosen What shal we saie by them yt by their office so dere, yt they be of necessitie compelled too spoile the kyn¦ges subiectes for to make vp theyr monye agayne. or whose parte it is to choose, electe, and make offycers, not, which do get offyces by fauor, by bribes or other deuylish waies and meanes; thē (I saye) do I thinke to be lawfully cal∣led, which either are such as Iethro doth describe here, or elles do studye & labour to be suche. I do suppose nowe, that it is sufficiently proued, & that by the wordes afore aleged, that suche godly men, may execute the office of a maiestrate in god, for the words do signifie the same. They that are made rulers, must be iust, righte¦ous, faythfull, trewe, fearing god, not co¦uetouse. But who can do these thynges better then a christiā? It foloweth agayn in the same chapiter. Yf thou doest these thinges, thou shalt fulfyl the commaun∣dement of god, & shalt be able to susteine or beare the commaundementes, or bur∣dens of the lord. Sith then that a christiā ought to execute and do the commaunde¦ment of god, which thynge is done by ye magestrate, it foloweth yt a christian may execute the office of a maiestrate. Dothe not Paule saye that the magestrate, is ye minister of god? Romaines .xiii. chapter. Wherfore I do make mine argumente
after this fasshyon.Marke and waie this ar∣gumente yu re∣bell Libertin. All thynges wherby god is serued, are lawfull for a christyan: but god is serued by a magistrate, ergo, it is not forbidden, that a Christian shuld execute ye offyce of a magystrate. Of this thing we haue innumerable examples of most holy men, which were magistrates as Abraham, Ioseph, Iudas, Moises, Iosue, Gedeon, Samuel, Dauid, Ezechi¦as, Iosias, and other. SIM. What is yt to vs, yt they did in the olde testament? If we may so gather oure argumente, it shal be proued by the same reason, yt we must sacrifice, & offer vp bulles and goa¦tes. IO. Doth Paul pertain nothing to ye? That, which yu bringest of ye sacryfices hath no place here:All sacrifices are abolished by Christe Dost thou not know yt they are abolisshed by Christe? But yu canst not proue yt the magystrate is abo∣lisshed. Tel me now, I pray the, wer not Abraham, Moises, Samuel, & the other, whome I haue recited, faithfull, and the frendes of god? SIM. But they were not christians. IO. What is a christian? SIM. What a chry∣stian is.Which beleueth in Christ Iesus & hath ye spirit of Christ. IO. Very well Tell me, had the apostles an other spirit then ye prophetes? SIM. The spirite of
the apostles, and ye spirit of the prophets was al one.The holy fa∣thers of ye old Testamente were christi∣ans and also maiestrates. IO. The holy men of ye old testament, beleued in Christ, and had the spirit of Christe: ergo, they were christy∣ans, and they were not onely christyans but also magistrates, rulers, and officers then a christian maye be a Magistrate. That the holy men of the old testament, had ye spirit of Christe, it is manifest by ye first chap. of the .i. Epistle of Peter. For he speaketh after this maner. Of ye whi∣che saluation. ye prophetes haue enquired & sought, which did prophecie of ye grace yt shuld come vpon you, seking to whom or to what time, ye spirit of Christ, whych was in them, did signifie. And that they did beleue in Christ, Christ him self doth testifie in the .viii. chap. of Ihon, & Paul in yt .i. to ye Corin. & .x. chap. They dyd all (speaking of ye fathers of ye old testamēt) eat one spirituall meat wyth vs, & all did drinke one spiritual drinke. And they did drinke of ye spiritual rocke,What diffe∣rence there is betwene the congregation of the Patri∣arkes & our congregacion yt folowed thē & the rocke was Christ. The congregaty¦on thē, of them yt did beleue in those day¦es, and of them that do beleue now, is al one, whiche congregation is gathered in one spirit. This difference onely there is yt they did beleue in Christ, being promi∣sed,
and which was yet to come, & we do be∣leue in him, yt is alredy come & exhibyted How they dyd esteme, regarde, and vn∣derstand the ceremonies, it is easye to be sene in the prophets. SIM. Then whē we do iudge, we must vse the lawes of ye Iewes. IOIA. That doth not folowe, syth yt they were no more bounde to the law, then we are. The marke that the christian maiestrate dothe shote at, is that peace & iustice maye florishe, that men maye lyue righteously, godly, innocently, & honest∣lye: on the contrarie syde, that vyces and wickednes maie be roted out and punis∣shed, that sedition, tumult, and rebellion and al such other thinges, may be eyther taken hede of, or elles banished awaie vt¦terly. It scilleth not by what lawes these thynges be done, so ye they be done. We do not reade that the apostles dyd euer preache agaynst the lawes of the genty∣les. And why? because that the fasshions lawes, and customes, of countreyes and natyons, were dyuerse and sundry, nor it could be possyble, that all thynges shuld be conuenyent for all menne. But what nede we to speake of ye auncyent fathers? We wyll come to the newe testamente.
Nicodemus, and Ioseph dyd beare rule. He was the steward of Quene Candace that was baptized by Philip, & receiued into the flocke of Christ Cornelius was a christian, which dyd sende for Peter, and was baptized by hym. Surgius Paulus and Erastus were receyued by Paule. Thou canste not denye but that all these were common offycers. SIM. They were officers, whē they came to the faith but it is not expressedlye set forthe, yt they dyd remayne in theyr offyce, after yt they dyd receiue the fayth. IOIA. Therfore I wyl heare by what reasons thou canst proue, yt faythe dyd put them from theyr office. SIM. What neadeth any proba¦tion, syth that it is not written, that they dyd abyde in theyr office? IOI. Shewe then, that they dyd not continew in their office. SIM. I can not. IOI. Then yu hast proued nothing, & myne arguments that I do bringe, are as stronge as thine. Trewly these questions do engender in∣finit contentions, & bringe a mans mynd into perplexitie. Herken to me then.The christian fayth, doth put no man frō hys office. The christian faith, doth put no man from his empire, dominion, rule, or office: For Io¦seph and ye other whiche we haue named
before, were christyans, & were alsoo pu∣blike magistrats & officers. Likewise, Ihō doth not commaund ye souldiers to put a waie & forsake warfare, inioyning thē on¦ly, yt they shuld hurte or accuse falsely no man, and that they shoulde be contente wyth theyr wages. Luke .iii. chapter. If faith, & the name of a Christian shuld con¦strayne any man to goo from his power & authority, truely it shuld compel him to go from the seruyce of god. For ye Magi¦strate or officer, is ye minister or seruant of god. The Euangeliste, when he maketh mentiō of Ioseph of Arimathia, doth say yt he was a senator or alder man. Agayne he sayth, yt he was an honest & iuste man, but wtout faith there can be no righteous¦nes. (For by faith ye righteous doth liue) He is righteous, he is faithfull, he is a se∣natour, ergo, a faythfull may be an alder man or senatour. Paul. Ro. xv. sayth: E∣rastus yt receyuer of ye towne, doth salute you. He was then in office, he was notte gone frō his office of a receiuer. For in ye ii. to Tim. iiii. He did say yt he did dwel in Corinthus. Thou dost not read yt Philip did forbid ye Eununchus his stewardship But now I wil hear whether thou canst
bring anye other thinge. SIM. I haue no expressed wordes, touchyng the same But this doth seme vnto me most dete∣stable, & most vnsemely for a christyan, yt he should syt there, where many thinges are done against the law, & against right as it is often times done in iudgementes and in the senate or parliamente house. IOIA. I haue proued yt a christan may execute the office of a Magistrate. What shall I say to thyne obiections? Nicode∣mus & Ioseph were in ye bloudy councel, where Christ was condemned, & yet not wtstanding, they were not polluted with yt bloudy iudgement. For thei did not cō¦sent to ye counsails of ye vngodly. Lu. xxiii Wherfore a christian, is nothing harmed though yt he sate in ye councel of ye vngod¦ly, so yt he doth not consent to their filthy dedes & actes, but defende & counsayle, ye which is ryght, as much as lieth in him. Psalme .i. But now loke vpon ye thinge more narowly, & ponder it more diligent¦ly, whether it is better yt godly men and christyans, should be rulers and Magy∣strates, or vngodlye persons? For if the Magystrate be an infydell, what good∣nesse can wee looke too haue of hym?
For he can do no maner of good him self beinge not good, as be all they, yt neyther know, nor worship god, which thinge ye do not deny your selues. Syth then that ye do say, that a christian neither can, nor ought to beare rule or be a Magystrate, what other thynge do ye say, but yt there ought to be no goodnesse at al in ye magy¦strate?If ye doctryne of ye Libertins & anabaptists shuld stand, al right & iustice shuld be per∣uerted. Which doctrine if it should stand shuld not all ryght and iustice be peruer∣ted? They that ay yt a Christian can not be a Magistrate, and graunt that the vn∣godly may, they seke nothing els, but to destroy al religyon and common weale. Can any man gouerne & rule better then he that worshpipeth god,As kingdoms dyd alwayes florishe vnder godly & vertu¦ous princes, so they haue ben ouerwhelmed wt al kindes of calamites whē vngodly men did beare rule and liueth inno¦cently before him? We do learne out of ye bokes of iudges, of Samuel, of Kynges, and of ye Chronicles, that the Realmes & kingdoms were neuer in a better & more prosperous state, then when godlye iud∣ges and kinges dyd beare rule. Againe, yt there were neuer so troublous tymes, so muche wyckednes, famine, hunger, war∣res, tumultes, and calamytyes, as haue bene vnder vngodlye tyrauntes, as was Hieroboam, Achab, Manasses. &c. Ther¦fore we do now conclude, not onely that a christian may execute the office of a ma¦gistrate,
but also that suche an offyce can not be prosperously and wel administred but by christians. ¶ The second Dialogue ¶ That the office of a magystrate, is not onely profytable, but also most necessary to a christyan cō∣mon weale. SIMON. BVt what dost thou say to this yt Christ answereth to Pilate: My kyngdome is not of thys world? Sith then that christyans are na∣med after Christ, surely (for soo it semeth to me) they ought to haue nothing to do with suche a kingdom, nor I thinke it to be necessary to the chyldren of god. For he yt is a true christian, doth wronge and violence to no man, he doth not contend he doth not striue, he hurteth no man, he smiteth no body, but liueth accordyng to the commaundemente of god. Math. v. chap. IOI. Christe was accused of high treason, agaynste the imperiall Maiesty, wherby the Iues thought soone to haue condempned him. For they sayd, he ma∣keth him selfe kynge of the Iewes Our lorde woulde be semed (as he oughte by ryght) to be so farre from the affectation
and coueting of any earthly kingdome, that it shuld be agaynst all reason, to sus∣pect any suche thing of him. Therfore he did answere: My kingdom is not of this world, els I should haue seruauntes and ministers, which wolde endeuoure them selues, to defend me. So that Christ byd both confesse that he was king of heauē and also did signifie vnto Pilate, that he had no cause to be afraid of the kingdom that he did minister vnto, as thoughe he should go about to chalenge it vnto him whereof the Iues did accuse hym before Pilate.The kingdom of Christe is not of thys world, but in spirit & truthe As though he should say, I am a king, yet notwithstanding, my kingdom is not of this world, but in spirit & truthe SI. This is my meaning. Then ye kinge¦dom of Christe, is not of thys world, yt is to say, it doth not consist in outward do∣minion & power, wherby it foloweth yt it is destituted or spoiled of glory, pomp, ri¦ches, & outward puissaunce and myghte Wherfore we ought to be here ye outcast of ye worlde, we shal at length reygne wt Christ in ye regeneration. IO. I do saye nothing against ye, but that yu dost gather therby, ye christians haue no nede of a ma¦gistrate, yt I do deny. The reason, why?
Because that Christe speaketh so of hys kingdom, that in ye mean season,Christ doth so speake of hys kingdom, yt in ye mean seasō, he dothe not take awaye ye politike magi¦strate. he doth not condempne nor take away the magi¦strate. Besides that, the christians are not bare spirites, but they dwel yet in ye flesh which they do cary about. As touchyng the spirit, by the whych man is renued & made a christian, he hath no nede of a ma¦gistrate. For the inwarde manne can be preserued with no outward things. But as touching the flesh, whiche he beareth about, & his outward conuersation, man hath as muche nede of a Magistrate, as of meat, and other outward things. For it is a lyke reason to say:The Magy∣strate is as ne¦cessary to chri¦stians in this worlde, as meat & drinke The kingdome of the christians is not of this world, ergo they haue no nede of a magistrate, and to say: The kingdom of ye Christians, is not of this world: ergo, they nede no meate. For meat is eaten in this world. SI. If ye spirit of a christian man, is a true spiryt he hurteth no man. If he hurteth no bo∣dy, what nedeth he a magystrate. IOI. Paul answereth ye. Princes are not fear¦ful vnto them yt do wel, but to them yt do euil. Wilt thou not feare the power? Do ye thing yt is good. and yu shalt haue praise of it: for he is the minister of god, for thy good.
Yf thou doest that thinge, which is euyll, feare, for he bereth not the swerd in vaine But he is the minister of god, to take pu¦nishment & vengeaunce of hym, yt doth ye thinge which is euill. Wherfore we must be subiects or obedient, not onely for fear of punyshment, but also for cōscience sake SIM, There shal be no nede of al these thinges: for the christian knoweth, what Christ hath saied: Do not resist or wtstand ye euil. IOI. It is trew, a christian ought not to reuenge him selfe rashly, sith yt the same doth perteine to ye magistrate. But this doth beguile you,The libertins and Anabap∣tistes do dreame that Christians do not synne nor commyt any fate. that ye do ymagin & dream, yt the christian people is such, as it is not, nor euer was, nor euer shall be, yea such, as it can not be: ye wyl, I say, ye christians to be of such a perfection, yt no man shal fall, or syn emong thē. In thys ye are deceyued. For, although there be many good mē, yet notwtstandyng there be many mo hipocrites. And ye old & aun¦cient partiarks, had ye same cōmaundemē¦tes yt they shuld hurte no man, they that were good in dede, & godly, did wrong to no bodye, yet for the wycked sake yt were emong them, there were, yea, them selfes were magistrates. SIMON. Yf wee
were trewe christians, we shuld haue no nede of Magistrates. IOI. The old pa∣triarkes were very godly men, & yet not wtstanding they had nede of a magistrate not for them selues, but for ye wicked sake We do not speake of yt, yf we were such,If we had ye, that we haue not, we wold do that, which we do not. but of yt, yt we are. Syth thē, yt we be not as we ought to be, it is necessary, that we haue yt, wt out yt which, it is impossible for vs to liue. Yf we had great riches, truely we shuld be rich, if we had great lerning we should wtout doubt, be great clearkes But we may not so gather, ergo, we nede not to labor, we nede not to study. Yf we had winges we shuld flee, sith then yt we haue no winges, we haue nede of fete to go. SIM. We are al together vndone & loste. we are cleane cast awaie, for we are no trew christians. IOI. Why so? SI Because that we are yet soo vnperfite yt we haue nede of a magistrate. IO. Dost yu not yet vnderstande, yt the magistrate is for the wicked sake, ye honesty and vertue may be safe emong ye euyl persons,Why the Magistrate is ordeyned of God. and ye god hath ordeyned it? SIM. I do not vnderstand, howe it hath bene ordeyned of god, syth that Christ sayth: Do not ye resist or withstand euyll. IOI. He doth
forbid that no priuate person,No priuate person oughte to reuenge his wrong, for ye belongeth to ye magistrate. shuld of af¦fection, reuenge his wronge, he doth not forbid, yt a magistrate shuld not punisshe the euyl doers. For the power is the my¦nister of god, to punish & take vengeance of them yt do committe euyl. Also, where Christ saith, when any man goeth about to take away thy cloke, giue him also thy rote, if thou dost conferre it with ye place of Paul. i. Cor. vi. cha, thou shalt fynd ye same saying, to be somewhat mollifyed, when he doth permit yt there shuld be iud¦gementes emong christians, for thinges perteinyng to ye life. SIM. If yu dost dis¦cusse diligently ye words of Paul, yu shalt fynd ye Paul permitteth no such thing to ye christians. IOI. These be ye words of Paul: Can any of you abide, hauing bu∣sines, or to do wt an other, too be iudged vnder vnryghtfull iudges, & not rather vnder ye sainctes? Do ye not know yt the saints shal iudge ye world? And if ye world be iudged by you, are ye vnworthye of smal iugements? Do ye not know yt we shal iudge angels, & not only those thin∣ges yt pertain to ye liuing? Therfore yf ye haue iudgements, touching those things ye pertain to ye vse of life, make thē iudges yt are vilest in ye congregatiō, I do speake to your shame.
Is there not emong you a wyse man? not as muche as one? whych can geue iudge¦ment betwene brother and brother? But one brother striueth with an other, and ye vnder infidels. Therfore nowe there is a great fault in you, ye ye haue strife emong you.The place of Paul is dis∣cussed. Why do not ye rather suffer wrong Whye do ye not receiue harme? yea, but rather ye do iniury and wronge, and yt to your brethren. These, I say, be the wor∣des of Paul, wherbye we do learne, that we ought rather to suffer wrong, and to receiue paciently harme, then to stryue & contende emong our selues, wheruntoo Christ, in the .vi. of Mathewe, hath a re∣specte. But if thys, for the imbecyllytye, weakenes, and corruption of our flesshe, can not be done, there be Magystrates, courtes, and iudges, before whom, suche matters, if any do chaunce, may be discus¦sed and pacifyed, too the intents, that he, which suffreth wrong, may be reuenged and he that doth the wrong, may be pu∣nisshed and holden in.Wherefore courtes and iudges serue, looke vpon thys, O ye iudges. Now they that so contend before a iudge, for thynges that pertayne to the vse of lyfe, are christians for Paul saith: One brother doth wrong to an other, whom he commaundeth (yf
nede do so require) to sue for their righte before christian iudges. For brothe and christian, are al one. Finally, by the fore∣sayd wordes, it may be manifestly gathe¦red, that a christian may execute ye offyce of a magistrate.Saynctes are euerye where in the scriptur taken for the faythfull. For he apointed the sain¦tes to be iudges, and here the sainctes be put for the faithfull whom he wil rather to be chosen of the vilest sorte in the con∣gregation, then that they should repayre to vnfaithfull iudges. Of all these thinges we do gather and conclude that the faithfull haue nede of a magistrate, sith that the congregation is gathered of good and euyll, the faithfull them selues being in the flesh, as long as they liue. And again, sith that the Patri∣arkes and elect of god, had nede of a ma¦gistrate: We haue no lesse nede then thei had. Therfore the magistrate is not one¦ly profitable, but also most necessary to a christian common weale. ¶ The third Dialogue. That we are bound to obey the Magistrate. SIMON. THose thyngs that thou hast brought oute of Paule, doo
please me very wel, but I do not se, that we are bound to obey thys Magistrate. IOI What is this? Doste thou thinke that we are not bounde to obey ye power which is of god? SIM. I would not be greatly against it, if al power wer of god if they did al rule wel, if they dyd defend right & equitie. What if this power doth fighte against god, doth breake & violate lawes and statutes, doth oppresse ye poor wylt thou say yt it is of god? or dost thou thinke that we are bound to obey it? As farre as I can iudge, a tyrannical power is not of God, yea, rather it is no power ergo, we oughte not to obey it.The tiranous poweris geuē of god, as a rod to punysh and try the people. IOIA∣DA. A tyrannouse power is also of god, gyuen of god, as a rodde wherewith the people is bothe tryed and punysshed. Whych thyng is made most playne and manyfest in Pharao, in Saule, and Bal∣thasar. Paule also doth saye, that all po∣wer is of God. SIMON. Paule spea∣keth of that power, which is benefycyall to the good, and punyssheth the wycked But contrarye to that, a tyraunte dothe wronge to them that are good and ver∣tuous, he oppresseth them, and dothe en∣haunce and set vp the wycked. Sith then
that suche power is not beneficyall to ye good,God doth or∣deine ye which semeth euyll to vs, for the good of the electes. but rather do them wronge, howe can it be of god? IO. That thing whych semeth euyl vnto vs, god doth ordeyn it to the good of his elect. Did not ye crosse & death of so many martyrs, which were slaine and put to death by tyrauntes and cruel persecutours, serue to the glorye of god, and to the increase of their own fely¦citie and beatitude?That officers and rulers do sometymes waxe tyrants it cometh ey∣ther of the vy¦ces of them yt are in offyce or els, of the Ire & wrath of God. God vseth Nabugo∣donosor as a rodde, wherwith he punys∣sheth his people. Besides yt, if any chaun¦ges and alterations do happen, so that he which was a good magystrate, a godlye ruler & officer, is cleane chaunged, & doth become most wicked, ye procedeth not of ye nature of the magistrate, or office, but it commeth of the vices of most peruerse & wicked men, yt are in office, & execute the office of a magistrate, yea, many and sun¦dry times it commeth of ye plain yre and wrath of god. Are not many times yt wa¦ter & ayre, yea, ye meat it selfe pestiferous which notwtstanding by them selues, are most wholsom. But so god doth punish our sinnes. Vnderstand ye same of ye tiran¦nous magistrates. SI. What if he com∣maundeth that, whyche is vniuste and vnryghtfull? Shall I obey?
What yf the tyraunt be both vnryghte∣ous and vngodly, shall I obey neuerthe¦les? No. For thou hast sayd before, that no man can better execute the office of a magistrate, then a christian. Again, Paul doth with a certaine stomacke, speake a∣gainst them that suffered them selues to be iudged vnder vnryghtuous iudges. Finally, the apostles them selues, wold not obey the commaundementes of the vngodlye magistrates, saying: It beho∣ueth rather to obey god, then men. IO. I haue made a comparison betwixte the godly magistrate, and the vngodly, whē I said these wordes: No man can better nor more godly execute ye office of a ma∣gistrate, then a godly man,Thoughe the vngodlye ma¦gistrate is not to be compa∣rid wt the god¦lye, yet notwtstandynge in externe & out¦ward thyngs hee is not to be disobeyed. and yet in the meane season, I did not say, that an vn∣godly and tirannous magystrate, is not a magistrate. I did preferre the rule that the christian doth beare, before the rule yt the vngodly doth beare, & yet notwyth∣standing, I did not condempne the laste although it were no power, or rule, or as though we were not bounde to obey it. The commō weales neuer florisshed bet¦ter, then when godly men did Raygne. That we may se in Ezechias, & other ho¦ly
Kinges. Wherunto same Paul had al¦so a respecte when he did bid ye Corinthi∣ans to chose & make iudges of ye saints, yt is to say, of ye faithfull. The apostles dyd wel, yt in certain things they did not obey ye vngodly edictes & cōmaundements of ye senate. When yu dost then aske and de∣maund a questiō, touchyng obedience, I do aunswere after thys maner: When yu saiest these wordes:Too obey an vngodly magi¦strate, & to o∣bey vngodlye lawes & statu∣tes, is not all one. Shall I obey an vn∣godly magistrate? Shal I obey vngodly lawes, statutes and commaundementes? Thou dost not aske all one thynge. Thy question & demaund is not al one. For to the first question, I do answere yt we are bound to obey, to ye second again I say, yt we ought not to obey. The magistrate be¦reth no rule ouer ye soules, but ouer ye bo¦dies & outward substance, & whatsoeuer doth perteyn to ye outward conuersation of mē. Now if he cōmaundeth any thing against god, against conscyence & health of ye soule, we ought rather to obey god, then ye vngodly cōmaundementes of the tirant. Now hath place yt the apostes do say: It behoueth rather to obey god, thē men. But if he cōmaundeth only yt, whi∣che perteineth to outward thinges, or to
thy body, which thing, cā,We owgh o∣bedience to a tyrant, and a∣gain, we owe no obedience, that is to saie, in outwarde thynges we owe to obey, but in matter of conscience yf he com∣maundeth any thynge a∣gaynste god we are not bound to obey Why the ma¦gistrate doth medle in mat¦ters of relygyon. What profyt doth come of the statutes and ordynaū¦ces of godly magistrates. or may be per¦fourmed & done by the, wtout the losse of ye truth & righteousnes, wtout paril of sal¦uation (though it semeth neuer so hurtful to thy body and substaunce, though it se∣meth neuer so vncomely for ye) thou arte bound to obey. Therfore we owe obedy¦ence to the tirant, & againe, we owe hym not obedience. SI. Now an other questi¦on doth rise, Yf ye publike magistrate bea¦reth no rule ouer ye soule, why doth then ye magistrat now a daies, vsurpe so much power, in matters of faith? IO. He doth yt, not as a magistrate only, but as a chri∣stian magistrate, nor he doth it, wtout cō∣maundement & example. In Deutero. ye kyng is commaunded to haue ye boke of ye law by him, & to read it diligētly which boke also is delyuered to Iosue by Mo∣ses. Let vs loke vpon ye example of Iosa∣phat, Iada, Iosias, Ezechias, Nabugo¦donozer & Darius in Daniel. SI. Haue they any power ouer the soule & spirit of man, or can they print faith by their statu¦tes & cōmaundements, in the heartes of men? IO No forsothe: But their statu∣tes & ordinaunces do profit in this thing yt the vngodly do lesse harme, do commit
lesse offence, lesse ydolatry & blasphemy being fraied, cohibited & brideled by such godly edictes & proclamatyons. Els the weake, by such licencious doings of ye vn¦godly, eyther are letted to come to Christ or elles too take occasyon, too swerne a waie from Christ, & his worde. Therfore ye administratiō, which is done by ye laws of ye Magistrats, doth bring this to passe yt there is lesse euil & harme emong mor∣tall men, that men do lyue godly, honest¦ly, & quietly, and although, ye vngodly do hide their vngodlynes, malice and wic∣kednes within in their heartes, yet not wt standing they dare not suffer it to breake forth, to trouble disquiet, & offend them, yt will liue godly. God onely doth loke in ye hearte, & iudgeth it. Wherefore I thinke this proposition, to be sufficiently proued yt we are bound to obey the Magistrate For, if ye magistrate be a christiā, so much more ought we to obey hym. Againe, yf he be an heathen and vngodly, ye art al∣so bound to obey him though he dothe oppresse the, in thy body and substaunce so yt he doth not call ye frō god & the truth But let vs make it stronger wt the scrip∣turs, In ye .xx. of Luk, Christ cōmaundeth
to giue to Cesar, ye whych belongeth too Cesar, & to god,What by Ce∣sar we owe to vnderstand in the scriptures that which belongeth to god. By Cesar he vnderstandeth general¦ly al ye maiestrats of ye world, to whō our bodies & goodes are subiects .i. of ye kyn∣ges, viii. Our mynd doth only belong to god, & therfore touchyng it, we are more bound to obey god, then man. Peter tea¦cheth vs after this maner: Be ye subiect to al humain ordynaunce for ye lord sake, whether it be to a king, as to ye most excel¦lent, or to his deputes, which are sence of him, to ye punishment of the euil doers, & to the praise of them yt do wel, for so is ye wil of god, yt by wel doing, ye stop ye mou¦thes of ignorant persons. &c. SI. Ye haue alwaies taught out of Esaias, & wordes of Christ, yt god is worshipped in vain, by ye precepts & cōmaundements of men, & now ye affirme ye plain contrary oute of Peter, yt is to say, yt we are bound to obei al humain ordinaunces.Ther be two kyndes of hu¦main traditi∣ons. IO. Humayne traditions or constitutions, are taken .ii. waies. Some are set furth too this ende, that they shuld be a worshipping of god which men do prescribe vntoo other, as necessarye to saluation, whych yf a man shoulde omytte and neglecte, he shoulde
greuously sinne & offend: again, if he ke∣peth them, they thinke them selues, & al∣so make other too beleue, yt he deserueth much of god. With these preceptes & cō∣maundements, which are mere inuenty∣ous of men, god is worshipped in vayn. There are again certain constitutions of magistrats, touching heritaūces, proprie¦ties, selling and bying, letting furth tou∣ching publike contractes & suche lyke, of yt which things, princes & magistrats do make lawes & constitutyons, for a peace & cōmon quietnes & tranquilitie. Al men generally are bound to obey al suche cō∣stitutions & lawes. And of suche Peter doth speake, as it appereth manifestly by his words. Besides yt, Peter writeth not to the heathē, but to the christians, which were dispersed here & there .i. Pet. ii. cha To Titus .iii. chap. it is writen after this maner. Warne thē (sayth saint Paule) yt they be subiect to Princes & potestates, ye they be obedient too magistrates & ru∣lers, yt they be ready to al good works, & that they speake euyl of no man. To the Roma. xiii. he sayth. Euery soule (yt is to say, all men & women) be subiects to the higher powers, for ther is no power but
of god: & al the powers yt are, be ordened of god. Therfore, whosoeuer doth resyst ye power, doth resist the ordinaūce of god But they yt resist, shal receiue to them sel¦ues dampnation. The fourth Dialogue. ¶ Whether it be lawful to resist ye magistrate, where we do write a∣gainst them that do rebel against magistrates & rulers. SIMO. Tel Ioiada, if there were a magistrat (as ther be to mani) which shuld do nothing wel, nothing soberly, nothing iustly, & ac¦cording to right, which being rebellyous to god, & his lawes, shuld wt infynit wrō¦ges, oppresse ye good, & not reuenge them yt suffer wrong, nor yet delyuer them frō the handes of their enemyes, were it not lawful to resist him? Doth not Esaias cal the wicked maiestrats theues & robbers? Esai. i. Doth not Christ cal them the po∣wer of darkenes? Paul doth reuile Ana∣nias to his face. Actes. xxiii. calling hym a whited or painted wall. IO. To an vn∣godly & wicked magistrate, his faultes & wicked dedes are to be shewed, yt he may turne from them, to a better life, and that
ought to be done now in time, now out of time. The fact of Paul hath some occasy¦on. Be thou lyke to Paul, and then imi∣tate and folow Paules dede. SIMO. What auaileth if the wicked dedes of ma¦gistrates and prynces be rebuked, sythe that they be wicked stil, and amand not? It were farre better that they should be roted out of the earth, euen as Iehu, and other did. IO. Why, and wherfore dost thou say so my Symon? How farre hast thou ouer shoot thy self? do not ye Cata¦baptistes datest and abhorre warrely tu∣multes? But I se what it would be, if al thinges should happen and chaunce too you,All ye doyngs of ye Anabap∣tists do breath and sauour tu¦mult & confu∣sion of all thynges. accordyng to your owne desires, I feare me, lest all your doings do breathe and sauour tumulte and confusyon of all thynges, Not so, my Simon. Paul saith i. Cor. vii. chapter. Let euery man abyde in that vocation that he is called in. Arte thou called, being a seruaunt? Care thou not therfore, but also, if yu canste be made free, vse rather the same. SIM. Thou dost heare then, that he doth preferre fre∣dom and libertie, to seruitude & bondage and warneth that (if it may be done) we do seke it. IO. I heare that fredom and
libertie is to be wisshed for, and also (yf it may be done conueniently) to be embra¦ced, but I do not heare,Liberti ought not to be sought by sedition and bloud sheding If all thinges were done, as we would, e∣uery houre tumultes shoulde ryse. yt it oughte to be desired & sought, by seditions, by tumul∣tes, by euyl waies, by violence, bloude, & warres. Nor ye apostles did euer vse such meanes, for to be made free, or to get thē selues to libertie, therefore we muste ab∣stayne also from them. If al things were done by our councell, euery houre tumul¦tes and seditions, should be styrred vp a∣gainst the magistrate, for euerye man (as soone as any thing should not come too passe, according to his luste, & inordynate desire) shuld begin an vprore & tumulte, & wold say: The magistrate is vngodly, he hath handled me agenst al right & equity Shoulde not thus ye christyan name be a cloke of tumults, inordinate affections,The Liber∣tins go about to make the Chrstian name, a cloke of tumultes & confusion. & of al confusion? SI. Truly thys thynge must be tried & proued by hands, and by strength, for wordes do not auaile wyth those tirauntes. By and by, as soone as anye manne doth rebuke their tirannye, and wycked factes,O brayneles Anabaptiste they waxe hote and angrye, they threaten, they take, they caste intoo pryson, they spoyle menne of their goodes, they banishe, they kyll and
murther thē yt are godly. This waie ney¦ther godlynes, nor iustice, nor good men are sene to. Therfore this sore sickenes & disease of ye cōmon weale, can not be hol∣pen, but by tumult & the swerd, yt the vn∣godly may be vtterly destroyed, & roted out of ye earth. IO. That thing which to men semeth impossible, before god is pos¦sible. Therfore, this high & waighty vn∣sines, & matter, ought to be committed to god, wt most ernest & burning praiers, for he saith:God dothe neuer forsake hys electe. Put or remyt ye vēgaunce to me & I wil reueng or require. It is most sure yt god doth neuer forsake, his electe, and yt he doth neuer deny hys helpe vnto them that with a sincere heart, and trew faith do call vpon him.To them that are godly, all thyngs ye god doth, seme well done. Luk. xviii. SIM. But he doth helpe manye to late. IOI. To them yt are godly in dede, nothinge doth seme to soone, nothinge to late, that the lorde god doth worke. They do receyue with a thankful heart, what so euer their merciful father doth geue, whether it be weale or woo, they knowe that they are alwaies in the handes of their most boū¦teous father from the whiche, nothynge can take them awaie. They do commyt them selues altogether, to this most mer¦cifull
father, yelding them selues whollye to his will. For, they do remember ye say¦ing of Peter, which saith. The lord kno∣weth how to deliuer ye godly from temp¦tation, & how to kepe the vnrighteous to be punished in the day of iudgement.Marke these goldē sayings and prynte them in thy mynd, who so¦uer thou be, ye art opressed and so com∣mitting thy self holly into the mercy of thyne heauē¦ly father, be∣ware of deuy¦lyshe tumult & insurrection Al∣so that saying of Dauid stycked in theyr mindes: I neuer sawe the righteous for∣sakē. Finally yt golden sentence of Paul is neuer from their memory: God suffe∣reth not vs to be tempted aboue yt we be able, to beare, & maketh a ioyful & prospe¦rous ende wyth the temptation. Wyth out doubt god doth alwaies deliuer hys trew seruauntes, for eyther he doth illu∣minate and lighten the heartes of the ty¦raunts & princes, that they shall fauoure his electe, as he dyd to Pharao, towarde Ioseph, too Cirus, toward ye Iewes, to Xerxes, toward Eseras, to Artaxerxes, to¦warde Rehemiah, to Ahasuerus, toward Mardorche, to Nabugodonozer, toward Daniel, that ye faithful and godly might haue some respit. Or yf he be determined to vtterly destroye the tyrantes and vn∣godly rulers, he begynneth that matter with so great, and so notable signes and tokens, that no man canne doubt of the
good wyll of God, and alsoo he doth al∣wayes atcheue and fynysh the thynge yt he hath begon, wyth a prosperous ende Now yf any man doth go about any de∣lyueraunce,Note thys dreadful ex∣ample of Is∣mael, whyche killing Godo¦ly as, ye Baby¦lonians de∣pute, dyd bring ye reme¦naunt of the Israelites to vtter confu∣syon. All ye yt are oppressed let neuer thys goodly hysto¦ry be from your hert, and then I truste that ye shall neuer haue mynd to in∣surrection & tumult, but rather to call ernestley vpō god for dely∣uerance. wythoute, or agaynste thys order, as thoughe he had begonne or en∣terprysed that thyng, by the wyll and cō¦maundemente of God, he shall auayl no more then Ismael dyd agaynst the Ba∣biloniens, in kyllyng Godolias .iiii. of ye Kynges .xxv. chapter. and Hieremye .xl. chapter. But go to, we wyl bryng furth out of the armorye and storehouse of the scryptures, weyghtye exaumples, where by it shall be made manyfeste and plaine bothe by what meanes, god delyuereth hys electe, and alsoo howe vnfortunate∣lye and vnluckelye, they dyd spede, whi∣che dyd go aboute to delyuer theym sel∣ues by boldenes ond tumulte agaynste the wyll of God. The people of Israel dydde serue in Egipte, certayne hundred yeares, beynge oppressed wyth sundrye and dyuers labours, and greuouslye af∣flycted, besydes that, they were compel∣led too se howe theyr chyldren and infan¦tes, as soone as they were borne, were drowned in the ryuer of Nilus. By and
by, as soone as they beganne too call to the Lorde wyth a trewe heart, they were hearde of the Lorde. For he dydde sende Moises, whyche shoulde be a captayne and a delyuerer of the people. He dydde carye theym drye shoed thoroughe the redde Sea, and dydde drowne Pharao, wyth all hys hoste and armye, in the bo∣tome of the deepe. Exodus the fourtene Chapter. Saule, kynge of the Israelites, dyd kyll and murther the Prophetes of God, and persecuted the innocente and ryghtuouse Dauid.Oh most god¦ly Dauid, yt we might haue grace in our troubles and affections and when we are most op∣pressed, to en∣sue & folowe thy steppes, god graunte, we maye. Dauid dothe notte reuenge hym selfe, nor put hym from hys kyngdome, but rather he flyeth him selfe, and when he had fallen twyse in∣too hys handes, he spare hym, and dyd suffer hym too goo awaye vnhurte, or wythoute harme, sayinge: The Lorde be mercyfull vntoo mee, that I doo not that thynge too my Lorde, the anoynted of the Lord, that I should lay mine hand vpon him, for he is the anointed of ye lord The Lorde lyueth, that excepte, the lorde doth smyte hym, or hys daye become that he dye, or he, goyng downe too bat¦tayle, do perysshe, the lorde be mercyfull
vnto me, yt I do not lay mine hand vpon ye anointed of ye lord .i. of the kings xxiiij. At an other tyme, when Abisai did saye. The lord hath shutte vp to day thine ene¦my into thine hands, now therfore wil I thrust him thorow wt a spear to ye ground once, & it shall be no nede of the seconde time. Dauid sayde vnto Abisai: Doo not sley him. For who shal lay his hands vp on ye anointed of the lord, & shall be vngil¦tie? .i. of the kinges .xxvi. cha. These wor¦des, my Simon, being wel weighed and pondered, do teach vs, yt we must not fo∣low ye blynd affection of our flesshe. For when the time was come yt the lorde had appointed, not Dauid, but ye lord him self did take Saul away frō the world, wt the swerd yt he him self had sent, & dyd set vp Dauid in ye roial & kingly seat. The chyl¦dren of Israel, haue bene many times af¦flicted vnder tirants & vngodly kynges, as we haue in the history of ye iudges, no man did go about of his own head, or of his owne industry, to deliuer them. But ye lord him self did deliuer them by Gede¦on, Samson, Iephte, & other like, whō he him selfe had chosen to suche businesses. Who doth by sedition & tumult, inuade
or come vpon the vngodly king Achab. when he doth set vp ydols, & commaun∣deth yt innocent & good man, Naboth, to be stoned to death, keping neither ryght nor equitie, slaying the prophetes, perse∣cuting Helias (tyl yt the lord doth styrre vp Eliseus, which at ye commaundement of god doth anoint Iehu king, yt he shuld take vengeaunce for ye lord, of the vngod¦ly .iiii. of the kinges .ix.x. So Ioada did vnto Athalia, so the king of the Assirians did to Manasses. How long time did ye Emperours of Rome, shede the christian bloud, yet notwtstandyng no man goeth about to better it by tumult, til Constan¦tinus Magnus did come. I could reherse vnto the Thrasibulus, a tirant of ye Athe∣nienses, & William Tell, & Stouffaker, ti¦rants of the Heluetians, but we wyll be content wt the examples of the scripture. SI. Shalt it then be alwaies lawful to ti¦rants to be vngodly, & that wtout punish¦ment? which of the words of Paul. Ro. xiii. Do take a cloke, a buckeler & shielde of their own malice, vnder ye which they fraude & deceiue, they steale, they robbe, they slaye, they murther, & confounde all things, they euery foote slea ye poor com¦mons
to the very bones, wt new exacty∣ons, taxes, & subsidies, being in the mean season, giuen to riot, and outragyous ex∣cesse, to drunkennes, to vnlawful gaining to whordome, and most vniuste warres, and therwith committing moste detesta∣ble dedes, and wycked factes agaynste god, and the common weale. But I wil shewe to the out of Hieremy .xv. chap, yt the people is punisshed of god, because yt they thus suffer tyrauntes and vngodly prynces, to kyll and flea, without any pu¦nishment. For after the .iiij. plagues yt he doth rehearse there, he addeth by and by ye cause, saying: And I wil deliuer thē vp into the fury of al ye kingdō of the earthe yt is to say: I wil styrre vp againste them the fury & rage of al the kingdoms of the earth, for Manasses sake, ye sonne of Eze¦chias, the kyng of Iuda, for all the wyc∣kednes yt he hath done at Ierusalem. Se in the .vii. of the kynges .xxi. chapt, what wyckednes he did commit, if the Iewes had not suffered their kynge, thus wtout punishment, to be so wycked, they shuld not haue bene so greuouslye plagued of god. It behoueth to pull oute the offen∣ding eie, & to cast it away, likewise of the
hand and of the fote, IOI. Here be .ij. questions. The firste is: whether the ty∣raunte must be remoued from his roume or not? The seconde: howe, and by whō Therfore I do not deny, but that a wyc∣ked magystrate, must be put downe, but not the same way that thou wylte. Noo man ought to kyll hym, nor to styrre vp warre and sedition against him, we must go to worke, an other maner of way, the matter muste be attempted and assayed by lawful meanes, for god hath called vs in peace .i. Corinthians the seuenth chap the tyraunt must be taken away (that do I not denye) for Samuel dothe depose Saule from hys offyce, and doth anoynt Dauid, kynge ouer the people of Israel. Ioiada putteth furthe Athalia from the ruledome and maketh Ioas a kynge. If then a kynge be made by the common assente of all the people, and begynneth too be wycked, let hym agayne be put downe wyth common assente of the peo¦ple, excepte they wyll all be punysshed wyth hym. And yf he be chosen by ye cō∣sent & election of fewe princes, let ye peo∣ple signifie & shew unto them, ye wycked
and vngodly lyfe of thys kinge, & that it ought to be borne or suffered no longer, let them be cōmaunded, that haue chosen him, to put him doune agayn. Now here shall be all the labour,What the ty∣raunt wyll do to them, that dare speake a∣gainst his wic¦ked tirannye. for against them ye do thys thyng, the tyraunt shall exercyse all kynde of crudelytye, handlyng them accordynge to hys inordynate luste, and whome it shall please hym, he wyll sleye and murther. But it is a gloryous thing to dye for ryghtuousnes, and the truth of God. And better it is too be slayne, for the defence of iustyce and ryghtuousnes then assentyng vnto vnryghtuousnes,It is far bet∣ter to be put to death for defence of righteousnes, then after¦wardes to be kylled, wyth the vngodly and wycked. What we owe to do yf he be come to ye kyngdome by ye swerde, or by enhery∣taunce. or dyssembling, to be afterwardes kylled to the vngodly and wicked. They that can not awaye wyth thys thynge, let theym suffer and beare a vycyous and proude tirannie, and wyth hym, let theym loke too receyue an extreame punysshemente Yet notwythstandyng, the hande of the lorde is stretched furthe, and threateneth a plague. Finally, yf he hath inuaded or come into the kyngdome, by anye other chaunce, as by strengthe, or by enhery∣taunce, we muste beare hym, till the lord vouchsafe to delyuer the oppressed, leste any commotyon and tumulte be styrred
vp by vs, for the kingdom of god is righ¦tuousnes, peace, and gladnes in the holy ghost. Romay .xiiii. There be then many waies, wherby tiraunts may be taken a∣way and put downe, but we do wante a feruent study of rightuousnes, and of the truth, we do wante the feare of god, and deuilish wickednes reigneth eueri where For it could not be possible that a tirant durst do so muche, except there were mo wycked, by whom he should mainteyne and vphold his tyrannye. But fyrst and formest, the prophetes, that is to say, the ministers of gods word, must be bold to rebuke the synnes and wycked factes of Prynces & rulers:Which is the most commo∣dious way, to ouercome ty∣rauntes. none other way more commodious to ouercome tirauntes can be, then if the preachers of the truthe, do once determyne too dye, they muste put their bodies & lyues to ieopardy. Yf Ne∣ro, Dominitanus, Maximianus, wyth o∣ther, could not by murtheringe and she∣ding of bloud, roote out and vtterly de∣stroye the doctrine of Christ, muche lesse shall these braynlesse and madde princes (yf we do stand vp boldly) oppresse ye gos¦pel and the truth.This is not spoken in de∣rogation of a∣nye godlye prince,  Therfore this is ye first and chiefest way, that ye ouerseers be not
blynde, that the dogges be not dombe, yt they put them selues a wall betwixte the synnes of the people, and god, that they amend vp the broken hedge. The second that we do always,The lawfull wayes and meanes to get our selues out of myserable oppressyon. and without ceassing praye vnto god, whych in his wrath and indignation, maketh the hypocrytes too reigne, for our sinnes. Finally, and last of all, that we thyrst for ryghteousnes, that we amend our liues, and chaunge our cō¦dytyons. For yf we be godly, and righ∣teous, it is impossible, that a tyraunte do reigne longe. SIM. All Israel, after ye death of Salomon, did swarue awaye, & forsake Roboam, because he oppressed them to muche, & that of their own head iii. of the kynges, and .xiii. chapter. IOI. Why, doest thou not reade, that, whiche foloweth:Why Gobo∣am dyd not graunt ye peti∣tyon of ye peo∣ple, wherfore he was vtter∣ly forsaken of ten trybes. And the kinge did not graunt the people their petytyon, because yt god hath forsaken hym, yt he might, or should perfourme hys word, that he had spoken in the handes of Achias the Silonite, to Hieroboam, the sonne of Nabate. Thou canst not proue by this, that it is lawfull for any man to make insurrection of hys own head, agaynst tyrants, or euil rulers SIM. I feare, least thys doctrine wyll
make men sluggish, negligent, & dastards that if at any time, the lorde doth sende a deliuerer, they wyl be in doubt, of the wil of the lord. IOI. Care for other thyngs when ye lord doth begin and go about so hygh things, he calleth not sluggyshe da¦stards, and negligent persons:Whē god wil put doune ty∣rauntes, he doth alwayes styrre vp men meete for the purpose. he geueth wisdom, confidence & boldnes, he giueth lustynes of courage, and strength, & brin¦geth all thinges to the appoynted ende. Which thing we may se in Moises, Ge¦deon, and other. The godly man, doth di¦recte al thynges to peace, vnitie, and con¦cord. Again, he knoweth that the people is punished, if prynces do rule & gouerne wickedly.The solicitud and care of a godly man. These things do make a godly and faithful man, heauy, & ful of thought and kyndell him with a certain studye of godlynes, these thinges do make him to beware, and circumspect, not temerouse rash, and ouer bold, these thinges do con¦straine him to pray earnestly to god, and to thinke both day and nighte, vpon the amendement and redresse of those things that are done and cōmitted against god. Then god doth open the waies, wherby the desyres of the godly may be fulfilled nor doth forsake thē, that put their truste
and confidence in hym, nor yet dothe re∣pulse or put them backe, that cry and cal vpon him. SIM. When the tyraunt se¦eth, that he maye do al thinges, without punishment, he euery day waxeth worse, and more hygh minded. IOI. What so euer he seeth, let hym be sure, that an vt∣ter destruction doth hang ouer him,Who soeuer doth misuse the longe suffraunce of god, shall not escape punish¦ment. if he wyl continue syl in his wickednes. For no mā did euer escape wtout punishment that dyd misuse ye long suffraunce of god SI. Why doo ye then euery where de∣predicate and say, that they are like vnto Iudas the Gaulonite, and not christians that wil not obey the magistrates and ru¦lers?No godly man doth re∣siste the ma∣gistrate. IOI. Because that no godly man doth resist the magistrate. For sith yt the apostles do warne & byd vs to obey hea¦thenysh magystrates, who doth not se, yt it is an vnfittely thyng for a christian, to shew him selfe disobedient to a christyan magistrate? SIM. That were wel sayd yf we had a christyan Magistrate.Who is to be called a Chri∣styan magy∣strate. IOI I do cal him a christian magistrate, whi∣che is baptyzed in Christe Iesus, which beleueth in Christ, doth confesse him, and heareth hys gospell, which he dothe also suffer to be preached emong his subiects
nor doth persecute it, withstandynge (as muche as in him lyeth) wickednesse and iniquitie, or vnryghteousnes and punys∣shing the euil doers, that do offend open¦ly, which doth bend al his care and study to this, that ye glory of god may increase, may be promoted and set forth, that men maye lyue godly, honestly, and quyetly in the common weale. And (thankes be giuen to god) we do not want such now a daies, emong the magistrates and high powers, which thynge, no man can per∣swade to you.The Lyber∣tines & Ana∣baptystes, do thynke no man to be a Christyan, ex¦cept he recey∣ueth theyr doctryne and be baptized agayne. For ye thinke no man to be a christyan, excepte he doth cleaue too you, and receyue youre doctryne, and at length be baptized again by you, though all these things be altogether repugnant to christyan statutes, and publyke lawes No tongue can expresse how bytter and venymouse, or poysoned railyngs, ye do here vomite and spue out against the ma¦gistrate. SI. These thynges neuer plea∣sed me. IOI. But yet they are done of them. They do pycke and gather certain bytter and greuous sayinges oute of the psalmes and prophetes, which afterwar¦des being learned without boke, they do vomite againste the magystrates. These
thinges do please to stubburne & disobe∣dient persons,The scripture doth call the iudges and magystrates gods, because that they be here in the roume & stede of god, who soeuer then doth ryse or rayle agaynst them, God shall punyshe him extremly where as gods word doth forbyd vs to raile against the gods (for ye holy scripture doth so cal the magistrats and iudges) Peter doth liuely set theym furth, vnder the name of false prophetes, in his latter epistle, and .iii. chap. O Citi∣zins (say they) the magistrate is no chry¦stian, but yet be obedient vnto him. And thei their own selues wil not be obedient vnto him, in the leste thing of the world. What should I say? They go aboute to abolish and put downe all magistrates & high powers, that so they may do, what soeuer they list. Paul saith: If thou wilt not feare the hygh power, do that which is iuste, but they do fear the hygh power (for they go about to abolysh and put it downe) ergo, they wyll do that which is euyll. They are then the felowes of Iu∣das, the Gaulonite, and of Siba, the son of Bocheri, whych both for their hygh treason, were worthely put to death. Of Iudas the Galonit, se Iesephus, in the xviii. boke of antiquityes, and first chap. Actes .v. chapter. He dyd styrre sedition emonge the people, which he seducynge with hope of liberty, did perish at length
wyth many. Of Siba thou shalt read, in the seconde of kynges, and .xx. Chapter. Suche sedytyous personnes, are in the scriptures, called the chyldren of Be∣lial. Therfore, my Symon, if thou wylt folow my councel, thou shalt leaue this false opi¦nion, and afterwar¦des stycke to the truth, and be obedient to the Magistrates, and ru¦lers. SIM. Thou hast well satis¦fyed my mynd, therfore I wyll folowe thy councell. FINIS.
Imprynted the third daye of Aprill. Anno. Do. 1551. ¶ At Worceter in ye hygh strete, by Ihon Ofwen. ¶ They be also to sell at Shrewesbury. ☞ Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.
