19181.3 S94591 54532425 180849
THE TRVE AND perfect order to distill oyles out of al maner of spices seedes, rootes, and gummes with their perfect taste, smel, and sauour: where vnto is added some of their vertues gathered out of sundry auc∣thors. As Gualterius, Riffius, Guinthery An∣dernaty, Phillipus, Hermanus, Leo∣nardo, Phirauante, Phallo∣pius, Cardanus.
¶ Here beginneth the true order to make oiles of all manner of spises, Seades, Rootes and Gumes with their vertues gathered out of di∣uers and sundry authrs. To make oyle of scinamond. TAke Scinamond as much as ye wil and stampe, it grosely, than put it into a glasse wyth pure Aquauite and so let it stand v. or vi. dayes, than di∣still it with a small fire and there wil come foorth both oyle & water, the which ye shall seperate one from another for the oyle wil sinke to the bottom, some vse to distill it with wine and some with Rose water, ye shall vnderstand that this oyle is of a mar∣ueilous nature for it perceth through fleshe and bones and is very hote and dry. & ther∣fore it is good against all colde and moyst deseases, and in specially for the harte, and head in so much that if a man did lie speche∣les and could scant draw his wind it would presently recouer him againe, so that hys time be not yet come, most miracolous to sée, and to be shorte this oyle is of such ope∣ration and vertue that if a man drinke ne∣uer
so little therof he shall fele the working therof in his fingers and tooes, with great maruell and therefore to shut vp the some of his vertues it perceth thorow the whole body and helpeth al diseases, that are come thorow colde and flegmatike matter, this oyle is hot and sharpe, it disgesteth and ma∣keth thine and driueth down wemens ter∣remes, it helpeth wemen that haue great paine and smart in their trauell, and brin∣ging forth their frute, if ye geue the pacient a little of this oyle with oyle of Myrre in wyne to drinke and anoynt the parts ther∣with, the face and handes being anointed with this oyle it driueth away the messells and spotes, it warmeth the breast & helpeth the colde cough, it consumeth all cold flixes, that proceedeth from the braine and head, the tempels and nostrelles anoynted ther∣with, taketh away paines of the head and causeth quiet sléepe, this oyle may be occu∣pied in stead of the naturall balme for ma∣nie diseases, ye shall note that this water is also good against the aforesaid diseases, but yet nothing of such force and strength for one drop of oyle wil do more than vi. spone fulles of the water, Gaulterus riffius & Phi∣lippus Hermanus:
To make oyle of Cloues. THis oyle is made in the same order as ye did make the oyle of Scinamond and sinketh also to the bottome of the wytter the which ye shal seperate and keepe close, and his vertues are these. It strenghteneth the braine, head and heart and reuiueth the spirites, it serueth against all colde diseases it taketh away all euill fleames being out∣wardly aplyed, it hath great vertue in hea∣ling and may be occupied in stead of natu∣rall balme for woundes, one or two dropes taken in the morning with wine helpeth a stinking breth, this oyle maketh the harte merrie and clenseth the fylthines therof & openeth the lyuer that is stopped, being put into the eye it clereth the sight, it comfor∣teth a colde stomacke and causeth good dis∣gestion, it purgeth melancoly, Riffius. To make oyle of Nutmeges. THis oyle is made in the same order as ye made the oyle of Scinamond, but it will swime vpon the top of the water and is very cléere and pure and with very little heate or with the heate of the sunne it will flie away, therefore keepe it close in a glase,
if ye will distill this oyle againe in baleno, ye may keepe it an hundred yeeres in his perfect strength and vertue, & his vertues are these, it driueth down wemens termes and also the quicke and the dead fruite and therefore women with childe shall not oc∣cupie this oyle, vntill such time as they be in trauell with child, and than it causeth thē to be faire deliuered without paine & dan∣ger, being dronke with wyne it taketh a∣way all paines of the head cōming of colde it comforteth the maw, and openeth the ly∣uer mylte and kydnes, and such like: it is excellent against beating of the harte and faintnesse and sounding being dronke and annoynted with this oyle vnder the lefte breast, on the Region of the hart, it maketh good blood, and expelleth Flegmatike and melancolicke humors, and maketh a man merrie: being vsed at night it taketh away all fances and dreames: if any had a woūd or had broken a rybbe within him with a fal, let him drinke this oyle with any slight wounde drinke and it will helpe him, al∣thoughe he were almost dead: it is good in all fylthie soores which be called vncurable it is also precious for all colde diseases of the ioyntes, & sinowes. It maketh a swéete breath, if the splene do swell ye shall anoint
therewith the lefte side and it wyll ease it. Philippus Hermanus. To make oyle of Peper. THis oyle is distilled in manner as is a∣foresaid and will swym vppon the wa∣ter and is very clere, and his vertues are these, this oyle hath more vertue then the Peper had in percing and specially in the collike and other weake places fylled with Fleme, if ye take thereof. iii. or. iiii. dropes with one scruppell of the Iuyse of Quinces two houres afore the fyte, after that the bo∣dy is wel purged and let blood, it stayeth al∣so the shaking at the firste time or else at the second, and taketh away the fyt, ye shall vnderstand that this oyle is only the ayrye part seperated from the other elementes. Euonimus. To make oyle of Saffron. THis oyle is distilled as the other are, & hath these vertues, if it be dronke with wyne it maketh a man merry and to haue a fayre collour, if ye anoynt ye tempells of a man that is ouercome with drinke wyth this oyle it wil helpe him, this being anoin∣ted
on sante Antonis fire it quinceth it, and preserueth the place, this oyle mixed wyth womans milke it stoppeth the running of the eyes, beyng anoynted on the harte it maketh it merie, the head anoynted there∣with, it prouoketh sléepe, by reason wherof the auncient Doctors of Phisicke hereto∣fore dyd vse it to such as were mad anoyn∣ting their nostrels therewith, it clenseth also olde sores. &c. Riffius. To make oyle of Anysead. THis oyle is made as is aforesayde, and his vertues are these, being drunke in the morning with a littell wyne, it maketh a swéete breath if ye put a litle into the no∣strels when ye go to bed, and anoynte the temples therwith, it taketh away al paines comming of colde and causeth the pacient to sléepe quietly. It is good against wind in the gutes and stomacke & causeth the paine to sease, if ye drinke. iii. or, iiii. dropes, and anoynt the stomack therwith, it wil breake Fleame and cause it to come forthe at the mouth, it prouoketh venerus actes, and dri∣ueth forth poyson by sweat: it is most ex∣cellent for those that are short wynded and cannot fetche their breathe but with great
paine: It comforteth the breast and lunges It breaketh the stone in the Raines, and is good against the bluddy flix and pylles, yf ye anoynt any cheste therewith it will suf∣fer no mothes to breede therein. Philippus Hermanus. To make oyle of Fenelsede. THis is made as is aforesayde, and his vertues are these, it is most excellent a∣gainst all paynes of the eyes in so much yt if a mā were almost blynd it wold recouer his sight againe if he drinke thereof once a day, and drope one drope into the eye mor∣ning and euening: it maketh a swéete brethe and comforteth the head of colde hu∣mors: it comforteth the mawe and ope∣neth the Lyuer and mylte that is stopped: it helpeth the dropsie and yellow Ianders of what cause so euer they bée: In whote diseases ye shall vse it with colde waters, and in colde diseases wyth wyne. Philippus Hermanus. To make oyle of Comyn seede. THis oyle is made as the aforesaid oyles are made, and these are his vertues, this
oyle is good agaynst woundes that pearse to the splene, and against the wyndy col∣lycke, the which causeth the vrine somtime to stay. Ye may vse this with some licour conuenient, or make it in Manus Christi, with Sugar Euonimus. To make oyle of the seede of Rewe, or herbe Grace. THis oyle is also made in the aforesayd order, and his vertues are these. Car∣danus wryteth, that this oyle being perfect∣ly made, is of great vertue agaynst poyson being drunke with wine: for it causeth the pacient to auoyde it by vomit, at the fyrst time that he taketh it, and at the seconde tyme it expelleth the other euyll humours that were infected therewith: and at the third tyme it cureth the pacient, and ma∣keth him hole: and this is done in three or foure dayes. It helpeth also all diseases of the eyes, of what cause so euer it be, in so much that the apple of the eye be not peri∣shed, the vse of this oyle to the eye, is to annoynt it therewith twyse a day, or wash the eye with the water of Rewe distilled, and droppe two droppes into the eye. This oyle being drunke, suffereth no poyson to
remaine in a man that day, if a man drinke thereof fasting which is sore wounded and that the other cure be had accordingly he shall easly escape, this oyle beyng drunke, putteth away the goute or dropsie spronge of a colde cause: It restoreth all nummed members taken with the palsie if ye an∣noynt them therewith. Cardanus also af∣fermeth in his seconde Booke de subtilitate that there are certaine poysons the whych slay with the onely touching, against which poyson sayth he, the best remedie is not to tary in any place tyll thy hande wax hote, but often bathe the partes with warme water, and anoynting them with the oyle of Rewe, not with the common oyle made by expression, but of the seede of Rewe di∣stilled. The vertues of oyle of Iuniper beres. THis oyle is made as is aforesayd, but if it be rectifyed againe it will be an hun∣dred times more purer and more percing for I haue séene those that could not make their water in thrée or foure dayes and af∣ter they had drunke. iii. or. iiii. drops of this oyle and anoynte there with the Region of the blather presentlye they made water
without any tarying. This oyle is so excel∣lent against the pestilence that if any drink thereof, oftentimes he shall not be infected althoughe he were in the house where the Pestilence is: but if any haue the Plague vpon him, let him drinke thereof. iii. or. iiii. drops with a little wine and lay him down to sweate and the next day he shall be well againe, this oyle is also excellent againste poyson so that if any vse to drinke thereof it will not suffer any poyson to remayne within his body. It strengtheneth ye maw and all inwarde partes and principally it warmeth the harte: It stoppeth the blud∣die Flyx: It is also good against all disea∣ses of the Kydnes and Blather if ye drinke it with wyne: It stoppeth womens ter∣mes: this oyle beyng anoynted from the Nauell of a woman to the priuie partes and Raynes of the backe it strengtheneth the Matryx or mother, it dryeth vp ye moy∣sture therein and prepareth it to concepti∣on. Phillippus Hermanus. In the aforesaid order ye may make oyles of all manner of swéete herbes, rootes and séedes.
To make oyle of all manner of Gumes and first how to make oyle of Mastike. THis Gumme Mastike ye shall beate in pouder & thā dissolue him in burnt wyne and so distill it with an easie fyre and than seperate the oyle from the water. Some vse to myx a lyttle faire sand cleane washed and dryed with this Gume and so distill it with a soft fyre, some vse to distill it alone in a Retorte of glasse, with a gentle fyre, and then Rectifie it againe and so it will become very faire and clere, and his vertues are these it is excellent agaynst all could diseases of the maw: It comfor∣teth also the Lyuer, and the Mylte, and all other inwarde partes of the bodye, beyng drunke it helpeth those that vomyt or spyt bloud: It consumeth and breaketh all in∣ward sores, this beyng anoynted on the belly, it stoppeth the Flux: It stoppeth wo∣mens termes: It is also good for the mo∣ther that is fallen downe if ye annoynt it therewith, and also the vnder parte of the belly: It is also good for young children howes arse gutte commeth forth, if ye a∣noynt it therewith and put it vp agayne: it is also good for those that are burst if ye a∣noynt
them therwith and let them weare a trusse fytte for that purpose: It helpeth freshe woundes maruellous quickely if ye anoynt them therewith: It fasteneth the téeth if ye anoynt the gumes therewith: It comforteth the stomacke if ye anoynte it therewith, to be short this oyle hath all the vertues of the Mastike, but yet it is an hundred times of more force that it was afore. Phillippus Hermanus. To make oyle of Myrra. TAke pure Rectified Aqua vite without Fleame. xii. ounces and put therein sixe ounces of fyne Myrra that is not falcifyed and so let them stand vi. dayes in horse dunge to disgest, then distill away the Aquauite in Balneo and the oyle that re∣maineth in the bottome thou shalt strayne thorowe a fyne clothe and kéepe it to thy vse. This oyle by his naturall vertue pre∣serueth all things from putrifaction that is anoynted therewith: Likewise the face be∣ing anoynted with this oyle it preserueth it fayre and youthfully a long time. It hel∣peth woundes quickly and also diuers in∣warde diseases if ye drinke thereof two drammes: It helpeth paynes of the eares,
It preserueth the sight of the eyes, if ye put therin a drope or two, it helpeth all paines of the mother, if it be anoynted therewyth▪ beyng anoynted on the heade it stayeth the heare from falling, if any be troubled with a great feuer let him anoynte all his bodye ouer with this oyle leauing no part vna∣noynted: and lay him downe to sweate and he shall be holpe, this oyle dryeth and con∣sumeth all accidence after byrthe thrée or foure drops beyng drunke it helpeth the coffe and causeth a swéete brethe. It is good for those that are shorte wynded: It taketh away the stytche in the side, it stoppeth the Flux of the belly: It maketh a cléere voyce, the Arme pyttes beyng anoynted therwith it taketh away the stynch from those parts beyng mixed with wyne and the mouthe washed therewith it strengtheneth ye gums & teeth it is good for woundes in the head: if thou wilt vse this oyle to preserue anye part of the body ye shall vse it in this maner first ye shall make a bathe of some odorife∣rous herbes and syt or bold that parte the which ye will preserue ouer the feume of that bathe so that the powres maye open, than with a fayre lynnen clothe drye that part and than anoynt it with this oyle and rube or chafe it in that beyng done if there
remaine any yellownes of the oyle ye may lightly washe it way with white wyne and so it wil preserue thée a long time in youth∣full state and without diseases: ye may vse these oyles very well when ye are in a dry stowe or hote house if ye vse it as is afore¦said Leonardo, Phirauante, et Gualterius Rifius. To make oyle of Galbanum▪ FIrst ye shall choose the purest Galbanū that ye can fynde the which is not falsi∣fyed and dissolue it in pure wyne, than di∣still it in a gowrde with a head and a recei∣uer and their wil come forth both oyle and water the which ye shall seperate one from another: and his vertues are these, the na∣uell of a womans belly beynge anoynted therewith it driueth forthe the fruite: the face and handes beyng anoynted therwith it taketh away all spottes in them: beyng drunk with wine it helpeth ye cough yt hath continued long: It is also good against stife∣nes of the ioyntes: beyng mingled wyth a lytle oyle of Myrra and drunke with wyne it is most excellent against poyson: the no∣strelles being anoynted with this oyle pre∣uaileth much against the falling sicknesse
with the fewme of this oyle women maye be holpe that are troubled with risyng of the mother. Riffius. To make oyle of Bengimyne. TAke the best Bengimyne yt thou canst get and beat it to pouder thā put there to the purest Aquauite that ye can get with out Fleame and so let it stande. vi. or vii. dayes than distill it & thou shalt haue both oyle and water ye which are very pleasant eyther to make wasshing water or to per∣feume gloues. Phirauante. To make oyle of Storax Liquida. TAke as muche as ye shall thinke good of Storax Liquida the which is pure and cleane without any filthe and and put it in∣to a gord of glasse with a head and a recea∣uer and so distill it with a soft fyre, & there will come forth both oyle and water, the which ye shall seperate, and kéepe to thy vse Riffius. To make oyle of Storax Calamite. THis oyle is made as ye made the oile of Bengimyne but in stéede of Aquauite take Rose water, and than distill it accor∣ding to arte and at the latter end there will assende a certaine matter like Manna the which is very pleasant and his vertues are these, thrée or foure dropes of this oyle be∣ing
drunke comforteth the breast & lunges and all inward partes. It helpeth paynes of the mother if it be dronk and also anoin∣ted therwith. It stoppeth the rewme that falleth downe to the breast and necke: this being drunke maketh a man merry and of light courage: but beware that ye take not to much thereof two or thrée drops put in∣to the eares it taking away the singing in them. Rifius. To make oyle of Serapinum. FIrst choose that which is pure and clene and dissolue it in wine, than distill it in sand with a small fyre▪ This oyle is good for the stitche in the side: It taketh awaye the cough that hath continued a long tyme, it helpeth the swelling of the breast where∣by the brethe is stopped it is very good for the crampe and warmeth the ioyntes and helpeth paynes in the hype and al such like diseases, comming of colde. It is good for women that haue great payne in theyr chylde byrthe, if ye anoynt her nostrelles therwith for it driueth forth both the quick and ye dead fruite spéedely, this oyle drunke with wyne helpeth agaynst poyson and is specially good against the bytting of an Ad∣der: beyng put in the eye it taketh awaye the spottes and cléereth the sight, ye shall
note that womē with child must take great héede of this oyle. Rifius. To make oyle of Opoponax. THis oyle is made in the aforesayd ma∣ner & his vertues are these, yf ye drinke thrée or foure dropes with wyne it helpeth the cofe and all impedimentes of the mylt It helpeth also all impedimentes in the blather▪ it helpeth the stytche in the side, It clenseth the blather of all scabes and sores, It causeth spéedie deliuery in women with childe: It helpeth against wynd in the Ma∣tryx & dissolueth the hardnes of those parts, and causeth the paine to sease. Rifius. To make oyle of Euphorbinum. THis is made as is afore sayde, and hys vertues are these fyrste ye shall note that this oyle is not to be ministred inward¦ly by reason of his great heate, except it be myred with some other thing as if it be mingled with honny it purgeth the belly maruellously, It helpeth those that are troubled with obliuiousnes if ye annoynte the partes therewith: It draweth foorthe thornes and suche like out of the fleshe: It helpeth the byting of an Adder: It is also good for stifenes of the Ioyntes commyng of colde if ye anoynt it therewith▪ Rifius.
To make oyle of Succinum or Amber. TAke yellow Amber and beate it to pou∣der and put it into a vessell of glasse wel luted with a head and a receauer and geue it gentle fyre according vnto arte and there will come for the both oyle and water and salte the which ye shall seperate one from another. This oyle beyng well distilled is good against paynes of the head and resolu∣tion of scinowes and against swymming in the head and falling sickenes if ye drinke thereof thrée or foure dropes in the morning with water, it preserueth a man from all poysons and pestiferous ayres if ye a∣noynt the nostrelles therewith, or put into some medicyne fytte for that purpose: It is excellent againste diseases of the Blather and Raynes and dryueth forth the stone & prouoketh vrine if ye drink it with malme∣sye or percele water or such like: It helpeth the collicke and choking of the matryx, if ye anoynt those partes therewith: It dryueth forth the fruite and causeth a woman to be fayre deliuered if ye drinke thrée or foure dropes with water of enuye, it is good a∣gainst all Fluxes of the heade, &c. Guinthe∣rus Andernaci.
To make oyle of Frankensence. TAke Frankensence as much as ye will and put it in a Retorte of glasse and put therevnto for euery pounde of stufe foure ounces of sand and than distill it accordyng to arie and you shall haue both a fayre oyle and water the which ye shall seperate, this water is good against chopes in the handes and féete if ye washe them therewith and a∣noynt them ouer with the oyle against the fyre and strayte wayes put on a payre of gloues and so doynge thrée or foure dayes they shall be holpe, this helpeth simple woundes in three or foure dayes if ye a∣noynte them therewith and lay thereon a clothe weat in the same, it preserueth fleshe from putrifying and alteracion and taketh away the paine, It helpeth all aches and brusses if ye anoynt them therwith ye shall note that ye must tent no wound wherein ye occupy this oyle for it will heale it pre∣sently. Leonardo Phirauante. To make oyle of Turpentine TAke pure cléere Turpentine as muche as ye shall thinke good and put it into a glasse so that thrée partes be emptie & put therin a certain quantitie of sand as much as ye shall thinke good, than geue it a gen∣tell fyre and there will come forth a cléere
oyle like water with the which oyle there will also come forthe a yellow oyle, and af∣ter that there will come forthe a red oyle, the fyrst oyle is hotte the second botter the thyrd hottest of all and not so good to occu∣pie inwardly as the fyrst Phallopius in his Booke of secretes wryteth that this oyle healeth freshe woundes in. 24. houres if ye anoynt them therewith: It is also good a∣gainst contraction of scinowes commyng of colde: it prouoketh drine if ye drinke one dramme of the fyrst oyle in whyte wyne, it breaketh also wynde in the body and dis∣solueth the plewresye and also a pestelent Feuer, it prouoketh an appetyte if ye an∣noynt the stomacke therewith. Phillipus Hermanus wryteth that this oyle beynge drunke is good against all colde causes and fylthines of the maw and dryueth away a stinking brethe, It helpeth the coffe, ye shal note that the white oyle may be occupyed inwardly but not the second nor third. To make oyle of VVax. TAke newe yellow Wax as muche as ye will and melt it on the fyre, then cast it into good swéete wyne then wryng it harde with your handes and melt it agayne and than cast it againe into freshe wyne & thys do v. or vi. tymes than put it into a glasse
well luted with his head and receauer and distill it according to arte and thou shalte haue a goodly yellow oyle lyke golde, but it will congeale like pappe vntil it cometh to the fyre and than it wil be fayre and liquid, but ye shall vnderstand that for euery poūd of wax ye must put therevnto foure ounces of the pouder of brykes whan ye put them in your glasse to distill, the vertues of thys oyle are these, Ramend Lull, greatly com∣mendeth this oyle aprouing it rather to be a celestiall or deuine medicyne than hu∣maine, for because this in woundes wor∣keth moste myracolously, which for his maruellous commoditie not so well to be∣vsed of the common Chirurgians because this precious oyle healeth a wounde be the same neuer so bygge or wyde beyng afore wide stitched vp in the space of a leuē daies or twelue at the most, but those that are small this oyle healeth in thrée or foure dayes by anoynting onely the wound ther∣with and laying thereon a clothe weate in the same. Also for inwarde diseases thys oyle worketh myracles, for if ye geue ther∣of one dramme at a time to drinke wyth white wine, it stayeth also shedding of the heare eyther on the head or beard by anoin∣ting the place therewith, moreouer it is
myracolous in prouoking of vryne whyche is mightely stopped: It helpeth also styt∣ches and paynes in the Loynes if ye drinke the afore saide quantitie with white wyne It helpeth a colde goute and sciatica and all other gréefes comming of colde, ye shal vn∣derstand that if this oyle be rectifyed it will congele no more, but it will be so hotte and percing yt it will be scarse possible to drinke it downe but beyng once distilled ye may safely vse it inwardly▪ To make oyle of Lignum vite or Guacum. THou shalte take the freshest wood that thou canst get and make it in fyne pou∣der then put it in a vessell of glasse and lute it very close than set it in horse doong or in balneo to disgest than take it forthe and di∣still it in sande according to arte and thou shalte haue a cléere water and a fayre oyle that at the last change thy receyuer & aug∣ment thy fyre vntill the forth degrée vntyll the stuffe be burnte into asshes, than take that asshes and make thereof a strong lye with feumetory water and when thou seest that the asshes will make the lycor no more sharpe than take that lycor the whiche ye haue and let it settell tyll it be cléere than distill it with a fyller thrée or foure tymes, than put it into a great body or some other
vessell of glasse and set it on a smal fyre vn∣till al the lycor be consumed and than thou shalt fynde a salt in the bottome, the which salt ye shall dissolue and congele so long till it be verye fayre and white as salte geme than kéepe it to thy vse, this is good against the goute, Pox, and palsie as ye may plain∣lye read in the Chirurgery of Paraselsis where he intreateth of this wood. To make the oyle or licor of Honny. YE shall vnderstande that there is a cer∣taine quintaessence to be made of honie the which is myracolous and of wonderful vertues and the order to make it is thus, take pure honnye that is without anye fylthe or euil sauor and that is gathered on a pleasant grounde and put it into a great vessell of glasse so that foure partes of the glasse may remaine emptie, and looke that the glasse be well luted than set thereto a head and receyuer and geue it fyre vntyll there appeare certaine white fewmes, the whiche will turne into a read water, if ye kéepe the head & receauer colde with weat clothes and when all the substance is come forthe ye shall put it into a glasse & so kéepe it close vntill it be come very cléere and to the coullour of a Rubine, than rectifie it by Balneo and distill it at the least vi. or vii.
times, so it will come to the coulour of gold and will haue a maruellous pleasant sauor and then this quintaessence will dissolue golde and make it potable and likewyse all other sortes of Iuelles that is put therein, and therefore this is a blessed licour, for if ye geue any that were at the poynt of death two drams or thrée of this licour, presently it will recouer them, as well as wyth the quintaessence of wyne, if ye washe anye wound or sore with this presently it taketh away the paine: it is also good against the coffe and cattare and paine of the mylt and many other diseases the which I wyll not wryte of for if I should write those thyngs that I haue sene done with this lycor: they would not be deleeued: if ye distill thys ly∣cor twentie times with pure siluer in bal∣neo it wil restore sight vnto those that were almost blynd: moreouer I gaue it forty six dayes vnto one that had the Palsie and he was holpe: it helpeth also the falling sicke∣nesse and preserueth the body from putry∣faction and therefore by this we maye sée that this is a heauenly remedie sent from God aboue, and therefore I woulde wishe euery vertuous man to take a little paines to be expert in making of this lycour as I haue done and he shall do myracles there∣with
for I haue geuen it many times that fewe did perceiue it and afterwarde they thoughte that I had wrought by inchante∣ment for his working was so strange and myraculous, It comforteth the stomacke & extinguisheth all Feuers, It helpeth the collick, It breaketh the stone in the raines and prouoketh vryne, there is nothing in the world that preserueth the heare of the head and causeth it to be as fayre as the an∣gell golde more than this lycor dothe if ye washe the heare therewith foure or fiue times and let it drie in the same. Leonardo Phirauante. To make oyle of Butter. TAke new freshe Butter as muche as ye will and put it into a retorte of Glasse wel luted and geue it fyre according to arte and there will come forth thrée lycores the which ye shall seperate, this oyle doth pe∣netrate maruellously, it taketh awaye the paynes of the goute if ye anoynt therwith, if ye anoynt the face or handes therwith it maketh them very faire, It is also good for those that are troubled with a cattare if ye geue them one ounce therof fasting for pre∣sently it aryueth to the stomacke and mol∣lifyeth the cattar in such order that he shall spit it forth at ye mouth. Leonar▪ Phirauāte.
To make oyle of Egges. THis oyle being well made of the yolkes of Egges is a lycor of greate vertue in diuers and sundry causes, and it will neuer consume, it serueth also in Alcimia to fyx there medicens that are volatill and the order to make it is thus, take Egges and sethe them hard than take out the yolkes & stampe them in a morter, than put them in a vessell of copper and set it ouer the fyre & continually stir it, vntil such time as it tur∣neth all to oyle, & when thou séest it turne into oyle, presently presse it thorow a can∣uas & kéepe it to thy vse. This oyle helpeth woundes with great spéede: It maketh the heare of the beard or head blacke. It taketh away the scicatrise of wounds: It taketh a∣way paines of the emerods. The order to make oyle of briks otherwise called oleum philosophorum delateribus vell aleum benedictum. THis oyle hath the vertues of the natu∣rall balme against all cold diseases, and may be occupied in steade of balme, if it be well distilled, & the order to make it is thus take the newest brykes that thou canst get that neuer touched water & put them in the fire vntill they be redhotte, than quinch thē in swéete sallet oyle or oyle of roses, & whē
they are quinched take them forth and put them in the fire againe & let them lye vntil they be red hotte than quinch them in that oyle againe, & let them lie vntill they wyll drink no more, than put them in the fire a∣gaine & quinch them again and this ye shal do at the least vi. or vii. times & at the laste time take them out of the oyle and stampe them to pouder & put them into a retort of glasse well luted and distill it according vn∣to arte & thou shalt haue a precious oyle, ye shall note that some for luker of gaine doe put in the oyle on the brykes in the retorte and some other doe stepe them but once & also put on the oyle the which they ought not to do, but to take only the dry brikes af∣ter they haue byn quinched vi. times, some write that the older this oyle is the better it is and it hath these vertues, It helpeth al cold aches if ye anoynt the place therwith, it helpeth freshe wounds mightely if ye put therein these herbes which are a propriate for ye purpose, it helpeth chops in ye handes or féete cōming of cold or winde, it is good a∣gainst paines of the seinows & goute, it hel∣peth the stone in the blather & raines if ye vse to drinke it oftentimes and anoynt the partes therwith, it prouoketh vrine, it hel∣peth paines in the eares comming of colde,
it helpeth also against worms in the eares it rypeneth al impostumes if ye put therto the roote of a white lylle, it helpeth against the falling sicknes if ye anoynt ye nostrels therwith, it helpeth against al paines of the head cōming of cold if ye anoynt the parts therewith, it driueth forth the dead fruite, it helpeth a colde coffe if ye drinke thereof. It helpeth against the byting of any venimus serpent if ye anoynt the place therewith, if fyshers anoynt their nettes with this oyle it will cause the fyshes to follow the net, it is good for those that haue drunke opium or henbane, it is good for those that spit blud or pis blud, it dissolueth bloud congealed in bruses, with this oyle ye may make a can∣dell that neither wind nor water can put it forth, ye shall take weke or cotten and wet it in this oyle and than with wax or tallow make a candell, the which will burne in water, if ye mixe this oyle with pigeons dunge & anoynt a sticke therwith and laye it in the sunne it will kindel fire of it selfe: Also if ye take calkex vyfe & brimstone & of this oyle of eche a like, and mix them toge∣ther and make therof balles and cast them into water and straight waies it wil kindle on fire. Diodorius Vchinius. This oyle saith Phirauante beinge annoynted on the
rupture in short time it cureth the same, it dissolueth all paines and hardnes, the fesese the which remaineth in the bottome, if they be layde on an vlcer presently it doth consolidate. &c. To make oyle of Tartar. TAke Tartar of white wine and set it to calcine in a furnes of calcinacione, till it be as white as snowe, than lay it on a mar∣bell stone in the aire and it will turne into oyle the which ye shall kéepe close shut in a glasse for this is perfecte oyle, some vse to burne this but black and then mix it wyth vineger to falsifie it, and othersome burn it with commō salt, but those two wayes are not profitable this oyle is very sharpe and corosiue and when ye will occupie it to take away spots in the face ye shall mix it wyth some other kynde of water: this oyle also taketh awaye all spottes in clothe if ye washe them therewith, It mundifyeth vl∣cers if ye washe them therewith: It hel∣peth against all euill dispositions of the sto∣macke if ye drinke one scurpell wyth two ounces of mell Rosarum and thrée ounces of Rose water in the mornyng fastinge. Phallopius.
To make oyle of vineger. YE shall take Vineger that is made of pure wine and distill it according vnto arte and than take the fesses that remain in the bottome & drie them, than burne them tell it become white than take that ashes and lay it in a moyste place and it will dis∣solue into oyle the which is of suche a mar∣uellous vertue for mans body that it is not to be credited, for if ye drinke thereof a ly∣tell quantitie it breaketh grauell in the raynes and blather: this secret was neuer found til this time of no man, also Vineger being distilled with a little oyle of Tartar and Aquauite, maketh the face faire. Leo∣nardo Phirauante. FINIS. These oyles with a number of others are to be solde at the signe of the furneseies adioyning to Powles wharfe at the dwelling house of Iohn Hester, practissioner in the arte of distillacions. 1575.
