B1800AA R172698 52211691 175421
The Tryal of WITCHCRAFT OR, WITCHCRAFT Arraign'd and Condemn'd. In some Answers to a few Questions anent Witches and Witchcraft. Wherein is shewed, how to know if one be a Witch, as also when one is bewitched: with some Observations upon the Witches Mark, their compact with the Devil, the White Witches &c. by: Mr. John Bell. Exod. 22.18. Thou shalt not suffer a Witch to live. It is advantagious to have many engaged in writing on the same Subject, even though they should say little more then what is said by others. Mr. Durham on the Revelation. Digress. 3. Page 63.
Le Friend. Sir, HAving heard strange things reported of Witch-craft and Witches: I de∣sire to know from you, what sa∣tisfaction you can give me in an∣swer to the following Queries, wherewith the mouths of People are on that occasion so much filled: take them thus. Query 1. How shall one know if a disease be the effect of Witch-craft, seeing all grant, that strange diseases may happen either to Man or Beast, which yet are neither the pro∣duct of Devils or Witches. Query 2. What meanes are best to be used for help to these thus bewitched. And here I would know 1. what is to be thought of cau∣sing the suspected Witch, touch the afflicted Party, 2. If this be not, then what other mean is best. Query 3. I would further know, what will
prove one to be a Witch? and here 1. If bi¦ter cursing and imprecations with malefices fol∣lowing thereupon, will prove it? and if not that, then 2d. If a persons often enquiring into the disease of the tormented, or their coming to visite them unsent for; yea, after they have been discharg'd the house as being suspected persons, will do the business? Or 3d. if the af∣flicted person his or her seeing, in time of th tormenting fits, so as to know and name parti¦cular Persons; will prove the Person thus seen known and nominate, to be a Witch. Or 4th If none of those, then (pray) what will do it? your answers agreeably to the mind of the best Writers you have seen, is earnestly intrea∣ted by, Your Humble Servant. An answer to the Letter. Sir, THo I am sensible, that to speak on this head of witchcraft, is a very hard Task; con∣sidering especially the difficulty of discovering Wiiches; (the secrecy of the grounds of witch∣craft; and the cunningness of some juggling counterfits, being so great and many) as also considering how Satan seeks to imitate God i his actions; as Scripture, and many strange
(tho true) relations about Witches do abun∣dantly make appear: for example, 2 Kings 5.27. we read that God by the Prophet makes Naamans leprosie cleave to Gehazi; so Satan does by the help of Witches at sometimes, take the disease from off one person, & layes it upon another. Also, we read Acts 8.39. of Philips being carried bodily out of the Eunuchs fight; so also can the Devil transport bodies from one place to another, as we find he took our bles∣sed Saviour up unto the pinacle of the Temple, Mat. 4. And he often carries his own servants into the aire, as he did Dr. Faustus, or over into forraign places; as is usual for him to do with these Witches. Tho, I say, these with many moe things concurre to render the un∣dertaking hard; yet I think it needs not be ill look't upon if an essay be made of this nature; considering especially how much light may be borrowed from the Writings of learned men both of old and of late, the direful experience of former ages, as well as of this, having af∣forded occasion for such questions as be pro∣posed by you, and which are current with the common people. Adventuring therefore to obey your desire, take the Answers in the following Method.
SECTION I. How to know if one be ewitched. IN answer to your first Quer I would say; that no doubt most people may be thought too rash in attributing to Witchcraft every dis∣ease that seems strange and beyond ordinary, as is rightly insinuated, in your ground given for your first Qury: famous writers instancing in their books many strange and wonderful diseases, yet no work of witchcraft, as are the Apoplexy, Carum, Catalepsis, Cramp, with many moe mentioned by Dr. Cotta in his Em∣periks, and Dr. Mason in his practice of phi∣losophy, and R Bernard in his Guide to Grand jury men. All which Authors do yet still affirm these to proceed from natural causes, and to be curable by natural remedies; tho scarce would a common person look on the party thus distempered, without concluding witchcraft to be there. However, where the disease is more then natural, and no less then the effect of witchcraft
it may be known by such signs as Witches them∣selves in their confessions, and learned Physici∣ians have condescended upon as symptoms of Witchcraft. I only name a few which we may ake thus. 1. When the disease is such as that wise and skilful Physicians can find no probable eason of any natural cause for it, as it was with M. Throgmortons child, who would often have a great heaving & swelling of the belly, then a passing to the throat ready to stop the breath: as also thrusting out her leg or arm so as non could bow it, with other such like motions 2. When ye tormented Party in time of such fits vomite up crooked pins, coals, nails, needles, knoted hair, straw, &c. 3. When the tormented party in ime of their fits tell truly many things; some past, others in doing, as, where the Witch is, what she is doing, saying, &c. as hapened in the case of Mr. Throgmorton's elder daughter, Mrs ean, who could also tell some things to come, as how many in the house were to be bewitched, and who they were. 4. When there is superna∣tural strength, so as that a very strong man should not be able to keep down a child of about 12. years of age as it was with one of M. Throgmor∣ton's children. Other signs are given by Authors, but we pass them.
SECTION II. Of Means to be used for helpin the bewitched. VArious are the methods fallen upon for e¦sing the afflicted: among which is th made mention of in the second Query of causi the suspected Witch touch the afflicted perso as if their touch could cure them: Which y seems not to be a mean on which we are to re (though I find not the use of it simply conde¦ned) as having neither a divine appointment, n a natural reason for it. Add to this (whi some have well taken notice of) that the susp¦cted Witches either presence or absence, is a ve uncertain thing. for 1. Their presence or absen as Witches takes it force only from their leagu and covenant with the Devil: which as they c renew at pleasure, so can they make their pr¦sence or Touch effectual accordingly; So a the tormented party be bad, and take fits, th present, by indenting with the Devil over aga
(God permitting) they may procure that in their presence they may take no more fits; and on the contrary, if in their presence and at their Touch they be well, so that their presence there will prove nothing, either for curing the diseas∣ed, or making them yet worse, and so thereby founding a presumption for By-standers to con∣clude them Witches, 2. Their touching is an un∣certain thing, because (as writers on this head have sufficiently instructed) by Touching they even sometimes bewitch the afflicted party. Thus Danaeus in Dialogis suis de Sortiariis, wit∣nesseth, that a Witch touched but the breasts of a woman that gave suck, and her milk dried up: and the forcited Rector of Batcomb, R. Bernard reports of one Mary Suton a Bedford shire Witch, that having but touched the neck of one of Mr. Engars servants, wt her finger, he was presently after her departure miserably vexed, how then can thir touch cure the diseased? So then, the best mean is fasting and prayers, for God only can best free us from Divels, and in the use of his means alone it is, that we are to expect a blessing: So that if we would pre∣vent Witches, and whatever else the Devil can do, let us always rely on God, who hath promi∣sed to such, that he will cover them under his wings. &c. Psalms 91.4.
SECTION III. What will prove one to be a Witch▪ GReat is the Mystery of iniquity, and its hard to discover the Members of that King¦dom of darkness, where the King is Satan, the fiery Dragon, the roaring Lyon, and deceive of the Nations; and where the subjects are fag¦gots of hell, Deceivers and deceived: Yet thorough the Lords blessing on the means and methods fallen upon for detecting such, they may be known, let us then touch at these, and first negatively what will not prove one to be  Witch, and then positively, what will. To begin then and go throw with the seve¦ral particulars contained in the third Query le us consider the first particular which is if bitte cursings & imprecations, evil following there upon, will prove one to be a VVitch, and to thi it is answered, that tho VVitches have bee known thus to bewitch people by Cursing the whereupon presently evil followed to the pe¦son
thus Cursed, yet it is no more then a pre∣sumption of ones being a VVitch, for first such Cursings and Imprecations are in some no other then the effect of a natural constitution, and so may be acted oftner than once or twice: Con∣stitutions (in the Judgment of the learned) differing from habits mostly in name, when they come to any perfection; and habits being got by acts frequently repeated. 2. Because, as Sa∣tan may get a permission from God, to work natural diseases which do break forth upon cur∣sing, so doubtless he improves it subtily, of which some do thus conceive. They say, the Devil he knows when his power to do hurt is granted him of God; as also, he knows the growing, ripening, and breaking forth of a disease upon man or beast. Again, ere natures act thus break out, he stirs up some occasion to make the party against whom his design is, to fall out with some angry neighbour, which being gain'd, Satan stirs up people hereupon, because of one or two such practises, to pursue the neighbour to death, as becoming by her ill tongue a VVitch; when as, tho she be otherwise pestilentious enough, yet possibly is no VVitch. So then we conclude, that however this may be an Item to such ill na∣tur'd cursers and railers to forbear further pro∣vocking of God by such practices to give them
over to Satans power; yet I see not why cu¦sings with harm following them are any oth then a presumption (however great it be) th one is a VVitch. 2. As to a persons often enquiring into th disease of the tormented, or their coming to v¦site them unsent for, yea perhaps after they hav been discharg'd the house, as persons under su¦picion, its answered in one word, that this is n other then a presumption, & that for this reaso among others, that revengeful spirits (thoug they be no VVitches) having once cursed, an hearing of some sudden mischance followin in order of time thereupon, may inquire afte the afflicted party, yea visite him or her, whil under this fit of cursed joy conceived in them at the hearing of such news, when yet for al this there is perhaps no league with the Devil and as for their visiting undesir'd, yea, whe prohibite and discharg'd some have rightly im∣puted the same to the confidence, or rather im∣pudence of the poorer, and unmannerly sort of people. 3. As to the afflicted persons seeing, know¦ing and naming diverse persons in time of thei fits, as their tormentors; as it was with Mr Throgmortons Children (as the Author of the Relation of VVarboys VVitches does attest) ye
will not yt prove ye person or persons so known, & nominate, to be all VVitches, for 1. as to their being seen, doubtless tho the Devil cannot cre∣ate any inward species or representation, this being a work of Omnipotencie (as Holy and lear∣ned Mr. Durham hath observed) yet God per∣mitting him; he by working upon what is al∣ready within the person, may misrepresent ob∣jects, by disturbing inwardlie the Faculties & Organs: so that he can presentiate to the Phana¦tasie such persons, as he knows the tormented party abhors to see, and useth to fear: for if he could represent a seeming Samuel, much more a Graceless man or woman, to deceive the Fan∣cy of disturbed minds of afflicted Persons; and yet these graceless persons may be no VVitches, for doubtless in this the Devil may lie, as well as speak true. 2. As to their being named, its but the Devils Testimonie, which is not to be laid weight on, in the matter of life and death; seing he may accuse an innocent, as histories abundantly declare Sir, I perswade my self you take up my mind in this matter better then to think any favour to be intended or allowed, by what I have said of thir Negative marks (as I called them for distinctions sake) to any of these members of Satans Kingdom the VVit hes: God forbid any
(far less I) should in the least Favour such for whom God hath told us in his word he hath no favor they continuing such; for however I have all alongst called these but Presumptions, in so do∣ing; I say no other then what pious and learn'd Writers on this head have spoken, who withal are of opin on (as I also am) that such preg∣nant and shrewd presumptions sufficiently wit∣nessed are just cause of imprisonment, and are worthy (after tryal) of most severe and con∣dign punishment▪ but ere the life can be taken away from them, it will perhaps be found need∣ful, that a league with the Devil be once proven, for understanding of this, let us premise these 4. or 5. things. 1. that the Devil seeks not to make any a Witch whom he finds not some way pre∣par'd either by impenitency and obduredness, distemperedness of passion, prophaness, and the like: for he will not readily nor willingly at∣taque and surprize, where he thinks not to gain ground. 2. Finding man or woman thus prepa∣red, he waits his opportunity of appearing to them visibly, sometimes in one shape, sometime in another, varying according to the nature, quality, and condition of the persons to whom he thus appears: thus he is said to have appear∣ed to Dr Faustus in the habite of some religio person; and now it is, that he works upon the
poor creature, whom he at one time allures by many perswasives, at other times surprizing them, frights them into a complyance with his overtures, according as he finds them igno∣rant or witty: for he's a cunning Engineer, who attacks towns according to their fortifica∣tion, situation, or garrison: he understands who among men and women are weak, and on what side; and agreeably, some are min'd, others bomb'd, some won by storm, others by com∣position, others again are starved into a surren∣der, 3 That which he aims at in all thir assaults, and in order whereunto he appears once, or oftner, as he finds need is, to draw the poor, impenitent, and obdured creature into a league with himself, which League or Covenant, Di∣vines makes to be twofold: the one implicite, secret and closs; wherein is a mutual consent, but without any express terms on either side; Mr. Perkins in his discourse of Witchcraft. chap. 2. Explains this, while he says that when a person desires in heart to have such or such a thing effected by superstitious forms, &c. And the Devil consents thereunto, if he then do the business, there is a secret compact: thus such as by certain forms of words and prayers, call upon the Devil; and when tho they know it to be unwarantable, yet will do it, because they
find an effect answerable to their expectation in using such charms and spells, they are in Co∣venant with the Devil, though they will not let themselves know or think it. Now this secret compact Satan sometimes, and as to some per∣sons, rests satisfied with, as when the man or woman is of considerable knowledge, and hath much Mother VVit (as we commonly call it) and so is such as he knows will not be easily drawn into a more formal and express league with him; or when he is content they should be shinning professors and such of whom he de∣signs to serve himself mostly, if not only, in mat∣ters seemingly good. The other sort of league is that which is more express and formal, and when there be mutual conditions: the VVitch on his or her, part giving over their Soul (and sometimes also the body) into Sathans power, he on the other part, promises great things t them, knowledge to the ignorant, revenge to the envious, and wrathful, &c. though he often breaks his promise to them, as he did to a Hu¦garian VVitch, of whom I have read, who being put in prison, and wanting food, she did eat he own fl sh and so perished: Satan her Master never once helping her, if it was not to destro her self, sooner then otherwise she might have done. But then 4. the Covenant thus made, he
proceeds to confirm it, which (some say) must be done by blood: therefore, some offer him a Sacrifice; perhaps of a cat, dog, &c. possibly he condescends thus far to some VVitches of a more then ordinary station: but however I will not be positive in this; only I find it asser∣ted by some, that he will not part thus with your ordinary VVitches, but must needs Suck Blood of them which is done by Spirits, and that in several parts of the body, as the crown of the head, under the ear, the chin, &c, as witches of whom I have read, have confessed before the Judges. Next follows the VVitch Mark, some∣times like a blew spot, or a little tate, or reid spots like flea-biting, sometimes also the flesh is sunk in, and hallow, and this is put in secret pla∣ces, as among the hair of the Head, or eye∣brows, within the lips, under the arm-pits, and even in the most secret parts of the Body. 5. Thus the Devil & they becoming familiar, they get from him Familiar Spirits, some one, some moe, with whom they consult, and act, and o∣ver which Spirits he makes them believe they have all power, and can command them at pleasure: and in this they assume to themselves a kind of Glory, to think that they have Spirits at their nodd, to send forth for the torment of others; and herein they rejoyce, that they can
keep others in awe by such thoughts of them or words to them, whereupon follows hurt and mischief. Some have so far run on in maintain∣ing this point of it, anent the Witches getting fa¦miliar Spirits, at that they think, that Witchs d work all their malice and mischief by those cur∣sed Caytiffes; and so they make three things concure to the bewitching of a Person; viz. a Divine permission, a Devilish operation, or the evil Spirits working: and lastly, the Wit∣ches consent; So that the Devil does all, and they consent to all, which to wit, is done in their behalf, for no doubt, Satan can go of, and for himself, where he hath no league with the Witch, thus some define a Witch to be such as do act beyond the ordinary power of Nature, by the help of wicked Spirits. Athen. Merc. V. 1. N. 3. Q. 6. Now, before we proceed further, we shall take notice of this one Collorary that may be drawn from what we have now said anent the Covenant with the Devil. From hence possi∣bly we may gather a reason, why Witches them selves are not afraid to met with the Devil? Fo one would think that Humane Nature migh justly fright at the appearance, if not the am¦sing name of DEVIL. We would say there∣fore, that we doubt nothing, but at sometime the Devil appears even to his own in frightful
shapes, to their great terror, especially if he be angry at them, and designs violence unto them, upon their refusing to do as he bids them, as Bernard reports he did to old Demb∣dike, whom he pusht into a Ditch, because she would not go help Chattox another VVitch, (whom she could not abide) to make Picturs. The same Author says, the Devil came some∣times to Witch Chattox gaping upon her in the Form of a Beare, with open month as if he would have worried her, yet I think the rea∣son why for ordinary they are not so much a∣fraid to meet, speak to and keep Caballs with him; is, that they being now in Cove∣nant with him, dream of no hurt in the busi∣ness: yea, they fancy they have him at Com∣mand. And if it be said, its strange they have no checks of Conscience in the mean time be∣cause of their League wt the Devil: We answer, that it is not so strange as sad, and to be lamen∣ted; For they being readily before that given up of God to a reprobate mind, have their Consciences seared, so as that they want all sense and feeling of sin. But now to come to the question more closely, and to shew how one may be convic∣ted of this their league with the Devil; this compact how secretly so ever made, is to be searcht into, and all the presumptions hitherto spoken of, must tend to prove and discover
this compact, which some think may be got∣ten done by a narrow scrutiny and search into these among other evidences of this Covenant. 1. By a Witches Mark. We told already where this is to be found, it must therefore be again & again diligently searched for; and least it b mistaken for a Natural mark, it is to be obser∣ved, that this is Insensible, so that being pric¦ked it will not bleed, as Natural marks wil do, But what if they hide them? Or what i they find a way to remove them? We answe that God in his providence will scarce suffer i to be so; or if it so fall out, then it grows a¦gain, and comes to its old Form, if we ma credit the Grand Witch Lewis Gaufridus a ric and learn'd Priest, as Bernard calls him: S that, tho this mark be not found at first, it may be discovered at length. 2d. By Witche words, as their fortelling what shall happen to others the same found true, and their boastin thereof afterwards; as also, their speaking o transportation from home to forraign places &c. 3d. Witches deeds; as their feeding crea¦tures secretly, which some say they send their errands; their making of pictures, giving an¦ thing to any Man which causes pains or death as is, the perusing one shirt or cloaths, retur¦ning the same again, and the owner upo
wearing them, and all the time of his or her wearing them, pained or tormented. 4th. The confession of Fellow-Witches, especially if appearing penitent, and being called one by one yet all agree in their Testimony; as their having seen, and been with them at their sus∣pected Devilish meetings, plotings. &c. And here comes in the report of the Good or white Witch (as they call him or her) whereby is meant, these Healers or Blessers (as some call them) who pretend to know who are bad Witches, and where they dwell; and how to heal blasting, for speaking &c. These being themselves Witches and in league with the De∣vil, best know who these are, and what be their practises. 5. A Divine witness. where God condescends to give it, as, when they pray for a token from God of displeasure against them if they be guilty; and it accordingly falls out. As it is reported to have been with one Mother Samuel the Warhoys Witch that tormented Mr. Throgmortons children, who by bitter curses on her self if she were guilty; presently her Chin did bleed, the place (as afterwards she con∣fest) where the Spirits did Suck blood, 6th. And lastly, The confession of the Witches them∣selves. Sometimes the arraign'd Witches con∣fess their being in Covenant with the Devil,
partly upon being charg'd with the guilt,  of their own accord, or finally, being draw thereto through terror of Conscience. But now Sir, after all that is said, I desi not to be so understood, as if hereby I d¦sign'd to force any into a complyance with th Conclusions already laid down, further th the reasons brought by grave Authors alre hinted will perswade; nor do I think the Opi¦nions or Practises of others which may se to run cross to something hitherto asserted are to be taxed by any; so that what is he said is only to shew you what hath given th Answerer to your Questions most satisfactio in these Points. For a conclusion therefore I would say, that tho I have adventured on these few lines in answer to your Queries, therein I do not, nor ineeed can I expect to satisfie all even of the more Judicious, but am apprehen∣sive on the contrary, that I may displease som of them (for which I should yet be sorry) who may possibly think that the greatness o the Task might have forc'd me to a more aw¦full distance, and a giving way to better an greater Undertakers; but finding none hither∣to forward for allaying vulgar rude notions ¦bout your momentuous questions, I have (ye
with all submission) adventur'd on this short essay the questions handled therein, ra∣ther then the answers, being such as may push others forward to se∣cond and much better cares about them; which should much Sir, Your Friend and Servant. FINIS.
