C1815B R173648 52211732 175547
THE Remonstrance and Declaration of George Cha∣berlaine Gent. declaring to the World all passages concer∣ning his lawfull Mariage with Ione Hele, sole daugh∣ter and heire of Andrew Hele Esq late of the County of De∣von. deceased since whose decease one Samuell Massey married the Widow of the sayd Andrew Hele, being Mother of the sayd Ione Hele, and how the said Samuel Massey drew in the sayd George Chamberlaine to mary with his sayd daughter in law both by his and his wifes, and the sayd Iones consent, and by Ar∣ticles of Agreement under hand and seale; And also how the said Samuel Massey and his sayd wife, since and before the said ma∣riage, hath defrauded the said George Chamberlaine of above sixe hundred pounds in money, besides Watches, Rings, Iewels, and Apparell for his wife, and how, and by whom, and by what meanes the sayd Mr. Chamberlaine should have beene poyso∣ned, with other foule and notorious misdemeanors by the sayd Massey, and his sayd wife, perpetrated against the sayd George Chamberlaine, by keeping his sayd lawfull wife from him; and by divers frauds in offering the sayd wife of the sayd George Chamberlaine in mariage to divers persons, since she was lawfully married to the sayd George Chamberlaine, by which practise the sayd Massey did delude and defraud divers and severall persons of severall valuable sums of money, toge∣ther with other remarkable passages, of absolute transcendent knavery, acted by the sayd Massey, and fit to be discovered and made known to the view of all men. IN and before the moneth of November, in the year of our Lord, 1651. The said Samuell Massey and his wife, and Mistris Jone Hele, Masseys daughter in law, being sole daughter and heir of one Andrew Hele, by the said Masseys wife, all of them being then in the Strand, and fame speaking her to be heire at Law unto about 2000 l. per annum free-hould lands of inheritance, besides many thousand pounds due unto her for the arrerages thereof, di∣vers young Gallants and others were Suitors unto, and highly and costly Courted the said Massey and his wife, to admit them but to see or be suitors for marriage unto their said daughter, whereby much mony by many per∣sons was spent, upon the said Massey, and his wife and daughter, in feasting
and entertainements, besides many costly Watches and Rings, were pre∣sented to the said Massey and his wife from severall persons, hoping thereby and by their meanes to Ingratiate and degree themselves into the favour and liking of the yong Lady, so that the said Massey and his said wife for a time, did drive on a very pretty trade, untill such time that it begun to be too commonly known to be a meare cheat; but before the Market was quite done, one Master John Samine had gotten Intelligence of that great pretended heirs estate and wealth, and he being no lesse full of desire then credulity, makes meanes to the said Massey that Master Samines brother in law, Master George Chamberlaine, might have the sight of his daughter in law, and that he might be a suitor for marriage unto her, which accord∣ingly was assented unto. This assent begets an Interview and meeting be∣tween Master Chamberlaine and his friends, and Mistris Jone Hele, and her friends: it so pleased God a liking was had between them, the said Master Chamberlaine and Jone Hele, and by the consent of themselves, and friends on all parts, the said Massey her father in law, being her Guardian by order of Chancery, and the said Mistris Jone Hele being above the age of fourteen years, and so consequently of the full age in law to consent to mariage, on the eighteenth day of November, in the year of our Lord 1651. There were Articles of agreement entered into, sealed and duly executed, by and with the consent of the said Jone and her mother, by and between the said Samuel Massey of the one part, and the said George Chamberlaine on the other part, to this effect hereafter following. First, That is to say, that the said George Cham∣berlaine by Gods grace and providence did intend to marry and take to wife Jone Hele sole daughter and heire of Andrew Hele Esquire, deceased, and daughter of the wife of the said Samuel Massey, on or before the first day of May then next following. Secondly, that the said Massey and his wife during their lives, and the life of the longest liver of them, should hold and enjoy one full third part, in three parts to be divided, of all such Manors, Messages, Lands, and Tenements, as should be recovered in the right of the said Jone Hele, as heire to her said late Father Andrew Hele, or as heire unto one Walter Hele, and Eise Hele deceased. Thirdly, it was agreed by and between the said parties, that all such Rents, Arrerages of Rents, Issues, and profits whatsoever, that should be recovered in the right of the said Ione Hele, should be equally devided between him the said George Chamberlaine and the saide Samuel Massey and his wife, if the said marriage do take effect. Fourthly, that out of the fines and profits of the estate when it shall be re∣covered, the said George Chamberlaine shall pay unto the said Samuel Massey, the full some of 100 l. Fiftly, that the said George Chamberlaine shall lend and pay unto the said Massey the full some of 500 l. and that the said Massey shall secure the repayment thereof by statute of 1000 l penalty, if the said marriage take no effect, by or before the aforesaid first day of May, and that if the said marriage take effect, the said five hundred pounds not to be repaid, for in truth that money was paid towards the yong Gentlewomans e∣ducation, and for bearing the charge of the recovery of the estate due unto her. Sixthly, it was fully agreed by and between all the said parties; That the said Massey and his wife should permit and suffer, the said George Chamberlaine with their free and Voluntary consents to be a suitour for marriage unto
the said Jone Hele with freedom at all fitting & convenient times, and that the said George Chamberlaine should enter into one statute of the penalty of 2000 l. to the said Massey, to performe the Articles of agreement in all points, which was accordingly performed and entred into. Seventhly, That if the said marriage took no effect, by, or before the foresaid first day of May in the Articles of agreement mentioned, that then it was agreed that the said Massey should repay the said 500 l. without Intrest unto the said George Cham∣berlaine, within six moneths after the said first day of May, and that if the said marriage did take effect according to the said Articles of agreement, that then the said 500 l. to be quit to the said Massey, &c. After which said Articles of agreement so sealed and duly executed, all faire and friendly so∣cieties, meetings, and invitations, to feast and enjoy each other societies of themselves and friends reciprocally, with all Joy and amicable love on both parts: after which it was unanimously agreed, by the full and free consent of the said Jone Hele, and the said George Chamberlaine, and by the full and free consent of the said Massey and his wife, and by the consent of the friends of the said George Chamberlaine, that on the fift day of the moneth of February then next after the date of the said Articles of agreement, which was just two moneths and 17 dayes after the Articles of Agreement were sealed: That then, and upon the said fift day of February, there should be a lawfull marriage had, and solemnized, by, and between the said George Chamberlaine and the said Jone Hele, which accordingly was lawfully and willingly had and performed, by a lawfull Minister in a law∣full Church, the dores being open at a lawfull houre, the said Massey her Father in law, and her naturall Mother being then personally present, and the said Massey and his wife bringing her thither in company, with the said George Chamberlaine in a Coach for that purpose, and the said Massey her Father in law, in the presence of her naturall Mother, and by and with all their consents, the said Massey giving her in marriage in the said Church, unto and to be the lawfull wife of the said George Chamberlaine, in the pre∣sence of divers credible witnesses, Into which sacred bonds of marriage, she the said Jone Hele did enter into, with the said George Chamberlaine, with all cherefulnesse and willingnesse, and did answer the Minister, with such a willing, forward, and audible voice, to the admiration of all the specta∣tors of that marriage: and that it may appear when and where, and by whom they were so lawfully married, you shall have next following, the Certificate printed, under the Minister, and Parish-Clarks hands, of the said Parish, to testifie their said lawfull marriage.
Here followeth the true Copy of the true Certificate of the lawfull Marriage had and solemnized between Ioane Hele, and the said George Chamberlaine, attested un∣der the hands of the Minister and Clerke of the Parish Church where they were lawfully married, as followeth, &c. But first you must take notice, that the said Massey had received the aforesaid sum of five hundred pounds of the said George Cham∣berlaine. THese are to certifie whom it may concerne, that George Chamberlaine and Joane Hele were lawful∣ly married as man and wife together, at, and in the Pa∣rish Church of S. Margarets Pattens, London, neare Towerstreet, the fist day of the month of February, in the Yeare of our Lord, One thousand, Six hundred, Fifty, and One, as appeareth by the Register Book of the said Parish Church, whereunto wee have subscribed our hands, the day and yeare abovesaid. Robert Chamberlaine, Minister. William Prescot, Parish Clerke. Hereafter followeth such Copies of Depositions as prove the said Marriage, sworn before a Master in Chancery, and recorded in that Court. RObert Chamberlaine, Minister of Gods Word, and William Prescot, Parish Clerk of the Parish of Margarets Pattens, neare Tower-street, Lon∣don, doe make Oath, that on the fift day of the month of February, which was in the yeare of our Lord, One thousand, Six hundred, Fifty, and
One, George Chamberlaine and Joane Hele were very lawfully & willingly by their free consents, without any force or fraud, which at that present ap∣peared to us, according to the constitution of the Laws of England, married together, & so became lawfully man & wife, which solemnity of Marriage was performed by this Deponent Robert Chamberlaine, in the foresaid Parish Church, the Church doores being open, about the houre of ten of the clock in the morning of the same day, and in the presence of divers persons, and especially in the presence, and with the consent of the naturall Mother of the said Joane, and also of Samuel Massey, the reputed Father-in-law of the said Joane, who at that present time gave her in Marriage to the said George Chamberlaine. And these Deponents do further make Oath, that the foresaid Joane, at the time of the said Marriage, with the greatest cheerful∣nesse, plainnesse, forwardnesse, and extraordinary willingnesse, did answer unto all things which on her part were to bee performed, as in relation to the forme and ceremonies of the said Marriage. Robert Chamberlaine, Minister. William Prescot, Parish Clerk. Sworn the last day of July, 1653. ROBERT AYLETT. IOhn Samine of London, Merchant, and Elizabeth his wife, doe make Oath, that they these Deponents were personally present at and in the Parish Church of Margaret Pattons, neer Tower strete, London, on the fifth day of the month of February, in the year of our Lord one thousand six hundred fifty and one, about the hour of ten of the clock in the morning of the same day, at which time and place they these Deponents did see Ioane Hele, willingly and very cheerfully intermarry and take to be her lawfull Husband one George Chamberlaine Gent. which said marriage was so had and so∣lemnized betweene them, by and with the full and free consent of the naturall Mother of the said Ioane, and in her mothers presence, and by and with the consent of one Samuel Massey father in law and Guardian unto the said Ioane, whereby the said George Chamberlaine and Ioane Hele became lawfull man and wife, and the said Massey gave her in marriage in the Church unto the said George Chamberlaine. Iohn Samine. Elizabeth Samine. Sworne this last day of Iuly 1653. ROBERT AYLETT.
GEorge Lambert of London, Salter, doeth make Oath, that on the fifth day of the moneth of February, in the yeare of our Lord one thousand six hundred fifty and one, hee this Depo∣nent was personally present, at and in the Parish Church of Marga∣rets Pattens, neer Tower street, London, about the houre of ten of the clocke in the morning of the same day, in company with one George Chamberlaine Gent. and one Ioane Hele, at which time and place he this Deponent was present, and did see the said George Cham∣berlaine, and the said Ioane Hele lawfully intermarried together, by one Robert Chamberlaine, a Minister of Gods word. And this Depo∣nent doth make Oath, that the said Marriage was had and solemni∣zed between them, by the free consent of the said Ioane, and of her naturall mother, and her fathr in law Samuel Massey, who gave her in the Church to be the said Mr. Chamberlains wife, in the presence of her said naturall mother: and the said Ioane did then say over af∣ter the Minister the words which belong to the consummation of Marriage, with willingnesse, plainenesse, and cheerfulnesse, to the admiration of this Deponent. George Lambert. Sworn the second of August 1653. ROBERT AYLETT. IOhn Titus, Gent. maketh Oath that one Samuel Massey about five months since did contract with this Deponent for the Marriage of his Daughter in Law, Mrs. Joane Hele, and withall told this Deponent, that there was a drunken contract made betweene his Daughter and one Mr. George Chamberlaine, which if it could not be null'd by Law, then the said Massey said that he this Deponent, and one Major Bishop should prepare a dose of deadly poyson, and the said Massey said, that hee would give it to the said Mr. Chamberlaine himselfe, which would not onely make his Daughter free for this Deponent, but keep him the said Massey from being troubled for divers sums of money which he owed unto the said Mr. Chamberlaine. And this Deponent further deposeth, That the said Massey since hath combined with one John Nelson, sent to make a supposed Marriage betweene the said Mr. Chamberlaine and the said Mrs. Hele voyd. And that the said Massey hath made a contract to that purpose with the said Nelson, as this Deponent ve∣rily believeth. And further the said Massey desired this Deponent to send him word from London when the said Mr. Chamberlaine was to goe into De∣vonshire,
upon which notice being so given, the said Massey vowed to give him the said Mr. Chamberlaine such an entertainment, as should suddenly take him out of this world. John Titus. Witnesse John Samine. Sworne the 21. of March, 1652. ROBERT AYLETT. IOhn Bishop, Gent. maketh Oath, that one Samuel Massey being in company of this Deponent, and one Mr. John Titus, the said Samuel Massey did desire the said Mr. Bishop and Mr. Titus to prepare an effe∣ctuall dose of poyson, which the said Massey with his owne hands would give unto one Mr. George Chamber∣laine; and by that meanes to be freed from many trou∣bles which were then upon the said Massey by the rea∣son hee had a desire to marry his Daughter to another man. John Bishop. Witnesse John Samine. Sworne the 21. of March, 1652. ROBERT AYLETT. WHen the foresaid Samuel Massey caused an assault to be made upon, and wounded the person of the said George Chamberlaine in the quiet possession of his said Wife in Chancery Lane, in Trinity Terme, 1652. by which meanes hee the said Massey gained away the Wife of the said Mr. Chamberlaine, and conveyed her to a private Lodging, to the house of one Mr. Halsey, unknown unto the said Mr. Chamberlaine, shee the Wife of the said Mr. Chamberlaine did then and there say and acknowledge, that shee should never injoy any comfort or happinesse in this world, unlesse shee might enjoy the Company and society of the said Mr. Chamberlaine, who
was then her lawfull Husband; as then, and as divers other persons of worth and quality that will depose the same, or words to the like effect, both at that, and at severell other times spoken by her selfe, and upon her owne accord and free will. MOyses Holebrooke of Islington in the County of Middlesex doth make Oath, That hee this Deponent in the later end of the yeare of our Lord, One thousand, Six hundred, Fifty, and One, did serve one George Chamberlaine, Gent. as his then servant, which said George Chamber∣laine was then lately before that time married unto one Mrs. Joane Hele, a yong Gentlewoman, Daughter in Law unto one Samuel Massey of Lawrence Clift, in the County of Devonshire. And this Deponent doth make Oath, that the said Joane and George Chamberlaine, for above the space of ten weeks together did live as man and wife together, and so declared them∣selves to be, and this Deponent comming many mornings to wait on the said George Chamberlaine in his said Chamber, he hath found the Chamber doore bolted, and the doore being unbolted, hee hath found the wife of the said George Chamberlaine with him in the said Chamber, undrest and in secret privacy as man & wife; & the said George Chamberlaine hath acknowledged that although his said wife was not then full 15 years of age, yet he the said George Chamberlaine had knowledge of her body as his Wife. And this De∣ponent doth further make Oath, that hee this Deponent hath bought and paid for divers necessaries for the said Wife of the said George Chamberlaine both by his and her consent, and at the cost of him the said George Chamber∣laine; and that at the departure of her said Husband out of the Countrey for London, shee did shed many teares for his absence and desired his injoy∣ment. The marke of Moyses (-) Holebrooke. Sworne the 6. of August, 1653. ROBERT AYLETT. IOhn Sessons of Houghton parish in the Bishopricke of Durham, Gent. doth make Oath, That one George Chamberlaine Gent. having lately made a very sad complaint unto this Deponent, that he the said George Chamber∣laine having lately inter-married and taken to bee his lawfull Wife one Joane Hele, sole Daughter of one Andrew Hele, deceased, and informing this Deponent, how that his said Wife was shifted from place to place, and hidden and detained from him, whereby hee could not have her, nor injoy her as his said Wife, nor could hee have any accesse unto his said Wife,
either by word or Letter, and that the said George Chamberlaine had lately discovered that his said Wife was in the house and hands of one Collonel Gravener at the Mews, neare Charing-Crosse; where, and to which place the said Mr. Chamberlaine desired and prevailed with this Deponent to car∣ry a civill Letter from the said Mr. Chamberlaine unto the said Col. Gravener, concerning the delivery of the said Mr. Chamberlaines Wife unto her said Husband; and also desired this Deponent to present and deliver one other godly and loving Letter unto his the said Mr. Chamberlaines Wife; which Letters, the one of them this Deponent did deliver to the hands of the said Col. Gravener his owne hands, and the other Letter from the said Mr. Chamberlaine, directed to his said Wife, the said Col. Gravener did refuse to deliver, or to suffer this Deponent to deliver the same Letter unto the wife of the said Mr. Chamberlaine; & he the said Col. Gravener did acknow∣ledge unto this Deponent, that one Mris. Joane Hele was in his house; but whether she were the Wife of the said Mr. Chamberlaine or not, he said he did not know; but if that she was the Wife of the said Mr. Chamberlaine, the marriage was illegally had, and did absolutely deny to have the Letter from her Husband delivered unto her, and seemed very angry with this Deponent for bringing the said Letter, and gave some threatning speeches that hee would have and obtaine an Act of Parliament for the dissolving the said marriage betweene the said George Chamberlaine and the said Joane his now wife: And the said Col. Gravener did then threaten to secure this Deponents person, if in case hee this Deponent did trouble him with any more Letters of this nature, yet this Deponent hath upon earnest request of the said George Chamberlaine, and pittying his condition, in being deprived of his Wife by a strong hand, did once more adventure to deliver a second Letter to the said Col. Gravener, which Letter the said Collonel did abso∣lutely refuse to receive. John Sesson. Sworn the 10. of August. 1653. ROBERT AYLETT. This Affidavit doth manifest that Col Gravener did refuse all civill Applications by Letter to himselfe, or to Mr. Chamberlaines Wife from the said Mr. Chamberlaine. BY all which the foregoing premisses you see a lawfull marriage, fair∣ly gained by the full and free consent of the said Jone, her naturall Mother, and of her father in law, the said Massey her Guardian, and as truly proved by the forgoing depositions, by honest persons of quali∣ty, and known honesty and integrity, who were at the foresaid marriage, and who also well know that after the said marriage, the said George Chamberlaine was at a great charge, for the apparrelling of his wife with rich attire, as Satten Gown and Peticoats, and the like, and that they lived in the Country as man and wife together, for about ten weekes time, or a
quarter of a year, and his said wife accepted of a Watch from him, and all other necessaries as her lawfull Husband: and so owned him in all points, untill the said Samuel Massey and his said wife, for their own base sinister ends, and for filthy lucre sake, did most wickedly and unjustly de∣taine my said lawfull wife from me, contrary to the laws of God and man; Since which time of their wicked seperation, the said Massey and his wife have confederated themselves with one Colonel Gravenor, who liveth at the Mewse neer Charen-Crosse, who now do go about to that horrid act of nulling of the said lawfull marriage, and so consequently the cursed seperation of that my dearly beloved wife, in whom my soul de∣lighteth, with a resolution to rend my said lawfull wife from me by the hand of power, intending to marry her to some other person, to inrich themselves, because my said wife is in a capacity to recover a valuable e∣state in law, which if ever recovered, I hope to manage it with prudence, if the Lord will allot it to me, in providence, so that in the next place I am (although very unwilling) yet vastly necessitated to make this my De∣claration publique to the world, thereby not only to cleare my Innocencie from any fraud, or force, by me intended or acted, in the obtaining of the said lawfull mariage, but also to unmask to the publique view, all those hell-hatcht, black, and horrid practises, and unparraleld, Insufferable, In∣juries, oppressions, cosenages, and frauds that the said Massey the father in law and his wife, with their horrid adherents have practised, and do dai∣ly put in action, to rob and disrobe me of my lawfull wife, whom God by his holy ordinances hath lawfully made my wife, and that if by the power of the potency, and the arme of flesh rended from me, will make me cry out with David, Iudge and revenge my cause O Lord; and I am confident, that if God shall be pleased to suffer them to prevaile against me, to deprive me of my lawfull wife, yet the Lord for that fact will shower down the Viols of his Just vengeance upon the pates of them, their wives and children, that shall act, though never so secret, for such a horrid seperation of man and wife. Here followeth the true and perfect discovery of what will be made manifest, and evidently proved against Samuel Massey and his wife, and others their hellish abettors of his black conspiracies, against my innocent selfe and wife, only to ruine me, and to inrich himselfe, and those his conspirators, that take part with him in this hellish designe, &c. THat the said Samuel Massey, before the said marriage between the said Master Chamberlaine and his now wife did take effect, did invite one John Titus Gent. to be a suitor for marriage unto the now wife of the said George Chamberlaine, by which meanes he the said Massey defrau∣ded the said John Titus, of a rich Watch, a rich Sword and Belt, and a Gilded Dagger, and severall other valued things, besides the expence of much money, And that the said John Titus travailing beyond the Seas, and
in the interim, the said marriage between the said George Chamberlaine and the said Ioane Hele taking effect, And the said Master Titus, after the said marriage returning into England, the said Massey most fraudulently and wickedly, perswaded the said Master Titus that the said Ioane Hele was not legally married unto the said George Chamberlaine, but that it was only a drunken contract that might easily be avoyded; and the said Massey did perswade the said Iohn Titus, that the said Ioan Hele did passionately love him, and that he had oftentimes heard her declare, that Master Titus was her first love, and that shee could never have any hearty affection for any other person in the world besides himselfe, and therefore with all strong and delusive perswasions, invited the said John Titus to be a suitor for mar∣riage unto the said Jone Hele, which in truth the said Massey well knew to be the lawfull wife of the said Master Chamberlaine; by which wicked and undue practise, the said Massey defrauded the said John Titus of, and drew the said John Titus to expend above the sum of two hundred pounds cur∣rant money; and that when the said John Titus discovered the frauds of the said Massey, and that the said Jone Hele was very lawfully married unto the said George Chamberlaine. And then the said Massey did use meanes to poyson the said George Chamberlaine, unto which horrid plot and practise he the said Massey did invite the said John Titus, and one John Bishop Gent. with all secrecie, to consent, and to prepare the said poyson, and he the said Massey affirming that he would give the said Master Chamberlaine the said poyson with his own hands. THat since the foresaid marriage took effect, between the said George Chamberlaine and the said Jone Hele, the said Massey hath willingly, falsely, fraudulently, and corruptly, had divers conferences and communications, with divers persons and their agents, both in the Counties of Devon. and Cornwell, and other places, and also with divers other per∣sons, in and about the City of London, for, and concerning a marriage for the selfe same Jone Hele, now the lawfull wife of the said George Chamber∣laine, and the said severall persons of quality, to the great damage and oppression of the said Master Chamberlaine. That the said Massey, since the foresaid marriage, so had, and solemni∣sed between the said George Chamberlaine and the said Jone Hele, that is to say, in the moneth of February last past, did enter into some Articles of A∣greements, or Covenants in writing, that the said wife of the said George Chamberlaine, should within convenient time, Intermarry, and take to be her husband, one John Nelson Gent. as in and by the said Articles remain∣ing in the hands of the said Nelson and Massey, or one of them may at large appeare: and that the said Massey in Hillary Tearme last past, did enter into one Judgment in the Court of upper Bench at Westminster, of the penalty of ten thousand pounds to the said Nelson, to performe the said Articles: By which horrible and wicked practises, the said Massey having the said Master Chamberlaines wife in his keeping, and hiding her from place to place where the said George Chamberlaine cannot finde her, nor have accesse unto her, ei∣ther by word or letter, hee the said Massey by adulation, and base flattery,
hath alienated the heart and affection of the wife of the sayd George Cham∣berlaine, and hath and still doth offer and expose her to no better then pub∣lique sale for marriage unto divers persons, to the great damage, wrong, and heavy oppression of the sayd George Chamberlaine. That the said Massey and his said wife, by their practise and conspiracie with Mr. Dike, the Master Keeper of Newgate, and other Confederates since the Month of February last past, did conspire to hide, keep and detaine the lawfull wife of the said George Chamberlaine from him, and to effect their wicked and unlawfull purposes, they the said Confederates did hide, de∣taine, and keep the wife of the said Mr. Chamberlaine, in secret manner in the dwelling house of the said Mr. Dike, at or neare Newgate, London, and when the said George Chamberlaine had discovered his said wife to be there, then the foresaid Conspirators, Massey, and Dike, with much subtilty and secrecy, caused the wife of the said Mr. Chamberlaine to bee conveyed unto Vintners Hall, and to be put in the custody of some friend of the said Mr. Dikes, and being there not long before she was discovered to bee there, then the wife of the sayd George Chamberlaine, was by the conspirators conveyed away from thence unto the golden Suger-loafe in Holborn; and not think∣ing her to be hidden safe there from her lawfull husband, shee was thence conveyed and hid and kept at Wimbleton, at the house of one Mr. William Massey, a kinsman of the sayd Samuell Massey, and all to the great wrong and heavy oppression of the sayd George Chamberlaine, and contrary to the Laws of God and man. You are to take notice that under the colour of Mr. Chamberlaines wife, being a reputed great heire to about 2000l. Lands per annum, and so decla∣red by that black-sould, treacherous, false father in law Samuell Massey, all these horrible plots, practises, and unheard of villanies doe proceed; The first cause and ground of his villany arising because Mr. Chamberlaine would not suffer himslfe to be cozened of 250l. more in money, over and above the foresaid five hundred pounds before paid unto the said Massey by the said Mr. Chamberlaine, which 250 l. being refused to be parted withall by the said Mr. Chamberlaine, to the said Massey, he the said Massey for that and for no other cause at all, did settle upon a resolution, and did protest and declare, that the said Mr. Chamberlaine should never have his said wife, but that the said Massey and his said wife would keep and hide her from him, and would utterly disswade her against the said George Chamberlaine her law∣full Husband, which will be proved upon Oath by sufficient and good wit∣nesse. But now to returne where the old Kennell of Foxes have left the young one, at VVimbleton; for by this time it must be believed, that at the Ac∣cademy and University of Newgate, in the Jawes of a Jaylor, there must needs be infused into her tender eare such sordid literature and learning, as is able to separate man and wife, and so consequently to undoe body and soule, to bring about the wicked ends of those Conspirators. Being now lodged at VVimbleton, notice thereof is given unto the said Mr. Chamberlaine that she is there, and that a person of Honour, a Lord of this Nation, by the false information of her Father in Law, is invited to believe her a great Heire, and not married, is to give her a visit for mar∣riage,
and that if the marriage take effect, the conspirators shall have 12000 l. Then Mr. Chamberlaine her Husband is advised and doth apply himselfe to the Lord Chiefe Justice, who grants his Warrant to take the said Mssey for his misdemeanors; Mr. Chamberlaine with the Warrant takes a Coach and goes with the Warrant to Wimbleton, takes a Constable with some other friends, and in a peaceable manner searches the house of William Mas∣sey for the body of the said Samuel Massey, and in that search findes his law∣full wife, courts her into the Coach, and brings her to London, as was just and lawfull so to doe; the perfidious Father in Law, and the rest of the Conspirators have notice of this suddaine change, they use instruments to be in the Chamber with them, to keep man and wife from lying together, or from having any private conference; the Conspirators pretend a force and a Riot, and charge the husband and the wife before a Justice of the Peace, one Mr. Peter Bradshaw; this Justice, it being Sessions time at Hicks Hall, directs a Constable to bring Mr. Chamberlaines wife in custody to that Sessions, which was the very last Sessions held in July 1653. there the said Jone is brought, and her husband goes in voluntarily, expecting good justice to be done; and for that it did appeare to that Court, and for all there were divers witnesses to prove that the said Master Chamberlaine and the said Jone were lawfully married together, and so became lawfull man and wife, yet by the strong influence of one Colonell Gravener, who now liveth in the green Mewes by Charing-crosse, and who formerly did live in Pater no∣ster row, London, I say by this Colonels procurement, the said Mr. George Chamberlaine was taken from his lawfull wife, and committed to the New Prison, when if there was any force or Riot at all, the fact was committed in Surrey at Wimbleton, and not in Middlesex So that the said Colonell Gavener taking part with the said Massey, the father in law, having gotten the lawfull husband of the said Jone in the Goale, being a courteous, kinde Gentleman, doeth take away the lawfull wife of the said Mr. Chamberlaine from him, and in his Coach carries her away, without any lawfull Warrant or Authority whatsoever, to his house at the Mewes, where she is now mewed up from her husband: my consci∣ence tells me that there is not such another courteous person in this Com∣mon-wealth, that hath such a conscience to take away a mans lawfull wife from him, and to imprison him, and to measure out so much and so large London measure of oppression; and although hee bee reported to be Quarter-Master Generall to this noble Army, yet that ever Heroick, and honoured Lord Generall, nor all, nor any his worthy Officers of the Army will bee pleased to think it fit or reasonable, that Quarter-Master Generall Grave∣ner should be so wanton with his wits, or so far to go beyond his Commis∣sion, as to rend man and wife asunder, and then to take up quarters for another mans wife, whether her husband will or no; it is not the way to be Quarter-Master, but to be whole Master of another mans wife; there∣fore every man had need have a care of his wife, if the Col. go on with such a trade, and if he go so far beyond his Commission, it may please the no∣ble Governours of this Nation to give him a Writ of ease. But to take a mans Wife from him in the face of a Court, under the co∣lour
of Justice without any Warrant, and when a noble Parliament and ho∣nourable Councel of State is sitting, nay when this Nation and all the eyes of Christendom are upon our Supream Authorities, expecting Justice to be done to every man, poor and rich; and Judgment to flow like a mighty stream; at this time that is expected, that the weary and heavy laden should be eased, & the wrongs of the oppressed should be righted; tis strange that at this time, and so near the Supream Authority, the Parliament of England, the said Col. Gravener should attempt to doe so irreligious an act, as to part man and Wife. Now the said wife of Master Chamberlaine, being at the whole Master Generals house at the Mewse, it is fit the lawfull husband of her, Master Chamberlaine should know of her welfare, and how she doth do, or how, or by what way he may enjoy her, to live in the fear of the Lord com∣fortably together, as man and wife ought to do, and upon a strict inquiry, Mr. Chamberlaine hath discovered that the Master Goalor of Newgate, the said Massey the father in law of the said Master Chamberlaines wife, this noble Colonel Gravener, and a blunt, rich, able person, well friended and well monyed, and well reputed, whose name shall go free, and be yet and at this time exempted, if he prove to be a peace-maker, have all of them together, with some other persons that may be named and shamed in time, set up a resolution in a contentious way, as they call it, to bring the said Mr. Chamberlaine and his miswandred wife together, or at least some what near unto one another, and in order thereunto the foresaid confede∣rates by their foresaid confederacy having gotten the said Master Chamber∣laines said lawfull wife into the power of the Army (as the said Massey reports) (and which no wise man will beleeve, that the noble Army will patronise or protect any such horrid thing) and in order to this their new designe they the said conspirators have framed penned, contrived, abetted, and fomented a false, untrue, and scandalous Petition, in the name of the said Mr. Chamberlaines wife, to the honourable Councel of State against her foresaid lawfull Husband the said Master Chamberlaine, and against divers other innocent persons, and by the insinuating power of some or one of the aforesaid conspirators, that transcendant and incompa∣rable Col Gravener, did procure a Warrant from the said honourable Councell of State, for to apprehend and secure the person of the said George Chamberlaine, and other innocent persons, as namely Robert Chamber∣laine, Minister of Gods word, which was that Minister that did marry the said Mr. Chamberlaine and his said wife together, William Prescot the Parish Clark, John Samine and his wife, George Lambert, and all others that were at the foresaid Solemnity, or which could prove the lawfull marriage of the said Mr. Chamberlaine and his lawfull wife together; but it is to be noted, that the name of that Fox Massey must be also put into that Warrant, and it must be contrived to avoid suspition, or that the plot may not be discovered, but that it may be so carryed on, that the said Massey may draw in the said Mr. Chamberlaine, and all his foresaid friends together at some known place of meeting, and that then he the said Massey might betray them all, and that then a file of Musketteres might come in and take the said Massey, and all the rest together. Now the Warrant is under Seale, the Marshall Generall, that gallant
clear honest hearted man, is prepared to execute the said Warrant with some Souldiers, Although no person named in that Warrant had any relation, as being a souldier or capable as being a prisoner of war, but to make it the greater terror and bugbear, nothing is wanting but that Judas part of Massey to be acted, Massey as being set on by the fury of his thirsty, villanous re∣venge, Clokes his knavery under the species of a faire pretence, Courts Mr. Chamberlaine and his friends to a faire compliance of the ending of all dif∣ferences between them by indifferent men; Mr. Chamberlaine assents thereun∣to, a meeting of all parties is had, for the end of setling peace and unity be∣tween both parties the third of August 1653. at the Paul head Taverne neere Doctors Commons, Mr. Chamberlaine by himselfe and friend Ingage that no affront or surprisall either by Sarjeant, or by souldiers shall be of∣fered, to Massey, Massey and his friend one Mr. Leigh doe ingage, that Mr. Chamberlaine nor his friends should come by any damage, nor surprisall by any Officer, Sarjeant, or souldier during the time of that treaty, Massey, binds up his Ingagements by many execrable oathes, wishing that his flesh might rot from his bones, and that his Wife and Children might for ever perish, &c. If he meant any ill, or if any Sarjeant or Souldier should interrupt that Treaty for peace; the Treaty for that peace thereupon proceeded, and all parties being met for that purpose, then, and not till then did that black Villany of the said Massey and the rest of the conspirators appear, for in the debating of the business, in comes the Marshall Generall, with Grave∣ners man, who pulled the Warrant out of his pocket, & six Souldiers, mus∣ketteers, with a Warrant from the Councel of State, obtained by the said Gravener, and the consent of Massey, and the rest of the conspirators, and the Warrant not mentioning any crime at all, the said Marshall and the said Souldiers, forced the said George Chamberlaine and others his friends to the Marshalls prison at the Muse, where they have remained prisoners ever since the third day of this present August 1653. And being there restrained, and kept prisoners by the Marshall General, and by the souldierie, the said Massey again insinuated himselfe into the society of the said Mr. Chamber∣laine, he being a prisoner, and offerd unto him, that if he would pay unto the said M ssey the sum of one hundred pounds in money, that then he the said Mr. Chamberlaine should have, & injoy his said wife, and that he, the said Massey and his wife, would joyne together and would reduce her out of the hands of the said Gravener, and deliver her to the said Mr. Chamberlaine, that they may enjoy each other, and live as man and wife together; and the said Massey having made the said offer at the house of the said Marshal General, whilst he was a prisoner, he the said Massey did send for a quart bottle of Sack at his own charge, and did there with drink unto the said Mr. Chamberlaine by the name of his sonne Chamberlaine, and to his wife, be∣ing the daughter in law of the said Massey, whereby it is evident that Mr. Chamberlaine is deprived of his said wife by a strong hand only, and for no other cause but for that the said Mr. Chamberlaine will not suffer himselfe to be defrauded of any more money by the said Massey, Mr. Chamberlaine, upon all Masseys flatteries, will not be defrauded of any more moneys by the said Massey, Massey he works by Gravener to continue Mr. Chamberlaine prisoner, Mr. Chamberlaine, indeavours to send letters to his lawfull wife, Gravener denies the reception of them or the delivery of any letter unto her,
yet acknowledged that the said Mr. Chamberlaines wife by the name of Joane Hele is in his house: Mr. Chamberlaine Courts Gravener with severall Letters, one whereof he receiveth, the other he denieth to receive; both Letters are herewith printed, together with the said Mr. Chamberlaines Letter to his Wife, at Graveners house, that the world may know, that the said Mr. Chamberlaine hath left no faire way unacted, unattempted, or undone for the reducing, and regaining of his said lawfull Wife, unto the cohabitation of the said Mr. Chamberlaine her husband; all which applications proving fruitlesse, the said Mr. Cham∣berlaine was enforced to set forth to the view of the world this modest following Declara∣tion, wherein Col. Graveners name was not at all mentioned. To the Honourable Colonell Gravener, at the Mewes these present. Honoured Sir: YOƲ are the person by the report of divers, that have in your habitation, a Gentlewoman that you call Mrs. Ioane Hele, which in truth is my most dearly beloved and lawfull wife; I have sent her by this Bearer a Letter from my selfe, and doe desire that you would be pleased to permit that Letter to bee safely delive∣red by this bearer to her own hands, leaving the success therof to the sear∣cher of hearts. Sir, it would be a great obligation unto me, and a great ma∣nifestation to the world of your honour and integrity, if you would eyther deliver me my wife, or admit and command that I might have her deli∣vered unto me, or might have a safe and faire accesse for conference with my wife: Truly Sir, you will find for all the false aspersion of my enemies, that she is my true and lawfull wife, nor will God blesse the seperators of man and wife; and therefore I desire you in the feare of the Lord, and as you expect to answer it at the great and terrible day of Iudgement, and as you expect a blessing from Heaven upon you and yours, and as you hope to enjoy what ever is deare unto you, Doe not, oh do not, patronize, promote, abet, or countenance, the rending of my lawfull wife from mee; a curse must follow the contrivers thereof, I hope you are none, yet vastly suspe∣cted by some; be pleased to doe your selfe that honour, and mee that right, but to have a faire and friendly examination of the truth of all things in controversie, and then I am confident your noble soule will informe you, that I have been vastly abused; Sir, be pleased to suspend your judgement untill you know the truth of things, and where you doe not know the truth, charity invites you to think the best, and leave the rest to the searcher of all hearts; and then I hope, I shall find you a noble sould person towards mee, and hope to have just cause to manifest my selfe to be, Sir, Your servant, and ever honourer, Geo. Chamberlaine. Iuly 27. 1653.
The true Copy of a Letter sent by George Chamberlaine, Gent. unto his Wife, being by divers dangerous persons and practises undu∣ly detayned from him. To his dearly honoured and beloved Wife, Mris. Joane Chamberlaine, these with fidelity present. My faithfully beloved Wife: GOD by his providence hath made you my lawfull Wife, nor shall I ever by any means whatsoever, whilst I live, be drawn to leave you or forsake you; and therefore in the name of God, and in obedience to all his holy Com∣mands, I do hereby with all faithfull affection intreat you speedily to ad∣mit me to speak with you, and with the forgetting of all unkindnesses to injoy you: what can you desire of me, as in relation to your owne happinesse, or concerning your Fatherlaws freedome, or your Mothers future felicity, but you may absolutely command my just rights in the injoyment of you as my dearely beloved Wife, will be your Fathers Freedome and your Mothers felicity? and therefore be not cruell to them, when the sweet smiles of a faithfull heart by you my deare Wife, together with your desired selfe thrown into the armes of me your faithfull Husband, may yet make up the breach of all unhappy differences; let no voice nor power flatter you into a beliefe of dissolving that sacred knot of marriage that Heaven hath knit between us, and let God shoure downe the Viols of his just vengeance upon all those that seek that horrid seperation; remem∣ber my Deare how sweetly and solemnly in that sacred Bands of Marriage in the pre∣sence of God and Man you were lawfully married to me; remember your then solemne Promises you made to me before the Lord, keep those Promises, for God will not be moc∣ked, and in the name and feare of the Lord returne unto me, which am resolved faith∣fully to receive you, carefully to love you, plentifully to provide for you, and most con∣tentedly and charitably to passe by all things, any thing of injury from any person or persons. This (my Love) is the way to Peace, this is the way to Love, and this is the true way to draw downe the blessing of the Lord upon us, which can only make us happy both in this life, and also to eternity; be so kinde to your owne soule as to consider what the Lord hath given me leave to write to you, and the great God of all hearts incline you to returne me your Answer (like the innocent Dove with the Olive branch) with sweet tydings, which will be great joy to my soule to see the returne of my innocent misled and almost lust Lamb into my bosome, which are the hearty desires and prayers of, Your faithfull loyall loving Husband, GEO. CHAMBERLAINE. July 27. 1653. This Letter above written I sent unto my wife the 27. of July, 1653. unto her, to the house of Col. Gravener, at the Mewes, who hath and doth most unjustly keep my said wife from me, and now hath most wickedly by foule practise, caused me to be kept prisoner at the Martial Generals house at the Mews, for no cause at all; wherefore I am inforced to make this pub∣lick Declaration to the world hereafter following. George Chamberlaine.
The Declaration of George Chamberlaine, Gent. to all persons of this Nation, concerning the undue practice of divers persons which do most unjustly and illegally detaine his lawfull Wife from him, for their own sinister ends and purposes, &c. WHereas according to the known Laws established in this Nation, I George Chamberlain Gent. have lately and law∣fully inter-married and taken to be my wife Joane Hele, sole daughter and heire of Andrew Hele Esquire, of the County of Devon. her late Father, deceased, which said Joane my said wife, is by the foul practise and conspira∣cy of one Samuel Massey, who married the mother of the said Joane, and by the undue means of the said mother, perswaded and prevailed withall to withdraw, absent, and hide herselfe, from me her lawfull loving and faithfull husband; and she being so unduly kept from me and seduced by evill Counsell and most destructively advised against me by the said Samuel Massey and his wife, and others their Agents and Confederates, by base flattery and adulation, whereby she is now prepared not onely to deny mee to bee her lawfull husband, but also to be∣leeve that the said lawfull marriage shall be nul'd and made void, and shee be put in a capacity to marry with some other person of honour, so that those cursed Counsels and Instruments have wrought a resolution in her tender yeares not to live or cohabite with me her lawfull husband: and as being bound in conscience, so with great care and diligence have I sought all lawfull wayes and meanes, and made all uncessant and civill applications both by letters and otherwise for the begetting of a true understanding whereby I and my said wife might have enjoyed each other with comfort, and in the feare of the Lord, as man and wife ought to doe, all which my most faithfull endeavours proving fruitelesse by reason of that hell hatcht, blacke destroying influence, and sordid interposition that the said Massey and his wife and their flattering false hearted instruments and Agents have had and practised upon my too much credulous and misled wife, being al∣together in their unhappy custodie, and shifted from place to place un∣knowne unto me, I am now with great griefe of hart, constrayned to pub∣lish & Declare to the world these my unparalleld and heavie oppressions a∣bove said; and to the end the said Massey and his said wife shall no longer delude any young gallant by exposing their daughrer (my lawfull wife) to sale, under the notion of a young great heire, which the said Massey and his wife have done since shee hath beene my lawfull wife; and since shee hath beene rended and torne from me. And therefore I the aforesaid abused George Chamberlaine do hereby publish, declare, and make knowne to all peo∣ple that the foresaid Jone is my reall and lawfull wife, & that the said mar∣riage was had, and solemnized between us according to the known lawes of this nation, & by & with the free and full consent of her selfe the said Massey her father in Law, & her naturall mother, and before them and in their pre∣sence and in a lawful Church, & by a lawful Minister without force or fraud:
for in truth before the said marriage did take effect, I the said George Cham∣berlain did pay unto the said Massey and his said wife, in consideration of the cost that they had beene at in the education of my said wife, the full and just sum of five hundred pounds currant money, which the said Massey and his said wife received accordingly. Besides I bestowed above one hundred pounds currant moneys in apparrel & other necessary accommodations for my said wife: and therefore, through Gods assistance, I do speedily resolve to use all lawfull wayes and means to reduce my said lawfull wife to her sweet cohabitation with me, that we may live together in the feare of the Lord, and to gain her out of the hands of those destroying flatterers, whose ac∣cursed keeping man and wife asunder, God will never blesse. I doe further declare sincerely from my heart, that I never gave my said dearly beloved wife any just cause, by word or deed, to withdraw her desired selfe from my society, but am resolved by Gods Grace, faithfully to love and honour her, and plentifully to provide for her all the dayes of my life, according to Gods holy Laws and Commandements. And further I declare and publish my free resolution by Gods Grace to passe by, and bury in eternall oblivion all former prejudices whatsoever, either by her tender too much creduli∣ties, or by her harkening more to the voice of flattery then the heart of loy∣alty, nor shall I take advantage of any thing heretofore perpetrated by her mother or father in law against me, unto whom I shall yet have a civill and very tender regard, if complied withall in time, and shall obliterate all former unkindenesses, with these strong weapons of true love and gentle courtesies, wherein I hope all persons and power, both millitary and civill, understanding the candor and truth of the premisses will abhor to take part with those, who most indirectly go about to seperate my selfe and my dearly beloved wife, whom God by his holy orders hath lawfully joyned together. Lastly, I do hereby further Declare, that from the day of the date hereof, I do give publick notice and warning to all people whatsoever, that they do not lend or trust my said Wife for any monies, wares, goods, or chattels, food, or raiment, or for any other thing whatsoever, without my Warrant and authority first had and obtained in writing, at their and every of their perils. All which I have beene most tenderly unwilling to declare to the world, but that I am inforced thereunto, by reason of those malignant advi∣sers that have a vast prevailing influence upon my Wife, and dayly go about to implunge her in great and vast debts, thereby to supply and bring about their wicked purposes, and contract great debts upon me to hasten my over∣throw, which they desire. Dated under my hand this 28. day of July, 1653. GEORGE CHAMBERLAINE. The full substance of this Declaration above written is fully proved upon oath, by seven substantiall honest and undeniable Witnesses, and by Gods grace shall be main∣tained to be full of Candor and truth, with hazard of the life and fortune of my selfe her lawfull Husband. George Chamberlaine.
To his honoured and dearly beloved VVife, Mrs. Ioane Chamber∣laine, these with fidelity present, at Colonell Graveners house in the Mewes. My most deare Wife: HAD I not been debard of all civill applications, (by Colonell Gravener) in my personall wayting on you, or in the deli∣very of my Letters, I doubt not but that I should have gi∣ven you so clear a demonstration of my true integrity, and so plainly have disclosited the wicked conspiracies of these most hell-hatcht Incendiaries (which now I feare sit at the stern of thy ten∣der years, and seek this accursed dissolution between us) that their most sut∣tlest inventions could never have had power to have made these delusions penetrate upon thy tender and innocent soule. Truly, my Love, I hope you cannot but be sensible before this, how these irreligious counsellors in∣deavour to make a prey of thee and thy reputation, to bring about their ungodly and selfish designes, which tends to no other purpose then the de∣struction both of thy body and soule. And therefore, my heart, it is my soules desire, that thou wouldst shun these abominable advices, and return into the bosome of thy dearest Husband, which at present (for thy sake) is exposed a Prisoner at the Marshall Generalls house in the Mues, not far from thee, (or at least a civill visit) where thou shalt receive the best of welcomes, from him that dares challenge no longer a being, then he is most cordially devoted in his inclination to be, My Deare, Thy most affectionate, and I hope inseperable Husband, GEORGE CHAMBERLAINE. August 8. 1653.
These to the Honoured Colonell Gravener present. SIR, BY a person of civility and quality, I did present you with a Letter from my selfe, thereby inviting you no longer to detaine my lawfull wife, under that fallacy of Mrs Ioane Hle; I have printed some papers unwillingly to the view of the word, declaring her to bee my lawfull Wife, of which I am confident you cannot bee igno∣rant; but to leave you without excuse of that know∣ledge, I have desired and prevailed with this Gentle∣man to present one to you. Sir, under your good favour, I did take it un∣kindly from you, that a Gentleman of your quality, honour, and fame, should not permit, or in charity promote the delivery of that Letter that this Gentleman was pleased by your permission, and my direction, to deli∣ver to my mis-led Wife, unjustly detained from me and harboured in your house. Sir, I pray God it be not palpably proved, that you have some va∣luable selfe ends and interest as in relation to the indeavouring to deprive me of my lawfull Wife. I am most confidently assured, that it stands not with the Lawes of God, nor of this Nation, nor with the honour nor ho∣nesty of any conscientious Christian, to be the means, the ayder, a better, or separater of man and wife. Sir, I charge you before the face of Heaven, to consider what I have writ, and to lay it to heart, and to examine your own conscience therein, and to write me back a civill answer like a good Chri∣stian, and like an honest man; For let me be rendred to you never so incon∣siderable by the basest of depraving tongues, yet know, that I will not by you, or by any man else, be fooled out of, or from that Wife that God by his Ordinance hath lawfully made mine, which is the unalterable resoluti∣on of Sir, Your servant and abused friend George Chamberlaine. Broomly Hall this 2. of Aug. 1653. neer Strat∣ford Bow.
To the Honoured Collonel Gravener, these present. Honoured Sir, THrough that Civill respect I have to your selfe, being (as I am infor∣med) a member of this worthy Army, to whom under God we must ascribe all praise, for our lives, liberties, and fortunes; I have thought good once more to invite you to a clear understanding, whereby you might not be led unto utter darkness, through the false lights of selfe intrest, or misinformation, which will but add torments to the afflictions of a burthened conscience: I presume you spend not your time so irreligiously, but that you are very sensible what a bitter curse the Lord hath laid upon the seperators of man and wife; as in many places of Gods word doth appeare (therefore if you cannot have so much civilty to me, to returne me my lawfull wife, which you most impiously and illegally detain from me, being under the protection of your roofe, besides your unjust confining me to the most heavy, and unheard of oppression of imprisonment, for no other cause then demanding my best of rights, my most lawfull wife) be so kinde to your owne soul, as not to draw down the just curse of the Lord upon you. Pray, summon all your intellects, and ex∣amine whether Heaven be to be purchased with money, or by obeying the command of Almighty God: O then hazard not unspeakable, nay undeterminable comfort in your future life, by wilfully drawing down Gods Just vengeance upon your head. It is not I that say it, but the great God of all hearts, whom at this time hath permitted me to write this Letter unto you that you might know, it is not yet too late to repent of evill doing. But as the Lord hath commanded us to deale unto all men, as we would be dealt unto our selves, if we expect the comfort of his sweet smiles upon us; There∣fore in obedience to his most Holy and divine commands, my charity bids me not to believe these wicked actions proceed from your naturall inclinations, but are rather infused into you, by harkning to the base adulations perpetrated by Samuel Massey, and his black society, who as I am informed is very often in your company: Therefore I must confesse, I cannot much wonder why you so violently persist in evill doing, asso∣ciating your selfe, certainly with the most corruptest of villaines, which is long since pro∣ved by Affidavit before a Master in Chancery, The best of Judgements may be cor∣rupted if but one party heard; but to leave you without excuse: This is to remember you that I have formely made all civill and modest applications, thereby to invite you to have a Just sense of my honest cause (but instead of a kinde returne of my civilities, I have ranckounterd many of your threas; And so likewise hath Mr. Sisson who delivered my Letters, wherein some of them you have been as good as your word, but as to what else can be done unto me, I defy all those black instruments that attend your ears, with delusive falsities presuming by your power and means, to snatch away my just rights from me) To which purpose J now write this Letter, and in point of Charity advise you to balme up the deep wounds that will lie upon your reputation if not your conscience, by reuniting and delivery of my wise into that safe harbour the bosom of a Cordiall loving husband, and that Immediately, or else you must expect I shall no longer lie under this agony without giving the world a true account, who are the Pa∣trons of so foule a practise, wherein I cannot avoid your name, my unwillingnesse to bring you upon the stage, made me spare you in my first Declaration, lest the world should read your hypocrisie so often ventring your life to suppresse what you now must
promote, the great tyranny and oppression is inflicted upon the most innocents. Sir, thus do I make a Civill returne for your unkindnesse, in your secret practises, in the endeavouring not onely my ruine in this transitory life, but the losse of the soule of that innocent and misled Lamb, my Wife. Sir, believing the foulnesse of your practice may be vailed by the darkness of your Judgement, being cloudd with false informations, I shall commit you to your Prayers to God, that he may brighten your understanding, so that you may tread no longer in the paths of ignorance, if not willfulnesse, which are the most humble and hearty desires of, (Sir) Your most injured, and most oppressed servant, GEORGE CHAMBERLAINE. This Letter was sent as by directions, but produced no effect. YOU are to understand, that during the time of this Controversie, there hath been used by Massey, and the rest of the Confederates, all those knacks of Knavery that mortals can invent to null this law∣full marriage, and to defraud that honest Mr. Chamberlaine of his lawfull Wife, as namely the said Massey, and those his hell-hatch'd Conspirators did lately cause a Petition to bee preferred by and in the name of the said Mr. Chamberlaines Wife, by the name of Joane Hele, against the said Massey, and his Wife; by which Petition there was a Commission under the great Seale obtained for the voyding and dissolving of the said marriage, if good witnesses could have proved any thing materiall for to have ground equitie for the Lords Commissioners to have decreed the avoyding of the said marriage; but that tricke, although cunningly and strongly car∣ried on by power was quickly discovered, so that they durst never execute that Commission, for feare it would make for their greater condemnation; so that, that Commission is now out of date, and will not be owned. The next plot set on foot was, that Massey and his Wife alledged, that Mr. Chamberlaine had never laine with his Wife nor knowne her, as her Husband; to this Mr. Chamberlaine answereth, that hee hath knowne his Wife carnally, as a Husband ought to doe, and doth offer for the deciding of that controversie, by putting it to the triall of Midwives, or a Jury of Women: this (propose) did very much trouble Massey and his Wife; for if Mr. Chamberlaine her Husband had not been there, the question would bee who had been there. This stabbing question puts Massey to advise with the best of his old fe∣mall acquaintance and Counsell about London and the Covent-Garden, where he did finde advice to deceive a whole Jury of Midwives, as he conceived; which advice was, to make surfling or restringent water with Alome, and some other ingredients, and to make application by injection thereof unto and into the secret parts, as per direction, &c. and that without doubt will so contract her body, as that it shalbe hardly discernable whether she had
ever known man or not, probatum est, ut dicitur: This will be proved by good witnesse. Thus you see that Massey and his Conspirators have been traced out in all their severall unheard of frauds and villanies; and it is desired, that all things herein set forth and declared, may be by authority drawne into ex∣amination and proofe, that the Practisers, and Actors therein may be made exemplary, and that the Noble and Supreame Authority, the Parliament of the Common wealth of England will provide remedy against such practi∣ses and oppressions for time to come, and that no person whatsoever shall hereafter dare to make use of the Authority of the honourable Councel of State, and of their Warrant, to imprison mens persons by the Souldiery, or otherwise to bring about their owne ends, and unjust designes, as the said Col. Gravener hath done in this Case, by imprisoning the person of the said George Chamberlaine and others upon his businesse and accompt, ever since the 3. of August 1653. untill this present of they being all free-borne persons of this Nation, and ought not so to be imprisoned by the Lawes of this Common-wealth, which is their right and inheritance, and that the Justice of those Lawes ought not to bee denied to any free-borne man of this Common-wealth of England. Thus have I declared the sad Case and Condition of me the said George Chamberlaine, who have patiently (through the Lords Mercy) hitherto un∣der gone all those heavy oppressions formerly related, with as much brevity, and through the mercy of my God, notwithstanding this my hard imprison∣ment at the Mewes, do expect and hope for a speedy and happy deliverance, to the comfort of my soule, and to the shame of those Conspirators that sel thy ruine. Dated from my Prison in the Mewes, neare Charing-Cross this day of August . GEORGE CHAMBERLAINE.
