c7599 99887631 183255
CUPIDS COURT of EQUITY. The scornful Lady quickly took, While she her love Disdain'd: She was prick'd down in Cupids Book, His Vassal she remain'd. Tune of, When first I bid my Love Good-Morrow. WHen first I bid my Love good morrow, with tear in Eye, and hand on breast; My heart was even drown'd in sorrow, and I poor soul was much opprest. The glances from her Eye so darted, I her captive soon was made; The Prisoner took was broken-hearted, this I find is Cupids Trade. All my reason then was banish'd. and I left in Captivity: My hop'd for joys were quickly vanish'd, by the Lightning of her Eye. All my hopes at once were blasted, by one seeming scornful look: The joys I hop'd for to have tasted, had no Record in Cupids Book. I sigh'd, I groun'd just like a Lover, ready just for to depart; And had no hopes for to recover. for she, Oh she had broke my heart. Away I went without her smiling, which was worse then death to me: And Cupid was me then beguiling of my Life and Liberty. BUt when she see that I absented, almost melted into Tears, By Love sick case she then lamented, and like my self was fill'd with fears. Alas, quoth she, am I so cruel, as to let this Lover dye? Or to his flames to add such fuel, as makes his heart to scorch and fry, A Balsome then I will provide him, shall effect a perfect cure; And in my bosome I will hide him, he shall not these pains indure. My thinks I feel my self relenting, and in tears I almost melt: Now do I grieve at his tormenting, I now feel the pains he felt. None can indure this bitter anguish, which at this time I do feel: For want of him I grieve, I languish, none but he my wounds can heal. Let not your beauty make you peevish, you that nature made so fair: For mens as womens eyes are thievish, love commands or breeds dispair. At first too strangely I did slight him, whom I now so much adore: He is the Man I do delight in, and now will do for evermore. His sighs and groans shall be requited, with a shoure of brackish tears: And my senses are benighted, fill'd with storms of dreads and fears. Oh come again before my soreow brings me to the brink of Death, I cannot hope to see to morrow, except you come to save my breath. Then come & take thy conquest quickly I am ready to depart: Just at this moment I am sickly, thou hast won my tender heart. FINIS. Printed for P. Brooksby, at the Golden-ball, near the Hospital-Gate, in West-smith-field.
