c954 52211918 175487
THE CASE OF Daniel Gwyn, Agent for the Spanish Pacquet∣ts, in relation to Mr. John Russel's Charge inst him for pretended Mismanagement in at Imploy. HE said Mr. Russel in his Peon hath chg'd Mr. Gwyn with false Musters on the said Pacqu , imbezelling their Stores, extorting Mony from Sailors and others, defraud∣ing the said Ships in their Victualling, and impong Salt in said Ships without paying Customs o Excise, to the gre abuse of  Misty, and wrong to the Sail  adva It's humbly hop'd it appear'd before the Committee, that  many en were actually in the Service of the said Ships as were charg'd to be id; and generally two or more than were actually charg'd in the Pay∣book, serv'd on board, receiving no Wages; and one Man in  Ship  about four years past serv'd under another name, and these two Men Pay was actually apply'd to the defraying contingent Charge, which would have been (if not by this) some other way discharg'd by th st-Office. So that tho in strictness this may be term'd an irrgular M¦ (seeing the very Man whose name was entred, was not ually  rd) yet the same was not to the Prejudice, but Service of the Crown and not to Mr. Gwyn's private Advantage, as the Petition doth  and therefore notwithstanding the Committee (upon a Division) we pleas'd to resolve, That the said Mr. Gwyn hath been guilty o king false Musters according to the Petition: yet if it appear to  Honourable House by the Committee Minutes, that herein his Ma∣  ot defrauded, it's humbly hop'd this Honourable House will  to the King rties charge Mr. Gwyn wth importing Salt in the said Ships  aying either ustoms or Excise, to his great profit. small quan of Salt were by the Commander and Pur¦  ese Ships,  ted only for the use of those Pacquet-Boats  at first  ink those small Quantities brought over
worth Entry, whilst spent in the King's Service; but as soon as Mr. Gwyn was advised both Customs and Excise were due, he did then endeavour to get the best information he could, what quantities, and at what times imported, and what their Customs and Excise did amount unto: and seeing a great part hereof was imported when the Duties were very low, he did therefore make an Entry only of four weigh and quarter, as imported under the last Impositions, and for which he paid as much Customs and Excise as all that Salt would have paid, if entred when brought in (altho the Quantity was more) seeing much the greate part thereof was brought in when no Excise was due for the same. To prove the pretended Frands in victualling, Slade the Purser de∣clared he gave Mr. Gwyn a Receipt for 1100 weight of Pork, when only 600 pound was put on board the old Spanish Expedition. It was alledg∣ed, Mr. Gwyn had charged higher Prices for Victuals than others in those Parts then paid. It did not appear, upon view of all Mr. Slade's Receipts, that ever such a Receipt was by him given, or such a Quantity by  Gwyn  charged; and that whatsoever Provision Mr. Gwyn had charg'd to the said Ship, was justified by proper Vouchers under Mr. Slade's own hand. The several Provisions Mr. Gwyn bought for these Ships was the best of the kind, and therefore their Prices might be greater than was paid by others for a worse sort; and all those Prices justified by proper Vouchers. And it's humbly hoped that several worthy Members of this Honourable Committee do remember that Mr. Gwyn did produce an Abstract of seven years Account of what Butter he had bought for his Majesty's Service in that time: and (all Charge and s consider'd) he lost by the Butter he bought upon the King's Account. It's alledg'd, Mr. Gwyn extorted Money from Sailors. The Fact appeared to be thus, viz. In November 1697. Mr. Gwyn ad∣vanced of his own Moneys about 600 Spanish Pistols, to pay off Sailors then to be discharged; and having cull'd of the lightest about 30 l. and paid them the Captain at or about 4 l. per Ounce (and this done, as the Captain prov'd, that the Seamen might receive no light Pistols) he paid the rest to the Seamen at 17 s. 6 d. a piece. Upon change of some of these into Silver a small loss was sustained; but others were put off by the Seamen at 18 s. per Pistol. When Mr. Gwyn thus advanced these Pistols, he could have paid them in London at 18 s. a piece; and he dos humbly suppose not many instances can be produced where Agents advanced Money out of their own Pockets to pay Soldiers upon such easy terms. How far this may induce your Honours to resolve the said Mr. Gwyn hath been guilty of Extortions from the Sailors (as alledged in the Petition) is humbly submitted to the great Wisdom and Justice of this Honourable House to several worthy Members whereof it's known (and before e Com∣mittee was proved) that the said Mr. Gwyn at several times hath advan∣ced MANY THOUSAND Pounds for the necessary Supplies of those Pacquet Boats, without any reward for the same.
