c7285b 52212005 175627
My Bird is a Round-head, Being a very pleasant and true Relation of a man in Nor∣thamptonshire, that kept a tame Owle in his house, whom he called Round-head; and how one of his neighbours had him before a Justice, for calling his Owle Round-head. To the tune of, let us to the wars againe. AS I to London tooke my way, A pretty passage caus'd me to stay, Which you shall know if you attend, No honest man I will offend; You that are wise in your conceits, That with meere toyes doe trouble your pates, To whit to who, come say what you will, My Bird she is a Round-head still. In Northamtonshire a man did dwell, That sports and pastimes loved well, A May-pole be set up on hye, To recreate all Commers by; But one that was more nice then wise, Was much offended and tearm'd it a vice: To whit to who, come say what you will, My Bird she is a Round-head still. Neithbour (quoth he) you are prophane, I wonder you will be so vaine, A May-pole here for to erect, Me thinkes such toyes you should reiect; Young folke about it dance and play, It leads their minds too much astray: To whit to who, come say what you will, My Bird she a Round-head still, Ile have it downe beleeve me friend, Although that halfe my estate I spend, Tis but a kind of an Idoll vaine, Against it honest men complaine; And thus this understanding Clowne, Did still protest to have it downe: To whit to who, come say what you will, My Bird she is a Round-head still. Kind neighbour quoth the other man, How long have you beene a Puritan? Zounds he May-pole here shall stand, It shall not downe at your command; You I have it downe, I pray Sir, why? Come show me your authority? To whit to who, come say what you will, My Bird he is a Round-head still. This man he had an Owle in his house, That killed many a Rat and Mouse, And cause he would doe wa he list, He brought her otr upon his fist; And to his neighbour shew'd her straight, That still stood bawling at his gate: To whit to who, come say what you will, My Bird she is a Round-head still. The second part, to the same tune. NEeighbour, what Bird is this (quoth he) That here upon my fist you see? Tis a Mag-howlet tother reply'd, That on your fist doth now abide; No, tis a Round-head on my fist, I hope I may call my Bird what I list: To whit to who, come say what you will, My Bird she is a Round-head still. The man began to fret and chafe, Whilst he with his Owle did heartily laugh, His laughing made him almost mad, The one was merry the other sad: My pretty Round-head hurteth none, Among other Round-heads my Bird is one: To whit to who, &c. She meddles not with State affaires, Or sets her neighbours by the eares, No Crosse nor May-pole makes her start, Nor can she preach in Cup or Cart; She seekes to pull no Organs downe, Nor on an Image casts a frowne: To whit to who, &c. To be reveng'd the other sought, He cal'd him knave and all to nought, Before a Iustice he did him bring, And told the Iustice every thing; Before the Iustice they came I wis, But all they could get of him was this, To whit to who, come say what you will My Bird she is Round-head still. Sirrah quoth the Iustice hold your-tongue, Good men methinkes you should not wrong, Sir quoth the man, nor have I yet, Though he thinks so for want of wit; I have a Bird he sayes she's an Owle, But I may call her Round-head or foole: To whit to who, come say what you will, My Bird she is a Round-head still, The Iustice knew not what to say, But friendly bid him goe his way, Then home he went being dismist With his Round-head upon his fist; I wonder men so simple be, They can be so displea'd with me: To whit to who, &c. There's none my Round-head vill despise, But such as are knowne to be unwise, Giggy-headed fooles and dolts, Sisters and unbridled Colts; My Round-head is a gallant Bird, Good words to her I pray afford: To whit to who, come say what you will, My Bird it is a Round-head still. Humphery Crouch. FINIS. Printed at London for Richard Harper, at the Bi∣ble and Harpe in Smithfield. 1642.
