E1653A 52528812 178782
A MESSAGE FROM BOTH HOVSES OF Parliament Sent to YORKE to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, the 28. of March 1642. With his Majesties Letter to the Lord Keeper, in answer to the same, Dated March the last. 1642. Sabbati 2. of April, 1642. Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, that the Message of both Houses to his Majesty, dated 28. of March, 1642. That the Earle of Warwicke might command this Summers Fleet, in chiefe under the Lord Admirall: and his Majesties Answer thereunto shall be forthwith printed and published. Iohn Browne, Cler.Parliament. Printed at London for Andrew Coe. 1642.
May it please Your Majesty, THE Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, having found it necessary to provide, and set to Sea a strong and powerfull Navy for the defence of this Kingdom against forrain force & the security of your other dominions, the charge whereof is to be borne by the Common-wealth, and taking notice of the indisposition of the Lord Admirall, which disables him at this time for commanding the fleet in his owne person, did thereupon recommend unto his Lordship, the Earle of Warwicke (a person of such quality and ability as in whom they might best confide) to supply his Lordships roome for this imployment, and understanding that your Majesty hath since signified your pleasure concerning that command to Sir Iohn Pennington, wee doe hold it our duty
to represent unto your Majesty, the great danger and mischiefe the Common-wealth is like to su∣staine by such interruption. And therefore doe humbly beseech your Ma∣jesty that the person recommended by both Houses of Parliament for this service, may no longer bee detained from it out of any particular respect to a∣ny other person whatsoever.
To our Right trusty and welbe∣loved Counsellor, Edward Lord Lit∣tleton, Keeper of our Great Seae of ENGLAND. RIght trusty and welbeloved Counsellour, we greet you well: we wonder both at the forme and matter of that inclosed Paper ye sent Us, (in the name of both House of Parlia∣ment, in yours of the 28. of March) it beng neither by way of Petition, Declaration, or Leter, and for the matter, Wee beleeve it is the first tie that the houses of Parliament have taken upon them the no∣mination or recommendatiō of the chiefsea Com∣mander; but it ads to the wonder, that Sir Iohn Pen∣nington being already appointed by Us for that ser∣vice, upon the recommendation of our Admirall, (which is so well known that none can be ignorant of it) and no fault so much as alledged against him, another should be recommended to Us: Therefore Our Resolution upon this poynt is, that Wee will not alter him, whom we have already appoin∣ted
to command this yeares Fleet, whose every way suffeciency is so universally knowne, the which We are confident Our Admirall (if there shall bee occasion) will make most evident (a∣gainst whose Testimony We suppose our Parlia∣ment will not except) and though there were yet none appointed; or the said Sir John (through some accident) not able to perform the service, yet the men of that Profession, are so well knowne to Us, (besides many other Reasons) that (our Admirall ccepted because of his place) Recom∣mendation of that kind, would not be accepta∣ble to Us. Given at Our Court at Yorke, the last of March, 1642. FINIS
