F1156A 52614673 175883
The flattering young Man and the modest Maid. To be Sung to the pleasant Tune of, The Duke of Florence March. The young Man's Affection. OFt have I vow'd to love no one, but when I think on thee, I have no power for to give o're, thy Captive I must be; So many looks and graces dwells between these Lips and Eyes, That whosoever sees thy Face, must once be made a prize. 2. Oft have I view'd thy comely parts from head unto the toe, Which makes me fry in Cupids flames, the truth of all is so; For when I ly upon my Bed, in hopes to take my rest, I cannot sleep to think on thee, whom I in heart love best. 3. Oft have I Kist thy Rudie Lips, which are more rare and sweet, Than Sugar and the Cinamon, when they together meet. The sweet perfumed breath of thine, doth such great pleasure bring, That when I Kiss, it makes me think upon another thing. 4. Oft have I in my folded Armes thy lovely Corps embrac'd, Whereby with thy sweet Company my Person hath been grac'd; But never could I so happy be to have my full delight, To daily Court and play with thee, and ly with thee all night: 5. Oft have I much desired to hear, thy sweet melodious voice, Whose sugered Notes may seem to make a love sick Man rejoice; The pretty toys, the Female joys, and rare conceits of thine Must either make a pleasant cure, or kill this heart of mine, 6. Oft have I took thee by the hand, a bargain for to make, And thou did also promise me thou wouldst not me forsake. Come now dear love, perform they vows, and ease me of my pain; Or else with Cupids piercing Dart my Heart will soon be slain The modest Maids Reply. KInd Sir, I thank you for your lov and proffers made to me, In any thing that fitting is, your servant I will be; But in some words that you have spo you greatly are to blame; Therefore leave off your fond discou I cannot brook the same, 2. Your praising of me over much, it doth not like me well; For some Men will dissemble most, when fairest words they tell. Even as the silly fish is caught, with a deluding Bait, So young men think to catch poor M by cunning and deceit. 3 Soft fire they say, sweet malt doth and some say haste makes waste▪ Some in their journey tyre themsel with running over fast: Strong Wines do soon inflame the B sweet meats do surfeits bring, And young Men make fair promise when they mean no such thing, 4, Oft have I heard a Proverb tol in which I have a share, Happy the Maid, who by others ha can learn for to beware: This Lessons good for all young M to learn and keep indeed, The better use they make thereof, the better they may speed. 5, And now young Man I tell you t I tell you flat and plain: Except you mind to marry me, your labour is in vain. Its not the tempting looks of thine, nor thy inticing Tongue, Shall blemish the good Name of mine, nor do my body wrong. 6, When as the young Man understood to what the Maid was bent, Most kindly he saluted her, and so away they went, He liked her, she liked him. matters were so well carried, That on the morrow morning next they Kist and after married. FINIS.
