F99 99887700 183348
The Fair Maid of Dunsmore's Lamentation. Occasioned by Lord Wigmore, once Governour of Warwick-Castle. Being a full and true Relation, how Lord Wigmore enticed the fair Isabel of Dunsmore, in War∣wick-shire, a Shepherds daughter, to his Bed; she afterwards perceiving her self to be with child by him, rather than she would undergo the vulgar disgrace amongst her Friends, did stab her self, and dyed immediately. Tune of, Troy Town. VVith Allowance. ALL you that ever heard the Name of Wigmore that renowned Lord, Who once had gain'd a Glorious Fame, but lost it of his own accord, A lustful love did cause her woe, Which did his Honour overthrow. The King had made him Governour, of Warwick-castle where he dwelt, Not long, but quickly heard of her, whose name to name my heart doth melt: A lustful love, &c. Fair Isabl they did her call, a Shepheards Daughter fair and bright, Which caus'd this man of might to fall in love with her at the first sight: A lustful love, &c. Lord Wigmore on a Summers day, with his own Servant walke the field, By a small River they took their way, whose murmuring currant did pleasure yield, But a lustful love &c. They had not walked very far, but easily they might espye, Fair Isabels body to appear, a washing of her self just by: A lustful love, &c. She in the silver Stream alone, was washing of her milk-white skin, But had she her misfortunes known, she would not in that place have been: A lustful love, &c. The more he lookt the more he lov'd, till looking did for action call, With flames of lust his heart was mov'd, to work her ruin and his fall. A lustful love, &c. Thus viewing her with burning pain, he could no longer there abide, But to his castle returns again, and there would fain his passion hide. But lustful love, &c. But all in vain the more he strove, from love-sick fancies to retire, The more he burnt in lustful love, and Isabel must quench the fire: A lustful love, &c.
A Trusty servant forth he sends, to bring her to him without delay, Resolving for to have his ends, and quickly too, he could not stay, A lustful love, &c. The Servant goes at his command, and vows he will not be deny'd, There did he spy fair Isabel stand, just dressed by the River side, A lustful love, &c. The Servant told her courteously, his Lord desired her for to come, For he must speak with her instantly, she grants and went into his Room, A lustful love, &c. Lord Wigmore fell upon his knees, and beg'd to him she would be kind, Crying Isabel my dear, none sees, blush not my sweetest, love is blind. A lustful love, &c. Her innocence was overcome, oh itty 'twas she was beguild, She afterwards reutrned home, and from that time conceiv'd with child. A lustful love did cause her woe, Which did his Honour overthrow. Fair Isabells mournful Recantation, AT Dunsmore the fair Isabel, near unto Warwick that brave town, There 'twas she mournfully did dwell, repenting what was yet unknown. With sighs she cryes Heaven pitty me, Lord Wigmore this is long of thee. Quoth she alas what shall I do, or unto whom shall I make my moan, Each day and hour increase my woe, and yet I dare not make it known, With sighs, &c. Oh, that I had ne'r been born, and being born had dyed just then, Each Virgin will hold me in scorn, and shall be scoff'd by all young-men, With sighs, &c. At six months end she could perceive, her belly swelled and big did grow, The Babe within her womb did strive, and friends began the cause to know, With sighs, &c. Poor Isabel distrest with grief, laments her folly, but too late; Instead of giving her Relief, her friends do prosecute their hate, With sighs, &c. But she not able to endure, their anger and her own disgrace, Resolves to find a speedy cure, in some convenient private place, With sighs, &c. With this sad resolution bent, she takes a Dagger in her hand, 'Twil make a heart of stone relent, the truth of this to understand, With sighs, &c. She prays that heaven would her forgive, then to her heart her Dagger sent, And down she dropt, let those that live, take care betimes, and all Repent, At last she cry'd, &c. Lord Wigmore hearing of this, he never more had quiet rest, His guilty heart did in him bleed, and privately his sins confest, Fair Isabel forgive, and I, VVill pine with sorrow till I dye. I must confess I did thee wrong, and openly will it proclaim, Let all-young men that hear this song, take care they ne'r commit the same. Fair Isabel, &c. And when I am dead, and blood is cold, to shew my dear I lov'd thée well; One Tomb shall both our bodies hold, such is my love for Isabel. Fair Saint forgive my crime and I VVill pine with sorrow till I dye. FINIS. Printed for J. Wright, J. Clarke, W. Tha¦ray, and T. Passinger.
