i124 52614711 175914
In the County of PALATINE IN DURHAM, NEAR FERRY-HILL, Jan. 25th. 1682. Was Acted the most Horrid and Barbarous Murder that ever was heard on in the North or elsewhere, upon the Bodies of John Brasse, Jane Brasse, and Elizabeth Brasse, while their Parents were gone to Ferry-Hill, not half a Mile from there own Home. As may be seen by this following Relation ON Thursday the 25th. of the January, 1682. being St. Pauls day, John Brasse and Margaret his Wife, going that Evening to Ferry-Hill (a Town not half a Mile distant from their own House) they left John their Son, Aged Se∣venteen years; Jane, their daughter about Nineteen years of Age; and Eli∣zabeth, their Daughter, being Ten years of Age. All three were hopeful Children, and well Educated. These three young People being left at Home, with one Andrew Mills their Servant: About Nine of the Clock the same Night, this Andrew Mills came to the House where his Master and Dame were at Ferry-Hill, to Acquaint them with this sad News, saying, Dame, our Johnny and Jany are both Kill'd. The Mother crying out, Asked what was become of her Little One. This Andrew Mills, Answered, and said, there were two Men in the House, whilst he was feeding the Oxen, and he heard one say to the other, Kill All, Kill All. But the Mother Reply'd, Villain, none but thou has Murther'd my Children. Upon this, People of all Sorts in abundance flocked to the House, (taking the said Andrew Mills along with them) where they found all the three Persons most Barbarously and Inhumanely Murther'd: Their Throats being Cut, their Bodys great∣ly Mangled, especially their Heads and Necks. Two Axes was found on the Floor all Bloody, both Heads and Handles. This Mills, was suspected by all to be the Mur∣derer, and being searched, found in his Pocket, his Knife all Bloudy, but denied the Fact. The Coroner being sent for, and calling a Jury, Impanell'd them; they Examined the Rogue, who denies all. Whereupon the Coroner advising the Jury to withdraw, Examins the Fellow alone, telling him (if he were guilty) and did confess the Fact, he would befriend him in saving his Life. Upon this, the Villain confest he did it. Saying, whilst the two Eldest were asleep (but not in Bed) he Kill'd them both. And afterwards, took the Little one out of its Bed and Murthered that also. He said, after he had so done, he left them all in one Room. In his confession he further faith, he in∣tended but Four dayes before to have Murdred the whole Family, but wanted opportunity. What might be the Cause for these Horible Murrders, is not yet known, he living there but a short time, and no differences in the Family. Who ever doubts the Truth of this, may be further satisfied by Mr. Samuel Newton at his House in Gray-Fryers, whom this Relation was sent to, and does know the Parents of the Murdred-Children, and did know the Children likewise. LONDON, Printed for T. M. and sold by Randal Taylor. 1682.
