j1166a 669.f.4[16] 99883501 182690
IUDGE BARKELY HIS PENITENTIALL COMPLAINT: Wherein he laments the Condition of his present Imprisonment, and the late Corruptions of violated and inforced IUSTICE. WHat wonder's this, to heare a Terme should be Gone off, and yet Vacation still with me? That I should owne the leasure to rehearse My Cause to'th Stones, and plead my Griefes in Verse: That I who ballanc'd Right, and in her Scale Did raise or sinke her to make Wrong prevaile, Should now lye lost to Justice, and inferre My selfe an Exile to her Hall and her; Should feare her sentence, and should hide my face (Where once I sate) from her Tribunall place. Judgement proves then most happy, when the Law Of Truth and Goodnesse doth the Conscience awe. Nor can he quickly into danger fall, Who to himselfe lives a law rationall. But when the showes of Honour or of Gaine Grow on the heart, and doe corrupt the braine, Reason doth startle, and th'affections straight Prove conquer'd Captives to that golden bair. Why should those thicke and glittering spangles, that Doe dance in glory on the robes of State, Trouble the knowing minde to gaze upon Their flattering splendors, or to put them on? But that's not all; for when that fatall Vice (That Turke 'mongst Christians) sordid Avarice, Leads her blacke Army up, and doth begin To make the heart and Usurer to Sin; Then Peace, Religion, Safety, Justice, all Who owne to Grace or Honour, humbled fall Before that tyrant Fiend whose irefull doome Breaches nought but ruine, rage, and martyrdome, Who bribes the Law, and what was made so strong To speake our Right, makes Law to speake it Wrong. These were my faults, made happy did they guest But in one Inne, or lodg'd but in my Brest: But when that Justice on her knees shall fall To beg the Judge to doe her right, and call Her spotlesse Ermines to his eye, and wrong'd, Desire that grace to have her Cause prolong'd Untill some happy Parliament should raise New strength to her unnerved hand, and praise Her faint and labouring pulses, make her know Holds she the Ballance in her hand, or no, To lend her eyes, and from their gracious tongues Infuse new breath to her despairing lungs, When Life and Honour lay upon the stake, And Justice dumbe, while Falshoods tongue did ake, My sadded bloud sickens to whay, and while That Right now laughes, I gratulate her smile. That Hand of Justice which I downe did beare, Strikes now repentance through me, which no eare Can heare and spare no griefes, nor passing by Can any see but with a bleeding eye. Let all my Lawes he broken, let the wheele Of Fortune split, and her Atturneyes reele. It is a glad and happy sinne would prove It selfe reform'd to every good mans love: Thus much my penitence can doe, but this Is good begotten from too much amisse. Though cold my hopes, and my more sad affaires Doe pull more winter on my snow-touch'd haires, I now learne Justice, patient I learne more Then ere her Agent I perform'd before: And shall decree what ever way she's bent, Just is my fate, as just the Parliament. Printed in the yeare 1641.
