S1910 R183539 51784663 175067
A PROCLAMATION For Securing the Kingdom against an Invasion designed from France. WILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great-Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, To  Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that Part, conjunctly and severally, specially Constitute, Greeting: Whereas the merciful Providence of GOD to Us, and Our Kingdoms, hath discovered a most wicked & Horrid Conspiracy to Assassinat Our Royal Person, which was designed to have been Acted before an Invasion, which is intended from France, for the Ruining Our Religion, and all that is dear to Our Good Subjects; We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council have thought fit, upon this Occasion to Require, Likeways We hereby do Require all Our loving Subjects to be in a Readiness, as they shall receive Orders from Our Pri∣vy Council, with their best Horses and Arms, to defend against any such Horrid Invasion from France, and against the Attempts which may be made by Enemies, or evil affected Persons at Home: And hereby require all Our loving Subjects, especially Our Magi∣strats, Justices of Peace, Collectors at Our several Sea-Ports, and upon the Borders, to Stop and Seize all Persons coming into this Our Antient Kingdom, who have not sufficient Passes under one of the Secretaries of State for either of the Kingdoms of Scotland or England, or under the Lieutennant of Ireland their Hands. And farder, do hereby require all Our loving Subjects to take special Not∣ice of any Persons disaffected to ur Government, their keeping Meetings, and that they Discover the same time∣ously to some of Our Privy ncil, or the next Magistrate of the Place, that the saids Persons may be secured and Proceeded against, as Persons Designing to Disturb the Peace and Quiet of Our Government. And We with Advice foresaid, Do hereby Require and Command all Our Sheriffs and their Deputs, to Seize all the Horses above an Hundred Merks Price, and all sort of Arms more than a Walking Sword, of such Persons who are obliged by the sixth Act of the fourth Session of this Our cur∣rent Parliament, to have Sworn and Signed the Oath of Allegiance with the Assurance, and who have not Sworn and Signed the same: And Appoints and Ordains the Magistrats of all the Towns upon the Sea Coasts of this Kingdom, upon the first Sight of any Number of Ships Approaching Our Coast; that they, by putting on Fires and Beacons, Advertise all Our Leidges thereof: And that they likewise Advertise Our Privy Council of the same, by sending Expresses. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you strictly, and Command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat-Cross of Edinburgh, and to the remanent Mercat-Crosses of the haill Head-Burghs of the several Shires and Stewartries within this Our antient Kingdom, and there in Our Name and Authority, make publick Intimation of the Premisses, that none pretend Ignorance. And Ordains these Pre∣sents to be Printed. Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the twenty ninth day of February, And of Our Reign the seventh Year, 1696. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concili. God Save the King. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His Most Excellent Majesty, Anno DOM. 1696.
