S1799 53299283 180015
letterhead with royal emblems A PROCLAMATION, For a Solemn National Monthly Fast. WILLIAM and MARY, by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great-Britain, France and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith; To Our Lyon King at Arms, and his Brethren Heraulds, Macers of Our Privy Council, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, Conjunctly and severally, specially Constitute, Greeting: Forasmuch, as several Synods, and o∣thers of this Church, have Applyed to the Lords of Our Privy Council, that they would Interpose their Authority, for Indicting and Keeping a Solemn Na∣tional Fast and Humiliation, in all the Kirks and Meeting-Houses of this Our Antient Kingdom, to Implore the Blessing of the Lord upon Us in Our Coun∣sels and Undertakings, in Defense of the True Reformed Religion, and of these Lands, and Relief of the Oppressed Abroad; And especially, That GOD would Countenance Us in the present War, Preserving Our Royal Person, and giving Success to Our Arms by Sea and Land, and Preserve and Establish the Protestant Religion at Home and Abroad. Therefore We, with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, Do hereby Command and Enjoyn, That the said Solemn Fast and Humiliation, for the Ends above set down, be Religiously ob∣served by all Persons within this Kingdom, both in Churches and Meeting-Houses, upon the Twenty fifth Day of May next, being the last Wednesday of that Month, and thereafter Monthly, upon the last Wednesday of each Month untill the last Wednesday of September next inclusive: And Ordains all Ministers, either in Kirks or Meeting-Houses, to Read these Presents Publickly from the Pulpit, a Sunday or two before the first Day appointed for Keeping the said Fast and Humiliation, and upon a Sunday before each last Wednesday, during the space foresaid. And to the effect that this so necessary and Religious a Duty, may be Publickly performed; and punctually observed, and Our Pleasure in the Pre∣misses known: OUR WILL IS, and We Charge you straitly and Com∣mand, that incontinent, these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat-Cross of Edinburgh, and remanent Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs of the several Shires and Stewartries within this Kingdom, and in Our Name and Authority, make Publication of the Premisses, that none may pretend Ignorance. And We Or∣dain Our Sollicitor to Dispatch Copies hereof, to the Sheriffs of the several Shires and Stewarts of the Stewartries, and, their Deputes or Clerks, to be by them Published at the Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs, upon Receipt thereof, and immediatly sent to the several Ministers, both in Kirks and Meeting-Houses, To the effect they may Read, and Intimat the same from their Pulpits, and may se∣riously Exhort all Persons to a sincere and Devote Observance thereof, as they will be answerable at their Peril. And Ordains these Presents to be Printed, and Published in manner foresaid. Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the twenty first Day of April. And of Our Reign, the fourth Year, 1692. Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. In Supplimentum Signeti. DA, MONCREIF, Cls. Sti. Concilli. GOD Save King William and Queen Mary. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most Ex∣cellent Majesties, Anne DOM: 1692.
