T2688 R185642 53299339 180061
A true DIVRNALL: OR A continued Relation of Irish Occurrences, from the 12. of Febr. to the 8. of March. Printed after a Coppy that was sent from Mr. William Bladen of Dublin, to his Sonne resident here in LONDON: Shewing what overthrowes was given to the Rebells, and what good successe the Protestant party had; with a Relation of the late reliefe of Trohedagh. Printed at London for William Bladen, and are to be sold by Francis Couls in the Old Baily, 1642.
A True Diurnall, or a continued Relation of Irish Occurrences, from the twelfth of Febr. to the eighth of March. February the 12. 1641. THis day the Lord bert marched out to the Deanes Grange five miles from Dublin (with some horse and foote) where were a great multitude of the Re∣bels, who had great advantage of our men both of the ground and great Dit∣ches, which at the first onset shewed some courage to fight, but after twice discharge the Rebells betooke themselves to their heeles, where our men slew many of them; and in one Company we slew one Captaine, one Lieutenant, and one Corporall, tooke 12. or 14. Priso∣ners, one of which was a Commander, they had sixe Collours but all fled.
February 14. This day here were hanged seven Rebells, and the eighth had the Rope about his neck upon the ladder; he made a Speech, that his life or death was worth no∣thing, but if his life might be spared, he would doe that service which should be worth a hundred of his life, or else let him suffer, upon which he was for this time pre∣served, to make tryall of his good service, which if hee did not performe, hee must goe to the Gibbet from whence he came. February 15. This day a Rebell one of their Commanders was brought in, who on the Sabboth before drinking with the rest of his wicked Companions, made a vow that the first English he met with whatsoever, he would kill and wash his hands in their bloud, which he did the next day meeting with a woman, but being neare Dublin, some of our Scots accidentally met with him & brought him to our City, and upon examination he confessed his cruell Murder, and this day he was hanged for the same, as hee justly deserved. This day more prsion and men are sent to succour Tredaugh, the Lord in mercy send them safe to them. We heard that Sir Henry Tichborne sallyed out of Tre∣dagh, and tooke a good booty of Cowes, Corne, and Hay, which we hope is true, but it came to us by the Po∣pish Rebells, otherwise we cannot heare from Tredagh by land. We heare that the Lord President of Munster hath re∣covered Clomell out of the Rebells hands, and hath hanged the Major, and two or three Aldermen of that Towne, for their Rebellion which is here credibly reported to bee true. February 22. This day we heare that the Lord of Musgra, and the
Lord Rouch are revolted from us and joyned with the Rebells in the County of Corke; and that our Lord president of Munster is forced to goe into Corke for his safety, but if there bee a supply of men and munition from Bristoll, as wee heare and hope there is, I doe not doubt (by the Lords assistance) but that they will bee supprest in a short time: Musgra and Rouch have two fine Countries, and good Land, which I trust in God will be hereafter planted with true hearted English, it is a Country of a large extent, land enough for many thousands. February 22. We heare that the Rebells have besieged the City of Cork, Kingsale, and Bandonbridge, and it is to be feared is too true: but our confidence is in our good God the Lord of Hosts. This day here is landed a second supply of strength both horse and foot: and we heare and hope of more comming, which by the gracious assistance of our good God, wee hope Ireland will be new moulded both in Church and Common-wealth. February 23. This day more men landed here, with whom one Colonell Brimigham, a popish Colonell came and lan∣ded, but he was discovered, taken and committed to the Castle. This night some of our forces purposeth some exployts, the Lord in mercy prosper their enter∣prises, and send them safe returne with victory and honour. February 24. This day wee heare our men, some foot and horse went the last night to Kilestone; and by the way found two of our Towne that went to give the enemy notice of their comming to them, which were both hanged, as they justly deserved.
This night our men returned back to Dublin (bles∣sed be God) and have done good service; wee forced the enemy out of their Trenches, out of the wood ad∣joyning to the Castle; in which wood they had intren∣ched themselves, also took from them two Barrells of powder, and one Barrell of shot, with 500. weight of match, killed many of them that were without the Castle, but could not get the Castle, because wee had no battering Peeces there, but all that could not get into the Castle betook themselves to their heeles and ran a∣way; onely such as were laid fast by death, and could not run away. And we hope to visite them ere long in another manner. February 28. This day our men are returned from victualling of Tredagh (blessed be God, and have had a good successe; the enemy had made a mighty Chaine of Iron with Boats, which they had sunke in the River: but such was the gracious providence of our blessed God, that the night before our prevision was to goe up, to send such a mighty Tide, which broke the Chain, so that it was no hindrance to our passage: they had placeda th peeces of Ordnance upon the passage, but upon the dis∣charge of our Pinnices the Rebels ran away from their peeces, and our men have taken the three peeces; and part of the Chaine. I saw the Chaine in the Castle of Dublin, which wanted no strength, but it was the pow∣erfull worke of our good God, to whom let us ascribe al praise and glory to hi blessed Majesty for ever. I could write of many other passages, but because of the uncer∣tainty of them I omit, for my desire is to write nothing upon uncertainty: for I am ashamed to see some things in print, as that of birds and apparitions in the ayre to be seen here at Dublin is most false.
The newes we heard of Sir Henry Tychborne issuing out of the Town of Tredagh, is most certain, he brought in above eighty Cowes, one hundred Sheep, Corne and Hay, but with much difficulty: For the enemy beset them Front and Reare; yet blessed be God our men got safe into the Towne with their pilladge. March the 3. This night our men purpose to march out upon the enemy, the Lord in mercy prosper their intentions, and send them good successe, and a victorious returne. They carry with them ten peeces, five small and five great, but our trust is in the Lord of Hosts the giver of all victory, to whom we pray for his blessed assistance, and gracious protection. But of this event I will, God inabling me, write in my next: for the packet is to goe in the mor∣ning from hence. This day we heare that our men at Bandonbridge did fally out of the Town upon the enemy, and slew 105. of them, and the rest ran away. We lost not one man, and onely one man shot in the leg, in which, as all other, we may behold the gracious goodnes of our good God towards us. We heare that Sir H. Tychborn the last week marched out of Tredagh, and slew many of the Rebells, the rest ran away, so that the Rebells have no hope to get that Towne. Sir Henry sent to the rebellious Lords of the Pale, that they should send in the Countrey to the Market with provision, otherwise hee would send for what he wanted, and take the rest from them. I heard it from a good hand, and I doubt not of the truth of it, for which the Lord make us thankfull, as for al o∣ther his wonderfull mercies towards us. Your loving Father, William Bladen. Dublin: March. 8. 1641.
