V734 99885050 182898
Vox Populi Suprema Rex Carolus. Or, The Voice of the People for KING CHARLES With a true ACCOMPT of the Actions of the KINGDOMS Grand Trappanners, since the year 1641 to this present year 1660. GO, Go Bellora, try if thou can'st Finde out another Clymate, Our wants Have made us Friends, The Angels sing, The People Vote, God save the King. No more Committees, nor Sequestrators, No more Excise, nor Habberdashers, No more Compounders nor Malignants No more Engagements, nor Covenants. No more Imprisonments, nor Confinements, No more Jamaca's, nor Exilements. No more Tub-preaching, nor Hugh Peters. No more Good Wives to rub, nor holy Sisters, No more Lord Bradshaw, nor Prideaux No more Tom Scot that Jack in a Box, No more long Parliaments we thank thee George. No more Lord St. Johns of all designes the Forge. No more John Thurlo, old Cromwels Spyder No more blinde Generals, nor Esquire Lyder, No more Tom, and no more Noll No more Bess, nor no more Poll— No more of Richard, and no more of Harry No more Pembrooks which will neither go nor tarry No more Cecills of the Cammels Order. No more Lambert, but no more Sr. Arthur, No more Protectors nor false Committee. No more Projectors; to undo our City, No more John Ireton, nor John Titchbourns No more of Jenkins, nor blaspheme Barebones, No more of Marshall, and no more of Ny No more Phanaticks nor Presbytery No more such State Confounders, and their Kings, No more of Conscience ty'de with codpiss strings. No more Lord Desborough, but hie, je, ho. No more the Burgesse which ne're said I nor no No more of gifted Fleetwoods, nor Lord Whaley No more of Pride, the Commonwealths dam'd Talley. No more of Hewson the Commonwealths Translator, No more Church-Lands for Rich Sr. Arthur. No more of Staines Old Noll's Contriver, No more Lady Lambert since Old Nol don't sw—her: No more Lord Baxter the Thimble-maker. No more Griffith of all Sects but a Quaker. No more of Overton to keep out Hull, No more Nan Robbins! Harry Martins Tull; No more Whitlocks, nor Lisles for Keepers, No more Fleetwood Captain of the Weepers: No more Miles Corbet Divil of the Nation, No more Cooks the Devills by Creation: No more Hie, nor Haec, nor Hoe, no more Rump, No more Dear Sisters for a holy Jump, No more cheating of our City Maydes, No more riding of our Wives like Jades. No more pretences for a Reformation, No more Pissles for honest Hugh's Collation, No more Acts against Christmas Pyes, No more failing that with a Sister lyes. Now then no more, hare are enough to please, Three Kingdoms, since no more shall be of these. Now you've heard these Changes, there's but one more More Sweet then all the Changes were before. A KING, a KING, all the people cry— The KING, the KING cryes GEORGE and I— And so it shall be; GEORGE thy Word Will fetch him home, if not thy Sword. Although I am no Figure Flinger, No William Lilly, nor yet John Stringer, No Alminack nor yet Prediction, No strange Prophecy nor new Fiction, St. GEORGE that Star, was to Usher in the Sun To see Great CHARLES, of Good Charles the Son. Oh what a night we have had! GEORGE thou alone Must be both STAR and SUN to light him home. Hasten good GEORGE, and bring him to his Throne, Both KING and People, shall plate thee in thy own. To close these Changes, Men and Angels sing Thanks to thee GEOROE, and GOD save the KING. LONDON, Printed by Theodorus Microcosmus, 1660.
