W1464 99887353 182066
The VVestminster Frolick. Or, A Cuckold is a good mans Fellow. A wanton Wife that loved a relishing Bit, In Westminster the same then she did get; And it is now concluded so together, Her Husband must be fain to wear Bulls-feather. But yet the youngster he did not do well, Ah! silly Fool! that he must kiss and tell; She may thank her self the business is so bad Play with a man, ne'r trust a tell tale lad. Tune of, Hey boys slap goes she; Or, Alas poor thing! IN Westminster there is a Wife, a very noble Dame; And she does live a merry life with sporting Venus Game: But yet her name I will conceal, though she does backwards fall; She does transgress her Marriage-bed, and that spoiles all For she did cast a wanton eye upon a lively Youth; And you shall hear it by and by, we tell it for a truth: That with a youngman she did lye, to sport, and backwards fall, Pox take her Stease, they came too low, and, that spoiles all. And many a day this Young-man came with her to sport and play; She was so fi'd with her Gallant, she could not say him nay; He teu'd her soundly on the bed, she cry'd, Lad have at all, Strike up I say my noble Lad, for that spoiles all. She did the Youngman so insnare, and said her hand was warm, That he would mount to a full Careir; I wish he took no harm: She let him lye at Twick a Twack when she did backwards fall, The bones in her Stease they did crack, and that spoyled all. When i'me in bed then come my Lad the pleasure is so sweet; We'l have a dish of butter'd Eggs when we again do meet: Thou art good metal I am sure, I will be at thy call; Come on my dear and do not fear, for that spoiles all. My bonny Lad never be sad, with thee i'le sport and play; Ne'r talk of half a Crown a week, i'le please thee every way: Thoust never want while I have a C— I will be at thy Call, Ne'r think upon t what will come on't, for that spoiles all. But he had a soft place in his Crown, as I will make appear; To tell it all about the Town, where he went every where, That she in kindness did excel, he had her at his call, But he's a Clown to kiss and tell, for that spoiled all. Then it came unto her husband ear how he had sported with his wife: Now I am a Cuckold I do fear, and must be all my life; My Neighbour has so foked me he has had her at his call, He has plaid too much above her knee, and that spoiled all. Before her face to her disgrace, and her Husband too was there; He did declare the very case, that she was Market ware: Before their Neighbors where they went he spake both some and all; She made him to eat some Flesh in Lent, and that spoiled all. Then the poor contented silly man he made no farther strife, Though he must wear the Bull-feather he's beholding to his wife; She has Hornified his head so brave, when she did backwards fall; The Tell-Tale Lad was but a Knave, for that spoiled all. Printed for P. Brooksby at the Golden Ball in Py-Corner.
