107 99885220 182616
BRIEF MEMORIAL OF THE Losse of the Late Incomparable and Excellent Andrew Lord Rutherford EARLE of TEVEOT, &c. Killed by an Ambuscadoe of MOORES, May the 3d, 1664. WE present the World with a draught of the fatall Field wherein to the grief and unspeakable sorrow of all Men lyeth Carnaged the Body of that Illustrious and most Heroical Person Andrew Lord Rutherford Earl of Teveot, together with the Card of the Town of Tangier according to the exactest Delineation; wherein he had the honour to command so successfully for his Majesty. The view will contribute a great advantage to the piety of those Persons who would offer their Teares at his Tombe, and the more unaffected be satisfied with the story by these Particulars, which to a great expence we have caused to be Engraven. As to the Relation of this sad story, the proceeding of it was thus. Upon May the 3d. 1664. the Noble Governour calling to mind a brush he received from Gayland that Day Twelve Moneth, and expecting an onset from him upon account of that successe, ordered the Doubling of the Guards of the Town, and a Company of Foot to reinforce the Fort, having also received private Information from a Jew of a part of the Moores in such a place, whither he would conduct him; whereupon having left strict Orders concerning the Garrison, he ad∣vanced with Five Hundred Men to the Jewes River, (which you see in the Map) having the Jew with him, and passing the said River, sent a Forlorne of Horse to secure the Adjacent Fields, who seeing no Enemy alighted and fed the Horses, which the Moores suffered from their Ambuscadoes, as sure of the whole Party; for upon return of this Forlorne, with their Newes of no Enemy, my Lord marched forward, and commanded his Party to fell down those Adjacent Woods where the Enemy had lurked so often, and done so much mischief; but upon their approach the Enemy issued our, and with great Numbers encompassed this small Party, and finally butcher'd them all, very few escaping with the Newes:  And thus fell the Most Excellent Rutherford by the Treachery of a damned Jew, whom the Power and Force of no Enemy could Vanquish. Indeed no Fate could better suite his, nor was any Place but the Field worthy of great Actions. An ELEGY on His DEATH and Surprisal. WE are not Conquer'd yet, the Sooty MOORE Ere long will Vaile, and give his Triumps o're; Yet we shall make this bold USURPER bow, And fetch the Honour from his black ey'd brow, The LAWREL Crown for Warlike TEVEOT made Snatcht off by GAYLAND, withers in a shade: Thy Valour is Eclips'd thou Son of Night, Vertue from thy black Soul is darkned quite. What Champion fought with greater bravery Then fiery TEVEOT, which his Foes slavery Could often manifest, each dreadful blow Foretold the Enemy of his Overthrow, In every Battle he would first engage, The LIZBIAN Lion in his Rampant rage Was his true EMBLEM, for his Enemies falls His Warlike Drums beat doleful Funerals. While thundring shot did fly back with the breath Of fury, each Granado whispering death. There in the clouds of Smoke with winged speed DEATH gallop'd through the Army with a Reed, To measure out the Graves, of them which he Had sent to wander to Eternity. But now the matchless TEVEOT is fal'n down Unto a Moore, for a more glorious Crown Then that of LAWREL, not by VALOUR KILL'D But treacherous AMBUSCADOES Hedges fill'd: To Rifle this rich Cabinet of a Prize More Good, more Glorious, then in India lies, Then boast not Death, being slain by treachery In this last Combat, he has conquer'd thee. Jeremiah Rich. LONDON, Printed for Henry Marsh at the Princes Armes in Chancery-Lane, 1664.
