E701A R224438 [ocm]64551205 184543
An EMBLEM of MORTALITY. Containing a DIALOGUE between a PRINCE and pale-fac'd DEATH. WHEREIN IT APPEARS, That no Person, from the Highest to the Lowest, can be free from his severe Stroke, though never so loath to leave the Glory of the Tempting World; yet it is evident that we must whenever Death shall call. 8. Oct. 1687 depiction of a skeleton holding an hourglass in one hand and an arrow in the other depiction of a king (or other royal personage?) depiction of a man (the king?) on his deathbed Prince. BEhold, I am a Prince of High Renown; My Head's adorned with a Royal Crown; My Noble Lords they all bare headed stand Yielding bedience to my Just Command. Death. 'Tis true, great Prince, you can command; but I Am come to tell you, that you now must die: Therefore, great Sir, your power will decay; Another in your Kingdom must bear sway. Prince. Must I be stript of all my Worldly bliss? Who dare presume to bring such News as this Into my Court, and fill my Royal Ears, My Head, my Heart, my Soul with slavish fears? E're you depart, I solemnly declare, I'll know from whence you come, and who you are. Death. Yes, that you shall, for here I'le make it known, 'Twas I that did the Kings of old unthrone; Not only so, I conquer great and small; The King of Terror some my Title call: I am Impartial, when I strike my blow; To rich and poor I equal favour show: Sure you must needs have heard of me before, Who when I strike, no mortal can restore. Prince. And is thy Dart so fatal? then forbear To strike, because I much unwilling are To leave this World, while in my youthful prime; My blooming years call for a longer time To Reign, and reap the pleasures of Delight; Behold, I am in all my Glory bright: Therefore I cannot relish this your News; Methinks a potent Prince you might excuse. Death. No, no, I can't excuse, though ne'r so great, And therefore now in brief I do relate, That I must conquer you before I go; Therefore it is in vain to answer, No. This World, and all its Glory you must leave, But yet I would not have you seem to grieve; For though this present Life you do lay down, You may enjoy a never-fading Crown. Prince. Though this is true, yet loath I am to dye; Observe, and I will tell the reason why: Some of my Subjects worthy things have done, By which my Princely Favour they have won, And now they wait to be prefer'd by me; Therefore pale Death, I'm loath to go with thee. Death. This is a slender saying; now, great Sir, You must with me no longer Time defer: It is in vain to talk what must be done As a Reward; behold, your Glass is run: And this, I do declare, must be your doom, To change your Palace for a silent Tomb. Prince. What Soul-amazing Message do you bring! How shall I undergo so sharp a thing? Loath am I yet to yield to thee; for why? No living man knows what it is to dye. This tempting World, where peace & pleasures flow Makes me (alas!) unwilling to forgo Those sweet Delights, and therefore would I give Coffers of Gold that I might longer live. Death. What is thy Wealth? what is thy Golden Ore? If thou couldst give ten thousand worlds and more, All this is nothing, for it cannot save The highest pitch of Honour from the Grave. If mighty men for Gold long Lives could buy, They would be full of years before they'd die: But this was never yet, nor ne'r will be; Therefore make haste, and come along with me. Prince. Although you say my Life you will not spare, I am not free to go, therefore forbear To shew your sharp and strict severity; Who knows but there may yet be Help for me? Run, call my able Doctors now with speed; For why? I find there never was more need. My cheerful Countenance is waxed pale; My Joints do tremble, and my Spirits fail. Come ye Physicians now and comfort me, Then you shall find my Generosity; Not only Gold, but Honour and Renown: Speak words of Comfort, do not cast me down. Death. It is in vain on Doctors to rely; They cannot save whom God hath said shall dye: In vain Man seeks to them for Life; 'tis known, They cannot add one minute to their own. Now you upon your dying Bed condole, Send for the sweet Physicians of the Soul; The Able Doctors of Divinity, Who will administer good things to Thee. So will your Joys abundantly encrease, In laying down this painful life in peace. Fear not thy change, for he that hath done well, Shall Live & Reign where Saints and Angels dwell. Prince. Farewel the World, and e'ery thing that's vain, With my Redeemer now I hope to Reign. Then with a smile he said, Welcome sweet Death, To thee I freely do resign my breath. BEhold this Emblem of Mortality, Which shows there can no mortal man be free From Death, who conquers all, both high and low, There's none that can withstand his fatal blow: Then let us learn to live so righteous here, That we the stroke of Death may never fear. FINIS. This may be printed,. Printed by A. M. for P. Brooksby at the Golden Ball near the Bear Tavern in Py-corner. THere is also lately printed Six excellent new Broadsides, Ʋiz. 1. Christus Redivivus: being a Compendious History of the Birth, Life, Death, Burial, Resurrection and Ascension of our blessed Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ; together with the many Miracles by him performed: illustrated with divers Figures suitable to each subject. 2. The Life and Travels of our blessed Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. 3. Death's tyrannick Conquest: or the Funeral of that most Illustrious and thrice Renowned Prince Charles the Second. 4. Judg∣ment and Mercy; or, a dreadful warning-piece to all covetous and worldly-minded persons, and such as trust in uncertain Riches; by way of Dialogue between Dives and Lazarus. 5. A Description of the late Rebellion in the West. 6. Peals of Virtue; or, the VVomens deserved praise: being a Treatise of the many Virtues of the Female Sex, in divers rare Exam∣ples taken from Scripture, and sundry Histories, to confute the Slanders and Calumnies some have cast upon that happy Creature VVoman. And are all to be sold at the above-mentioned place: where all Chapme may be furnished with all sorts of small Books and Ballads, At Reasonable Rates.
