O992I R181310 [ocm]62369583 188079
Oxford's seal DOMIMINA NVSTIO ILLVMIA WHereas the Carriers between the University of Oxford, and the City of London, to the great Prejudice of the Members of the said University, and Others, have for divers years last past exacted what Rates they pleased for the Car∣riage of Goods and Letters, (and have aggravated this their Unreasonable Practice by requiring greater Summes from Scholars, then Towns-men) con∣trary to the Charters, and Antient Priviledges of the said University, and to the Orders fast prescribed to them in the year 1666. For the Prevention of these, and other Abuses and Irregularities for the future, It is therefore now Ordered, That henceforth They, their Servants, and Porters, shall demand, or receive no greater Rates then such as are hereafter expressed: I. For the Carriage of One Hundred Weight of Goods, from the Feast of All Saints to the Feast of Annuntiation, or Lady-day, Four Shillings. And for the rest of the Year, Three Shillings and Six Pence. II. For the Carriage of any Person by Waggon, Four Shillings. III. For the Carriage of the Greatest Parcel (all being to be esteemed Parcels under one quarter of an Hundred Weight) One Shilling: and so less in proportion for those that are less; except that for the Carriage of a single Hat and Case, Nine Pence. IV. For the Carriage of any Burden, not exceeding one Hundred Weight, nor less than one quarter of a Hundred Weight, from the Shop or Warehouse where the Goods were unladen, unto the Owners Habitation, or Shop, Three Pence: and for a Parcel, One Penny. V. All Letters directed to Scholars shall be left at the Butteries of their respective Col∣leges or Halls; and, for the delivery of every such Letter, shall be given onely one Half-penny Loaf, as was accustomed. But if any Carriage comes with a Letter, nothing shall be given for the bringing of that Letter. VI. Moreover, It is hereby strictly Ordered, That all ordinary Stage-Coaches travelling between the said University and City of London in Two Days, shall respectively set forth from Oxford, at, or before the Hour of Nine in the Morning by St. Mary's Clock: and shall in like manner set forth from London, so as to pass by St. Giles's Church in the Suburbs, at or before the same Hour, by the Clock of the said Church: And in all other Points, the Carriers are to take care, that Passengers be conveyed to their respective Stages, safe, and in Seasonable Time. If any thing, contrary to the fore-mentioned Orders, shall be hereafter practised by any of the said Carriers, let the Offenders expect to undergo due Punishment; and also to make Satisfa∣ction to the Party injured, according to Right and Justice. And that all Persons concerned (whether Inhabitants in Oxford, or elsewhere) may be better advised of the Contents hereof, it is required, That the respective Carriers do Openly and Publickly in their Common Ware-Houses, within the said University of Oxford, and City of Lon∣don, paste up Printed Copies of these Presents; and from time to time renew the same, if by any means they shall happen to be defaced or removed. Carriage by Water is to be estimated after the Rate of One Shilling for every Hundred Weight. Oxon. Decemb. 4. 1674. RA. BATHƲRST, Vice-Chancellor.
