V77 R233015 [ocm]61297185 180687
THE SUBSTANCE OF WHAT SIR HENRY VANE INTENDED To have spoken upon the Scaffold on TOWER-HILL, at the time of his Execution, being the 14th. of June 1662. Published to prevent false Reports. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1662.
THe work which I am at this time called unto in this place (as upon a publick Theater) is to Die, and receive a dis∣charge once for all, out of prison, to doe that which is but once to be done; and the doing or not doing of which well and as becomes a Christian does much depend upon the life we have been taught of God to lead before we come to this: they that live in the faith, do also die in it; Faith is so farre from leaving them in this houre, that the work of it breaks forth then into its greatest power, as if till then it were not enough at freedome to doe its office, that is, to look into the things that are unseen with most stedfastness, certainty, and delight, which is the great sweetner of death, and remover of its sting. Give me leave therefore in a very few words, to give you an account of my life, and of the wonder∣full great grace and mercy of God in bringing me home to himself, and revealing his Sonne in me, that by the knowledge of the onely true God, and Jesus Christ whom he hath sent, I might even whilst here in the body be made pertaker of eternall life in the first fruits of it, and at last sit down with Christ in glory at his right hand.
Here to mention some remarkable passages and changes of my life. And in particular, how unsought by my self I was called to be a member of the long Parliament; what little advantage I had by it, and by what steps I be∣came satisfied with the Cause I was engaged in, and d d pursue the same: what the Cause was did first shew it self in the first Remonstrance of the house of Commons. Secondly, in the Covenant. Thirdly, in the more refined pursuit of it by the Commons house in their actings single, with what result they were growing up, into was in the breast of the House and unknown; or what the three pro∣posals mentioned in my charge would have been at last, I shall not need now to repeat them. But onely from all parts together to assert that this Cause which was owned by the Parliament, was the Cause of God, and for the promoting of the kingdome of his deare Sonne Jesus Christ, wherein is comprehen∣ded our liberties and duties both as men and as Chri∣stians. And since it pleased God who separated me from the womb to the knowledge and service of the Gos∣pel of his Sonne, to separate me also to this hard and difficult service at this time, and to single me out to the defence and justification of his Cause, I could not consent by any words or actions of mine, that the innocent blood that hath been shed in the de∣fence of it throughout the whole warre (the guilt and morrall evils of which must certainly lye somewhere) did lye at my door or at theirs that have been the faith∣full
adhearents to this cause, which is with such evi∣dence upon my heart that I am most freely and chearfully willing to put the greatest Seal to it I am capable, which is the powring out of my very blood in witness to it, which is all I shall need to say in this place and at this time, having spoken at large to it in my defence at my Trials and had intended to say more the last day, as what I thought was reasonable for the arrest of the judgement, though I was not permitted then to speake it. Both which may with time and Gods providence come to light. And I must still assert, that I remain wholly unsa∣tisfied, that the course of proceedings against me at my tryall were according to Law, but that I was run upon and destroyed contrary to right, and the Liber∣ties of Magna Charta under the form of Justice: which I leave to God to decide who is the Judge of the whole world, and to clear my innocency. Whilest in the mean time I beseech him to forgive them, and all that have had a hand in my death; and that the Lord in his great mercy will not lay it unto their charge. And I doe account this lot of mine no other then what is to be expected by those that are not of the world, but whom Christ hath chosen out of it; for the servant is not greater then his Lord, and if they have done this to the green tree, they will doe it much more to the dry. However I shall not altogether excuse my self, I know that by many weaknesses and failings. I have given occasion enough of the ill usage I have met with from men, though in the main the Lord knows
the sincerity and integrity of my heart, whatever aspersions and reproaches I have or do lye under. I know also that God is just in bringing this sen∣tence and condemnation upon me for my sins, there is a body of sinne and death in me deserves this sen∣tence. And there is a similtude and likeness also, that as a Christian God thinks me worthy to beare with my Lord and head in many circumstances in¦ference to these dealings I have met with, in the good I have been endeavouring for many years to be do∣ing these Nations, and especially now at the last in being numbred amongst transgressors, and made a publick sacrifice through the wrath and contradicti∣ons of men. And having finished my course, and fought the good fight of faith, and resisted in a way of suffering (as you see) even unto blood. This is but the needfull preparation the Lord hath been working in me to the receiving the Crown of immortality which he hath prepared for them that love him. The prospect whereof is so chearfull that through the joy (in it) that is set before the eyes of my faith, I can through mercy endure this crosse, de∣spise this shame, and am become more then conque∣rour through Christ that hath loved me. For my Life and Estate, all is not so dear to me as my service to God, to his Cause, to the Kingdome of Christ, and the future wellfare of my Countrey; and I am taught according to the example, as well as that most Christian saying of a Noble Person that lately dyed after this publick manner in Scotland, How much better it is to chuse Affliction and the Crosse, then to
sinne or draw back from the service of the Living God into wayes of Apostacy and Perdition. That Noble Person whose Memory I Honour, was with my self at the beginning and making of the Solemne League and Covenant, the matter of which and the holy ends therein contained, I fully assent unto and have been as desirous to observe; but the Rigid way of prosecuteing it, and oppressing unifor∣mity that hath been endeavoured by it, I never ap∣proved. This were sufficient to vindicate me from the false Aspersions and Calumnies which have been laid up∣on me of Jesuitisme and Popery, and almost what not to make my name of ill Savour with good men, which dark mists do now dispell of themselves, or at least ought, and need no pains of mine in making an Apology. For if any man seek a proof of Christ in me, let him read it in this action of my Death, which will not cease to speak when I am gone; and henceforth let no man trouble me, for I bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus. I shall not desire in this place to take up much time, but only as my last words leave with you: That as the present storme we now lie under, and the dark Clouds that yet hang over the Reformed Churches of Christ, which are comming thicker and thicker for a season, were not un-fore-seen by me for many years passed, as some writings of mine declare. So the coming of Christ in these Clouds in order
to a speedy and sudden revivall of his Cause, and spreading his Kingdome over the face of the whole Earth is most clear to the eye of my Faith, in that Faith in which I Dye, whereby the Kingdome of this world shall become the Kingdome of our Lord and of his Christ, Amen. Even so come Lord Jesus. FINIS.
