7581.5 C.121.g.6.[14] R232100 99888814 196242
ELIZA TRIVMPHANS. YE precious shelles that lie on Lybian shore, Or Nilus sable sandes in needelesse store, Or in the welthie deepes that westerne lye, The muddye mines of Indian treasurie. Where euer incofred in the lowly clay, (There spitefull nature shrowdes your shining ray) Yeelde vp the Pearles that in you buried bene, To decke the triumphes of the Mayden Queene. The six-square Berill with his fierie shine: The chast greene Smar agde, ruddie Sardian stone, The Sardonix with mixt-lesse colours drest, Calmy Androdamant that aye loueth rest, The costly Chrysolite of golden greene, The Jasper king of wholsome medicine. A chates black, and cleare could Christalline. Chaldean Sagda, coole Topazion, Some in her valted Diadem be set Enameling her costly coronet. Some binde the borders of her braunched gowne, In seemly ranks descending fairely downe, Or in her crisped lockes be looser laid, Or dubling oft her bared bosome shade. Giue place ye Persians with your Tissued traines, Which baser tymes accounted Souerayne Giue place ye proudest Queenes that were araied In curious needle workes of the Tyrian maid. Lo here the Art of Nature, pride of Art, Vnited bene, yet striue for greater part Nature the matter, Art doth claime the make, And both their glory from her grace do take. Descerning eye deale vnto each his due, And giue the verdict with an equall view. The Lyon is the Forrests King, The flore-dece the pride of spring The three in numbers leads the Ring The square doth make the surest thing Foure-quartars can diuide the best. The circle is the perfectest, The crosse once bore the holiest Well may the crowne become their crest Which all desine the worthiest. A shame on him that thinkes amisse, Or grudges at Elizaes blisse, Grow euer greene victorious Laurell tree, Whose branch she beares in such solemnitye And thou faire bow, bud out and spring anew, That might'st vnto the world her triumph shew. Meane while preferred by her gentle grace To the reuenging sworde or awfull Mace. Round globe the figure of her kingdomes right, Due vnto herby sires subduing might Betoken thou to her impiring hand, The Northren world, and neighbour western land From scattered Orkneis vnto Piren hils, The sea-diuided Earths her Empire fils. Vpon two Piles of Trophe-like ascent, Much like the spires of Egypts monuments, Sit there two Nimphes arayd in lighter weede To shew the wondering world her vertues meede. Thone with a bending Palme, and band of Bayes, The signes of many fortunate assayes, Victorie selfe shall Crowne her aged heade, While conquered Spayne shalbe her captiue led. The other on her crowned Temples beares A girlond made of yellow wheaten Eares. Her left hand holdeth vp the Horne of store, Her right the wreath that earst Pomona wore, Peace in her Raigne, and plentie in her peace, And in her plentie pleasure, and sweet ease Wars in her Peace, and Conquests in her war, And fame of Conquest Crownes the Conquerer Thus doth Elyza Triumph on her day, Whiles her Nouembers sliden soft away. Slide on ye blessed Moneths to those forepast, And with the world winde vp your course at last. The Lion awe, the flower her fayre estate, Terneon perfect, square sure situate Four quarters equal rule Circle large gouernance The crosse her pietie, and sufferance. These are to be soulde in Pawles Church∣yard at the Brasen Serpent by Robert Dexter, 1597.
