8351.3 S120191 99855390 177854
❧ To the reuerend Fathers in God, and our trustie and well beloued, the Bishops as∣sembled at the Conuocation. IAMES. RIght reuerend Fathers in God, and right trustie and well beloued, we greet you well. By our Letters of the viij. of October last, directed to the late Archbishop of Canterburie of reuerent memorie, which we are assu∣red he did not faile to impart vnto you my Lords the Bishops, as we willed him to do, we recommended vn∣to him and you, the Citie of Geneua, to be releeued with some charitable Collection, to be made in the se∣uerall Parishes of this Realme, in such maner, and for such reasons, as in our said Letters are contained. Whereof we are since aduertised, that the successe is neither according to our expectation, nor the speede vsed therein such as their necessitie requireth. Whereupon we haue bene moued to renew our former direction giuen to the said Archbishop, to you all in generall being assembled together, that by our second commendation of so charitable a worke, you may perceiue how much we affect the good issue therof. Requi∣ring you, aswell my Lords the Bishops, as all other of the Conuocation whō it may concerne to further the executiō of this our desire, that you immedi∣atly take order, each of you within his Diocesse or other charge, that the con∣tents of our Letters to the Archbishop directed be speedily performed. And that you giue charge to all your inferiour officers or others who shal haue to do in this Collection, that they do their indeuors therein, without clayming any fees or laying charges vpon the poore citie, which hath more need of reliefe then perhaps is commonly conceiued. Giuen vnder our Signet at our Pallace of VVestminster the 25. day of March, in the second yeare of our Raigne of England, Fraunce, and Ireland, and of Scotland the 37. To the Minister, Churchwardens and Parishioners of THe former Letters of his Maiestie, haue bene from me transmitted to the Clergy of euery Deanrie within my Diocesse, with such effectuall motiues as the weight of the cause requireth, whereof I haue yet receiued no meete satisfaction from the most places. Therefore vpon this his Maiesties second Letter, I desire, and so expect better regard to be had, especially by my brethren of the Clergy, who (in my opinion) cannot yeeld lesse for their particulars, then three pence of the pound of the valuation of their Benefices, besides their endeuours to stirre vp the good affection of their pa∣rishioners to this charitable releefe, so againe recommended by his Highnes to their Christian and feeling commiseration. The returne of your contribution is required with all conuenient speed. 2. Maij. 1604.
