E1453 [ocm]12277450 197682
A DECLARATION OF THE Lords and Commons Assembled in PARLJAMENT. Setting forth the innumerable plots & stratagems which the malignant party of this King∣dome have lately used to break the brotherly bond of peace between England and Scot∣land, to ruinate and destroy the very being of Parliaments, and to subvert both the Religion and known Law of the two Kingdoms of England and Scotland. Ordered that this be forthwith Printed and Published. H. Elsyng. Cler. D. Com. LONDON, Printed for HENRY FOWLER, Septem. 24. 1642.
A DECLARATION OF The LORDS and COMMONS now assembled in Parliament. VVE the Lords and Com∣mons assembled in Par∣liament, having taken in∣to our serious considera∣tion the present estate & condition of imminent danger, in which the Kingdome now stands, by reason of a malignant party prevailing with His Majesty, putting him upon violent and perillous wayes, and now in Armes against us, to the hazarding of His Maje∣sties Person, and for the oppression of the true Religion, the Laws and Liberties of this King∣dome, and the Power and Priviledge of Parlia∣ment: All which every honest man is bound to defend, especially those who have taken the late
Protestation, by which they are more particular∣y tyed unto it; and the more answerable before God, should they neglect it. Wherefore we fin∣ding our selves ingaged in a necessity to take up Armes likewise for the defence of these, which therwise must suffer and perish; And having sed all good wayes and meanes to prevent ex∣remities, and preserve the peace of the Kingdom, which good endeavours of ours, the malignity of our enemies have rendred altogether senslesse and vaine) doe now think fit to give this accompt unto the world, to be a satisfaction unto all men of the justice of our proceedings, and a warning unto those who are involved in the same danger with us, to let them see the necessity and duty which lyes upon them to save themselves, their Religion and Countrey. For which purpose we set out this ensuing Declaration. Whereas it appeares by the Answer which His Majesty hath given to the Humble Petition for Peace, that the designe to alter the frame and constitution of this government both in Church and State is now come to ripenesse, and that the contrivers are able to put in execution. For whar else can be signified by the demand∣ing the Magazine to be delivered up, all our pre∣parations of Force to cease, and the defensive Armes of the Parliament to be laid downe. That the Parliament should be adjourned to a∣nother place, that we should yeeld our selves (out of the sence of our owne inability to make resi∣stance) to the eruell mercy of those who have
possessed the King against us, and incited him to violate all the priviledges, and revile the persons and proceedings of Parliament, or else if (as it cannot be otherwise conceived) We doe not grant what is unreasonable and destructive, forth∣with to bring on that Force which is prepared a∣gainst us, by the assistance of papists, an ambitious and discontented Clergy, delinquents abnoxious to the Justice of the Parliament, and some ill af∣fected persons of the Nobility and Gentry. How farre we were plunged, and how fast this growing mischiefe prevailed upon us before this Parliament, needs not now be declared, Religion was made but forme and outside, the Lawes were no defence or protection of any mens right, All was subject to Will, and Power. A popish Service-Booke was imposed on Scotland for well they knew thar the samefate attended both Kingdomes, and religion could not be alte∣red in the one without the other, God raised the spirits of that Nation to oppose it, with so much zeale and indignation that it kindled such a flame as no expedient could be found but a Parliament here to quench it. This necessity brought on this parliament, and gave it power to act with more vigour and resolu∣tion then former parliaments had done, and to set upon a reformation both in Church and State, which was a cause that those who had swallowed up in their thoughts our religion and liberty, and now saw themselves defeated by this meanes, ben¦ded all their endeavours to destroy it.
1. They endeavoured to incence the two Nations, and engage the two Armies one against the other, that seeing that confusion the Parlia∣ment might not be able to sit, and they gain pow∣er to perfect their wished designe; the wisdome of Parliament prevented that mischiefe, and com∣posed those differences betweene the King, and the Kingdome of Scotland. 2. They endeavour to turne the English Ar∣my against the Parliament; this was discovered the chiefe actors fled, and the danger avoided. 3. Then they laboured to stir up the Scottish Army against us, but such was the faithfulnesse of those our brethren, that they could not ef-eY it. Then they carried his Majesty into Scotland, to try if a party could be raised there to suppresse the good party in that Kingdome, and so to com∣pose their intended purpose here. 5. After his Majesties returne presently some members of both houses are unjustly charged with treason, and the King comes with a Troope of Cavaliers to the House of Commons, to fetch those away by force, whom he had caused to be so unjustly accused. 6. They perswaded the King to forsake White-Hall, under pretence that his person was there in danger. 7. Then they work upon him and the Queen, perswading him to retire out of the Kingdome, and carry him further and further from the Par∣liament.
8. They endeavour to possesse the people, that the Parliament will take away the Law, & inrroduce an ar∣bitrary government, it being such a charge as no rati∣on all man can believe, it being impossible that so ma∣ny severall persons as the two Houses consist of, a∣bout 600. and in either house all of equall power, should all of them, or at least a Major part, agree in acts of will and tirany. 9. To make all this good upon the Parliament force is prepared, men are levied, and the malignant party of this Kingdome (namely) papists, prelaticall Cle∣gy, delinquents, and other of the Nobility and gentry, which either feare, reformation, or seeke preferment by betraying their Countrey to serve the Court have, combined to bury the happinesse of this Kingdome in the ruine of this Parliamrnt. All this while the two houses of Parliament have stil applyed themselves unto his Majesty, with all duty and loyalty, and laboured by humble prayers, and covin∣cing reasons in severall petitions, to satisfie him of their intentions, the justnesse of their proceedings; their desire of the safety of his royall person▪ and the peace of the Kingdome. For which end the parliament thought fit to secure Hull, least it might be a receptacle of such ill affected persons, and of what aid could be gotten from Forraine parts, the fleet under the Earle of Warwicke to defend the Kingdome and prevent mischiefe from abroad, the Magazine of Armes that they should not be imployed against us, and the Militia of the Kingdome in such hands as we might confide in, to suppresse commotions with∣in our selves. Let all the world now judge what more could be
done by us, to appease his Majesty, if (after the presen∣ting of such a petition as the last, and having received so sharpe a returne) if it be fit for us not only not to yeeld to what is required, but also to make further provision for the preservation of our selves and of those who sent us hither, and at least give them warning, that if thee King may force this Parliament, they may bid farewell to all Parliaments, and if Parliaments be lost, they are lost, their Laws are lost, all which will be cut in sunder with the same sword now drawn for the destruction of this Parliament. Then if they will not come to help the Parliament and save themselves, yet have we discharged our con∣sciences, and delivered our soules, and we will look for a reward in heaven, should we be so ill required on earth, which we cannot feare, having found such de∣monstrations of their love and affection. Thus having cause to beleeve, considering these con∣tinuall designes upon us, and the composition of the Kings Armie, & of his Councell at this time, that these things are desired to be made use of for our destruction, and the destruction of that which we are bound by our protestation to defend. Therefore we the Lords and Commons are resolved to expose our lives and fortunes for the defence and maintenance of the true Religion, the Kings Person, Honour and Estate, the power and priviledge of Par∣liament, and the just Rights and Liberties of the Sub∣ject. In the maintenance of which cause, we are resol∣ved to live and die. FINIS.
