E1692 [ocm]12174517 197127
AN ORDER OF PARLIAMENT For the putting in due execution through out the whole Kingdome the Statutes made for the observation of the Sabath day. As also an Order of the Lord Major to the Al∣dermen of the severall Wards in the City of London, to see the sayd Statutes put in execution in their sayd Wards. blazon or coat of arms of the City of London Printed by Richard Cotes, Printer to the Honora∣ble City of London. 1643.
Die Sabath. 22. March. IT is this day Ordered, that the Aldermen and Citizens that serve for the City of London, in∣timate unto the Lord Major of Lon∣don from this House, that the Statutes for the due observing of the Sabath be put in execution; and that the like intimation bee made to the Iustices of the Peace in all Counties of Eng∣land and Wales. Hen. Elsynge Cler. Dom. Com.
By the Major. To the Aldermen of the severall wards in London. FOr asmuch as the Lords day commonly called Sunday, is of late much broken and prophaned by a disorderly sort of people, in frequenting Ta∣vernes, Alehouses, and the like, and in carrying and putting to sale Victuall, and other things, and exercising unlawfull Games and Pastimes to the great dishonor of God, and reproach of Religion, where∣of the House of Commons now assembled hath beene pleased to take notice, and by their Order, intimation hath beene by me
given, that the Statutes for the due obser∣vance of that day should be put in executi∣on. These are therefore to will and require you forthwith upon sight hereof to give strict charge and command unto all and every the Churchwardens and Constables within your Ward, that from henceforth they doe not permit or suffer any person, or persons in the time of Divine Service, or at any time upon the Lords day, to be tip∣ling in any Taverne Inne, Tobacco shop, Alehouse, or other Victualling house whatsoever, nor suffer any Fruiterers or Herbe∣women to stand with Fruite, Herbes, or other Victuall, or Wares, in any Streetes, Lanes, or Allies within your Ward, or any other wayes to put those or any other things to sale on that day, at any time of the day, or in the evening thereof, or a∣ny Milkewomen to cry Milke on that day in any the Streetes, or places aforesaid, nor to permit or suffer any person or persons to use or exercise upon that day, their la∣bour in unlading any vessels of Fruite or
other Goods, and carrying Goods on shore, or in the Streetes, or to doe any unlawfull ex∣ercises and pastimes within your Ward, and that expresse charge be given to every kee∣per of any Taverne, Inne, Cookeshops, To∣bacco-house, Alehouse, or any other Tipler or Victualler whatsoever, within your Ward, that hereafter they receive not, or suffer to re∣maine any person or persons whatsoever, as their Guests or Customers to tipple, eate, drinke or take Tobacco in their houses upon the Lords day, other then that Inholders may receive their ordinary Guests, or Travailers, and such like, who come to remaine for a time in their Inne, for dispatch of their ne∣cessary businesse. And if any person or per∣sons shall be found offending in the premises that then they be brought before me the Lord Major or some other of his Majesties Iustices of the Peace, to the end they may receive such punishment, as to Iustice shall appertaine. And hereof not to faile, as you will answer the contrary at your perill: March 23. 1642. FINIS.
