E3291 99827924 207636
AN ESSAY, OR, Modest Proposal, Of a WAY To encrease the Number of People, and conse∣quently the Strength of this Kingdom; to improve the Woollen Manufacture, and raise the Values of Land, of Corn, Cattle, and most other things of the Product and Growth of England; and raise a considerable Sum of Money to their Majesties, and that after such a manner as will be very much for the Advantage of the Kingdom: Out of which might be settled a Fund for the En∣couragement and Maintenance of Distressed and Disabled Mariners or Sea-men, or what else should be thought more convenient. With all Dutiful Respect most humbly offered to the Con∣sideration of the LORDS and COMMONS in Parliament assembled.
AN ESSAY, OR, Modest Proposal, &c. I Should not offer to present this to the Consideration of so August an As∣sembly, but that the consideration of the Advantages that it would bring to the Publick; and to probably every particular Member of that Great Council; makes me not only hope for pardon, but that this will meet with a kind reception from those worthy Patriots that have done so much in a few years time towards rendering this Nation the happiest spot of ground in the Universe. I do look upon this to be the time that the People of England may expect from the Great Council of the Nation all the extraordinary Laws for the Publick Good that can be thought of, and that upon a double account, both because they are secure that their present Majesties will not give a Negative to any Bill that is for the Glory of God, or the Public Good; and for that they will (I presume) think it convenient to endeavor, not only such a reformation as may render this Nation not unworthy that particular Providence that hath of late assisted it; but to put it into a way of growing better, richer and stronger, both at home and abroad, that it may be the better able to assist his Majesty, to perfect those great designs he hath so happily begun, and carried on hitherto: and that when he hath got it an advantageous Peace, it may not by its Wickednesses provoke God Al∣mighty to withdraw that Blessing. That Debauchery, Leudness, and some other ills have been rather upon the increase, than otherwise, this Twenty or Thirty years last past; and that they are now much too commonly practised, I shall not offer to prove, it being but too apparent to thinking and observing People. And that the Values of Land hath not met with that improvement, that hath been wished for and endeavoured by many Friends to their Country, I presume most People that have Estates have experience; and particularly those men of Quality and Fortune, to whom I ad∣dress these lines; so that I shall let that alone too: and only at present endeavor to propose something that will remedy in a great measure these Evils, which I hope will not be slighted for coming from an unknown hand.
I have with great impartiality and strictness bestowed some time, to discover the Cause and Nature of the increase and continuance of these before-mentioned Evils, as also that of Drunkenness; and I hope with that success, that I do not question, but I could propose two or three things to this I shall here mention, that would almost totally prevent Debauchery and Leudness for the future; and that would go a great way to cure Drunkenness▪ or at least prevent it in most of the Youth that are yet free of it: and that without inflicting any corporal or pecuni∣ary Punishment upon any one. But I shall content my self at present only to offer at one way to attain these ends, which is to bring Marriage, of late so much neglected, into a little more request, the doing of which would encourage Virtue, and discourage Vice; in∣crease the Number of People, and consequently the Strength of the Kingdom, and contribute very much to raise the value of Land. For as the general indifferency that is now got even into the meaner sort of People of this Age, for Marriage, occasions much Vice, so doth it beyond any other thing, yea all other things tend to depopulation, an ill of dangerous consequence, and most necessary to be pro∣vided against by any Government that desires to flourish: I know there are some other things that do harm, that are neither so easy, nor so convenient to be redressed; as inclosing of common Fields, the Foreign Plantations, Ireland, and the Wars, &c. but they are not all to be compared to this, and if this were but so effectually redressed, as it would be by what is here proposed, there would soon be such an increase of People as would supply the rest, and raise the Value of Land considerably. Now besides this want of People (which is already in some places so great, as that Laborors can hardly be got for Money) there are other things very fit and easy to be redressed, that do much prejudice the increase of the Value of Land, and occasion a fall of Rents; as the increase of Wages of Servants, and all sorts of Laboring People, which in some places to my knowledge are risen a third part within these few years; for if a Farmer pay 5 l. a year more in Servants Wages than was paid twenty years ago, it must necessarily follow, that he must pay so much less Rent; but this would be much remedied by an increase of Peo∣ple, or of the Number of Servants; but hardly by what some think, the Justices of Peace setting lower Wages at the Sessions, &c. as might be easily shewn, were it to my purpose. There is also another thing that doth very much prejudice the Value of Land, and doth yearly ruine many Families and hopeful Tradesmen (which will also be remedyed by what I shall here propose) that is the extravagant and expensive Apparel of the meaner sort of People; for not only Farmers are obliged to be at a greater charge to habit (for I cannot call it cloath, that being so little used) their Children, that they may appear something like their Servants (which must also occasion an abatement of Rents) but Countrymen that are averse enough to such excess, must for decency sake, suffer their Children to follow the Stream. And the Tradesmen, even in most of the Towns of the Kingdom, must for Quietness or Pride, habit their Wives and Daughters as if they had 500 l. a year inheri∣tance: Yea, when they dare hardly appear in their Shops; and it is become a very great charge upon the inferior Gentry, to appear now like such, considering how Servants and other mean People are set out.
And this extravagancy is not only in Fooleries, and things that make no conside∣rable consumption of any thing of the Product of the Nation, for black Woollen Hats, which destroyed a great quantity of Wooll, is almost quite routed from amongst the meaner sort of People by insignificant Straw Hats, and from amongst the Tradesmens Wives and Daughters, by Black Hoods and Top-knots; and Cloth, Searges, and other Woollen Manufactures, by Half Silk Stuffs, a very improper Habit for every common Servant, and very unprofitable to the Public. And which is another ill, to maintain this expence, Hospitality is almost quite routed out of the Kingdom, which must necessarily be a great occasion of the fall of Rents, seeing there is at least a third part less Provisions destroyed by the same number of People in many places than formerly, for it is but few that can bear the charge of both, and therefore the Belly and the Poor, must be pinched to get fine Cloaths. I know some will say these excesses tend to the Advantage of the Kingdom, and to the Incouragement of Trade; I grant it might be so, if they were in Hospitality, or in the Consumption of the natural Product of the Nati∣on; but not so when they are in things that hinder the Consumption of the Pro∣duct of the Nation. I do presume it was never more seasonable than now to prevent all expences prejudicial to the Public, to help the Kingdom with more ease to pay such Assess∣ments as will be necessary till the French King be brought lower, for till then we can hope for no Peace: And I do not question, but if what is here proposed were put into a Law, that besides the other Advantages, it would save many Thou∣sands of People more Money yearly in unnecessary expences, than they have paid in Assessments, and would gain to as many others as much more in advance of Rents, and would make good every thing mentioned in its Title. Now the ways I should propose to do this is, first to injoyn a small sum of Money to be paid by all conditions of People, above such an Age, so long as they shall continue unmarried, and next enjoyn a small sum of Money to be paid by People under such and such Qualities, that shall wear such and such Habits, for I am not for commanding the first, that is Peoples marrying; or for forbidding the latter, the People of England hating to be forced: but to do it after such a man∣ner as may shew the Government is not pleased with it, and may cure it insensi∣bly, as the Method I shall here propose, I presume would, if it were put into a Law, as I shall endeavour afterwards to shew. I do humbly propose, That foreseeing the General Disrespect for Marriage doth not only occasion much Lewdness, but also a decrease of People, and consequently a Decay of Strength, of Riches, of the Value of Land; and doth threaten this Kingdom with depopulation, if not timely remedied: And being sensible that the expensive and extravagant Apparel of the meaner sort of People doth not only tend much to their Impoverishment, but to the general Prejudice of the Kingdom, by discouraging most of the Woollen Manufactures, and hindering the Increase of the value of Land, that to prevent these Evils: It might by the Parlia∣ment be Enacted, &c. To incourage Marriage in all Conditions of People, and to set a little Mark of Punish∣ment or Shame upon all such as shall contemn or neglect a Duty so beneficial to the Govern∣ment, and so necessary for the Propagation of Mankind: That the several Rates, or Sums
of Money hereafter mentioned should be paid to their Majesties by all Men and Women of what condition soever (that have not been married) for every half year they shall live unmar∣ried, after they come to the Ages hereafter mentioned and set down, that is the Men to 21, and the Women to 20. And that every Man and Woman that should be above the Ages aforementioned, upon the first day of May next, or upon the first of November next following, or upon any first day of May, or first day of November afterwards, during their Majesties Life, or the Sur∣vivor of them, should pay upon every of those days after they attain to the Ages aforementi∣oned, until they marry, according to these rates following. That is, Every Man or Woman, of what condition or quality soever, should upon every of the days aforementioned, while they continue unmarried, pay the sum of one shilling six∣pence, that is, three shillings by the year. Except such Servants and Apprentices as should wear Hats of English Wooll, and no Silk or half-Silk, or Cloath or Stuff any ways mixed or lined with Silk upon their Heads or Bodies (other than the Silk used in sowing or making up their Woollen eloths) nor any Buttons, Lace, Fringe, Thread or Wire of Gold or Silver, or any Mettal in imitation of, or gilded with Gold or Silver; who should only pay upon the days afore∣mentioned the sum of six-pence, that is one shilling by the year. The Sons and Daughters of all Gentlemen, or Reputed Gentlemen, Clergy-men, Attor∣neys, Sollicitors, Proctors, and of every other Person or Persons whatsoever, that should after the first day of April next wear any Silk, or Half-Silk, or Cloth, or Stuff mixed, lined, or faced, with any Silk or half Silk, upon their Heads or Bodies (other than the Buttons and Silk used in sowing and making up their Woollen Cloaths) or any Buttons, Lace, Fringe, Thread or Wire of Gold or Silver, or of Tinsel, or any other Mettal gilded with Gold or Silver; and that should not wear Hats of Wool, should upon every of the days aforementioned, while they continue unmarried, pay the Sum of three Shillings, that is six Shillings by the year. The Sons and Daughters of all Knights, Sergeants at Law, Doctors of Divinity, Law or Physick, should upon every of the days aforementioned, while they continue unmarried, pay the sum of four shillings, that is eight shillings by the year. The Sons and Daughters of all Baronets and Judges, should upon every of the days, &c. pay the sum of 5 shillings; that is 10 shillings by the year. The Sons and Daughters of all Barons, &c. 7 s. 6 d. that is 15 s. by the year. The Sons and Daughters of all Viscounts, &c. 10 s. that is 20 s. by the year. The Sons and Daughters of all Earls, &c. 12 s. 6 d. that is 25 s. by the year. The Sons and Daughters of all Marquisses, &c. 15 s. that is 30 s. by the year. The Sons and Daughters of all Dukes, &c. 20 s. that is 40 s. by the year. I do also humbly propose, that Whereas the expensive and extravagant apparel of the meaner sort of Women, is not only prejudicial to their Husbands, but to Hospitality, and to the Kingdom in general, It might be by the Parliament Enacted, &c. that all Wives and Widdows, (except the Wives, Widdows, Daughters, and Sons Wives of all the No∣bility, and their Children; and of all Baronets and Knights, and of all those that are or shall be Members of Parliament; and of all Esquires by Birth or Office, all Justices of the Peace, Sheriffs, Barristers at Law; and of all Doctors of Divinity, Law or Physick: And except the Wives of all Deans, Arch-Deacons, Chancellors, Prebendaries, Heads of Col∣leges or Halls; and except the Wives of all Merchants, Shop-keepers and Housholders, that are Free-men of the Cities of London and Westminster, and are worth Three hun∣dred pounds; and of all Ministers officiating within the same: And except the Wives of all
Mayors of Corporations, for the time of such their Mayoralty only) that shall, after the first day of April next, wear any Silk or Half Silk, or Cloath or Stuff any way mixed or lined with Silk, upon their Heads or Bodies, (other than the Silk used in sowing or making up their Woollen Cloths) or any Buttons, Lace, Fringe, Thread or Wire of Gold or Silver, or of Tin∣sel, or any other Mettal gilded with Gold or Silver, and that shall not wear Hats of Wooll, should upon every of the days afore-mentioned pay the sum of three shillings, that is six shil∣lings by the year, till they should wear Hats of Wooll, and give over wearing Silk, Lace, Buttons, Fringe, Thread or Wire of Gold or Silver, or of Tinsel, or any other Mettal gilded with Gold or Silver. And to discourage the wearing of Straw or Wood Hats or Bonnets, so expensive and preju∣dicial to the Woollen Manufacture of Hats, That all Men and Women, above the age of 16, that should after the first day of April next, wear any Straw or Wood Hats or Bonnets, should be charged for the same, as those that wear Gold or Silver Lace, &c. that is, should pay 3 s. upon every of the days afore-mentioned. That the Wives and Widdows of all Aldermen of Corporations, and of all Ministers should be allowed for Decency and Gravity sake to wear little black Silk Hoods under their Woollen Hats. I do also humbly propose, that To the end that the several sums afore-mentioned might be raised with the least trouble, that the Constables, Headboroughs or Tything men, and three or more substantial Inhabitants of every Constablewick or Township, should upon every first day of May, and upon every first day of November, in the afternoon, meet at some publick place within the said Constablewick or Township, and make up a List of all the Men and Women in their Constablewick or Township, chargeable upon the said days to pay. Two of which Lists, fairly written under their hands, setting down the Names, Sirnames and Qualities, under which every one is to pay, should be carried within four days, by the Con∣stable, Headborough or Tything-man, or other Officer of the place, to the next Justice of the Peace, to be by him allowed under his Hand and Seal; one of which Lists so signed, should be delivered forthwith to such Collector as should be appointed by their Majesties Commissioner General to receive the said Money, to be by him transmitted to the said Commissioner Gene∣ral, to be a charge upon the said Collector▪ And the other List should be kept by the said Con∣stable, or other Officer, thereby to demand, collect, and gather the sums therein mentioned, which he should be obliged to do within fifteen days time after the day the said sums become due; and to pay the same, and deliver the said List within six days afterwards to the said Collector, whose Receipt should be a sufficient discharge to the said Constable, and to those whose Money he had received: And for his pains the Collector should allow him six pence for every twenty shillings he should so collect and pay. And the Treasurers or other Officer of every Inns of Court, Inns of Chancery, College or Hall, should make and return Lists, signed by the Head, or two of the next present Seniors, of such persons as are chargable within their several precincts, in the same manner, and at the same time as Constables, and be liable to the like penalties in case of neglect or refusal. And to the end that none should evade paying, by pretending themselves Servants or Appren∣tices, when indeed they were no such thing, or by shifting from place to place before the days of payment; power should be given to Masters and Mistresses to detain or keep back so much of their Wages, upon their removing near such days of payment, as aforesaid; and that none should be excused as Servants or Apprentices, that should live with their Father or Mother, Grand father or Grand▪mother, Ʋnkle or Aunt, Brother or Sister, or with their Guardians; and to prevent abuses in false Lists, in peoples being left out or charged short, that upon their being convicted of the same before the next Justice of the Peace, they should be charged double.
That the Collectors should have power to enquire into the truth of the Lists brought them, and upon discovery of any abuses, might summon the Offender to go before the next Justice of the Peace, &c. and that if any person should think himself aggrieved by the Judgment of the said Justice, he should have liberty to appeal to the next Sessions (giving notice to the other party) which should be final. And to prevent their Majesties being cheated of any part of the Money to be raised, that the Justices should be obliged once a year to certifie to the Sessions an account of all convictions made before them, and that the Clerks of the Peace should be obliged to certifie once a year as well those return'd by the Justices, as those made in open Sessions, to their Majesties Commis∣sioner General, to be a charge upon the Collectors. And to prevent any failure in the due execution, and to the end that the Money received. might be truly answered, that a penalty of 10 l. should be inflicted upon every Constable, &c. that should neglect or refuse to do his duty; and also upon the Clerks of the Peace for every time they should neglect to make Certificates to the Commissioner General, as afore-mentioned. I should have been much more particular about the Method of collecting the Money, that would arise upon the proposals before mentioned, as well to pre∣vent abuses in those that should pay, and in those that should collect or receive; as also that it might the better answer what I promise in the Title: but for fear of offending, or being tedious. And yet I thought it necessary to hint at the most material things, that I might the better shew how they would answer the ends I proposed, if they should be framed into a Bill, and passed into a Law. The Money proposed to be charged upon the several conditions of unmarried people, tho in it self not so considerable as may at first glance appear, will yet I pre∣sume be sufficient to answer all the ends I expect from it; and the Ages proposed for the beginning of the said charge, is I think most equal: The shame that Men and Women will fancy in paying, will spur them on to Marriage, at least the better sort; and it will not only do as much in the meaner sort, but it will insensibly bring them to wear the manufacture and product of the English Nation; the want of the doing of which, with want of People, are the two chief causes of the decrease of the value of Land, and the dullness of Trade, so much complained on, and not the War, as some fancy, seeing there is certainly more Wollen Cloth now exported than was when Wooll carried a much greater price in the Kingdom. And the Army doth consume many thousand pounds worth of Wooll more year∣ly than would be if there were no such thing. I have on purpose proposed it harder upon three sorts of People than any other, and that for these reasons. First, upon the Sons and Daughters of the meaner sort of People that shall be kept idling at home, who I propose to be charged three shillings by the year, that they may marry them, or put them abroad to be Servants, which would make Servants more plentiful, and to be had for much less wages, a thing of great advantage to all Farmers and House-keepers in general, and that would certainly encrease Rents: And I hope it will not be thought too great a charge, upon such as are too proud to be Servants, to pay three shillings a year till they marry: Nor I think is one shilling a year either too little or too much for those Servants or Apprentices that comply with wearing Woollen, seeing they cannot well pay less, and it's convenient they should pay something to prompt them to marry. And if
any are against having those excepted, from paying as Servants, that live with their Fathers, Mothers, &c. I desire they will but consider, and they will find, that without that exception there will be few more Servants than are now, nor would the most of those that live with such Relations pay more than Servants, though in truth they were no such thing: which would prejudice several of the benefits to be received by these proposals. Secondly, Upon such Servants and meaner sort of People as shall continue to wear Silk, Gold or Silver Lace, &c. and as shall refuse to wear Hats of Wooll, all which I propose to be charged as much as Gentlemens Sons and Daughters, that is six Shillings by the year, to make them give over wearing Habits so unsuitable to their conditions, by the doing of which the Woollen Manufacture would not only be very much improved, (for even the general wearing but of Woollen Hats would consume a great quantity of Wooll yearly) But it would become a much less expence to the meaner sort of Gentry to distinguish their Children for such, and it would certainly in a little time gain, or save, most of the Land-holders in England more Money than would answer their Assessments to their Majesties for carrying on the War; that is, gain in the increase of Rents, and of the value of all things of English Growth; and save in Servants Wages, in clothing their Chil∣dren, and several other things that might be named, worth being considered. Thirdly, Upon the Wives of the Meaner sort of People, to bring them to wear such Cloaths as are fitter for them, than often to wear a great part of their Hus∣bands Estate upon their Backs. And there is no question but it will do it by de∣grees, for the generality of People will comply with wearing any sort of Habit, rather than pay yearly, a small Sum of Money upon any public account. And if any shall think this charge will be too hard, or that it will raise too much Money, or that it will occasion too many new Offices, or that it will prejudice the Manufacture of Silk, or that of Straw, or Wood Hats or Bonnets. To the first, I answer it cannot really be esteemed so, seeing none needs pay long∣er than they please, for let them but marry and wear Cloaths suitable for them, and they will be no ways charged by what I have proposed, or let them but be Servants, and the charge will be very small. To the second, I answer, it will not raise so great a sum as may be apprehended, for people will comply with the design of such a Law rather than pay any thing, and then the Money due would be every year much less than other. And proba∣bly before it could be got into a good way of management, there would not be so many people chargable by at least a third part as would be now: But admit it would raise a much greater sum than it really will, hath not the Government oc∣casion for it; and can it be better raised than after a way that will bring so many benefits to the publick; for if this Money were to be buried, I dare engage the Kingdom would gain by paying it, for it is hardly to be imagined how much it would do as to the answering all that's promised in its title: But there might be a fund charged out of it for the maintenance of distressed or disabled Mariners or Seamen, and considering that England's safety depends much upon those sort of People, it is but prudent to give them more than ordinary encouragement. Or it might go towards paying of the charge of the Transport Ships, and prevent the ruine of a great many Families; or there might be a fund to cure an evil now too common in most parts of the Kingdom, that is Clipping and Coyning, by erecting
a Prison or Work-house in some remote part of the Kingdom, to which such Of∣fenders should be confined for Life, which might be so contrived, as to cure that evil sooner than the taking away of Life, as now practised, as I think I could make evident; or to what else shall be thought more convenient. To the Third, I answer, it is true it must neeeds occasion some Officers to get it truly collected, and the more exactly it is collected the better it will be for the Kingdom: but the number imployed need not be many, for I should not question but to propose a way to manage it at a very moderate charge, and so as it should hardly be possible for any imployed therein to cheat ot wrong their Majesties of any part of it without being discovered. And as to the Fourth, I desire to know whether the manufacture of Wooll, the natural Product of the Nation, be not in the first place to be considered, and then I shall answer that it will not prejudice the Silk Manufacture near so much, as it will advantage the other; for there will be so many to wear Silk, that are not proposed to be charged for the same, as will be sufficient not only to keep up, but to encourage that Manufacture: As all the Nobility, the Gentry, most of the Citi∣zens of London and Westminster, and a great many others that will come within that exception; and besides which there will be a great many that will wear it, though they pay for their Pride, but for such it is but reasonable they should pay for pre∣judicing the Public. And as to that of Straw Hats or Bonnets, it is not to be na∣med the same day with that of Wool; however there may be enough worn to continue that Manufacture, which doth much more prejudice than good to the Public; for Children, and young People under 16 are not proposed to be forbid wearing them, and those that wear Silk may wear them without any increase of Charge. I need not I think say much, why I would discourage the wearing of Lace, &c. in the Meaner sort of People, it being so apparent an improper Habit, and become so expensive to them, that I believe no thinking man will encourage it. Now besides the benefits that what is here proposed, would bring to the Public in incouraging the Woollen Manufacture, and increasing the Value of Land, the Number of People, and consequently the Strength of the Kingdom: The Discou∣ragement that it would give to Vice, will I presume be sufficient to make it take with all good Friends to their Country. I know that there is another thing that would much more effectually suppress Vice, and encourage Marriage, which I have before hinted at, and which I may probably offer to the Public, if this meet with a kind reception. But this would do well at present, and truly I cannot but think, something more than ordinary should be done to suppress Vice, and to inable the Kingdom to pay Assessments; if we desire God Almighty should continue his fa∣vors to us, and to be in a posture to defend our selves against a French power. I must needs say I think there might be several considerable sums of money raised towards the support of the Government, after such ways as would be much for the advantage of the Kingdom, as instead of forbidding any thing that is pre∣judicial to the the Public, to lay an imposition upon it, and so raise an additio∣nal Revenue, which would not only be a better way of rooting any inconvenient thing out of the Kingdom, but would decrease as to the quantity of the sum to be raised, as the inconveniency to be removed were discontinued, which would
be a way of raising money in reality hard upon no body, for I cannot look upon it hard if upon the doing some extravagant action, I should be obliged to pay so much to the Government, seeing by the not doing it I should be clear, and that therefore the charge is Voluntary. And I do not question but I could propose something to this I here offer, that should not only this year raise a considerable sum of Money to the Government, and that without being hard upon any one poor person, but that should put the Kingdom into a much better condition to pay assessments; and which should be managed after the same manner, and by the same Officers without any increase of charge. And I have had thoughts of men∣tioning a thing that should either save the Kingdom 2 or 300000 pounds a year in a very unnecessary and prejudicial expence, or raise a sum of money to the use of the Government, and which should decrease as the expence aforementioned were discontinued; but for fear it should be thought I have done more than enough already, I shall forbear. Now I shall not say much about the way I propose for the collecting of it, it be∣ing I think obvious to any that the Constables are not only the likeliest to know who are chargeable, but to collect it with the least trouble and charge, and by that means there needs be fewer Officers imploy'd by their Majesties, which make the money raised more considerable. I do also propose to have all disputes deter∣mined by the adjoyning Justices, with only an appeal to the Sessions; and the penalty proposed to be laid upon the Clerks of the Peace, Constables, &c. that shall neglect or refuse to do their duty, is but convenient to get the Revenue truly answered, and to prevent abuses. I must confess I am a little at a loss as to the wording that part of the Exception for the Citizens Wives of London and Westminster, for though I would bring ma∣ny into the Exception that I think were as fit to be habited in Woollen, as in Silk, out of respect to the inhabitants of those great Cities, yet I would not have it reach to every poor Mans Wife of the Town, and therefore I propose they should be worth 300 pounds at least. As to the rest of England I think the Ex∣ception is large enough. And now give me leave to hope that none of the Worthy Founders of their Countrys happiness will scruple to give his assent to a thing that will be so bene∣ficial to the Publick, though he do thereby lay a small charge upon some of his Children, or may be upon himself, for as neither of them will I presume be of any long continuance, so will they not be of any consideration in comparison of the gain they will meet with in the improvement of Rents, and the lessening of other expences, and of the general advantages that will accrue to the Publick, which should be the chief thing to be considered, as I am sure it is by me: for the charge I here propose is likely to lie as hard upon me, and probably for as long a time, as upon any man, but I do not consider that in comparison with the other, nor will I hope any of those worthy Patriots, to whom this is addressed. Whose Pardon I do with all Humility and Submission beg for this boldness, which is purely occasioned by my Zeal for the Prosperity of my Native Country. FINIS.
