F2193 [ocm]14874206 206133
THE French Plot Detected. BEING A Relation of a late Barbarous and Horrid Design of the French, to Burn and Destroy the Spanish Fleet, in the Port of Naples; and of their Design of Bombarding that City. With an Account of the Examination, Confession, and Execution of an Italian Abbot, (late Confessor to the Spanish Admiral) and Five Romish Priests, his Accomplices, for the said Horrid Conspiracy. Licensed according to Order. THE Dint of Sword, and Policy of Conduct, together with a due Reliance on assisting Provi∣dence to Crown the Success of Battle, are the great Hinges of War, on which every just Cause and glorious Arm should depend. But as France has too little of the last two Pretensions, it has not overmuch Gonfidence in the sole strength of the three first Supporters; and therefore has recourse to a Fourth Auxi∣liary, vix. Infidelity, such as the vile and abject Treachery of sordid and Mercina∣ry Renegadoes and Traytors, to betray Success and Victory into their Hands, if those fair Names may properly be given to such foul practises. A more notorious instance of which has not been, than in their late Italian Expedition, the Desings and Attempt of their Thoulon Fleet, upon the City and Fort of Naplas, and the Spa∣nish Fleet before it. The Martial part of our Relation has been already sufficiently and loudly pub∣lish'd: Nevertheless, as a necessary Intro∣ductian to our following Narration, we must make some short Repetition, and tell you, that the French Thoulon Squadron, consisting of 22 Capital Ships, with Nine Bomb-Ketches, and 12 Fire-Ships, and all other necessary Attendance, set Sail the 12th. of the last Month, with a Design up∣on the City of Naples, and the whole Spanish Fleet, as well Merchants as Men of War, lying in the Port before that City. Now so far as this Expedition was silently formed, and carried on so near to Execu∣tion; as to that part of the French Con∣duct, to be just to an Enemy, we must ascribe them all due Honour: The Execution likewise of such a Design, as endeavour∣ing no less than the Burning the whole Spanish Fleet, and Bombarding of so capi∣tal a City under the Dominion of Spain, as Naplos, which gives its Name to the whole Kingdom, and possibly grants the Precedence to no fairer, nor richer Sister (Rome only excepted) thro' all the Prin∣cipalities of Italy; so formidable a Design, we must acknowledge a Projection of Bulk and Importance. But when we must descend, so far as to inform you of their poor and sordid Measures, taken for accomplishing so vast a Design, instead of France's priding her self in her high Atchievments of Glory, she has but too much Reason to blush at the infamous Foundation, on which she builds them. For example, for manag∣ing this intended Blow upon Naples, as the stroke was not to be so much their own handy work, as indeed no such open, or generous Hostility, they had privately corrupted and suborned a Traytor, of no less Figure than an Italian Abbot, and Confessor, to Papuchino the Spanish Ad∣miral, who together with five other beje∣suited Sub▪villain Tools, had laid this Horrid and Execrable Plot, which was upon the first Advance of the French Fleet, to have set their own Admiral's Ship of fire, by a Fire-Chest, prepared for the pur∣pose; the effects of which, as possibly it might be of that dangerous Consequence, as spreading a larger Conflagration thro' the whole Spanish Fleet, or at least it would certainly strike that Consternati∣on and Confusion through them, as to fa∣cilitate the French Access, by giving them means and opportunity of making an ea∣sier Execution by their own Fire-Ships; and thereby, after the entire Destruction of the Spanish Fleet, to have been made Masters of the whole Port, and so have been rendered capable of laying one of
the most glorious Cities in Europe in Rub∣bish and Ashes, by their Bombs and Mortars. This Egregious Villainy, though thus near hatcht, had nevertheless this peculi∣ar Defeat, through a special Blessing and Providence, as to be crusht in the Embrio. For by a private Intelligence, received from Rome, not only the intended Approach of the French Fleet was advertised (though not many Hours before its appearance) but likewise this whole Treachery was informed the Viceroy of Naples; who cau∣sing the Traytors to be all Apprehended, the Treason was charged upon them, though very obstinately and utterly de∣nied by them all, especially the Abbot, Ne∣vertheless, the Vice-roy's Intelligence being too authentick (as being supposed to come from no less a Hand than the Pope's) and being likewise supported and con∣firm'd in each part and point, by a frail weak Brother, whose remorse of Consci∣ence bad made him fall off from the Par∣ty, he was so fully confronted with it, 'till at last he confest the Fact, and was accordingly, with the rest of his wicked Accomplices, immediately hang'd at the Yards Arm. After this Conviction, upon some Questions made him, viz. What mo∣tives could induce him to so barbarous a Treason against his own Native Prince, and that too in behalf of the Universal Enemy of Europe, he was pleased to An∣swer, That what be acted was out of a prin∣ciple of Religion. For as the King of France had in so many several Respects sig∣nalized himself so true a Son of the Church; and on the other side the King of Spain had so notoriously Leagued and Consorted with Hereticks, he had entertained a veneration for the one, and an aversion for the other; and from thence had been perswaded into this particular Service to France. Having given you this full Matter of Fact, I shall not make any long Flourish or Discant upon it, only ohserve, That we are not so much to wonder at France's clandestine Traffick with Villains and Miscreants, for gaining her ends; for 'tis not to be supposed she could shrink at hi∣ring of Traytors to burn Navies, when last Campaign in Flanders, (to her only glory be it recorded) she could hire Ruf∣fians to murder Kings; nor is this Abbot's Religions Motives for his Infidelity, any new Miracle, when if we will but look back, we shall find the surrender of Mons o be owing to much such another Eccle∣siastick Persuasive: All that looks strange in it, is, that the Enthusiastick Members of a Church, should have those Tran∣sports of extravagant Zeal, more than the Head of it himself has. They may call it their Religion to contrive and perpetrate such a Treason, when he may think it a part of his Religion to detect and blast it. But to return to our Narrative, The Accomplishment of this Design, besides the blow it had given the Spaniards, had yet a further reach. The Scene of Action was laid in the Miditerranean Seas, as of∣fering, possibly, one of the best occasions of Aggrandizing the French Glory, when so important a Naval Success (as expect∣ed) so near his grand Allie, the Turk, had undoubtedly not only confirmed the glo∣rious Character of the French King, so in∣dustriously heightned and magnified at Constantinople, and thereby not a little strengthened the Interests and Confede∣racies betwixt the most Christian, and most Antichristian Monarch; but likewise had, in a very high measure, repair'd their last Years Dishonour and Losses at Sea. But whatever Renown or Advantages they had proposed to themselves, their whole Conduct herein has, on the con∣trary, so blazon'd both their weakness and shame, that though their loss has not equall'd that of the last Year, their Re∣putation has suffered little less. For on the 18th. of the last Month, with 22 Capital Ships, with English and Dutch Colours, they appeared before Naples, on the 19th. they advanced so near, as with∣in reach of Cannon Shot, both from the Spanish Fleet, and the Castle of Baya, and the Batteries from the Rocks on the Shoar; from all which they were very warmly sa∣luted with the Enemies Shot: but instead of returning the Compliment, the next day they drew farther off; and the 21th. and 22th. lay off at Sea, and the day fol∣lowing, without the least Attempt what∣ever, not so much as the discharge of one single Gun, they very shamefully retired towards Thoulon. Thus their Plot detected, their Hire∣lings hang'd, their Enemies provided and prepared for their Reception, they poorly Skulkt home again, and being immediate∣ly after dispersed and shattered by a vio∣lent Storm, they made hard shift, not 'till the fourth Instant, to reach Thoulon, with not only some sad marks of the angry Heavens, the Tempest they had suffered under, but likewise with the double mor∣tification of so glorious an Enterprize so meanly frustrated, and so potent an Allie as the Grand Seignour, so near neigh∣bouring a Witness, of so inglorious a Re∣treat and Defeat. London, Printed for J. Wright, in Fleet-street, 1693.
