F2550 515.l.2[182] R226787 99886930 189677
A further and more Particular ACCOUNT OF THE Barbarous Murther, OF PHILIP PARRY, Esq; Committed by Mr. THOMAS BOND, Near Covent Garden, on Friday Night last, being the 15th. of March 1700. AS ALLSO, How the Coroners Inquest brought it in willful Murther, on Saturday last and of Mr. Thomas Vaughns being Committed to Newgate, for being Accessary to the said Murther, and of his own Son being set at Liberty. ON Friday Night, being the 15th. of this Instant March 1700. Philip Parry,Esq; who lived in Lincolns-Inn-Fielas, near the little Turn-Stile, Drinking at the Rose Tavern in Bridges Street, near the King's-Play-House, in company of his own Son, Two of his Sons in Law, and one Mr. Thomas Bond; they having had some Difference about Mr. Bond's keeping Company with the Wife of one Mr. Cl—n; and some say, reflected on the Chastity of Bond's Sister, which he so highly relented, that very provoking Words happened between them: Notwithstanding which, after having stay'd till near Ten of the Clock, they went out of the said Tavern, in a seeming friendly manner; but Malice having no Bounds when agravated by a violent Passion, it so unfortunately fell out, that no sooner was they got on the ether side of the way, a small Distance from the Rose Tavern, Mr. William Vaughn, Son in Law to the deceased Gentleman, being then taken his Leave of a Gentleman, who was next day to go into the Country, Mr. Thomas Bond Drew his Sword, and renew'd the Quarrel with 'Squire Parry, and attemp∣ing to come up to him, the Squires own Son, Mr. Phillip Parry steping between them, and with a Stick (he having no Sword) kept Bond off his Father; but Mr. Thomas Vaughn one of the Squires Sons in Law, who had Married Bonds Sister, Unfortunatly laid hold of the Squires own Son, tho for what cause is not yet known, and at that very instant Mr. Thomas Bond, Stabb'd Squire Parry into the upper part of the left Pap, the Wound extending several Inches Slope wise, even so far as tis suppos'd it reach'd his Hart, for he thereupon fell Immediatly down Dead in the Place, without speaking a Word: Whereupon several People com∣ing by and hearing a Noise, and Bussle Seized the Squires Son, and the two Sons in law, and carried them to the Round house, where they were kept all Night, till the next Morning at which time Phillip Parry, Son to the Deceased unfortunate Gentleman, sent a Letter unseal'd to a certain Person: The begining was to this Effect, viz. Sir, To my great and unexpressible Sorrow; I must let you know that my Father was Barbarously Murthered last Night by Bond, the which Letter, together with Mr. Bonds Obsconding, and the Jury's Acquitting Mr. Phillip Parry, suffici∣ently contraidcts the Scandalous Reports spread abroad of his being Murther'd by his own Son. The Coroners Inquest fat on the view of his Body on Saturday Night last, and brought it in Wilful Murther, and at the same time Discharged the Squires own Son, and William Vaughn his Son in Law, but Mr. Thoms Vaughn was Commit∣ted to Newgate, as being Accessary to the said Barbarous Murther. London, Printed by J. W. near Fleet-street, 17
