I955 C.21.f.1[20] R226599 99886789 192375
English version of royal coat of arms of the United Kingdom HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT By the Lords Iustices and Council. Maurice Eustace Canc. Orrery. Mountrath. WHereas We are given to understand by the Informations of many persons well deserving credit, that of late times there have been sundry unlawful assemblies in many parts of this Kingdom held by Papists, by Presbyterians, by Independents, by Anabaptists, by Quakers, and other Fanatical persons meeting in great numbers, divers hundreds and sometimes thousands at an assembly convened and congregated, some by a forraign pretended Iurisdiction, others by a pre∣tended Domestique Authority from a Presbytery, others under pretence of Congregational Churches, and all of them contrary to and in contempt of his Majesties Royal Authority, and the established Laws of the Land, and if not seasonably prevented threatning the disturb∣ance of the good Government, Peace and Tranquility of the Kingdom; In which Assemblies some have taken upon them on their own heads to appoint publique Fasts, and days of Humi∣liation or Thanksgiving for his Majesties Subjects, and to give holy Orders, and induct into Ecclesiastical benefices, and to deprive Ministers (who have good titles by the Laws of this Realm) at their pleasures by their Arbitrary Orders by the force of such of their parishioners as joyn with them and go along with them, At which meetings they are not afraid to speak evil of Dignities, and to cast dirt in the face of the lawful Magistrates, yea to usurp the essential rights of Soveraignty it self, and to inveigh against the known Laws of this Realm; We therefore the Lords Iustices and Council, considering and de∣siring timely to prevent the many sad inconveniences and mischiefs which must of necessity flow from these tumultuous courses if not prevented, and what apparent dangers they threaten to the Kingdom in general, Have thought fit to declare to all his Majesties loving Subjects, that all such Assemblies, whether it be of Papists, of Presbyterians, of Independents, of Ana∣baptists, of Quakers, or of any other Fanatical persons, are in themselves altogether unlawful, and most dangerous to the common good of the Kingdom; And therefore We do strictly inhibit and forbid all his Majesties Subjects either Ecclesiastical or Lay, to call or convocate any such Assemblies under the name of days of Humiliation, or days of Thanksgiving or consisto∣rial days, or under any other pretence whatsoever, or to be present at them, or to execute their sentences, or to be present or any way to assist at the execution of them, as they will answer the contrary at their perils. And We do hereby further declare, that as We can readily pass by such disorderly and tumultuous meetings for the time past upon hope of amendment for the future, so if any person or persons whatsoever, shall for the future presume to convocate or appoint any such Assemblies, or meet at them being convocated by any others, or shall disperse or spread abroad any of their Orders, Sentences, or Acts, or execute or assist at the execution of any of their said Orders or Sentences, or Acts, or any part of them hereafter, We shall call him to a strict account aswel for the time past as for the future. And as We assure Our Selves that the most Reverend Arch-Bishops, and the right Reverend Bishops, will use all due care and industry to gain such as have been seduced into those Turbulent and Seditious courses to obedience and conformity to the just Laws of this Realm, so We do hereby require and charge them, and all Governors, Iustices of Peace, Sherifs, and all other his Majesties loving Subjects and Officers whatsoever, that they suffer not any such unlawful meetings under the pretence of Religion to be held within their several Provinces, Diocesses, Sheires, or districts for the future, but seize upon all such persons so assembled, and bind them over with sufficient sureties to answer for such unlawful meetings, and all other abuses and disorders aforesaid either before the Iudges of Assize, or the Iustices of the Peace at their Sessions according to the quality or degree of their offences, there to be proceeded with according to Law, as they tender his Majesties service, and the prosperity and welfare of this Kingdom. And We require all Commanders Officers, and Souldiers of his Majesties Army, and all other his Majesties Subjects, as occasion may be offered, or their assistance required, to be ayding and assisting in the due execution of these our commands, whereof they may not fail; And We require all Mayors, Sherifs, and all other Officers of Cities, Counties, and Corpo∣rate Towns to cause this Proclamation to be forthwith Published and Proclaimed, and publiquely fixed up in all publique places within their respective limits. Given at the Council-Chamber in Dublin the 22. day of Ianuary 1660. Io. Armachanus. Cork, Cloyn, Ross. Ia. Margetson Elect. Dublin. Montgomerie. Michael Boyle, Elect. Hen. Tichborne. Rob. Forth. Rob. Meredith. Theo. Iones. GOD SAVE THE KING. Imprinted at Dublin by William Bladen, by special Order, Anno Dom. 1660.
