P3831 1872.a.1.[148] R6235 99890810 200702
THE Protestant Dissenters LETANY. Occasioned by a late Pamphlet falsly call'd, The Loyal Letany FRom Rom's Tiranizing o'r Kingdomes and Kings From Religion that Murther and Massacre brings From TREASON styl'd Merit and such dreadful things. Libera nos Domine. From Poysoning of Princes i'th bles'd Sacrament From Eighty Eight's Torments that Spain did invent From Blowing up Parliaments by Hell's consent Lib. &c. From whipping of Monarchs to please a base Monk From those who at Villanies never yet shrunk And from the vile Strumpet with Saints blood made drunk Lib. &c. From Piedmont, Bohemia and Waldences fate From such as do strive to raise War and Debate And with burning of Martyrs themselves Recreate Lib. &c. From Damn'd Inquisitions and Massacring Knives From deflowring our Daughters and Ravishing our Wives From ripping up Wombs to destroy Infants Lives Lib. &c. From Firing of Cities to quench them with blood From Adoring of Pictures and Statues of Wood From praying to Saints and Blaspheming of God Lib. &c. From Marean dayes and a Smith field Rounds Sweat, From the Stakes and the Faggotts that there would be set If the Pope and the Papist the upper Hand get. Lib. &c. From Jesuits who still in close Ambush do lye, From such who known truth to the last do deny, And in hopes of Saintship do most Perjur'd dye. Lib. &c.
From Godfrey's sad usage, and that which was meant To conforming Protestants, and those that discent, From three Nations bleeding to give Rome Content. Lib. &c. From Bosm friends at our ives wld betray, From suc as their Derest Relations you'd slay; From those the Pope's Cure can Compell to obey Lib. &c. From such as their trust, with their Conscience do sell, From TORY'S whose work's to perswade us, Rebell: And from all those who of Popery smell. Lib. &c. From evil Counsellors, if such there be, From those that wou'd Conscience-chain which shou'd be free, From all Superstition and Idolatry Lib. &c. From Plotts and Sham-Plotts good Subjects to wrong From those who to wade in our blood do think long From Mass and from turning our Prayers to a Song. Lib. &c. From fashions of France and their murthering Arms, From Secret Impoysonings, and Mischevious Charms, From Roman Locusts, with which England Swarms. Lib. &c. From all the Devices the Pope can contrive, From those that do seek to devour us alive: From all those Villains that by Murther trive. Lib. &c. From our Worship being turn'd into noise and loud Cants, From Bowing to Pictures and praying to Saints, From making a God of what each Block-head Paints. Lib. &c. From smiling upon us and cutting our Throats, From such as a Saintship for Treason Rome Votes: From those who from side to side still shifts their Coats. Lib. &c. From Romish Merchants Extortioning Jews, Who deceiv'd us of Coyn to maintain the Popes Stews, And from those the Oath of Supreamacy refuse. Lib. &c Printed for W. B. 1681.
