Q171 T.1800[7] R219653 99884898 190540
QUAERIES: Or a Dish of Pickled-Herring Shread, Cut and prepared according to the DƲTCH Fashion. For the squeamish Consciences of English Phanaticks, who pray for the New building of their Old BABELL. English coat of arms, circa 1665 Printed at Amsterdam for the use of the High and Mighty States of Holland, and re-printed at LONDON, 1665.
QUAERIES. Or a Dish of Pickled-Herring, &c. I. VVHither the Hollanders Government by States is not better than Monarchy by some Millions, by their usurpation over Royal Privileges and Properties? II. Whether Lucian did well to make Hell govern'd by States? III. Whether the States of Holland (who eny Kingship to be Jure Divi∣no) may not lawfully affirm there are no Devils; since Scripture commands them to deny themselves? IV. Whether their Land may not be compared to the Ingredients of a Black-pudding; since their patches of ground in the water, seem like the knobs of Fat, or Oatmeal not well stirr'd together in the Blood? V. Whether we may not judge them cruel and merciless to all who have dealing with them, since they are so to themselves; for rather than want Fu∣el, they will fire the very foundation of their being, the Earth? VI. Whether we may not call Holland a Green-Cheese in pickle, by reason of its watry situation: And whether lately thousands of its Inhabitants were not souc'd by the English, to make them bear some analogy to their Country? VII. Whether they have not a shorter cut to Hell than the people of o∣ther Kingdoms and Nations; since their Country is so low?
VIII. Whether it may not be called Hell, since all Erronious Tenents, with the Authors of strange and unheard of Villanies flock thither, as to their proper Centre? IX. Whether England be not Sampson; since it hath torn the Dutch-Ly∣on's Jaws asunder? X. Whether any now know what their Hoghen Moghenships are doing; or whether they know now what to doe. XI. Whether if a Malefactor were condemn'd to be hang'd, a man could find any other Tree for that purpose than a Willow, which makes them pilfare Timber elsewhere for Shipping? XII. Whether a Dutchman can break his Neck by leaping out of his own Window, since he is not like to meet with ground, till he sink to the bottome of a River, or the Sea; for their Houses stand like Privyes, in Moat∣houses over the water? XIII. Whether Dr. Lamb living there might have feared that Death by Stoning (which he receiv'd at London) there being so sew stones, that the living ones are as plentifull, except what are imployed to the Paving of Streets: wherefore it is called the Buttock of the World, since it is full of Veins and Blood▪ VVater) but no Bones hardly in it (Stones)? XIV. VVhether Holland be not a meer Paradox; since its Inhabitants fish in the Water for Fire, and having taken thereof, spread it on the Land; which then appears to the beholders imagination, a Green-Cheese over∣spread with black-soap. Their Horses are Wood, which carry the Bridle in their Posteriours, and their Bellies contain their Burdens, and the Wind is the Spur that pricks them on? XV. VVhether if Mount Atna or Vesuvius be Hells fore-gate, Holland is not the Postern. XVI. VVhether that Text (They are all become abominable, there is none that doth-good, no not one) doth concern the Hollander? XVII. VVhether to shake off Allegiance (as they did from their lawfull Soveraign the King of Spain) for Christian-liberty, was not Don Quixots Argument to turn loose the Gally-Slaves, because God and Nature had made them free? XVIII. VVhether the United Provinces (dis-united by water) may not be ranked with Magallaus Insula Latronum, or Island of Thieves, who stole his Cock-boat. XIX. VVhether the water they use be not very Cordial, since it is A∣qua Coelestis, distill'd from the Clouds: However I am sure it is Aqua for∣tis, or fortia, Strong-water I mean; for using it with one hand, you must hold your Nose with the other?
XX. VVhether they believe the World will be burned (as some of them were lately at Sea) since they make it appear by dayly experiment, that its matter is combustible. XXI. VVhether the Dutch Sea Captains have not lately found out the art of flying, without other wings, (then what their fears pocured them, their Sails) and that it is fit they which come after should understand this old in∣vention, revived to prevent what danger might ensue for want of knowledge thereof? XXII. VVhether it be not requisite the States should canonize those for Saints that dye in their Service, who since there are but two VVorlds, ought at least to be honoured in one? XXIII. VVhether the Wisemen of Gotham would not have been horribly puzzled to have found out in Holland an Hedge for their Cuckow? XXIV. VVhether Escutcheons are not in Holland more plentifull then the Gentry, since there every man is his own Herald; never fearing to have a Coat, if he hath so much wit to contrive one? XXV. VVhether they regard not their Houses, and Utensils therein con∣tained, more then themselves; for though they neglect their own formlesse unlickt Cub-Ships, yet to be sure the other shall not want any thing of their native beauty: Hence may be said they keep their Houses cleaner then their Bodies, and their Bodies then their souls? XXVI. VVhether at any time they are so nice-conscienc'd, as not to turn Religion out of doors to let in Policy? and whether the most borish among them, if he gets wealth, may not quickly be made a Statesman? XXVII. VVhether this may not be a real truth, that their Country is the God they adore, War their Heaven, Peace their Hell; and that they love not any but for Interest; but the King of Spain they hate worse then the Devil? XXVIII. VVhether a man may not sooner convert a Jew, then perswade a Dutch-man contrary to his humour; For Custome is his Law, and his Will is Reason? XXIX. VVhether in the late expedition at Sea, they trusted not more to their Yard armes, then their own armes, to secure themselves from that mis∣chief would have (justly) fallen on them? XXX. VVhether he may be now said to be a man of Spirit, since that failing him he lost his courage; neither hath he seldome any but what he bor∣roweth from Brandy? XXXI. VVhether Pickled Herring, Butter, Onions, and Holland Cheese, be not the ingredients which make an ordinary Dutch-man; which the heat of the Sun under the Equinoctial in a Voyage to the Indies consolidates?
XXXII. VVhether his Body, Hands and Face are made of the same mole or composition; for his Body when naked seemeth a Christian-European, but the rest Hellish-Aegyptian? XXXIII. VVhether they were not bread before manners were in fashion, since they hold civility and courtesie a late uselesse invention, and good for nothing but to steal away mens hearts from their worldly affaires? Surely they would make good Justices of the Peace, not so much for the slendernesse of their wit, but because they neither respect persons nor apparel. XXXIV. VVhether the love of gain, upon what dishonest ground soever, be not as natural to them as water to a Goose, or carrion to a Kite? XXXV. VVhether it would not puzzle a Phylosopher to define a Dutch∣man, whether fish or flesh; since he draweth his food and breath as much or more from the water then from the land; however foul I am sure he is. XXXVI. VVhether Dutch-men would wonder to see Iron float, since every thing is so made to swim among them? XXXVII. VVhether they would not have forborn to use their virulent expressions against the King of Spain, had they not been formerly his Sub∣jects; neither would they have dared to contend with the King of England, had not they wrong'd his Sacred Majestie and People so much, they knew not how to render him satisfaction equivalent. XXXVIII. Whether Myn. here will not venture the daubing of his fac'd Cloak, by carrying home three penny worth of Pickled Herring when he meets with them in his walk, rather then go without them? XXXIX. VVhether when his belly is full, he beareth the resemblance of a full grown Oyster boyled? XL. VVhether they will not tolerate any thing rather than hinder Traf∣fick; and will not stick to entertain the Devil (should they know him so) and trade with him, should the Fiend assume the habit of a Burgo-master, and shew them Merchandize. XLI. VVhether you may not be what Devil you will at Amsterdam, pro∣vided you push not the State with your horns? XLII. VVhether if any one hath lost his Religion, he may not there find it again, it being an University of all sorts of Opinions, which grow there like stocks in a Nursery, without either order or pruning. XLIII. VVhether by this their boundlesse toleration, they place not their Commonwealth in a higher esteem than Heaven it self, since they had rather offend God then crosse their Republick. XLIV. VVhether the Father and the Son were not created together, since observation tells us, there is not to be found among them any demonstration of Duty or Authority to distinguish them?
XLV. VVhether their women would not have indifferent good faces, did they not marre them in making. XLVI. VVhether a Dutch Saylor is not in continual danger of having his leggs swallowed up, by reason of the wide gaping and yawning of his breeches at knees? XLVII. VVhether a Dutch-woman may not be compar'd to a Monkey chain'd by the middle, for she had rather want food, then want lincks to hang her keys in? XLVIII. VVhether a Dutch-man be longer eating his dinner, then an English-man preparing it? XLIX. VVhether the English have not the better over the Dutch in drinking, (as well as in other things) having lost it long since by prating too much over their cups. L. Whether we mortals may not reckon the Hollander in the Massacre at Amboyna amongst the Gods, since they did there put off all humanity? LI. Whether Rudis indigestaque Moles, was not a saying exprest by Ovid, relating to the Hollander? LII. VVhether it had not been much safer for the Hollander to have made use of their own fails for fewel, rather than to have fell foul on our Cole∣ships? This I can prove by many Chaldrons of Reasons drawn from theirs and our experience? LIII. VVhether it is not sitting that the States should now make an Act, wherein it should be lawfull (as it is thought by some needfull) for the wid∣dows and Orphans of the deceased in the late expedition, to make away with themselves by hanging in the Air, (since their Husbands were destroy'd by two other Elements Fire and VVater) lest they joyning issue with some male∣content persons, it should cause an alteration in their Government, and verefie the saying, The mighty shall be brought low? LIV. VVhether the Commonwealth of Holland hath any other mark of Christianity than the grand prosecution of its interest, which is to make their calling and election Sure? LV. VVhether the common Proverp, That bought wit is best, may not now be justly acknowledged by the Hollanders with a sad Probatum est? LVI. VVhether it may not be said (when the Dutch Fleet set sail to Pro∣secute injustice (it being then a hot season after their cold VVinter) That they went out of Gods blessing into the warm Sun? LVII. VVhether old Van Trump by carrying a Broom in his main-top, did signifie that he would be the Scavenger of the British Seas, or that he would have ad the then Commonwealths Cobler to have furnished with old Shooes, or old Boots? (will you buy any brooms.)
LVIII. VVhether Holland Cheese will not sweat coming on our Coast for car oof our great Guns; or whether it would not dissolve or melt awa ra∣ther before it comes by the heat of their own Fire-ships? LX. VVhether they look not on this as the Essence of their hodge-podge Religion? That the power of the Sword belongeth to him that can lay hold on the Hilt. LX. VVhether Opdam hath not shewn us, that the speediest way of sayl∣ing to the Antipodes, is in a Dutch Bottom? LXI. VVhether if the Dutch dare play out their game at Ruff, and that they will once more Shuffle, it is reasonable for us to Cut? LXII. VVhether Captain Smith for sinking one of the Dutch Admirals, may not truly as well as Honourably be said, To have hit the right nail on the head? LXIII. VVhether he that can say no more at present, hath not a sufficient excuse to hold his tongue. Finis.
