R558e 816.m.12[24] N61287 99882376 190175
REASONS Humbly Offer'd to the Honourable House of COMMONS, by the Church Wardens and other Inhabitants of the Citty and Libertie of Westminster; Against Passing the BILL to Exempt Apothecaries from Serving Parish and Ward-Offices. THat by Reason of the great Numbers of Kings Servants, Justices of the Peace, Kings, and Militia Officers, Physitians, Counsel∣lors and Attornies, Chyrurgions, Kings Pensioners, Roman Catholicks, Widows, and poor Inhabitants in the Citty and Libertie of Westmin∣ster; It is very difficult to find a sufficient Number of Substantiall Per∣sons, sit to serve the several Parish and Ward Offices, which Number Yearly being very great, forces the Ancient Inhabitants of each Parish, to choose many times very mean Trades whose Education generally ren∣ders them unfit for such Offices, and their Necessity may constrain them to Act contrary to their Honest Inclination. And tho' the said Ancients of each Parish do Endeavour to avoyd the choosing Vintners, and Victullers, (of which there is a very great Num∣ber in this Libertie) by reason their Profession naturally tends to Ex∣pending Mony. Yet they are necessitated sometimes to choose them, which has given a most just and vniversall Complaint, tho' it cannot be avoided, having no better Inhabitants liable to be chosen for Parish Officers. And the Parish of St. Paul Covent-Garden have in the last Seven Years for want of others, courted the Constables, Surveyours of the Highways, and Scavengers, each to serve Two Years together, the Overseer Four Years, and one Church-Warden Six Years, and the other Seven Years. That the Apothecaries Trades are as much managed by Journymen, and Apprentices, both at Home and Abroad, as any, and they are as much Absent from their Shops, at Taverns, Coffee Houses, Country-House, Governing in Vestrys, Choosiing Officers, Sheriffs, Lord Mayors, Mem∣bers of Parliament; in all which Honourable, and Profitable Employ∣ments they never refuse to serve themselves, from which they ought —as well to be exempted, as from Parish and Ward-Offices. That their Profession requires such Education, as better Qualifies them to do good in serving Parish and Ward-Offices, than any other Trade, and if there has been any Mismanagement in Parish Government, as has been by them Insiuated; it would be for a general good, if af∣ter they have been Seven Years Excused, they now might come in and Rectify such Ill Government. That the Profit of their Trades are so much Superior to any other, and Sunday to them an equall day of gain, with the rest of the Weekdays; therefore they may better bear with the loss of Time and Atten∣dance such Offices do require, than any other Trade whatsoever. All which is Humbly Submitted to the Wis∣dom of this Honourable House.
REASONS against the APO∣THECARIES BILL.
