S2749 [ocm]27960879 205793
SEVERAL AFFIDAVITS Lately taken upon OATH; By divers of His Majesties Justices of the PEACE. Which further confirm the TESTIMONY given, Concerning the MURDER OF Sir Ed. Bury Godfrey. Together With Part of the Last Will of FENWICK, the Jesuit, that was Executed for High Treason. LONDON, Printed for Tho. Simmons, at the Princes Arms in Ludgate-Street, 1683.
SEVERAL AFFIDAVITS Which further confirm the TESTIMONY Given concerning the MURDER OF Sir Ed. Bury-Godfrey. AS it hath been of late by many Learned Pens, made appear, That the Papists do justifie and countenance, nay, esteem Meritorious, Rebellions, Murders, and Massacres, against any Protestant Prince or People (whom they reckon Hereticks) for the Advancement of their Reli∣gion; so 'tis as well known, that if those Rebellions, Murders, and Massacres, be Discovered, they can (if they shall think them needful) have Dispensations to Forswear, Lie, Equi∣vocate, do any thing, to make the World believe that they are Innocent, or make Protestants themselves appear Guilty of them. That there hath been a Popish Plot, (and despe∣rate one too) in England, for the Subversion of the Prote∣stant Religion, and Established Government, I think no man doubts, only some persons whose Interest it is, may deny it. And amongst the several concurring Evidences of this Po∣pish Conspiracy, the Murder of that worthy Gentleman and Magistrate, Sir Edmond Bury Godfrey, by that Party, hath not been the least, That which induced the Papists to this Murder, (as well as can be guessed by those who are Stran∣gers to that Wicked Action) was one or both of these Considerations; namely, the hopes of finding and seizing the Examination of Dr▪ Oats about the damnable Popish
Plot which he had taken, and used to carry about with him, by which they thought to stifle the Plot: Or else they thought, by this Murder, to affrighten all active Magis∣trates from being Vigorous in the future Examination, and further prosecution of their Horrid Conspiracy, though (through God's providence) they have been very much Disappointed in both these Ends. And the Papists are so sensible how much this Murder pinches them, that after the Conviction and Execution of the persons for that Murder, no discouragements or dan∣gers they incur (by affronting and arraigning the pub∣lick Justice of the Kingdom) hath been able to Deter them from impudent Attemps (impudent I may say, the rather, because done under a Protestant-Government) to sham off that Murder from themselves, and making the whole Prosecution to be only a Design and Contrivance of the Protestants against them. Witness first, that noto∣rious Sham of James Magrath an Irish-man, who (being assisted by the Popish Priests in Newgate, Mrs. Cellier, and Mrs. Gibbon, and others) pretended there were those that could make it appear, and prove, That Sir Edmon-Bury-Godfrey Hanged himself, and that one Moor, who was Clerk to Sir Edmon-Bury-Godfrey Cut him down, finding him Hanging. Which matter being Examined at the Council Board, and appearing to their Honours to be a false and malicious Contrivance, the said Magrath was dismissed with security for his Appearance, and that Pro∣ject fell to the ground. But for the further Satisfaction of the World (though I think no body did believe that Idle Story) I shall here insert Mr. Moors Affidavit. The Affidavit of Henry Moore. HEnry Moore, late Servant and Clerk to Sir Edmond-Bury-Godfrey, Deceased, maketh Oath, That upon Saturday the 12th. of October, 1678. his said Ma∣ster having Persons come before him about Justice-business, till about Nine of the Clock in the Forenoon: when the
Company were gone, he bade me help him on with his Coat, which I did; and immediately he made me pull it off again, and give him another Coat, which I did; and then he girt his Sword about him, and went out from his House, which was the last time I saw him, till after he was found Dead in the Fields, which was the Thurs∣day following. The Constable of St. Giles in the Fields, and several others with him, came to my Master's House, and told us, that Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey was found Dead, and laid in a Ditch at Primrose-Hill, and a Sword thrust through him; and said, he had caused him to be carried to the White-House: This being late at Night, the next Day my Masters two Brothers, and Sisters, and my self, went thither; and then I saw him lye upon a Table in the House where the Constable had laid him, which was the first time that I saw him, after he went out of his own House, on Saturday the 12th of October, 1678. And then we brought him Home to his own House; And as I am Informed that there are several Scandalous Papers, and Words given out, That Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey Hang∣ed himself; and that they do Affirm, That I, the said Henry Moore, should say that I Cut him down; I do here∣by Depose, That the said Report is utterly false; and that I did not Cut him down, nor ever said any such words to any Person whatsoever; or ever said that Sir Ed∣mund-Bury▪ Godfrey made away himself, or words to that Ef∣fect: Which said Scandals are all False and Notorious Lies, Henry Moore. June the 28th. 1681. HEnry Moore of Littleport in the Isle of Ely, and▪ County of Cambridge, made Oath before me William Balam, one of His Majesties Justices for the said Isle; that this, which is contained in the above written Affidavit is true, and nothing but Truth. In Witness whereof, I have here∣unto set my Hand and Seal, the Day and Year above Writ∣ten, William Balam.
Yet, though this Matter had proved so unsuccessful, they could not be quiet, but must make one Experiment more, and that is contrary to the former: For now they Declare, that he made away himself (so far they agree with Magrath) but it was by running his Sword through his own Body. And Thompson, Farewell, and Pain, are the Men that are to Manage this New Invention; and they Write and Print the Scandalous Letters and Libels you find in their Trial: And lest any one should dare to Question the Truth of them, they boast, they can prove their Assertions by Five Hundred Witnesses. Every Body thought the Murder sufficiently proved upon the Trial of Green, Berry, and Hill, and were amazed to hear such a Declaration, thinking it hardly possible for Men to be so Impudent, publickly to declare, they had Five Hundred Witnesses to Prove a Matter, when they had not one, as may be seen by their Trial; for every Witness made against them; and further proved, that he was Murdered, and that by Strangling. But for these Scandalous Libels, they were brought before His Majesties most Honourable Privy Council, who (upon their owning those Libels) com∣mitted them to Newgate, and ordered the Attorny General to Prosecute them; and accordingly you find by the Tri∣all he did; and they were Convicted, and have since re∣ceived Judgment, and that Judgment hath been Execu∣ted. But though the Murder was clearly proved at the Trial of Green, Berry, and Hill; and though after all these Brags, that Thompson, Farewell, and Paine, made, That they could prove so much at their Trial, they could make out nothing; and so it was not necessary to call any more Witnesses for the King then; yet for the further Satisfacti∣on of the World, it hath been thought fit to Print (be∣sides what is Printed with the Trial, upon giving Judg∣ment) the following Five Affidavits all agreeing with Mr. Prance's Testimony upon the Trial of Green, Berry, and Hill; and as to the first Four of them, see John Oakly's Af∣fidavit, Printed in the Trial, at pag. 35.
The Affidavit of Elizabeth Dekin. ELizabeth Dekin, Servant to Mr. Robert Breedn, of Harts-horn-Lane, in the Parish of St. Martins in the Fields, in the County of Middlesex, Brewer, maketh Oath, That about two or three Dayes after the Rumour was Pub∣lished, That Sir Edmund-Bury▪ was missing, her fellow servant, John Oakely, told her, this Deponent, That he saw Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey, near the Water-gate at Sommerset-House in the Strand, about Nine of the Clock that very Saturday Night that he was first Missing, from his House in Harts-horn-Lane; and that there was then a Man or two near the said Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey: And this De∣ponent further saith, That her said Master, Robert Bree∣dan, asking her (before the Body of Sir Edmund-Bury-God∣frey was found) what News there was about Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey? She, this Deponent, told him, That she heard no News of him, but that her Fellow Servant, John Oakely, had told her, That he met Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey near the Water-gate at Sommerset-House, the very Saturday Night he was first Missing from his House in Harts-horn-Lane. And this Deponent further saith, That she then asked the said John Oakely, If he was sure it was Sir Ed∣mund? And he replied, he was very sure it was he, for he put off his Hat to Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey, as he pas∣sed by him; and Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey put off his Hat to him again: And he also told her, That when he had past Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey, he, the said John Oakely look∣ing back again, saw Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey stand still, and a Man or two hard by him, Jurat 22 Die Junij. 1682.  coram me. John Moore, Mayor. Elizabeth Dekin.
The Affidavit of Robert Breedon. RObert Breedon of Harts-horn-Lane in the Parish of St. Martins in the Fields, in the County of Middlesex, Brewer, maketh Oath, That one Night, betwixt Saturday the 12th Day of October, in the Year of our Lord, One Thousand Six Hundred and Seventy Eight, and before the Body of Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey was found, he coming Home to his House about Nine of the Clock at Night, asked his Servant Maid, Elizabeth Dekin, If there were yet any News of Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey's being found? or words to that purpose: who replyed, That she heard nothing of his being found; But told him, That her Fellow Servant, John Oakely, did positively Affirm, That he met Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey near the Water-gate at Sommerset-House in the Strand, that very Saturday Night about Nine of the Clock, being the same Saturday that he was first Missed from his House in Harts-horn-Lane; to which this Deponent replied, Sure John is mistaken: To which Elizabeth Dekin answered, John Oakely said, he was sure it was he; for when he met him, he put off his Hat to Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey, and Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey put off his Hat to him again. Jurat. 22. Die Junij. 1682. coram me. John Moore, Mayor. Robert Breedon.
The Affidavit of Ralph Oakeley. RAlph Oakeley▪ Citizen and Skinner, maketh Oath, That he was an Inhabitant in the Parish of Little St. Bartholomews, Lon∣don▪ in the Month of October 1678. and that John Oakely his Nephew, was then and is now a Servant to Mr. Robert Breedon, of Harts-horn Lane in the Parish of St. Martins in the Fields, in the County of Middlesex, Brewer. And this Deponent farther saith, that soon af∣ter that the dead Body of Sir Edinond-Bury Godfrey was found, his said Nephew, John Oakely, came to this Deponents House in a Visit, being as this Deponent believes, about the Sunday after that Sir Edmond-Bury Godfreys Body was found. And they falling into dis∣course of Sir Edmond-Bury Godfrey's being found murdered, his said Nephew John Oakely then told him this Deponent, That as he was going home to his Mr. Breedns in Harts-horn-Lane, after that he had parted with his Father Robert Oakely, about Ludgate, he met Sir Edmond-Bury Godfrey about nine of the Clock at night, near the wa∣ter-Gate of Somerset-house; that Saturday▪ night that he was first missing from his House in Harts-horn-Lane, and that he then pas∣sed close by Sir Edmond-Bury Godfrey, or words to that purpose. Whereupon this Deponent asked his said Nephew, are you sure that it was Sir Edmond-Bury Godfrey that you then met near Somerset House? how did you come to know him? to which his said Ne∣phew made Answer, I know him very well, for I saw him almost daily pass by Mr. Breedens house, and he lived in Harts-horn-lane a little below my Masters Brew-house, or words to that purpose. Ralph Oakeley. Jur: 4. die Julij 1682. Coram W. Dolbin. The Affidavit of Robert Oakeley. RObert Oakely of Bisseter, in the County of Oxon Maulster, ma∣keth Oath▪ that he being in London, on Saturday the 12th of October 1678 with his Son John Oakely, servant to Mr. Robert Bree∣den of the Parish of St. Martins in the Fields, in the County of Middlesex Brewer, that this Deponent did then accompany his said Son John Oakely without Ludgate, and there parted with him about Nine a Clok at Nght, and this Deponent went out of Town on the Thursday following before the Body of Sir Edmond-Bury Godfrey was found. And this Deponent further saith, that some short time af∣ter, he coming to Town again, the said John Oakely his Son, then told this Deponent that upon Saturday the 12th day of October, 1678. Af∣ter
he had parted from this Deponent upon Ludgate-Hill, as he went home to his said Masters House in Hartshorn-Lane, he saw Sir Ed∣mond-Bury Godfrey; near Sumerset▪ House in the Strand, and then put off his Hat to him, and the said Sir Edmond-Bury Godfry thereupon put of his Hat to the said John Oakeley again, all which this De∣ponent hath declared to several persons since that time. Robert Oakley. Jurat 22. die Junij 1682. Coram me, John Moore Mayor. The Affidavit of John Brown and William Lock. JOhn Brown and William Lock, both of the Parish of Maribone in the County of Middlesex, having been since subpaened to give Evidence for the King upon an Information in the Crown-Office, exhibited against Nathaniel Thomson, William Pain, and John Far∣well, and not being called at their Tryal to give Evidence for the King, in open Court, each of them severally for themselves maketh Oath, that upon Thursday the 17th of October, 1678. The said John Brown, being then Constable of Maribone aforesaid, word was brought to him, that there was a man found dead in a Ditch near Primrose-Hill, whereupon this Deponent John Brown, charged this other Deponent William Lock, and several others to go along with him thither; and when they came to the place where the Body lay, the said Deponents John Brown and William Lock, went into the said Ditch, as also some other persons, which were then with them, some of which are since deceased. And the said Deponents viewing the Body in what Posture it lay, and finding a Sword thrust tho∣row the Body, they each of them, the said Deponents, did feel un∣der the Body, and found that the Pummel of the Sword-Hilt did not touch the Ground by a handfull; but not knowing whose Bo∣dy it was, they the said Deponents and others that were then with them, pulled the Body out of the Ditch, and found that it was the Body of Sir Edmond-Bury Godfrey, with whom they were very well acquainted in his Life time. John Brown. The mark of William W. L. Lock. Jurat 30 die Junij 1682. Coram me John Moore Mayor.
The Affidavit of Benj. Man. Benjamin Man of London, Gent. having been twice subpaened to give Evidence for the King upon an Information Exhibited in the Crown-Office against Nathaniel Thompson, William Pain and John Farewell: And not being called at their Tryal to give Evidence in open Court, maketh Oath, That about the time Green was Charged with the Murder of Sir Edmond-berry Godfrey, This Deponent coming to the Gate-House in the Morning, found the said Green about to be put in Irons, and Asking the Turn-Keys What was the matter? They told him that Green was Charged with the Murder of Sir Edmond-berry Godfrey. And then the said Deponent called to see his Warrant, and this Deponent read∣ing of it, turn'd to Mr. Green and said I did not think to have found you such a man, whereupon Green replyed, I am a Dead Man, or Words to that purpose. Benj. Man. Jur. 3. die Julii, 1682. Coram me W. Dolben. The Affidavit of Robert Forset. Robert Forset of Maribone, in the County of middlesex Esq; having been twice Subpaened to give Evidence for the King, upon an Information exhibited in the Crown-Office against Nathaniel Thomson, William Pain and John Farewell: And being not Called to give Evidence in open Court, maketh Oath, That Tuesday the fifteenth of October, 1678. being the Tuesday after that Sir Ed∣mond-berry Godfrey was missing, he this Deponent was a hunting with his Pack of Hounds at the very place where the Body of Sir Edmond-berry Godfrey was afterwards found, and beat that very place with his hounds, and the Body was not then there, nor any Gloves nor Cane thereabout. The said Deponent further saith, That the same day Mr. Henry Harwood, requested him this Deponent that he would let him have his Hounds the next day after being Wednesday, and he would find that Hare which they
could not find on Tuesday, or words to that purpose. And this Deponent further saith, That he the said Harwood, hath several times since affirmed, That he did accordingly hunt in the same place and beat the same Ditch, and said that the Body was not there that Wednesday at Noon, which said Henry Harwood is now newly dead. Robert Forset. Jur. 1. die Julii, 1682. coram me W. Dolben. Vid. Green, Berry, and Hills Tryals, fol. 19. 20. As to the time of removing the Body and the Gloves, and other things upon the Bank. But because it may be thought strange that Protestants should Espouse the Cause of the Papists, it may be fit to give some Account what these Persons are, who have so zealously ap∣peared in this matter; It is to be supposed (not without some ground) that Thompson (notwithstanding his pretence that he was drawn in) knew those things he Printed in the Letters or several of them to be falsities, for Mr. George Larkin does swear as follows: The Affidavit of George Larkin. George Larkin of London Printer, maketh Oath, That having heard the Body of Sir Edmond-berry Godfrey was found, this Deponent on the Eighteenth of October, 1678. went to see the said Body, which then lay at the White House near Primrose-Hill, and there met with Nathaniel Thompson, of London also Printer, who then proposed to this Deponent the writing of a Narrative thereof to Print, wherein he desired this Deponents Assistance, and therefore wished this Deponent to take good notice of the Body and Circumstances, and promised to do the like himself, and this Deponent staid there with the said Thompson till the Coroners Jury sate on the said Body, and did see the said Body stripped. And this Deponent having conferred with the said Thompson, and agreeing with him in the circumstances; the
said Narrative, the same day was written in part in the said Thompson's house, and being finished, was read over by this Deponent and the said Thompson, who agreed with this Depo∣nonent in the truth thereof▪ George Larkin. Jur. 22. die Martii, 1681. coram me J. Moore, Mayor. And upon this sight of the Body, and comparing of Notes with Mr. Larkin, he puts out a little Pamphlet intituled, A True and Perfect Narrative, &c. in which there is a Paragraph or two quite contrary to what he Prints in the Letters, pray take it in the words of it. A True and Perfect Narrative of the late Terrible and Bloody Mur∣ther of Sir Edmond-berry Godfrey, &c. (with Allowance.) Printed by N. T. 1678. ON Friday the Eighteenth of this Instant, Mr. Cooper the Coroner of Middlesex impannell'd a Jury at the White-House to Enquire about the occasion of the Death of the said Sir Edmond-berry: and two Chirurgions (having been first Sworn) removed the Body in the presence of the Coroner and Jury, and found the Wounds about it, which one of the Chirurgions searched with his Probe, and found one of them not above an Inch deep, the Probe going against one of his Ribs, but the other being a little below the left Pap, went quite through the Body, his Face was of a fresh colour, tho' in his Life time very pale, somewhat swelled, and a green Circle about his Neck, as if he had been strangled, his blood being setled about his Throat, and the upper part of his Breast, the Chi∣rurgions having reviewed the Body, delivered their Judgments, That the Wounds they found about him were not the Cause of his Death; but that he was Suffocated before the Wounds were made. And that which may fully persuade any person of the Truth hereof is, That there was not one drop of Blood to be found in the place where he lay, nor the least appearance of any such thing, tho' the Ditch was dry, and it might have been easily seen if there
had been any. Another thing was, that the very bottom of the soles of his Shoes were as clean as if he had but just come out of his own Chamber, which was an evident sign that he was carried thither. A third thing very remarkable is, That one of the Jury Af∣firmed that a Servant of his Mothers (who is owner of the ground were the Body lay) with a Butcher and two Boys made a very strict and narrow search in all parts of that ground for a Calf that was missing upon Monday and Tuesday last, and at that time there lay no dead Body, Belt, Gloves, Stick, or other thing there. And notwithstanding he gives himself the Name of the Loyal Protestant Printer, this is not the first time he hath been charged with Printing Popish. Books, (I take still these Letters and Libels to be a Limb of Popery) for Wednesday the thirtieth of October, 1678. he was Committed to the Gatehouse at Westminster, by the House of Lords for that very matter. As for Mr. Farewell, he was mightily afraid he should be taken for a Papist, Mr. Ser∣jeant Maynard declared he thought he was of no Religion: but if he be, I know which is most like to justifie such Practises. But tho' I cannot say any thing as to his Religion, yet I have rea∣son to think the Papists had a great kindness for him, for (not to mention other things) he was Trustee for Fenwick the Je∣suite that was Fxecuted, and that I think will appear by the following Affidavit, and also a kind of Will made by the said Fenwick.
The Affidavit of John Richardson. John Richardson of the Parish of St. Clement Danes in the County of Middlesex, formerly Clark to Richard Langhorn Esq; executed (aged 36 years or thereabouts) Deposeth, that in or about the year 1670. Mr. John Farwel lately deputy Bayliff of Westminster, was employed by the said Mr. Lang∣horn, in the cause between the Jesuits, Whitebread Poulten, and others, and one Mr. John Savage in a sutie in Chancery; Concerning Newenham Abby in Bedfordshier. And that in the year 1678. About Michaelmas day, there having for some time before been another suite in Chancery depending between one Mr. Goodlad, and the Jesuits executed and others, all the papers in the said cause being removed by the said Mr. Langhorns order, (before his Imprisonment) out of his Chamber. Mr. Farwell met this Deponent, and said to him, where are the papers in the Cause between the Jesuits and Mrs. Goodlad. The Deponent told him in the Temple, Mr. Farwell said he must have them brought to him, (to follow the suite that Mr. Langhorn had begun, So the Deponent carryed them to him the next day, and within some short time afterwards, the said cause was finally ended, as the deponent hath been since informed, Mr. Farwell was also Concerned for the Jesuits, as a Trustee for five hundred pounds of Fenwick's mony, in Benjamin Hintons hands, found by a Jury and given as the Deponent is informed to the Sheriffs of London, Notwithstanding which he being Summoned on a Commission of Enquiry to Guildhal, about May last, and there examined if he had never been a Trustee for any of them, he said on his Oath No, yet after being charged with his being proved a Trustee for this Five Hundred Pound, (before the Jury) he then confessed he had forgot it: And owned he was a Trustee for the Five Hundred Pound before mentioned. John Richardson. Jur. 3. die Aprilis, 1682.  Coram me John Moore, Mayor.
Fenwick the Jesuit that was Executed, his Will. I had taken from me when I was Apprehended and brought to Prison, two Goldsmiths Notes, one of 400 l. another of 100 l. the Money is in Benjamin Hinton's hands at Birchin-Lane End in Lumbard-street. There were also two Bonds, each of 126 l. due to me from Mr. Samuel Tyrril, but the Bonds are made payable to Mr. John Farwell, and Mr. William Brewe. There was also a Bill of 50 l. due from Mrs. Olympia Wray. Of this I owe to Mr. Hamerton of Mark-road 100 l. which I had received from him with Order to pay it to another Gent. but had not paid it: also 40 l. to Mr. Edward Stockton, which I Received for him and had not paid it: also 10 or 15 l. (truly I rather believe 15 l.) which I received for Mr. Tho. Pordage, (who lives now beyond Seas, and had an Estate in Kent of 1000 l. a Year since the Kings Restauration, and is now reduced to that Poverty that this 20 l. is all he has to live on) from Mr. Tho. Lshington in Kent, by five or ten pound at a time, it being in part of an Annuity of 20 l. a year to be paid Quarterly. Also 15 or 20 l. to Alice Kettlewell, who lives with the Lady Petre, for which she has my Note. There are also several Deeds and Bonds betwixt the late Lord Widdrington, and George Collingwood of Eshington in Nor∣thumberland, Esq; which the said George Collingwood Ordered me to deliver to Capt. Ralph Widdrington, upon the payment of 100 l. but the money not being paid, I desire the Writings may be restored to the said Mr. Collingwood, or his Heirs. These several▪ Sums being paid, the rest of the money belongs to the House of St. Omers, for which I was employed. I desire what money is paid in satisfaction of the Sums above∣said, may be paid into the hands of Mr. John Farwell, Attorney at Law of Covent-Garden, who will take care to pay it to the persons to whom it belongs▪ I hope care will be taken to pay my Landlady my Chamber-Rent since my Imprisonment, also half a Year or three quarters of a Years Rent, which I was owing at the time of my Appre∣hension, since all is taken from me and I cannot do it my self, she will tell you exactly the time, for I cannot.
As for Mr. Pain, I shall only say this, that he is brother to Nevill alias Pain, a man famous for making the Traytor Cole∣man's Elegy, and for being an Agent and Scribler for Mrs. Cellier and the Papists, yet that I may do him right, I must tell the World since the prosecution of him for this matter, he hath declared himself sorry for what he hath done, and not carried it so impudently as the others. Thus I hope by Printing these Affidavits, the Murder of Sir Edmond-berry Godfrey by the Papists, does appear so clear and unquestionable, that no Persons (for the future) can assume the impudence to attempt any further Shams upon it, but at the same time must proclaim their Folly in so vain an Under∣taking. THE END.
