10121.5 23019203 26077
Articles to be enquired in the visitation, in the first yere of the raigne of our most dread Soueraine Lady Elizabeth, by the grace of God, of Eng∣lande Fraunce, and Irelande, Queene, defendour of the faith &c. Anno. 1559. decorative border R. I. OMNIA DESVPER printer's or publisher's device
Articles. FIrst, whether any  Parson, Vicar,Residencie. or Curate, be resi∣dent continually vppon his bene∣fice, doyng his duetie in prea∣ching, readyng, & duely ministring the holye Sacra∣mentes. Item, whether  in their Churches and Chappels, all Images,False mira∣cles. Shrynes, all Tables, Candelstickes, Trindelles, or roles of waxe, pictures, payntinges, and all other monumentes of fayned and false miracles, pylgrimages, Idolatrie, and superstition, be re∣moued, abolished, and destroyed. Item, whether they do not euery Holy day  when they haue no Sermon,Lordes prayer. immediatly after the Gospell, openly, playnely, and distinctly, re∣site to their parishioners in the Pulpit, the Lordes prayer, the beliefe, and the ten Com∣maundementes in Englishe. Item, whether they do charge fathers and  mothers, maisters, and gouernours of youth,To bryng vp youth. to bryng them vp in some vertuous studye and oc∣cupation.
Item, whether suche beneficed men as be lawfully absent from their benefices,Curates. do leaue their cures to a rude and vnlearned Parson, and not to an honest wel learned and expert Curate, whiche can and wyll teache you holsome doc∣trine. Item, whether they do discourage any person from reading of any part of the Bible,Readyng the scrip∣tures. eyther in Latin or Englishe, and do not rather comfort and exhort euery person to reade the same at con∣uenient tymes, as the very lyuely worde of God, and the speciall foode of mans soule. Item, whether Parsons, Vicars, Curates, and other ministers,Tauernes and games. be common haunters and resor∣ters to Tauernes or Alehouses, geuing them selues to drynkyng, rioting, and playing at vn∣lawful games, and do not occupie them selues in the reading or hearing of some part of holy scrip∣ture, or in some other godly exercise. Item, whether they haue admitted any man to preache in their cures,Preachers. not beyng lawfully licenced thereunto, or haue ben licenced accor∣dyngly. Item, whether they vse to declare to their parishioners any thing to the extollyng or set∣ting foorth of vayne and superstitious religion,Superstitiō pilgrimages, reliques, or images, or lyghtyng
of candels, kyssyng, kneelyng, or deckyng of the same images. Item, whether they haue one booke or register  kept,Register. wherein they wryte the day of euery wed∣dyng, christening, and burying. Item, whether they haue exhorted the people  to obedience to the Queenes Maiestie,Obedience. and mini∣sters, and to charitie and loue one to another. Item, whether they haue admonished their  parishioners,The Sa∣crament. that they ought not to presume to receaue the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christe, before they can say perfectly the Lordes prayer, the articles of the fayth, and the ten com∣maundementes in Englishe. Item, whether they be resident vppon their  benefices, and kepe hospitalitie, or no.Hospitalitie And yf they be absent and kepe no hospitalitie, whether they do relieue their parishioners, and what they geue them. Item, whether Proprietaries, Parsons, Vi∣cars,Reparati∣ons. and Clarkes, hauing Churches, Chappels, and Mansions, do kepe their Chauncels, Recto∣ries, Vicarages, and all other houses appertay∣nyng to them, in due reparations. Item,Prayer in Englishe. whether they do counsayle or moue  their parishioners rather to pray in a tongue not knowen, then in Englyshe, or put their
trust in any certayne number of prayers,Beades. as in saying ouer a number of Beades, or other lyke. Item, whether they haue receaued any per∣sons to the Communion,Diffamed persons. beyng openly knowen to be out of charitie with their neighbours, or diffamed with any notorious cryme, and not re∣fourmed. Item, whether they haue prouided and haue a strong Chest for the poore mens bore,Poore mens bore. and set and fastened the same in a place of the Churche most conuenient. Item, whether they haue diligently called vp∣pon,Testamen∣tes. exhorted, and moued their parishioners, and especially when they make their testamentes, to geue to the saide poore mens boxe, and to bestow that vpon the poore, whiche they were wont to bestowe vpon pylgrimages, pardons, trentalles, and vpon other lyke blynde deuotions. Item, whether they haue denyed to visite the sicke,Sicke. Buriall. or burye the dead, beyng brought to the Churche. Item, whether they haue bought their bene∣fices,Symonie. or come to them by fraude, guyle, deceipt, or symonie. Item, whether they haue geuen open moni¦tion to their parishioners,Adulterers. to detect and present
to their Ordinarie, all adulterers, and fornica∣tours, and such men as haue two wyues liuing, within their parishes. Item, whether they haue monished their pari∣shioners  openly, that they shoulde not sell, geue,Churche goodes. nor otherwyse alienate any of their Churche goodes. Item, whether they or any of them do keepe  mo benefices and other Ecclesiasticall promoti∣ons, then they ought to do,Many bene∣fices. not hauing sufficient licences and dispensations thereunto, and howe many they be, and their names. Item,Communiō whether they minister the holy Com∣munion  any other wyse then onlye after suche fourme and maner as it is set foorth by the com∣mon aucthoritie of the Queenes Maiestie and the Parliament. Item, whether you knowe any person with∣in  your parishe, or els where,Letters of the worde or preaching that is a letter of the worde of God to be read in Englishe, or sin∣cerely preached in place and times conuenient. Item, whether in the tyme of the Letanie, or any other common prayer,Goers out of the Churche. in the tyme of the Sermon or Homyly, and when the Priest rea∣deth the scriptures to the parishioners, any person haue departed out of the Churche, with∣out iuste and necessarie cause, or disturbe the
Minister otherwyse. Item, whether the money commyng and ry∣sing of any cattell or other moueable stockes of the Church,Churche money and money geuen and bequeathed to the finding of torches, lightes, tapers, or lampes, not payde out of any landes, haue not ben em∣ployed to the poore mens cheste. Item, who hath the sayde stockes and money in their handes,Kepers of the Church money. and what be their names. Item, whether any indiscrete person do vn∣charitably  contempne and abuse Priestes & Mi∣nisters of the Churche.Contempt of Prieste. Item, whether there be any other Grammer  taught in any schoole within this Diocesse,The kinges Grammer. then that which is set forth by the aucthoritie of king Henry the eyght. Item, whether the seruice of the Churche be done at due and conuenient houres.The tyme of seruice. Item, whether any haue vsed to commune, iangle,Talkers in the Church. and talke in the Churche in the tyme of the prayer, readyng of the Homylye, preachyng, readyng, or declaring of the Scripture. Item, whether any haue wylfully mayntay∣ned and defended any heresies,Heresies. errours, or false opinions, contrary to the fayth of Christe and holy Scripture.
Item, whether any be common drunkardes, swearers, or blasphemers of the name of God.Drunkards. Item, whether any haue committed adulte∣rie, fornication, or incest,Adulterers. or be common bawdes, or receauers of such euyl persons, or vehemently suspected of any of the premisses. Item, whether any be brawlers, slaunderers, chiders, scolders, and sowers of discord betweene  person and another.Brawlers. Item, whether you knowe any that do vse  charmes, sorcerie, enchauntmentes,Sorcerers. inuocati∣ons, circles, witchcraftes, soothsaying, or any lyke craftes or imaginations inuented by the de∣uyll, and speciallye in the tyme of womens tra∣uayle. Item, whether the Churches, Pulpittes, and  other necessaries appertaynyng to the same,Pulpittes. be sufficiently repaired, and yf they be not, in whose default the same is. Item, whether you knowe any, that in con∣tempt  of their owne parishe Churche,Resorters to other Churches. do resorte to any other Churche. Item, whether any Inholders, or Alehouse-kepers, do vse commonly to sel meate and drinke  in the tyme of common prayer, preachyng,Inholders. rea∣dyng of the Homilies or Scripture.
Item, whether you knowe any to be marryed within the degrees prohibited by the lawes of God,Deuorse. or that be separated or deuorsed without the degrees prohibited by the lawe of God, and whe∣ther any suche haue married agayne. Item, whether you knowe any to haue made priuie contractes of Matrimonie,Priuie con∣tractes. not callyng two or mo witnesses therunto, nor hauing ther∣to the consent of theyr parentes. Item, whether they haue marryed solemnly, the banes not first lawfully asked.Banes. Item, whether you knowe any Executours, or administratours of dead mens goodes,Executours which do not duely bestowe such of the sayde goodes as were geuen and bequeathed, or appoynted to be distributed among the poore people, repayryng of hygh wayes, fynding of poore scollers, or ma∣rying of poore maydens, or such other lyke cha∣ritable deedes. Item, whether you knowe any that kepe in theyr houses vndefaced any Images,Images. Tables, pyctures, payntynges, or other monumentes of fained and false miracles, pilgrimages, idolatrie, and superstition, and do adore them, and special∣ly suche as haue ben set vp in Churches, Chap∣pelles, or Oratories. Bookes.Item, what bookes of Gods Scripture you
haue delyuered to be burnt, or otherwise destroy∣ed, and to whom ye haue deliuered the same. Item, what brybes the accusers, promoters, persecuters, Ecclesiasticall iudges,Brybes. and other the Commissioners appoynted within the seuerall Diocesse of this Realme, haue receaued by them selues or other, of those persons which were in trouble, apprehended, or imprisoned for religi∣on. Item, what goodes moueable, landes, fees, offices, or promotions,Losse of goodes. hath ben wrongfully ta∣ken away in the time of Queene Maries raigne, from any person whiche fauoured the religion nowe set foorth. Item, howe many persons for religion haue  dyed by fyre, famine, or otherwyse,How many burnt. or haue ben imprysoned for the same. Item, that you make a true presentment of  the number of all the persons whiche dyed with∣in your parishes,Certificate of the dead. sithen the feast of Saint Iohn the Baptist, which was in the yere of our Lorde God a thousande fiue hundred fiftie and eyght, vnto the same feast last past: making therein a playne distinct declaration, howe manye men, women, and men chyldren the same were, and the names of the men. Item whether you knowe any man in your Secrete Masses.
parishe, secretely or in vnlawfull conuenticles, say or heare Masse, or any other seruice prohibi∣ted by the lawe. Item, whether you knowe any person in your paryshe to be a slaunderer of his neygh∣bours,False ru∣mours. or a sower of discorde betweene partie and partie, man and wyfe, parentes and theyr chyl∣dren, or that hath inuented, bruited, or set foorth any rumours, false and seditious tales, slaun∣ders: or makers, bringers, byers, sellers, kepers, or conueyers of any vnlawfull bookes,Vnlawfull bookes. whiche myght stirre or prouoke sedition, or mayntayne superstitious seruice within this Realme, or any aydours, counsaylours, procurers, or mayntey∣ners therevnto. Item, whether the Churche of your paryshe be nowe vacant or no,Patron. Tithes. Vacation. who is the Patrone ther∣of, howe long it haue ben vacant, who doth re∣ceaue the tythes, oblations, and other commodi∣ties during the time of the vacation, and by what aucthoritie: and in what estate the sayde Church is at this tyme, and howe long the Parson or Vicar hath had that Benefice. Item, whether any Minstrelles, or any other  persons do vse to syng or say any songues or dyt∣ties that be vyle or vncleane,Minstrelles. and especially in de∣rision of any godly order nowe set foorth and established.
Item, whether the Letanie in Englishe, with  the Epistle & Gospel,Letanie in Englishe. which was by the Queenes highnesse Proclamation wylled to be read to the people were put in vse in your Churches, and if not, who were the letters thereof. Item, whether the Curates and Ministers  do leysurely, playnely, and distinctly,Distinct readyng. reade the publique Prayers, Chapters, and Homilies, as they ought to do. God saue the Queene. ¶ Imprinted at Lon∣don in Powles Churchyarde, by Ri∣charde Iugge and Iohn Cawood, Prin∣ters to the Queenes Maiestie. Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
