10822 99841299 5874
Terra Australis incognita, OR A new Southerne DISCOVERIE, CONTAINING A fifth part of the World. Lately found out By FERDINAND DE QVIR, a Spanish Captaine. Neuer before published. LONDON Printed for IOHN HODGETTS. 1617.
THE COPIE OF A Petition presented to the King of Spaine, by Captaine Peter Ferdinand de Quir, touching the discouery of the fift part of the World, called Terra Australis incognita: and of the great riches and fertilitie of the same. SIR, I Am called Captaine Fer∣dinand De Quir, a most humble seruant and sub∣iect of your Maiesties, who in all submission do shew vnto you, that this is the eighth Petition, which by mee hath beene presented to your Maiesties view, to perswade the conduction of some Colonies, vnto the land which your Maiestie hath commanded to be discouered in the Countrey of Terra Australis incognita. And yet to this houre no resolution is taken
in this affaire, neither haue I receiued any an∣swere or hope, whereby I might rest assured to obtaine my dispatch, although I haue at∣tended fourteene moneths in your Court, and haue imployed fourteene yeeres in this Discouery, vnto the which I haue beene in∣duced by the meere goodnesse of the cause, and in the assurednesse of the same haue ob∣durated my selfe against all difficulties and contradictions whatsoeuer. I haue despe∣rately exposed my selfe to a thousand perils both by sea and land, I haue diminished and suncke my estate, I haue beene trauailed with many afflictions in my person, and suffered such strange and extraordinary crosses, tha they seeme almost incredible to my selfe  and all, that so Religious an vndertake should not vnworthily be abandoned. In regard whereof, I doe most humbly beseech your Maiestie in the bowels of the Diuine Chari∣tie, that you would be pleased to take order that I be not depriued of the fruits of this de∣signe, which with such instance I doe desire and which with so much iustice are due vn∣to my continuall paines and trauaile: nor that
I be debarred from the effects of so conside∣rable and well-grounded a request, whose incipall scope is the glorie of God, and of our Maiestie, and from whence infinite be∣nefits are likely to issue forth, which will liue long as the fabricke of the world shall sub∣sist, and after the dissolution thereof will re∣aine to all Eternitie. Touching the extent of these Regions wly discouered, grounding my iudgment  that which I haue seene with mine owne es, and vpon that which Captaine Lewes ez de Torres Admirall of my Fleet hath re∣presented vnto your Maiestie, The length er of is as great as all Europe & Asia the lesse, to the Sea of Bachu, Persia, and all the Iles, ell of the Ocean, as of the Mediterranean , taking England & Island into this account.  This vnknowne Countrey is the fift part  the Terrestriall Globe, and extendeth it fe to such length, that in probabilitie it is twice greater in Kingdoms and Seignories, en all that which at this day doth acknow∣ledge subiection and obedience vnto your aiestie.
These Regions know no neighbourhood either of Turkes or Moores, or of any other Nation which attempteth warre vpon co¦ning Countreys. The land which we h discouered is all seated within the To Zone, and a great tract thereof reacheth vnto the Equinoctiall Circle, which is eleuated  them to 90. degrees aboue the Horizon, and in some places a little lesse. And if  successe prooue answerable vnto the hop there will be found Antipodes vnto the better part of Africke, vnto all Europe, and to the greater portion of Asia. But you must ob∣serue, that as the Countreys which wee haue discouered in 15. degrees of latitude, are bet∣ter then Spaine, so the other which are oppo∣sed to their eleuation, must by proportion and analogie prooue some terrestriall Para∣dise. All those quarters swarme with an incre∣dible multitude of Inhabitants, wherof some are white, others blacke and in colour like vnto those which the Spaniards call Mu or halfe-Moores, & others of a mingled com∣plexion. Some weare their haire long, black,
and scattered, others haue their haire crisped and thicke, & others very yellow and bright. Which diuersitie is an apparant argument, that there is commerce and communication amongst them. And this consideration toge∣ther with the bounty which Nature hath be∣stowed on the soile, their inexperience of Ar∣tillerie and Guns, and their vnskilfulnesse in labouring in Mines, with other semblable circumstances, doth induce mee to inferre, that all the Countrey is rich & well-peopled. It seemeth they know little what belongeth to artificiall trades; for they haue neither for∣tifications nor walles, and liue without the awe of Kings or lawes. They are a simple people cantoned into seuerall sexts, and facti∣ons, & exercise much disagreement amongst themselues. The Armes which they vse are bowes and arrowes, which are not poisoned or steeped in the iuice of venemous hearbes, as the custome is of many other Countreys; They do also carrie clubs, truncheons, pikes, darts to hurle with the arme, all which are framed only of wood. They doe couer them∣selues frō the waste or girdling-place downe
to the halfe of their thighes, they are very stu∣dious of cleanlines, tractable, gleeful, & won∣derously addicted to be gratefull vnto those that doe them a courtesie, as I haue experien∣ced many times. The which doth build in me a beliefe, that with the assistance of God, if they may be gently and amiably intreated, they will bee found very docible and easie of manage, and that wee shall without much worke accommodate our selues vnto them. And it is most necessary to obserue this way of sweetnes, especially in the beginning, that the inhabitants may be drawne along to this so holy and sauing an end, whereof we ought to take a particular care and zeale, aswell in small things, as in matters of more impor∣tance. Their houses are built of wood, coue∣red and tiled with Palme-tree leaues, they haue pitchers and vessels made of earth, they are not without the mysterie of weauing, and other curiosities of that kind. They worke on Marble, they haue Flutes, Drummes, and wooden spoones, they set apart certaine pla∣ces for Oratories & prayers, and for Church∣yards. Their Gardens are artificially seuered
into beds, bordered and fashioned with di∣stinct limits; Mother of Pearle and the shels which containe Pearle, they haue in much vse and estimation, of which they make wedges, rasors, sawes, culters, and such like instruments; They also doe make thereof Pearles and great beads to weare about their neckes. They that doe dwell in the Ilands, haue boates very artificially made, and excee∣dingly commodious for sailing, which is a certaine argument that they confine vpon other Nations that are of a more polished and elegant behauiour. And this also they haue of our husbandry, that they cut Cockes and gelde Boares. Their bread is vsually made of three sorts of rootes, which grow there in great abun∣dance. Neither doe they imploy much la∣bour in making this bread, for they doe one∣ly roste the rootes vntill they are soft and ten∣der. They are very plesant to the taste, whol∣some and nourishing, they are of a good length, there being of them of an Ell long, and the halfe of that in bignesse. There is great store of excellent fruits in
these Countreys. There are sixe kindes of Maple trees, Almond trees of foure sorts, and other trees called Obi, resembling almost in fruit and greatnesse our Quince trees. Innu∣merable Wallnut trees are found there, and of Citron trees the Barbarians haue no dearth, nor of other great and excellent fruits, which we haue seene and tasted. They haue more∣ouer Sugar-Canes, large in size and in great plenty, they haue knowlegde of our ordina∣rie Apples; they haue Palme-trees without number, out of which there may easily bee drawne a iuice, which will make a liquor al∣luding much to wine, as also whey, vineger, and hony, the kernels thereof are exceeding sweet. And they haue fruits which the Indi∣ans call Cocos, which being greene doe make a kind of twine, and the pith is almost like in taste vnto the creame of milke: When they are ripe they serue for meat and drinke both by land and sea. And when they wither and fall from the tree, there sweateth out an oyle from them, which is very good to burne in lampes, and is medicinable for wounds, and not vnpleasant tobe eaten. Of their rindes
or barkes there are made bottles, and other like vessels, and the inner skin doth serue for tow or mosse to stop and close vp the leakes in shippes. Men doe make Cables and other cordage of them, which are of sufficient strength to draw a Canon, and are fit for o∣ther domesticke vses. But that which is more speciall, they do there vse the leaues of Palme trees, which they amasse together, to make sailes of them for vessels of small bulke and burthen. They make likewise fine thinne mattes of them, and they doe serue for tiles to couer the house without, and for hangings to cloath the house within. And these hou∣ses are built of the branches of trees that are streight and long, of which they doe like∣wise make pikes, and other sorts of weapons, as also oares to row with, and vtensils for the house. You are to note, that these Palme-trees resemble Vines, from whence they gather their materials for Wine all the yeere long, which they make without much cost, or la∣bour. Amongst their herbage and garden fruits; Wee haue seene Melons, Peares great and little, and sundry sorts of pot-hearbes.
And they haue also beanes. For flesh, they are stored with a great number of Hogges which are like vnto ours, they haue Hennes, Capons, Partriges, Duckes, Turtles, Pigeons, Stocke-doues, and Goats, as one of my Cap∣taines doth relate. And the Indians them∣selues haue assured vs that there are Cowes and Oxen. There are also sundry sorts of fish, Harghi, Persereyes, Lize, Soles, Troutes, Shads, Macabises, Casanes, Pampani, Pil∣chards, Thorne-backs or Skate-fish, Cuculi, Congers, Porposes, Rochets, Muskles, Lob∣sters, and many other, the names whereof I cannot now remember. But it is probable that there are diuers other kinds, since those which I haue recounted were taken hard by our ships. And vpon ripe and serious consi∣deration of that which I haue represented vnto you, a man may easily collect, that such plentifull and different varieties of all things, may yeeld large meanes to inhabite there, with great and singular delights. There is stuffe for Marchpanes and sweet confections of all sorts, without borrowing any spice for the composition of them elswhere. And for
my Mates the Marriners, besides those parti∣culars which I haue before set downe, there will be no want of Gammons, Sausages, and other salt meats which hogges doe yeeld; nei∣ther of vineger, spiceries, and other sauces that serue for delicacy, and to awake the ap∣petite. And you must obserue, that many of these things, are the same with those which wee haue in our parts, and possibly they are there in greater abundance; by all which it is easily to be coniectured, that this Coun∣trey is fit for the production of all that which groweth in Europe. The riches which I haue seene in those parts, is Siluer and Pearle; another Captaine in his Relation, doth report that he hath seen Gold, which are the three most precious dar∣lings that lie and are cherished in the bosome of Nature. Wee haue also both of vs seene many Nutmegs, much Masticke, Ginger, and Pepper. There is also Cinnamum; and it is likely that Cloues may bee found in those parts, since so many other sorts of Spiceries and aromaticall drugges doe prosper there; and that the rather, because these Countryes
lie very neere the parallell of the Iles of Terr∣natte, Bachian, and the Moluccos. There an likewise materials for all sorts of silke, and we haue seene Anise-seed, and excellent good Ebony, as also other kinds of wood proper for the building of as many shippes as one will desire, and stuffe to make sailesf or the same. Three sorts of materials there are wherewithall to make cordage, and one o them is very like vnto our hempe. More o∣uer out of the oyle of Cocos, whereof I haue already made mention, there is a kind of bi∣tuminous stuffe extracted, called Galagald which may bee well vsed for pitch. They make also a kinde of rosen with which the Indians pitch their boats, which they call Pi∣raques. And since there are Goates and Cowes in those parts, without question we shall haue Goat-skins, leather, tallow, and flesh in full abundance. The Bees which we haue seene there doe make proofe, that there will be no scarcety of hony and waxe. And there is good appearance to discouer many other things which are not yet known, to say nothing touching thefor me and site of the
Countrey. Vnto all which if that be adioy∣ned, which the industry of man may contri∣bute to those parts, since there is such aboun∣dance of commodities which the Countrey it selfe doth yeeld, and such hope to transport thither those things which grow with vs, the best and choisest whereof that Peru and new Spaine bring foorth, I haue resolued to trans∣ferre thither; it is to be hoped, that this will so enrich that Countrey, that it will be able to nourish and furnish not only the Inhabi∣tants of the same, and those of America, but giue an accession vnto Spaine it selfe both of riches and extent of Command: and this may be accomplished after the maner which I haue proiected, and will vnfold vnto those which shall lend an assisting hand for the guiding and consummation of this worke. Now by that land which we haue already discouered outwardly and along the shores, without entrance into the inward parts, we doe conceiue a certaine argument, that as much riches, commodities, and greatnesse, may be hoped for from thence, as we haue already in these Countreyes. And you may
be pleased to vnderstand, that my principall ayme was to take a view only of these ample regions which wee haue discouered: for by reason of many sickenesses which haue wea∣kened me, and some other chances whereof I will at this time make no mention, I was not able to suruay all which I desired, neither could I in a full moneth haue seene all that, which I was of my selfe inclinable to view. You are not to make your iudgement of the Indians that inhabit these Countreys, ac∣cording to the honour of the people here, or conceiue them to be affected with the same desires, pleasures, necessities, or estimation of things that we are: But you are to make ac∣count that they are a people whose care is stu∣diously placed vpon this, that they may liue easily in this world, and passe their dayes with the least paine and perturbation they can. And this is indeed their practise, for they doe not bestow themselues on those things, which with such vexation and tor∣ment we here labour to obtaine. There are found in this Countrey as many comodities, both for the support & delecta∣tion
of the life of man, as may be expected from a soile that is manureable, pleasant and very temperate. It is a fat and a fertile land, wherein many places Clay is found, which will prooue of excellent vse to build houses, and to make tiles and brickes, and will serue for Whatsoeuer is vsually made of earth. There is no dearth of Marble and other good stones, wherewith if there be occasion there may be built structures of greater State and Magnificence. The Countrey aboundeth in wood, fit for all workes and vses, whereunto the same is commonly put. There are spatious & good∣ly plaines, and fields that are diuided and in∣terlaced with brookes, trenches, and riuers. There are great and high rockes, sundry tor∣rents, riuers great and little, on which water∣milles for corne may with much commodi∣ousnesse be built and placed, as also Engins to make Sugar, Tucking-milles, Forges, and all other instruments which in their vse doe require water. We haue found Salt-pits there, and which is a note of the fertilitie of the soile, there are
in many places Canes whereof some are fiue or sixe handfuls thicke, with fruit answera∣ble to that proportion. The top of that fruit is very small and hard, and the skin thereof is exceeding sweet. There are also Flints for fire, equall in goodnesse with those of Ma∣drid. The bay of Saint Iames and Saint Phi∣lip hath twenty leagues of banke, and is with∣out mudde; Into which there is a sure and safe entrance both by day and night. It is sheltered and couered with many houses, which in the day time we haue seene a farre off to send foorth smoake, and in the night to shew foorth fire. The Hauen called The true Crosse is of that spacious capacitie, that it is able to containe a thousand Shippes. The botome as I haue said is without mudde, and hath a blackish coloured sand wherewithall it is couered. There are no gulfes or deepe pits, but an as∣sured and easie anchorage in what part soe∣uer you will, from forty to halfe a fadome; and it is betweene the mouthes of two ri∣uers, the one whereof is as great as that of Quadalguiuer, & hath mud of a fadom deepe,
ouer which our Shaloppes and boates did passe. For the other riuer, when our Skiffs went to water there, they found the entrance safe and easie. And a man may from the very mouth of the riuer take in as much fresh wa∣ter as he will. The place where ships may be vnloaded hath three leagues of grauell, min∣gled with little flints blackish and very hea∣uie, which will serue for balaste for shippes. The banke is straight and vnited, on which much greene grasse doth grow and prosper, and that makes me to conceiue that the Sea doth not beat or rage thereupon; I obserue that the trees are streight, and the branches not dismembred, which is a token that there are no tempests there. Touching the Port, besides the commodities which I haue al∣ready discoursed of, there is one of maruel∣lous pleasure and contentation. And that is, that at the dawning of the day you shal heare from a wood which is neere at hand, a sweet and various harmony of a thousand birdes of all sorts, among which we could distinguish the Nightingales, Black-birds, Quailes, Gold∣finches,
Swallowes almost without num∣ber, Parrochitos, and one Parret we marked there, and creatures of sundrie other kinds, euen downe to Grasse-hoppers, and Field∣crickets. Euerie Morning and Euening wee recei∣ued a most odoriferous sweet smell, sent vn∣to our nostrells from the infinite diuersitie of Flowers and Hearbes which grow there, amongst which we obserued the blossomes of Oranges and Basil. All which (with a number of other varieties) doth make vs thinke that the ayre is cleare and healthie, and that the nature of the place is of a good tem∣perature. The Hauen & the Bay are therfore of the greater estimation, because they haue the neighbourhood of so many goodly I∣lands that are there, and especially of those seuen, which are said to haue two hundreth leagues of extent: and surely one of them (which is some twelue leagues distant from the Hauen) is fiftie leagues in circuit. In briefe SIR, I doe affirme vnto your Maie∣stie, that you may giue commaund to haue a goodly and great Citie built in this Port and
Bay, which are in fifteene degrees and fortie minutes of the Southerne Eleuation, and those that shall inhabite there, shall haue plentie of riches, and all other conueniencies which they can desire. Time will shew and discouer all these commodities, and in this place there may be made the discharge and vnloading of all the wares and merchandi∣zes of the Countries of Chilly, Peru, Panania, Macaraqua, Guttimala, New-Spaine, Terre-natte, and the Philippines, all which Countries are vnder the commaund of your Maiestie. And if you shall acquire vnto your selfe the Do∣minion of these Seigniories which I do now present, I doe make so great an esteeme of them, that besides their being the Key of all the rest, they will (in my opinion) prooue a∣nother China or Iapan, and equallize the o∣ther rich Ilands which are on this side of A∣sia, in trafique of curious and pretious mer∣chandizes, to speake nothing of the augmen∣tation and extent of your power, and the e∣stablishment which you may make vnto your selfe of your Dominions, by the acces∣sion of so great a Countrie. That which I
haue giuen vnto your viewe in my dis∣course, is of much slendernesse, in regard of that which I doe probably conceiue of this land, the which I am readie to make appeare in the presence of Mathematicians. Neither will I vexe this paper to demonstrate vnto you, that these Countries will be able at the first aboord to nourish twentie thousand Spaniards. In summe, this is SIR, the world whereof Spaine is the Center, and that which I haue related, is the nayle by which you may iudge of the whole bodie, which I pray you to take into your obseruation. You may iudge by that which I haue alrea∣die represented, what the goodnesse and tem∣perature of the ayre is: whereunto this may be added for a further testimonie, that al∣though all our Companie were strangers, yet neuer a one of them was sicke, albeit they were in continuall trauell and labour, and did sometimes sweat, and sometimes take wet. They dranke water fasting, and fed manie times on that which the earth did there bring forth. Neither had they any regard to keepe themselues from the Serenes, nor from
the Moone or Sunne, which indeed in those parts is not ouer-vehement. Onely about Mid-night, they couered themselues with Wooll, and did lye and repose themselues thereupon. And for the Inhabitants, they are commonly healthie, and many of them verie aged, although they haue nothing but the bare earth for their pallet: which is an argument of the wholesomenesse and pure∣nesse of the soyle. For if it were a wet and weeping ground, or had any viciousnesse in the mould, they would raise their lodgings higher from the earth, as they doe that liue in the Philippines, and other Countries which I haue viewed. And this is further confirmed by their Flesh and Fish, which although it bee vnsalted, yet will it keepe sweete, and without corruption two daies. And the fruits which are brought from thence are ex∣ceeding good, as wee had proofe by two that I tooke care to bring along with mee, al∣though they had not their full maturitie and grouth when I gathered them from the Tree. Wee haue not seene any barren and sandie ground, nor any Thistles, or trees that
are thornie or whose rootes doe shew them∣selues, no Marishes or Fennes, no Snow vp∣on the Mountaines, no Snakes or Serpents, no Crocodiles in the Riuers, no Wormes that vse with vs to hurt and consume our Grayne, and to worke vs so much displeasure in our houses, no Fleas, Cater-pillers, or Gnats. This is a Prerogatiue that hath the aduauntage of all the priuiledges that nature hath bestowed on other places, and is worthie to be compa∣red, or rather preferred before any delicacie of the Countries of India, some of which are abandoned and vnhabited, meerely by rea∣son of these incommodities, and of sundrie others that are distastfull vnto the Inhabi∣tants, as my selfe haue oftentimes beene wit∣nesse. These (SIR) are the vertues and excel∣lencies of the Countries which I haue disco∣uered, of which I haue already taken the pos∣session in the name of your Maiestie, and vn∣der your Royall-Banner, as appeareth by the Acts which I keepe safely in my power, whereunto I proceeded after this ensuing manner.
First (SIR) wee erected a Crosse, and built a Church in honour of our Ladie of Loretto. Then wee caused twentie Masses to be celebrated there, and our troupes made hast thither to gaine some Indulgences. We also made a solemne Procession, and obser∣ued the Feast of the blessed Sacrament, the which was carried in Procession, your Ban∣ner being euer displayed, and marching be∣fore it, through a great Circuit of Coun∣tries, which were honoured with the pre∣sence of the same. In three seuerall places wee set vp your Titles, in euerie one of which wee prepared and erected two Columnes, with the Armes of your Maiestie tricked and garnished there∣upon: so that I may with good right affirme, that since this will challenge to be one of the Parts of the World, the Impresse of Plus vl∣tra is accomplished, and because it stretcheth vnto the continent, whether it be forward or behind it skills not, the bounds of your Dominions are with much spaciousnesse en∣larged. Now all this which I haue perfor∣med, receiueth its root from this the faithfull
zeale which I beare vnto your Maiestie, that to all the Titles which you alreadie doe pos∣sesse, you may adjoyne this which I repre∣sent, and that the name of TERRA AV∣STRALIS INCOGNITA may be bla∣zoned and spread ouer the face of the whole world to the glorie of God, who hath reuea∣led this Countrie, and hath giuen mee the grace to guide my course thither, and to re∣turne to the presence of your Maiestie, be∣fore whom I do present & prostrate my selfe with the same affection and zeale vnto this worke which I had before, and which hath growne vp with mee as it were from my cradle, and for the noblenesse and worth thereof, I doe still tender and cherish the same with the greatest loue that can be. I doe confidently beleeue, that your Ma∣iestie doth vse so much prudence in your Councels, and are so magnanimous and full of Christian pietie, that you will (with your best care) embrace all the conducements which may further the habitation of these new-discouered Countries. And the princi∣pall reason to put a tye and obligation vpon
vs not to leaue them abandoned, is, in regard that this is the sole ordinarie way to establish the knowledge of God, and faith amongst them, and to bring to passe that his name may be adored and called vpon, where the Deuill vsurpeth so much reuerence and in∣uocation. And this ought to bee embraced with the more readinesse, because it is the channell to conuay and disperse all aboun∣dance of commodities amongst your sub∣iects. And hereby you shall be eased of ma∣ny disturbances and vexations, which will assuredly be put vpon you, in case the Here∣tickes should enter & nestle there, and should vent their erronious doctrines amongst them, whereby they would conuert all the blessings which I haue hitherto recounted vnto you, into assured incommodities and mischiefes, and would arrogate vnto them∣selues the name of the Lords of the Indias, to the vtter ruine and desolation of those coun∣tries. I make no question but your Maiesty well weigheth of what importance this dan∣ger of which I speak may proue, & what euil consequence some other hazards may carrie
with them, which are either at this time im∣minent, or may succeed hereafter. And if this should happen, it would cost you innume∣rable thousands of gold and men, before you shall be able to giue a remedie vnto the same. Acquire therefore SIR, whiles that occasion is offered you (that one day you may pur∣chase heauen vnto your selfe;) acquire (I say) with a little mony which you mis-place vp∣on Peru, a neuer-dying reputation, and this New-world with all the benefits which it rea∣cheth out vnto you. And since there is none that craueth a reward for this good tidings that is brought you concerning so great and singular a blessing, which God hath bin plea∣sed to lock vp vntil your happie time, I am he SIR, that doe demaund it, and my humble request vnto you is only this, that you would be of that gratiousnesse vnto mee, as to dis∣patch and giue me mine answer: for the Gal∣lions are readie to hoyse sayle, and I haue much way to goe, and many things must be fitted and disposed for the voyage. There is no houre passes, which carryeth not with it an assured losse both in regard of spirituall
and temporal blessings, the dammage wher∣of can neuer be made vp, or repaired. If vpon a bare suspition Christoferus Colum∣bus did pursue his designe with so much ob∣stinacie, you are not to account it strange in me, if the things which I haue beheld with mine eyes, and touched with mine hands, doe put some kind of constraint vpon me to be importunate. Let it therefore please your Maiestie, a∣mongst so many expedients which you haue at hand, to seuer and put apart some one for the accomplishment of this worke, that after all these languishments, I may at length meet with the successe of my desires. I doe assure you that you will find my propositions most iust, and that I shall be of sufficiencie to giue you satisfaction in all things. This, SIR, is a great worke, against which the deuill doth bandy himselfe with all the puissance hee may; And it is not consonant to reason, to a∣bandon these Countreys to his tyranny and power, which doe know your Maiestie for their Patron and Defender. FINIS.
