10844 99852768 18111
A CAVEAT for Parsons Hovvlet, con∣cerning his vntimely flighte, and scriching in the cleare day lighte of the Gospell, necessarie for him and all the rest of that darke broode, and vncleane cage of papistes, vvho vvith their vntimely bookes, seeke the discredite of the trueth, and the disquiet of this Church of Eng∣land. VVritten by Iohn Fielde, student in Diuinitie. REVEL. 18. 6. ¶ Reward her as shee hath rewarded you, and giue her'duble a¦cording to her works, and in the cup that she hath fil∣led to you, fill her the double. ¶ Imprinted at London by Ro∣bert VValdegraue, for Thomas Man, & Toby Smith.
To the righte honourable, and my very good Lord, the Lord Robert Dudley, Earle of Leicester, Baron of Den∣bigh, Knight of the most noble order of the Garter, Maister of the Queenes Maiesties Horses, and one of her highness most honourable priuie counsell. I. P. wisheth grace and constancie in the blessed trueth of , in this life, and after∣vvards euer-lasting life by Ie∣sus Christe oure Lord. HAuing of late according to my bounden duty (right honourable and my very good Lord) testified my pore affection to the Churche of God, and to your hououre a∣principall member thereof, by translating that worthy  concerning the Churche: I finde that one HOVVLET (If I bee not deceiued) nowe lying in Rutlandshire or thereaboutes: one of mine old acquain∣tance, a scholler in my time, hath taken the matter in great greefe, for that to your honor, I haue infinuated the Papists to be enemies to God, and to her royall maiestie. This he saith, I haue done to excite youre honour to persecution. The truth , I did it to youre honour, because, that as God hath set you in a cheefe place ouer this his church, so you and all the rest of your calling, might vvatch against suche enemies, and discharge that trust he hath committed  to
you, both to  them from farther  the Church of God,  euermore they haue  and also  for the preseruation of the Qe ne her  vpon vvhome  they  fauour & commodity they haue bene, are, and shal be,  her most dangerous enemies, suche as from time to time, haue gone about to seeke her high∣nes  subuersion. This argument, though I did then but touch as it were by the , yet this enemy hath now pro∣uoked me to make a further discourse therof. VVhich al∣thogh it be not don with that glosse & polishing of words that many times ill matters are colored & pounced vvith all, yet it is done truely and faithfully, no one charge being  vpon , to my knowledge, that is not iustifiable in euery respect. I graunt it might haue bene more fully de∣bated, longer stoode vpon, and vvith some better order & methode: But this being a common argument, others also hauing dealt and dealing in it, who can better, doe it then I, And considering against what aduersary it is, whose gifts are known vnto me, I haue ben bolde in this simple & rude sort further to prouoke him, not doubting, but by the assis∣tance of God, to be able from time to time, if he shall take any exception, to giue him his answere. That I vse my selfe otherwise then my manner is, in roughnesse of words and charpenes of stile, which perhaps some delicate eares will hardly beare, supposing it not fit for the spirite of the gos∣pell, I haue done it I confesse, both aduisedly and with iust deliberation thinking it to bee the fittest vvaye, to  dovvne his hawtie presumption. I think I know the man and also his gifts. Neither is it amisse, to vse sharpe medi∣cinesEsa. 58. 10. against impostumous corruptions, and fretting can∣kers.Ier. 10. 21. The Scriptures giue sufficient warrant,  by exam∣plesEze. 22. 25. confirmed in the Gospell, of round speeche against theMat. 23. aduersaries of Gods euerlasting trueth. I thanke God myMat. 6. 2. conscience beareth me vvitnesse of no hatred tovvardesLuk. 11. 42. &c their person, but I protest vnto your honour in the face, & sight of al the worlde, that I hate al their idolatrous and abhominable superstitions, and if they shall at any timePsal. 11. 25. 5. like the proude Philistian, dare to prouoke the hoast of thePsal. 30. 7. Lord in maintenance of their false religion, and shall blas∣pheme the trueth, let them not thinke, but to heare their1. Sam. 17. owne. The Lorde hath many in Israel, in vvhat contempte
soeuer they holde them, that shall be able to meete them, and euery way to match them, yea with their own swords to cut off their owne heades. I beseech your honour there∣fore, cheerefully to go for ward in defence of this trueth of God. Beware of the  of these double tongs, their. 140. 3. mouths are ful of guile, & the  of A pes is vnder their lips. As low as they , & as fast as they vveep, if they mighte but creepe in and haue oportunitie to shevve their nature, you shoulde try (as God forbid) vvhat Crocadiles they are: Her , and al that  the glorious Gos∣pell of Christe, vnder her gratious gouernment, should feel then the svvord, vvhich novv, they haue so annointed with hony. It were much better for vs that  the gospell, to fall among Rauens, if necessity should , then into the hads of these me , for the one wold neuer light on vs, til we vvere dead,  as the other vvould deuour vs vvhilest we are liuing  they haue hony  their mouths, & death in their harts As Doeg the Idume¦an flattered Saul in accusing Dauid, vvho vvas Saules dear Friende and Sonne, so do they by accusing vs. I savve the1. Sam. 22. 9. Sonne of  (saith he) in Nob  Achimelech the Sonne of Achitob the priest. So the flattering messenger that came2. Sam. 7. 10. to informe Dauid of Saules deathe, receaued a iudgement from his owne mouth, a iust  fit for all flatterers. So Rechab and Banaah brought  head of Isboseth to Da∣uid2. Sam. 4. 8. in Hebron, with flattering , But Dauid a iust King, gaue them a iust recompence. So Absalon, stealing the hearts of the subiects, made shew of great readines to exe∣cute iustice and spake flatteringly to  people. Their mat2 Sam. 15. . ters were good and righteous, but no man vvas appointed of the king to heare them &c. Oh, if he vvere iudge, hovv he vvould sit in the gates. No man cold make so much as a signe of obeizance, to vvhome his hande vvas not straight vvay stretched ont to take him, and to giue him a ludas kisse, so populer he vvas But vvhat became of it? The stron gre flatterye is, and the more examples vvee haue, hovve it2. Sam. 16. 7. hath deceiued, the more vvary had Princes and men of au∣thoritie1. Reg. 22. . need to bee (against vvhom especially this kind of2. Par. 18. 10. assault is vsually made) hovve they giue credite vnto it. Si∣bah2. Reg. 22. 12.  man deceiued Dauid, So did Sedechias2. Par. 18. 11. & 10. 10. that horned Prophet vvith his yron hornes, promising the subuersion of Syria. So did the false Prophetes vvho vvould
haue the king to go vp into Ramoth Gilead, againste the worde of the Lorde, and Rheboams councellers in fee ding the humor of their king, Therefore (good my Lord) As you , and haue hitherto ben, so continue, to be circumspect in your place, and looke aboute you. Trust not faire speeche, not fained freendship in them that haue alvvaies shevved themselues so false The diuel that Prince of darknesse de∣ceiueth, by taking vpon him the shape of an Angel,  ap∣peareth not in his ovvne ougly shape, for then vve should abhorre him. No more do these Synons, these Syrenes that play so pleasantly, and sing so svveetly. Though they haue a goodly shape, yet they are vnnaturall monsters. They giue titles (as Iob saith) but they are enemies to God, and to her highnes: The Lord Iesus send these Parasitical Papists their iust revvard, keepe her maiestic, and this vvhole state,  their craftie vnderminings, continue his Gospell, that vve may euermore serue him, and  in the obedience of his name, till vve obteine that euerlasting inheritance. Amen. August. 30. 1581. Your Lordships bounden and most faithfull. I. F.
A Caueat for Howlet, and the rest of his darke broode. PARSONS HOVVLET, I am muche beholding to you for youre good remembrance, in your flatte∣ring, fraudulent & presumptuous e∣pistle, dedicated to our moste grati∣ous Soueraign, the Queenes most excellent Maiesty. VVho would haue thought, that after twenty three yeares, in the cleare lighte of the gospell, such an obscure owle as your selfe, vvhome all the kindly birds of the day must needes vvonder at, durste euer haue fluttered foorth in the broade day and skriched oute in her Maiesties eares, suche notable vntrueths and vvicked asseuerations, com∣plaining of the harde case and greeuous persecu∣tions,  of youre Catholiques (as you callIn the Epistle dedicatory to her highnes, Pag. 3. 4. 5. 6. &c. them:) her highnes being a prince of such knowlege, so setled and confirmed in the truth of Christs , that al your deuises, flattering & fawning spea∣ches, conspiracies and traiterous attempts, shall ne∣uerFol. 2. (I trust,) be able by Gods grace, eyther to fear or remoue, from that glorious trueth, which shec hathHowlers cau∣ses of dedica∣ting the book to he high∣nes. Fol 2. professed to maynteine and continue to the vtter∣most end of her life. The causes that moued youre dedication, (though the matter were not your own).
vvas the composition and penning of it, beeing done (as you say) in greate modestye and humilitye, with all  full respect,  to her Maiesty, her Counsailors, and whole estate:  (you say) to the proceeding of al Sectaries (his zeal & opinion in religiō onely , erued:) the other, the waightinesse of importing her  soule-health, estate, and Realme,  the saluation of ma∣ny: thousandes  for ,  her confident Children, her highnesse their mother, and  Princesse, before a  they lay downe their griefes, as before the Substi∣tute and Angel of God, &c. If these causes vvere in deede as you pretend, you vvere the more to bee borne vvith, but being subtil, slaunderous and false, youre presumption is intollerable. For first, for the maner of conceiuing & penning that treatise, if it had ben done vvith such modesty and humility you speake of, you vvoulde not so haue betraied her maiestyeMat. 26. 49. vvith a Iudas Kysse, crying All hayle andSaund. lib. 7.pag.730. yet putting her into her enemies handes. You vvoulde not beare the vvorlde in hand, as if of her selfe she  youre Religion, and yet so slaunderously charge her Maiesties Realme and gouernment vvith such diuersitye of Sectes, contrarye to the truth of God.Pref. Fol. 3.you vvoulde not haue charged the glorious re∣ligion of Christe, to bee heresy, and the Churche of God, & it to be the Synagogue of Antichrist from vvhich vppon paine of damnation, al your Cateline Catholiques must , and not communicate, but must vvith all their povvers resist and auoyde. You vvoulde not haue snared and entangled the. fol. 5 consciences of the modester sorte of your dissem∣bling, timeseruing Hipocrites, euen as your selfe ac∣compte them, (who are yet the bane of this lande, hated of you, and to vs as pricks and thornes in our sides) charging thē to sinne against the holy ghost,
(vvherin you bevvray your slender diuinitie)Brist. Moti. 6. fol. , & mot. 12. fol.  you vvoulde not so haue  her Maiestie for a Schismatike, her Nobles for heretikes, her vvholeSaun lib. 70. pag 130. & e∣adem. pag. 7. 3. people for departers and sallers avvay from the faith and true religion. You kisse her, and yet you smite her. you faune vpon her like gentle Spaniels, and  most cruelly you bite her, (tanquam canes clanculo , as the prouerbe is, like butchers cutres.Hovvlet epi∣leafe. 4 & the 14. fol. 5. you prayse her clemencie and mercy, and yet you charge her maiesties gouernment vvith vnspeaka∣ble outrage and cruelty. And if you meant as you speake,Hovvl. pres. fol. 6 fol. 15. calling her The Lordes , the Aungell of God, the Lordes substitute your mother,  you lay  your  concerning religion, and  of her, Seeing in flattery you acknowledge this to doe harme, vvhy, do not you and the rest to do good, ac∣knoweledge it in trueth, and so denye the pope his forreine iurisdiction within this realme? And  shee be the Lordes Angell and substitute; vvhat hath the Pope to do to entermeddle in her territories and kingdomes? Or haue you M. Howlet any speciall priuiledge or commission to speake so directly a∣gainste one of your owne groundes, to charme the Prince withall, to thend shee may lende a listening eare to youre vniust complaintes? For that vvhicheThe prince is  chiefest  in  land, to  the care of Gods matters doeth specially be∣long to see Gods  established. you acknowledge in her, calling her the Lords sub∣stitute, vvould bee condemned as ranke heresie in vs, because it importeth that she hath authority to heare and determine in causes of religion (as in deede she hath) according to the vvorde of God. Such as you call at vnvvares Sectaries, more fauou∣rably then you meane, thereby meaning the  of the Gospel vvere neuer  with such
outrage and immodestye of Spirite to the disho∣noure of their naturall prince, to pronounce her a Schismatique and an heretique,. mot. 40 vnder the title of obe  labouring to dis∣charge her subiectës from their dutifull obedience, too iustle her oute of her seate, and to plucke the Crowne from her head, as you  haue done. If you thinke that I speake partially, let the Bull that mot. 15. fol. 72. . Felton set vp, sent from your abhominable Father of Rome, be remembred, and the issue that came of it, Let Sanders in his booke. lib. 2. pag. 78 of the visible monar∣chie d. . of the church, be heard to speake, Let. lib. 7. pag. 130. 734. Harding Dorman and Bristow say for themselues. Let imprin ted of  a table at Paris, and therein setteth out the Queene crounle. ie, though in the  amended. RosseMor. Phi. his booke of suc cession. Morgan Phillips, and such like traitours be exami∣ned, hovve they haue borne them selues together vvith this popeholy papiste of the  sorte of Papistes, vvho can abide no communicating vvith vs, nor our religion in any respecte. And as for the vvaightinesse of the matter being Gods cause, importing her highnesse saluation, Estate, and Realme, with the safegarde of Thousandes, it is but a shamefull asking of that vvhiche yet is in que∣stionHovvlet pre. . betwixt vs. This Owle and his Gentleman, should first haue proued their particular churche of Rome, to be the  Church of Christe. They shoulde first haue set downe vvherein our Churche hath departed from the doctrine of Christe and his , in vvhat , , Nobles; and  are  set, and continue in Heresic and  the woorde of God:The papistes are , and their ser∣uice and  idolatry to be . and then the consequence had  playne, that all Christians muste seperate them selues from vs, so they had vvonne their cause. For vve agree vvith them, that there oughte to bee no dissimulation in
the matters of God, that  are to bee , that their  is to be auoided: but vvee af∣firme that they are those heretiques in that Apo∣staticall  fallen from that vvholesom  of Christ; and his Apostles: VVe affirme that  and Lordship of Rome, and the tyrannous  thereof ouer the , to be that. in . . p.  in . Babylon,August de .  lib. 2 cap. 1. out of which wee are commaunded to departe, that vve be not  of the same destruction toge∣ther vvith them. But alacke, this is your olde ,.  in  18. de  dei cap. 22 . 17. Howlet, when you cannot obteine youre purpose,  by the Popes threatning thunderboltes of excommunication, or by your  and b Excom. Pii .  obteined by  vvho vvas executed in Cornevvall. bookes to styrre vp her  to rebellion, then you fall to your  and  glo∣sing. You file your tongues, and make them smoo∣ther then , they seeme svveeter then honye, but the poyson of Aspes is vnder them: then your com∣passion  out, her highnesse clemencye and mercy is praysed in youre the papists dange∣rous to rel. gi∣on, and to  vvhole . vvante of punishment, which yet in deede is her greatest daunger, and then she is a mother, whome notvvithstanding in deede you  a stepdame: a soueraigne princessc and yet no Queene of youres,Allen in his Apologie of the English Seminarie s. cap. 4. neither her Tavves any , because she is not established by your popes authority, your Gods vicar, of whome you woulde haue her hold her crowne in fee , eyther as te∣nant at will, or else as  by youre treasons king  vvas compelled to doe, that hee mighte take it agayn  your Popc, & pay a  for it, to hee deposed or  at his ,Chronica  Mathia; . Math. VVest. vvhome you holde not to , vvhen Harding in his confutati∣on of the A∣pology. in his Chayre, and aduisedly hee pronoun∣ceth
any sentence.Sun . lib. 1. cap. 4. Now he hath aduisedly and  pronounced her Maiestie a SchismatikeBulla. paspae. pii . and an here tique, therefore as in your opinion shee ought to be deposed:. mot. 40. fol. 154. so are all her subiectes dis∣charged of their duty and allegeance. And yet (good man,) besides your general and particuler crosses ly∣ing so harde vppon your pore backes, that you sel∣dome or neuer, except in the tyme of your greatest ruffe, lay  or fared better: example of your fel∣lows at VVisbich, in the Marshalsey, and else where,VVood the priest solicited  to vvhoredome, and gaue her mony and a comfite to make her mad vpon him. vvho beeing idle and liuing in no calling, are bent to folly and filthinesse, and yet the poorest of them, vvho mighte beg, if they vvere abroade, neuer had more plenty of mony in their liues nor more ease and leasure to followe all delightes, sauing that they are restrained from a little libertye of going a∣broad: and yet her maiesties gouernmente is accu∣sed, if not in respect of her selfe, yet of her counsel∣lors, inferior officers and Magistrates, in executing of herIf our lavves be vnsuppor∣table, that  not vvith life for religion, what  theirs, that  none? Fol. 6. pref. vnsupportable lawes (as you  call thē) through which there is such cruelty and souadge dealing as the like was neuer heard of before in any age. These thinges are greeuous, yet they  no∣thing in  of that one  in  Epistle dedicatory of  of booke to the Earle of Leicester hath accused you  be  to God and to her royall . This crabbeth & nippeth you at the very hart root, And I thinke in deede not vvithout . For the trueth of the matter beeing so plainely and mani∣festly  out, and proued in the learned vvorkes of, our time, it lieth more heauily vpon you, then you are able to remoue: and a man neede not much to stande vpon it. I vvill not speake  the other points
of your  Epistle, nor of that booke so high∣lyHovvlets im∣pudencye and presumption. cōmended by  graue , vvherwith you haue taken your  into the light, as vvith ano∣ther mans vvinges, and  your selfe not as an Ovvle in this point, but as Esops crovve vvith other  fethers:  forsooth vvith suche mode∣sty, that it is fit for none but a Queene: and yet the greatest part stollen either out of your fellovvGregory  book of Schisme hath the very  and ,  de∣ficit in . but he  in his minor. Gre∣gery Martyns booke of Schisme, whome you  not a little, robbing him of his glory, or  out of a French book, wherin the protestants rendred reasōs why they could not come to your  masse, vvhich you foolishly haue tourned and  to your purpose, I leaue that to be aunswered by one that vvil stand vpon it, & do it more thronghly. But because it hath pleased you to dravv me in a∣ganst my wil, specifying my name, I wil by the grace of God. vndertake the proofe of that vvhich I haue set dovvn in that . But before I enter into it, I vvold haue this diligently marked of al, that you on ly snatch at those bare vvords of mine, & neuer an∣svver any iot of the matter: you mention nothing of those same more general and particular  of treason & , plainly set down, in thatSee the ex∣amples  in the epistle. Epi∣stle, by expresse examples, vvhiche made me to call you papistes by your right names, enemies to God & to her royall maiesty: As for your aggrauation & pelting chafe vvith that reuerend Father & his of∣ficers, For letting passe the book to the print, for that this  vvas not onely vttered in speeche, but also let it passe in print to the view of the worlde, and vvas dedicated to a noble man of her  priuye counsel, (VVhose honoure like a Katife, you labor to blemish, whilste you in∣sinuate,
that I stirre him vppe to cruelty against you) and by suche a brar sicke fellovve, vvhom  possessed a long time for his fantasticall opimous, & yet I think, though he knew your nest and abiding also, with your, com∣panion Carters, or vvhether it be Parsons, that hath put your name vpon himselfe, for novv you are be∣come such honest mē that in an euil cause you haue names at commandement: yet you scarcely knowe him by the face, & are not able for your life to name any of those opinions: to vvhome, you farther at∣tribute such pregnancy (vpon such honest mens report as your self) of  sing any new religion vpon a weekes .Fol. 6 Praefat. &c. These circumstances I would a little consi∣der, before I enter into my proofe. Concerning the vttering of this matter in speech, being the trueth, and vttered by so many before, it should not so much grieue you, and specially for set∣ting it out in print to the view of al mē, that it might come euen to your owne owlish sight, what proueth it else? but that it was done with confidēcie, & , not fearing the light? Hovv vvould you haue cōplained, if it had bene vttered behind your backs in the dark, as such ovvlish Hovvlets as your self are vvont to do, vvho cānot abide the light? nether loue to come to trial, vvhat good face soeuer you set vp∣on the matter but your common guise is to eate & drinke men behinde their backs, to slander the truth and as much as lyeth in you, to deface it, to rage a∣gainst it, & to persecute it. VVhē such as cā ansvver you are driuen avvay by your tiranny, and you  the chaires alone: then you fighte vvith youre ovvn shadovves, either hauing them in your handes & also both svvord and fire at your commandemēt
to mainteine your chalenges: then you are strong enough to enter into disputations with them, or be∣ing abroad, by your truces and safe conductes. you can vvhope and prouoke them by your sweete al∣luring , and fawning till you haue them faste, vvhose  you haue burnt to ashes, vvhen they haue come to  the cause of God, & to giue a reason of their  inConci. Con∣stantiense. . 19. your generall Councils. Thus trayterously you hold thē in your limed spray, Pata. & as Mantuan pretily describeth. you bring them toPhilip. . the spit. Iohn Hus, and Hierom of Prage shall vvit∣nessePlat. volater. this to be true to all posterities, to the perpetu∣al shame of al such faithlesse traitors and trucebrea∣kers. This the Concill of Constance shall witnesse during vvhich there vvere sometimes at once. Rom∣Pla  Benno. Buc∣chingerus. threBlond. lib. 3. popes, somtimes tvvo, one, and none: altogether byMirandensis. the eares, in whiche that goodly decree was ratified,Concil Con∣stantiense. . 19. Quod non obstantibus saluis conduc∣tib. &c. that faith is not to be kept with here tikes,Nicholas de Clamangis in quadam colat∣de fut Concil. where in steede of the holy ghost, (vvhō they blasphemously said they looked sor,)Concil of Constance was begun at Rome vvhere this owle shevved  selfe vvhich they haue concealed. an vnlucky owle, () that same monster of birdes, portending some notable mischief, one of your great ancesters was president that so troubled the Pope and all the company, that two vvhol sessions vvere frustrate and vvithout ef∣fect, sauing that they murthered the pore owl, with.  and cudgels. Seing therfore it is in printe, you may ansvvere it, make vvhat exceptions you can, & take your best aduantages. And as for being done to a noble man, a cheefe  in our Land, what other thing can it argue. but that you are such dangerous enemies, as they haue good cause vnder her maiestie, chiefly to vvatche a∣gainst, to haue a diligent eye to the maintenance of
the gospell, and to the preseruation of her maiesties royal person the defender of the same, to whom (as faire shewes as you make)I et  v. ordes, one. of Saunders chiefe  be  spoken in the parliament house, anno primo of her  reigne. you wish no good. Concerning that you attribute to my person cal∣ling me a brainsick fellow, and in your popish heate and burning charitie, twite  vvith mine impri∣sonment in Newgate, I will onely saye this vnto it, the vvoordes of a brainsicke man shoulde not so greatly haue rent your catholike heart. But if you call me brainsick and mad, as the vvicked haue cal∣led the prophets, and the Iewes haue called Christe and his Apostles, because by the grace of God I2. Kin. 9. 11. haue and do stande for the trueth, against your Po∣pishIoh. 10. 20. Act. 26. 24. and Antichristian corruptions, I haue to re∣ioyce in it, and I consider you do but your kinde: you coulde doe little, if you coulde not rayle, and thankes be to God, though you grenne, you cannot byte. As for my beeing in Newgate, the cause vvas not such, as should fasten vppon mee any suche vile reproche as you obiect. And howHovvlet fol. 3. pref. standeth this re∣hearsall of my imprisonment vvith your complaint made before vvhere you saye, that no punishment in a manner is avvarded those that offend against the booke. As for my pregnancy vppon report of sraning nevv religions: the veriest Owle in the worlde vvoulde not so pub∣likely in print haue charged a man vvith such a hai∣nous crime vpon the report of others. In deede this is common vvith the papistes, whose religion being not grounded vpon the Scriptures, they varie it as euery mans braine and fancie leadeth him. Besides that, fame is an euill lyer, especially vvhen suche are blowers of it, as can breath out nothing but slaun∣ders, and reproches against the trueth, and the true
professors of it, yea it deserueth no more credite,Popery a reli∣gion patched together of al heresies and variable: A bird of diuers fethers. then  Howlet should  and affirme, that the papistes are no traitors. But hereby may plainely appeare vvhat light , rashnes, vncharitable∣nesse and impudencie there is in papists, that receiue credite, blaze, and vtter vvithout all shame, whatso∣euer commeth into their brainsicke heads, againste the true professors of Christs gospell. A man would haue thought that he vvho praised modesty and hu∣mility, in the author of this peking letter, vvoulde haue put it in botter practise himselfe. VVhereas he  me Puritane, and to require me, sheweth the doctrine of tvvo of my preachers (, as pleaseth him to call them) vvho prea∣ched at an exercise ofThe fast at Stamford don orderly, with consent & by authority as shall appeare in the end of this booke. a fast at , and that against the B , &c. I vvill not say much in it in this place, because I haue proued that, a lovvde and  in the end, vvhich as slaunderous and  as it is, is yet the principal and mayn ground woorke of his vile . This is , that vvhereas it vvas at firste somevvhat feared that it vvoulde not proue orderly ynough: and by the in∣tymation of some  not best affected to such holy exercises, yet vvas it afterwards procured both by honourable and vvorshipfull, and done by suche consent and authority, and vvith so good , that the vvhole Church vvas comforted by it. The preachers vvere suche, and so vvell knovvne to bee godly, learned and vvise, as vvoulde not vtter suche positions as this Momus, and his reporter haue spitefully patched together and blazed abroade. The collector therfore vvhome hee nameth a mini∣ster, must needes eyther be some such nightebyrde
as himselfe, not able to abide the light, or else  carterly misreporter, who giuing them some little endes, those Spiders haue VVouen according to their owne humour, to bring the trueth of God in∣to hatred (if they coulde) with her royall Maiestye. But thankes bee to God her Maiestie is wise, not to be carried avvay vvith such malitious parties. Her highnes trusteth not; but with good trial: & wher she trusteth, she will not be carried away by  In hearing reportes she reserueth an eare alwais sor the absent, she is experienced to know  euill, thinges are made at the second hande, and specially vvhen they are vttered of mallice, by such as are not indifferent but partial, not sincere but spitefull. And thus much for the circumstances. Now to the proof of my matter that pincheth you so sore, to vvit, firste that you are enemies to God, and then I saye not enemies onely, but traytors to her royall Maiestye. That you are enemies to God, the vvhole truth of God, agaynst which, you papistes do mischiuonslye set your selues, doth manifestly proue. For vvhosoe∣uer is an enemy to his word,  himself against his glory, wrestleth against his wil & ordinance, cor∣rupteth his religion, robbeth him of his greatest ho∣nor, & murthereth his people, he must needes be his enemy. That al the papists are such, holding of Anti christ, it shal appeare more plainly hereafter. In the meane vvhile, to proue the popeThe pope Antichrist and head of all pa∣pistes. Antichrist, as the captaine & head of al this band of enemies, althogh it be needles, considering howe it is a beaten argu∣mente in euerye booke; yet to satisfie the Reader, I vvill in a fevve lines speake of it. He is the speciall Antichriste that directly  him selfe againste,
Christ, both in doctrine and manners. And besides, that Dan. 7. 11. Apo. 17. 1. 18. Daniel and Iohn in the reuelation hath hue∣ly paynred him out, 2. Thes. cap. 2 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. &c. Paul ioyneth vvith them, de∣claring by the effectes, that it must needes bee hee; vvith vvhom the Church was threatned so long a∣goe.2. Thes. 2. 4. I am not ignorant that euery heretique, vvho setteth himselfe against the trueth of Christ, is after a sort an Antichrist, but the pope is this great An∣tichrist, that must haue his seate in the Churche of God, must vsurpe his place, and must not be in the stie of the heathen, to bee soughte for among theThis being prophesied of before cannot be intended of any singuler man: but of a company and state of men, because it shal endure till the comming of Christ. Turkes, Ievves or Paganes of the vvorld: but must spring and arise amongst his ovvne, And this is not any one man of the  of Dan, as the Papistes vvould haue vs to dream: but a company and estate of men, and therefore it is further called an Apo. 9. 12. 2. Kin. 21.Apo∣stasie, that is to say, a falling avvay from the Fayth, And thoughe hee bee called the man of sinne, and the Sonne of perdition, yet this is not meant of any singular person, but of the effect or quallity, that shall bee in the vvhole state and companye of that Apostasie, in the continuall succession thereof, vvhich is not onely borne in sinne, as all other men are, but euen borne and made, to vphold and main∣teine sinThough this be spoken of al in respect of original sinne, yet by a speci∣al priueledge, it belongeth to this troupe of perdition. A man of Belial, vvho vvill  at liberty from all lavves and subiection, vvho (as Iob saythe) hath drunk in vngodlines as the fish hath don water who hath sold himself to sinne, & is the eldest sonne of the Diuel, that as Christe the onely sonne God, (vvho vvas freely giuen for the saluation of al thatIob. 15. Ephes. 4. beleeue in him) is the head of thē to gouern them,Rom. 1. to giue them lavves, and to enriche them vvith the righteousnesse of fayth reueled by the Gospell. So
he might be the head of al the faithles, giuing  lawes directly contrary against Christ, leading them all to spirituall whoredomes, corruptions and al ab∣hominations, to their vtter , as that apo∣staticall sea hath done. And thoughSaunders de visibili monar chia Ecclesiae. lib. 8 cap. 3. &c. Sanders labor his hart out, to proue Antichrist to be some singuler man, and no succes∣sion of men, and reckoneth vp (as he saith) many  that we hold, strengthening this fly lighte, as aPlinie lib. 10. Nat  cap. 17. hauk, (because of the old friendship betweene the Owle and the Hauk;) yet the apostle Paul shall con∣uince him, who calleth it (as I haue said) an Aposta∣sieAuxiliatur Accipiter co∣legio quodam naturae, bel∣lumque parti∣tur. a mistery, that albeit it began to work euen in his time, yet must be no otherwise vtterly destroied, thē by the comming of Iesus Christe: whose greatnesse must be built vpon the ruins of the Romane empire andAug. lib. 20. de ciuitate dei cap. 19. must giue life to that wounded beast in the ree∣difyingApo. 13. 15. 16. thereof: which thing besides that, the moste ancient writers do plainly confirm, the practise pro∣ueth. For the Romaine empire fell by litle and litle, and this was builded vp and erected. For at the firsteChris. in epist. ad Thes. ca. 2. it vvas not so euident, it crept more closely like the yuy bush, till it had choked the one and gayned theApoc. 17. 18. top of the other, vvhich euer since it hath helde and mainteined. And though at the first Rome, was cal∣led the cheefe but of courtesy, because it vvas the seate of the Empire, yet afterwards by Antichriste, it obteined, to be chiefe by tyranny, and this by pri∣uiledge thereof would also be vniuersall byshop in despight of Christ and al his pouerty, Fot looke how Ioh. 14.1. Tim. 1. God sent his sonne into the world, for the saluati∣on of his, Phil. 2. humbling himselfe euen to the death of the crosse, so is he sent into the worlde, for the de∣struction
& condemnation of mankind,, aduancing himself aboue al that is called God. These are such (as the Apostle sayth) that vvithal other here  turne  grace of God into vvantonnesse, & denie the Lord Iesus the only ruler. They are clouds with∣out vvater, carried hither & thither by the wind, wi∣theredIude. trees, vnfruiful, tvvise dead and plucked vp by the roots: this vvhole body of Antichrist hath an y∣ron forhead, & a brazen brovv, a crooked & a poi∣soned tong. To vvhom the definition of sinne, Ioh. 3. agreeth in euery point both in false doctrine and corrupt manners; both being most contrary to the doctrin of Christ & his Apostles. For vvheras al our actions that must stand acceptable before god, must flovv from a true and liuely Rom. 10. faith, vvithout vvhiche it vvas impossible to please God: these men hath o∣uerthrovvne the vvhole doctrine thereof, resisting that righteousnesle, that is made Rom. 1. manifest by the gospell, and thrusting in a patched and vveake righ∣teousnes, stilted not vpon the lavv but vppon their ovvn deuised vvorkes. And therfore they vvant that same principal effect of fayth, vvhich is true loue, & haue in the place of it most sauadge and beastly cru∣elty.Read the spanish , and the stories of Fraunce, Eng∣land, Scotland and other countries. vvhose chiefe heade in his members, killeth, hangeth, burneth, drovvneth, pineth and pincheth Christians vvith all kinde of vnvvonted tormentes, more cruelly then euer did Phalaris or Nero, and that vvithout all couler of Iustice: vvhich is a plaine argument that Sathan the greate Belsire of the Ro∣mane Antichrist, vvhose liuely image he bereth (for a goose can  no Ovvls egges) hath instructed him and  him to this office. And therefore sun∣dry of the Popes, in this seat haue  familiar con∣ference
with the diuell their owne damme, and by his meanes they haue had their entrance,  themselues in magicall and deuilish arts.Volater in. Polych onic. For Mar∣tine the second in the yeare of Christ. 882. atteyned to his Popedome by , andMare histor. Ioh. Marius. Sergius, that  deuised candles to be born vpon Candle∣mas day (as they call it,) and Agnus Dei to be sung tvvise at masse, after he had. lib. 2. cap. 12 . hegorten Iohn the 12. of that name, of an harlot called Marozia, daughterAnno 928. also to a Harlot I , kept by Iohn the 11.) he vvas so great vvith the diuell, that by his povver he  great myracles, & at length by the help of this honest vvomans husband; named Guido, her Sonne Iohn was made pope, and the other pitifully smothered vvith a Cushin at Saint Iohns in the pal lace at Lateran. VVhat should I speake of Octa∣uian, called by the name of Iohn.Plat Sabellic Luitprand. 13. vvho vvas the sonne of Albericus, the son of the foresaid vvhoore , vvho kept such , that vnlesse the Di∣uell himselfe had bene in his place, hee coulde not lightly haue gone beyond him; vvho vvas aVolater Plat. Ioannes Mari us Naucieru. commō dicer, a , a Theefe, a vvhooremaster, vvhome their ovvne authors call a  of men, accursed man, that put out the eyes of some of his Cardinals,Chronic. Si∣gisb. Robert . cut out their tonges, cut off their fingers handes and noses, lay vvith tvvo systers one after another, vvho in playing at dice desired the diuel to helpe him, de∣flovvred Stephana his fathers concubine, a vvidovv called Rainer, and another named Anne: vvho war∣red,. lib. 6. burned, brake vp dores and vvindovves, drankeCapg in cata∣logo Anglic. drunke and pledged the diuell.Volater. lib. 12. Platina. This vvas hee thatPraemon∣stratensis. did homage vnto Otto, and crouned him. but after∣vvard plaied the Traitor vvith him: taking part with Albertus Berengatius his aduersary. This vvas hee
that was in such a league vvith Negromancers, thatCapg. in Ca∣tolo. &c. Dunston that Familiar of the Diuels in Englande, who could hold the diuel by the nose vvith pinsons, was dear vnto him, vvhom he made an Archbishop at length, & yet the diuel in the ende gaue this Pope his ? for being taken in bed vvith another mans wife he was by her husoāde thrust to the heart vvith a dagger. OfPlattin a set∣eth out the vvhole story fully.  second vvho was a student of Negromancie, and fetched avvay by the Diuell, I neede not to speake, the story is more ma∣nifest, then that it can be denied.Supplemen∣tum chronic. mare histor.  the 8. also appeared after his death on a blacke horse, (vvhether it vvere the diuel or no that carried him? tempor. let Hovvlet and his companions iudge) to a Byshop an acquaintance of his, to whom he said, he was thatIoh. Marius. Rob Barnes. vnhappy Benedict, being in great torment, & shew∣ed thē of an hidden treasure, vvhich til it vvas found he could neuer be quiet (though he had bene Pope) either in hell or in purgatory. AlsoBucchinga∣rus . Benedict the ninth gaue himselfe vvholy to this study, and vvher∣soeuer hee became, alvvaies hee carried a booke of  aboute vvith him, hee obtained his Popeship by this magical art, he sacrificed to diuels, and made vvomen to follow him into desert places by the helpe of the diuel, vvho vvayted vpon him ine  the Cardinal Si∣gebert volat. the likenesse of a sparravv, Ther vvas nothing done in the vvorld (as they sayde though they lied) that was hidden from him: & after he had sold his Carranza. as he vvas coniuring in the vvoods, the diuell vvhom he had serued, strangled him for his good ser∣uice: he vvas seene  his death in the shape of a beare, sauing that his head and  vvere the heade and taile of an asse, because (as  yeelded the
reason) hee liued vvithout reason, vvithout lawe, vvithout God.This vvas he vvho before vvas called Hildebrand. his life is writ ten by Benno the Cardinall. Marianus Sco∣tus. VVhat should I speak ofBlondus. Plat Othofr. and o∣thers, say that Benedict vvas in the pallace at Lateran, Syluester and Gregorye, and Clement the second vvas e∣lected the 4. Caranza. Gregory the 7.De  & obedi∣entia. Vnam sanctā in glos∣sa distinc. . .  in . of Gregory the 12. that bought his popedom (for at this time Benedict, Syluester and Gregorye vvere Popes all at once; and I vvonder vvhich  the head of the church) of Ioh. the 21. of Alexander the 6. of Paul the third, and of al the rest of them, it vvould make a whole book of a great volume, to set out all their villanyes & vvickednesse, whereby they beare the liuely resemblance of their father, vvhom they serue in that  See of desolation. For they were and so are their successors as proude as the ci∣uell, liars like himselfe,  as he is filthy, cruell and tirannicall, enemies to the glorious trueth of God, and to all righteousnesse. And though this Antichrist come like an angell of light, that he may the rather deceiue, & his brood in sheepes clothing, to the ende they may deuoure, that their deceite and illusion may be the stronger, putting on most beautifull titles and glistering vi∣zards, calling themselues Apoc 17. 18. most holy, most godly,  Lordes annoynted, yet are they the filthiest of all others, vomiting out Apoc 16. 16. blasphemies against the most highest. Let their stories be read, published to the vvorlde by their ovvne vvriters, that testefie their  abhominations. That this seate might fit Antichrist (as the Scripture ) an vvhooreVirgii. lib. 2. sitting vppon a beaste vvith seuen heades and Georgic. Homes, moste liuely describing theRoma metro . See and placeHanc olim ve teres. &c . . . of Antichriste, vvhiche vsually moste interpreters both olde and nevve, expound of Rome hauingVrbs, septi∣colis se∣uen nate  illa  Roma. hilles, howsoeuer that corrupter of the Rabbies commentaries,  Aelianus the Italian hath
vvith a kind of vvhiting, blotted such places quite out, in the last great Venice Byble: as that expositi∣on of Aben Ezra vpon the eleuenth of Daniell, ver∣ses 36. 37. 38: vvhere Damel mentroning the false God, he  it of the iniquitye of Rome, and so in diuers other places: I say not vvhether it be so fitly expounded yea or no, but of the trecheryChryso. hom. 40. in Mat. of this falsifier, that vvill haue nothing, to sound a∣gaynst Rome, and yet it is certaine, that this stateBernard ad Eugenium. and citie, is that Apoc. 17. 18. beast, vvoman and vvhore,Read Lact. lib. 7. cap. 17. vvho comes in, vvith crueltie and ignoraunce, vvith deceaueable and entising vvordes, vvith pleasaunt sleightes and alluring colours, drawing the vvorlde to her spirituall vvhoredomes and idolatries.Polycr. Cax∣ton, Marianus Scotus, Marti∣nus Polonus Sabellicus . 9. lib. 1. pag. 469 In vvhich seate that vvhore Pope Ioan, as a  testification thereof, vvhoe leyde her burden in the open streete betvveene the  heater Collossae and S. Clements Church; vvhich streete their Popes shunne euer since: although Harding and that  Saunders deny it neuer so impudently a∣gaynst an. tem, Mare historia∣rum, Plat and a number be∣sides. vvhole cloude of their ovvne Historio∣graphers, and a monument of their ovvne in Rome, that beareth  of it, besides the, antiquitie of theirPenes por∣tam, Petri, Pauli, peperit, Papa, pater, patriae, paruu∣lum puerum. tenne pees, and yet I say nothing of their Porphyrie stone. This is therefore that Apoc 17. 18. & 18. 9. Ioh. 17. vvhoreNear the gate of Peter and Paul, the pope the father of the country brought forth a little childe. sitting vpon this beast, compassed vvith those hilles, that by her vvhorish prouocations must allure those blinde princes of the world, vvho set them selues agaynst Christ to drinke of the cup of her abhomi∣nations, vvhoe muste be bevvitched and rauished vvith  braueries.  lights, and pompous shevves. This is that ionne of perdition, because he is a lost childe and of suche a curssed state as can not be sa∣ued.
For vvhome vvee must not pray, but ought to crye out against him, tyl our Sauiour destroy him by the breath of his mouth. Such a lost Iudas as neuer returneth, that betraith Christ vvith a kisse, entreth by craft, not as an enemy, but as a friend, by counter set keies, or else secretly like a thief. He isActiue & pas  dicitur fi∣lius . said to be the sonne of perdition it selfe, from the nature of the  begate him, not onely because he is al∣ready damned, but because hee shall dravve all his2. Thes. 2. 4. 7. members, of vvhom he is head, to the same damnati∣on. Hovv should it else euer haue bene saide, that, albeit he draw an infinite number of soules into hell vvith him, yet must not he be  of any.Plattina. . His place is not among Paynims and Ethniques, but hee shal sit in the church of God: and albeit this myste∣ryAnno . of iniquity began to worke long before, euen inConfirmed by a Synod vnder . 607. by 62. b. shops. the Apostles times, and fast after yet the time of his manifestation vvas, vvhen Boniface the thirde obteined by the meanes of Phocas, (vvho had mur∣thered & 3 deacons: Sy∣nod.  vnder Con∣stance Heracli . his Master Mauritius,) the seate and name of  Byshop, vvhichGregor lib. 40 & 32. 36. Gregorye his predees∣sour had pronounced to belong onely to the fore∣runner of Antichriste, the Father of the Sonne pride, and to bee the name of a verye Lucyser, re∣fusing it him selfe, vvhich yet this  sought, kepte and continued, and so did all his successors,. 40 . 38. li. 7. . . 30 to the ende they mighte make vp that vvhole beast that  to bee throvvne into that . And as before, this mysterye of iniquirye wrought by little and little in the corruption of true Doc∣trine, in some pointes, so . from time  time the contrariety, directly both against the Doctrine of Christ and his manners, shevved it selfe, that the
name might best fitte him and agree vnto him. And therefore he is rightly called Antichrist because he. in .  3. shall particularly oppose himselfe againste Christe our onely mediatour and sauiour. And as  in composition signifieth, For and agaynste, as :Apoc. 16. 13. &c. 17. 3. 4.  is hee vvhich is in the Kings steede, or agaynst the King, so bothe  this agreeth of the popeApoc. 3. 11. For that  is Christes , and yet settethApoc. . 13. him selfe  Christe bothe in Doctrine, and manners. And though he do not this in plaine vvords, because he hath tvvo * hornes like a Lambe, 4. 10. and yet a * dragons mouth: yet it is ; that hee counterfayteth,Leo the tenth said it to .   the Gospell but a fable, and vsing only die name and letter of it. for his gayne and aduantage * Christe came to fulfill: the lavves vvhich vvere ordeyned of his Father,Luk. 22. 42. the,  art 2  caus. 15.  pope Mar. . pope violateth , dispenseth  them,. 2. 8. and altereth them at his pleasure. *  submit∣tedIoh. 18. . him selfe to the  vvill of his father, * humbled 6. 13. Luk. 12. 13. him selfe to the death of the Crosse, * declared hisMat, 17. . kingdome not to be of this vvorld, *  vvhen they vvould haue made him king, * refused the decyding of cruill causes, * rendred obedience to  magi∣strates. thePelag: dist. 21. cap. Pope challengeth of right to be Christs high and generall vicar,. Nich.  21. cap inferior.  him selfe  all soueraigntye and povver,Bulla Cle∣mentis.  agaynste the very Angels,Dist. . 3. 40 . iustleth the vvoid of God, out of his Churches, & keepeth it lockt in a straunge  from the vnderstanding of the cōmō people,Non habet papa superio∣rem. demeth al obedience, chalengeth both the , and medleth in all . All that holde of him muste honour him, for Peters successor (though  be a  tat. 3. Distinc. Iudas and a theese, yet he must be the head of 2. in her  at, 1370,
Christes Church, & without Glossa ex∣trauag. de sede vacant. . vndergoe the gouernement of it, which onely  to Christe. Maruel it is, how contrary they be to thēselues in so substantiall poyntes of their religion. For at otherDecret de translat Epis∣copi cap. times they affirme, that the spirite can neuer de∣part from him, and then howe can he bee a thiefeQuanto. and a Iudas, and cary soules to hell? VVhatsoeuer1. . 5. ver. vlt. Christ requireth, it maketh no matrer, he admit∣teth nothing, neyther must they, that is againste his prerogatiue, against his idolatrous Masse, traditions ceremonies and customes. *Christ will haue his children to beware of Idols:See Carolus magnus, Catharinus in libello de i∣maginibus. The Pope will haue in ca. 1. ad Rom. Sand. de Typ∣hon. & adora imaginum. them placed & worshipped in euery Church. *Christ saith, you erre not knowing the scriptures: theConci. Trid. ses. 4. de cano∣n cis Scrip. pope & his adherents for him say, The scriptures breede errors, & thatHarding in his ansvver to the challēge. ignorance is the mother of deuotion,Mat. 22. 29. thatHosius de  dei . the people are swine and dogs, & holy thinges are not to be giuen vnto them, they are dumbPighius in lo cis communi. . lib. 1. cap. 2. Iud∣ges,Eckius. dead ynke, aHosius lib. 4. de tradit, &  Dei . blacke gospel, Roman distinct  ynken diuinity, &Cusanus li. 6. excitat vbi ecclesia. therefore the Church is the liuelyPrierius contra . brest of Christe. The lus Hos vt . . Andr. . 2. contr. . Church of Rome may giue authority to wri∣tings, which neither haue it of thēselues, nor of their Authors. TheAndra.  2 . fables of Esope, & the comedies of Terence, may (if the Church will) be made Cano∣nicall scriptures.  the Pope teacheth is the expresse word of God, & whosoeuer leaneth not to the doctrine of the  and of the Bishop of Rome, as to the  rule of God, of whiche the  taketh force and , hee is an Heretique,  the authoritie of the Churche is a∣boue the authoritie of the Gospel. TheOrth. . 19. change of the Churches iudgement chaungeth Gods iudge∣ment,
and Gods commandement also. VVho can vvithout horror and trembling in all his ioy nts,  these blasphemies, which this man of sinne  himselfe & in his members, beleheth out against the maiesty of the moste highest: I meane Andradius , , , Pighius, , , Osorius, Melchior Canus, Harding, San∣ders, and suche other bottomles locustes.Vaux. Cani∣sius catechis∣me printed at Antvverp by Plantine. In deede our new Iesuites, M. Censurer and suche like, vvho hath vndertaken Campions defence, and the rest of this nevv broode, they seeme to dislike this old rot∣ten stuffe. For they professe knowledge, they seeme to take a course of Catechising, and laying foorth the principles of Popish religion, auouching the ne∣cessity of being learned and taughte, so thatCarbonaris fides, fides ecclcsiae ro∣manae. Fides Romana, id est . Hosius Collyers sayth, to beleeue as the Church beleeueth is scarce sufficient with them And yet al this helpeth not their cause, for that they refuse, to bee directed1. Tim. 25. by the rule of fayth, vvhich is the onely vvorde of God. * The doctrine of Christ acknowledgeth but one mediator,To the virgin Salua omnes qui  glorifi∣cant. the Pope and papistes an infinite num∣ber,Thomas  kets bloude is made a ladder to heauen. Christ teacheth that his doctrine is profitable, full, and absolute, to make the man of God : The pope and his shauelinges saye it is not so, and2.  2 .  Ro∣ma , nu∣gas dabit, ac∣cipit , verba dat.  Romae, nunc sola pecunia regnat. therefore vve must receiue vnvvritten verities, tra∣ditions, and vvhatsoeuer theire idle braynes vvyll thrust out vnto vs. The scripture sayth, * It is a more blessed thing to giue then to take. The Pope sendeth out his infinite svvarmes of begging , the very Locustes that came out of the bottomlesse pit, that deuour vp all that groweth vpon thearth, vvho take all and giue nothing. The number ofAct. 20. 35.
which Sectaries following sundry Sect masters and patrons, vvas long agoe amounted toLambert in pre. The  of conformities in the begin∣ning. 94. sundrye , beyond all vvhich the Iesuites now go, vvho seeming to professe more learning, , and righteousnes, are the greatest hipocrites, confirming their falfe doctrine vvith wonderfull illusions, whichS. Clare. Brid∣get. S. Kat. and our S. Kath. of Seene with all their goodly reuelations . they call miracles, vvho yet are as emptie of trueth, godlines and vertue, as any of their predecessors, S. Frauncis that in most thinges was preferred before Christe: vvith vvhome Augustine, S. Clare, and S. Bridget by their disciples were matched, are now put cleane out of countenance, and their memories in a manner  blotted out, by these new repairers of that  church Christ taught that mariage wasIoh 2. 3. 5. lawful, he consirmed it, both by doctrine & myracle1. Tim. 4. 1 Cor. 7. . 13 vvith his owne presence: the de . . 82 . Pope and his greasie  condemn it as vnholy, and rather admitting whoredoome to their Clearks, and such as haue re∣ceiued  marke, then this  remedy, they. . 1. . di. 34 cap lector. giue thē a vvatch worde to walke vvarily. otho licet ad  in .  non ,  caute. And though they vvill needes haue it a Sacramente, yet it defileth their Cleargy as a prophane thing, and is for them vtterly vnlawfull. And as the Pope in , and in an infinite num∣ber of other pointes, the greatest and vvaightieste. dist. 82. . of  religion,  him selfe flatly a∣gainst Christ, so do all they vvho hold of him, whom for that cause vve iustly call papistes. The name ,  S. Such holde this Antichrist the pope to be their onely Gods vicar in earth, they depende vppon him,  Saund. . and all the  of . as heade of the Churche, in whome they acknow∣ledge the only direction and ordering of al Churche  to  throughout the vvorlde in all
kingdomesChristus  coelo paesidet, papa in terris residet. and countries, and therefore  to the  of God, and the vvholesome lavves prouided in that behalfe; they shut out all Princes and  from hauing any thing to doe  those cases, they barre them from the  of their ovvne kingdomes, and from the most principall charge *that God hath layde vpon. 17. 17. 18 19. 20 them  I cannot but maruayle at How∣lets 3. Reg. 5. 2. slyp mentioned before, vvhere he acknowled∣geth2. Par. 1. the prince to beHovvlet . Gods . But slip I thinke it vvas not. For he spake the trueth, vvith his tong and lied in his ,  he singeth or rather whopeth in the ears of our gratious Nightingale, of obedience, and readinesse in the papistes, to laye dovvne their  in her , yet this vnhappie owl meaneth nothing lesse. For it is to be thought,  vvryte, that they ioyne with,, alias Ducket, executed the last of Iulie. 1581. A verve  and vvilfull  proueth this.  Hauns,  this other day, for his wicked treasons. The Lord giue her highnesse more  subiects to reioyce in, or else it were like to be vvrong vvith her, and vvith vs all, as it shoulde quickly appeare, I am afraid, if their povver vvere to their hearts, but God hueth and blessed be his name for that holy persuasion he hath giuen vs in his pro tection. And though he glaueringly calleth her the  of God, yet the gentleman vvhom he ex∣tolleth for such rare modesty in the 42 leafe of his discourse, calleth this Antichrist the pope, Christes substitute, without all warrant & ground from him or his vvord. These are such deadly enemies to God, that ma∣litiously theyIacob  trac. de . lib. . vvithstand that doctrine of faith and
uation, vvhich the eternall sonne of God taughte. Tim. 2. here vppon earth, inseperably cleauing to that vile Idol of the Masse moste derogatory to his dignity.. 7. 10. For vvhereas hee is our only high and euerlastingRom. 6. byshop ordeined of God, vvho hath not spared  povvre out his life and bloud for our santisication, by offering vp one  sacrifice once for all. These ene∣mies make it vnsufficient, vvithout effect and im∣perfect, and pleade another righteousnesse to satisfy the vvrath of God, They pester the earth vvith ma∣ny Sacrificers and priests, matching them vvith our sauiour Christ? They make them Peeres and com∣panionsPsal. 110. 4. with him, to offer vp sacrifices acceptableHeb. 15. 10. & 7. 21. vnto him, as vvell for the sinnes of the liuinge as the dead, making the Apostles and  ly∣ers, and yet they confesse vvith Dauid, that Iesus Christ is an euerlasting Priest, according to the or∣der of Melchisedech. VVherein they vvholly dis∣aduantage them selues, seeing they must be Priests eyther according to the order Aaron and Leui, or according to thorder of Melchisedech. TheHeb. 10. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. &c. order of Aaron and Leui had an ende vvith the ce∣remoniall  and sacrifices thereof. And Christe vvas onely that high Priest vvho vvas euerlasting, offered vp a perfect sacrifice, stood not at the aulter, but hauing offered vp his ovvne body, beeing both the priest and Sacrifice, offering not for his ovvne sinnes, but for oures, hath entred into Heauen, and is set dovvne at the righte hande of the Fa∣ther for euer, hauing finished a perfect voorke of this Priesthood for our full satisfaction and attone∣ment. This vvhole crowde therefore, The Pope, Cardinals, Friars, Priestes, Iesuites, Massesayers, and
, and all that delight in them, & con∣sent vnto them: they are horrible enemies of God,  Prophetes, vvicked , Apostataes, VVolues, false pastors, Idolaters, , & execrable , murtherers of soules, renouncers of Iesus Christ, and his death and passion, false vvitnes∣ses, traytors, the , , and robbers of Gods honor, and most detestable. For by this * sacrifice ofPhil. 4. 18. Iesus Christ, al outward and visible sacrifices of anyHeb. 13. 16. other priesthood before or after are abolished and made of no effect, except these sacrifices of * praysePsal. 51. & thankesgiuing, of almes conteining the spirituall worship of the kingly priesthod which are perpetu∣all amongst al Christians. In deede we must haue a hie * Priest, who muste bee holye, innocente, andHeb. 4. 4 & 26. without spotte, vvho needed not to offer vp day∣lye sacrifices, firste for his owne sinnes, and after for the sinnes of the people, but  perfourmed. 10. 12. 14 this * in offering vp himself  for al. He sayth once for , because neither it  the like should or could be reiterated. And therfore he is called the *  ofHeb. . 11.  thinges to come,  into the holy place, by his ovvn blood once for all, wher through was wrought euerlasting redemption & ,  of sinnes. VVherfore vnlesse vve vvil renounce Iesus Christe, vve haue no neede of such sacrifices. * Behold I come, to thende to doe thy vvill O God, by the whicheHeb. 10. 7. 12. 15. 16. 17. vvill vve are ,  the offering vp of the body of Christ once for al. The holy ghost witnesseth that in this new couenant, sealed and perfected in this one on∣ly Sacrifice of Christe, that he vvil no more remember  iniquities: and vvhere there is remission of them, there remaineth no more oblation for sinne, The sacrifi∣ces of the olde  by reason of their imperfection must be continued & dayly renued, but Christes of∣fering
ces of the old lavv by reason of their imperfection must be continued and daily renued, but Christs of∣fering vp himself, finished a perfect worke, & his sa∣crifice vvas persect. As for their sacrifices, they are imperfect, & therfore they continue & renew a sacri fice & oblation derogatorie to that of Christs, rob∣ing God of his glory, & the people of their greatest comfort in this vvorld.D. Smith of the sacramen. . &  of the re∣all presence. They are suche enemies to God, that they ouerthrovv the trueth of all religion and draw vs to execrable idolatry, teaching vs vnder bread & wine to worship vvhol Christ whō they af∣firm in a  presence most grosly & contrary to al the scriptures to be there present, against the truth of a body & notwithstāding his resurrectiō & assen∣sion they say, that such a transubstantiation is made, as there remaineth no substance of breade & vvine, most contrary to the nature of a Sacrament, though the accidents remain: & as they are enemies to him in these grosse & monstruous doctrins, so their  hath another ende then the supper hath. For in the supper the seruanes of Christ * make publique pro∣fession of their faith, they heare the word preached,1. Cor. 11. 23 26. they vvitnesse their faithfull persuasion, &  of saluation, keeping an actuall memory of the death and passion of Iesus Christ, &  to remē brance his vvonderfull and vnspeakable loue, vvho hath giuen his life & shed his bloud freely for them, and all eating of one breade, and drinking of one cup; are admonished of that brotherly loue and great vnity wherby they are knit together, & liue and die to Iesus Christ, as one body in one and the same spirite: vvhereas in the masse the knowledge of Christ is defaced, the preaching of the gospell is re∣iected,Durandi rationat.  see Ga∣briel. Biel. the Pontificall. & the time is altogether spent in mockinges
and movvings, turnings, and remouinges from one place to another, vvith an infinite number of fruitlesse superstitions and vvicked ceremonies, vvorse then euer those were that vvere inuented by Numa Pompilius, and dravvne from the Paganes. I could vvish in my heart that some young scholler vvould take the paines to translate their Pontificall into English, that al our countrimen might see their more then hethenish and mad customes and abho∣minations,Alexand. ab Alexandr. lib. Ouid. de . The making of their holiwater, with∣out doubt, they learned of Ouid, as they did purga∣tory of Virgil, & other their misteries frō other pro∣phaneGenialio. 40. cap. 17. Pagans and vvriters. Suche enemies to God they are, that vvith the gentilesRom. 1. 19. 20. 21. &c. they haue forsaken the liuing God, & cho∣sen to themselues other forren Gods, made of met∣tall, wood, & stone, potearth & bread, before whom they haue ; to which they haue praied, which they haue adored & vvorshipped, kissed, crept to, & embraced, making their vile priests creators of their Creator. For if he be greater that maketh and crea∣teth, then that vvhich is made and created, it must follovve that their dignitie muste needes be more then Gods, that that place of Scripture may iustlye fit them, vvhich saith: That2. Thess. 2. 7. that man of sinne,  himselfe  all that is called God. And if euery prieste be greater then God, vvhat is he that createth such creatures, as can make God? In deede, if this vvere true, they are far aboue the virgin Mary, vvho boreSacerdos est creator sui creatoris. Qui creauit me si∣ne me, iam creatur medi∣ante me. him but once, and they make him often. Shee vvas his mother as he was man, but they make him as he is both God and man. vvhich is horrible blasphemy: And therefore their ovvne massebooke saiethIn the title do dignitate sa cerdotum in a masse booke printed at Paris. that the priest is the creator of his creator, And he that made me with
out me is novv made by the meanes of me. Such wretched enimies to God they are, thatIoh. Andreas Innocentius. Ioh. de turre. cremata, de ec cle Summa. their sayth hangeth altogether vppon Antichriste their God, vvhome they make not onely a God of the hilles, but also of the vallies. They beleeue nothing but that which he alloweth, as for Christe his Euan∣gelistes, Apostles, and teachers, they make no rec∣koning of them inLanfr. con∣tra VVickle∣fum Lepus. respect of their Popes lawes and constitutions: heSee their ca∣sus . that can dispence with them & a∣gainst them, must needs be aboue them. AndHochstratus. Eckius in his Enchiridion. Hosius de ex∣presso dei. ver∣bo. ther∣fore their doctors teach that to cleaue to the scrip∣turesLaurentius. Ockam in dia logo par. 1. lib. 5. Ioan. is to be an heretique. Suche enemies to God they are, as are marked vvith Caynes lying, cru∣cltye and murther, bothe agaynste the Lavve ofDreido de Dogmatib. vari s. lib. 4. GOD and man,See the stori∣es of their go∣uernment, the book of mar∣tirs, Spanishe inquisitio. &c. For they haue murthered Chri∣stians, vvithout all compassion, they keepe no faith nor promise. No nature or kindenesse maketh them spare vvhere hatred is  againste the trueth, no age sex or condition, dravveth any pittye, be they old or young; halte or blinde; with child or without, brother or father, sister or mother, wife or kinsewo∣man, husband or friend, at home or abroad, Sonne or seruant, but they shal be sure to die a cruell death for it. Al stories are full of examples of their sauage and outragious cruelty, not only against the profes∣sors of the trueth, but euen one of them againste a∣nother, example is yet freshe in memory ofIuly. 18. 1581 Sher∣vvoodes  againste Hobson; one of his deareste friendes:Iohn Diazi∣us Pantalio in his Chronic. Sleyd an. Chrisp. muche like the vvicked Trea∣son of Alphonsus against Iohn Diazius his own na∣tural brother, besides infinit examples in these mur∣thers in Fraunce, in the inquisition of Spaine full of hideons tormentes, which shall vvitnesse the trueth
hereof to all posterities. This howling owle notwith¦standing (by his bolde flight prognosticating some mischeefe) scricheth in her maiesties eares, of the hard handling of Catholikes, how theyHovvlet. pag 5. 6. are tossed and tumbled, opmrisoned and pined, husbandes seperated from their vviues, vviues from their husbands, their houskeeping broken vp, & by name, M. Dimock killed in prison, & one mystresse. Tomson a virgin sent for religion to :  what shal I say, In imbre garrula est noctua. This foolish owle complai∣neth of case, slaundering her maiestie, to vvhome he vvoulde seeme so dutifull: and her vvhole gouern∣ment and state, of barbarous cruelty: when the tres∣passe in deede is onely herein, that they are dealte vvith but to gently, considering their continuall at∣tempts against her highnesse estate, crounc, and dig∣nity. ConcerningM. Dimocke his ovvne friends hath testified this to be true. M. Dimock of whom he speaketh he had the chusing of his ovvne prison (vvhiche was no choking dungeon, no Colehouse or  tower, (such as they were wonte to stifle men vp in) but a friends house, to vvhome his vvife (if he had a∣ny) friends, and other acquaintance repaired, vvhos death vvas by Gods hande and by no procurement of those magistrates, that sought his reformation as his ovvne friends can vvitnesse. As for the yong womā vvhō he cōplaineth to be cōmittedBridevvell a fit place for M. , that behaued her selfe im∣modestly be∣fore aucthori∣ty. to bride¦vvel for her conscience forsooth, if conscience may be without knowlege she was cōmitted by her high¦nes high comissioners to a place, both for aire & ex∣pēce, that vvas thought  for her person, & , hauing behaued her selfe, ouer obstinatly and immodestly  a sober , hovvsoeuer vvorthy her religion, before them. And yet this per∣king Parsons or ovvlishe  needs be so, out of his
yuie bush might haue lerned, that honester then sheDiuers that vvere of the priuate church were committed to that place till they vvere re∣formed. and al the pack of them vvil euer be, except they a∣mend & hie them apace, haue bene cōmitted to that place, both for religiō & other causes, as som others haue bene for dishonesty & an il life. Ther haue bin such cōitted thither, as he cōplained of before, that they escaped with litle or no punishment for break∣ing the booke. It is not the place but the cause that putteth off or draweth on an infamy. But her maiesti may see, & so may al the honorable, the malepertnes of this vgly ovvl, that is so curious in cōmonvvealth matters, that he prierh into her highnes officers do∣ings, & hauing so slāderous a toung, pretendeth not vvithstanding such loyalty and duety tovvardes her highnes. But if vve had bene in their handling, vvee should haue had little leasure and lesse oportunity to haue opened our griefes before any Soueraignty in authority. For besides that they vvere in trueth the practisers of tyranny and cruelty in al other doings, they vvould haue dried vp the best bloud in our bo∣dies, and sent vs to heauen in fierye chariots: after vnspeakable torments, to haue put an ende to our wretched liues. Their consciences forsooth may not be vrged, nor their catholikes may not bee allowedConscientia non fine scien∣tia. to obey their prince in comming to the Church, to heare the vvorde of God preached, the onely ordi∣nary vvay to reforme them, and to bring them to saluation: tender regard must be had of the sex and byrth of their offenders, (& yet this vvoman vvhom he vvil needes make a great gentlevvoman is but a francklins daughter) though they offende obstinate∣ly both agaynst God and their Soueraigne, vvhom they ought to obey in and for the Lorde, and that
vvhen they offend against the vvoorde of God, the peace of the churche, and the good lavves of this Realme. Not so muche as a little imprisonment (in steed of death, being founde obstinate and vncorri∣gible, and lightly ioyned vvith treason agaynste the state) but it must be exclaimed against, as if they had endured the greatest vvrongs in the vvorlde: vvhen it is plaine, and yet fresh in memory,Se the lamen table stories of England, France, Irelād &c. vvhat hauocke they made of the liues of noble and vnnoble, of blinde and lame, of boies & gitles, euen before their counterseite sentence of condemnation vvere past, and yet it vvas for true religion in deede, and but for standing against their blasphemies and curssed ido∣latries. your opinion and religion (Hovvlet) must be reserued, but to them that did vvith a true know∣ledge allege that plea of conscience, you vvere and are continually ready to abuse that place of Scrip∣ture:Rom. 13. Let euery soul be subiect to the higher povvers, &c. yea, you vvoulde vrge it in all thinges vvith all extremitye and vvithout all condition in re∣specte of your selues vvhen yet it mighte not binde you nor any of your greasy generation, & this maye appeare by the cold expositiō foūd of late by search in a gentlemans house, in Buckinghamshire, vpon this very place, together vvith another slaunderous, lying, and seditious libel against those godly learned men, M. Doctor Fulke and M. Charke. Suche enimies they are to God, that they vvill bring the vvorde of God into doubt, affirming the Churche to bee more auncient then the vvoorde. They vvill aske hovve  knovve the vvorde of God to be the vvorde of God. And albeit (God bee thanked for it) concerning the knovvledge of those
tongs theAs Daniel in the Chaldey, & some other vvere in Syri∣ake, al the rest in Hebrue and Greeke. Hebrue, Chaldey, Syriack, and Greek, in vvhich the Scriptures were first deliuered, frō which they would faine beate vs, if they haue gayned any thing, they haue had it at our handes,  their light from ours, yet they vvill svveare that our  are false, & lead vs to a translationReade Freder. Furi∣us de lib. sac∣ris in verna∣culum conuer¦tendis. fathered vpon Hierome, which we must receiue euē as it is, that yet in deed they can neuer proue to haue bene any of his, seeing in his ovvne works, theThe com∣mon translati∣on fathered vpon Hierom, non of his as may appeare in his ovvne vvorks. difference is plaine in many places, from that of , vvhiche is ful of Solicismes & imperfect speeches; Notwith∣standing euen by this, when vve haue accepted of it, and haue fought vvith them, their own throtes haue bene cut, as vvith their ovvne svvoord, and the er∣rorsSee Marcus Marinus in his preface prefi∣xed before his Hebrue Gram∣mer. vvhich they maintein haue ben confuted, whē they hane admitted it. I think they vvil aske shortly, hovve we know there is a God, as the prophet hath sayd of the vvicked, vvho thogh they vvere ashamed to vtter it, yet *thought they in their harts that there was no God. But that you may consider further of the transla¦tion, to which thatConcil. Trid. Ses. 4. conspiracy of Trent hath taken vpon them to bind all the vvorld, vpon pain of theirPsal. 14. black , vvith what good reason, I vvil set down a fevv testimonies and places. There vvas a very an∣cient booke in Hebrue, vvhich is entituled vvith∣out the authours name, in . . Nizahon, vvho vpon that psalm. The heauens declare the glory  God. witnesseth that vvhen Hierome did  that psalme at Rome he saide that he had turned the Byble with great trauel out of the  tong into latin, neither did I alter any thing (sayth he) but ther arose af¦ter him (as the author saith) such as with writing it out,  all And in Reuclines library also, being a great lear∣ned man in that tongue, there vvas found in a very auncient hebrue coppy written, vvhich had these
wordes, Loe Hierome the elder knew our whole , the whole  &c. VVhat likelihoode is there, that  being so learned a man in all the tongues, his ovvne translations being so far different fromRead in Cal∣uin  in Con cil. .  4. Canon. that cōmon translation, that a litle after carried his name, vvhich himselfe oftentimes taxeth and findeth faulte vvith in his vvorks, that euer  should be his, vvhere a manRead  in Concil. for his life in sundrye places can make neyther rime nor reason? as farre from the tongue vvhereinTrident. it vvas vvritten, as might be. And this  diuers of the Doctors many times into such , who vver either altogether ignorant, or but meanly seen in the tongs, that they knew not which way to turn them, as namely Ci∣uitate Dei lib. 18. cap. 44. Augustine: vvho doubted vvhe∣ther it vvere vvithin the space of forty dayes, ac∣cording to the Hebrue, that the Niniuites should be destroied or vvithin three daies, as that translation fathered vppon the Septuaginta had rendred. And yet, he saith, if his opinion should be asked: he rather thinketh it to be forty, as is in the Hebrue. So Hie∣rome in his Epistle to Damasus, iustly taxeth Hilari∣us for interpreting that vvord Hosianna, vvhich hee rendreth the redemption of the house of . And Am∣brose almost after the same manner. In  in the primatiue Churche, the Greeke tong so flourished that it vvas the moste common tongue thorough out the vvorld, hovvsoeuer the Romanistes boast of the latine, vvhereuppon it came to passe that euen the Euangelistes and other ecclesiasticall vvriters, liuing both at Ierusalem and Rome, in the vvritings of the olde testament rather vsed the greeke inter∣pretation, then the hebrue founteynes themselues. And it cannot be denied hovvsoeuer there may bee
defence made for that interpretation that goeth vn der the name of these 70. both for the antiquitye of it & for their vvonderfull paines, vvho labored in it, yet that it is farre more safe to haue recourse to theThe best way euermore to goe to the fountaines. founteines themselues, vvho euer denied but suche obstinate enimies? Is it not euer safer for men to looke vvith their ovvne eyes, and to goe vvith their owne feete then vvith other mens? And if any man shall obiect that they might change many thinges by the spirite of prophesie, besides that it vvas long ago confuted by Hierom, vvho affirmed that it vvas one thing to doe the duety of an enterpreter, ano∣ther of a prophete; this also is to be considered, that vve must not be ouer bold vvith the vvord of the al∣mighty. For albeit vve may & ought to labour pre∣cisely to interpret it, yet it becōmeth no mortal mā to take vpon him, to alter, ad, or deminish any thing in that euerlasting vvord of God. And if they beare no excuse that dravvn vvith an excessiue loue of the greek that then most florished, & was most general∣ly receiued, faulted: hovve shal they be excused that thruste a Lattine translation vppon vs that hath a number of vvantes, vvhiche hauing beene often shevved them, yet they vvould neuer vouchsafe to amend any, and is full of imperfections, yea contra∣ry to their ovvneDecret. Ca∣no 1. . 9. Canons, vvhich shevv vs that the credite of the ancient bookes is to bee examined from the Hebrue volumes, and the nevve from the Greeke. And thereforePagninus in  gramat. Hebr. Pagnine a learned Hebritian vvisheth that they could shevve him Hieroms tran∣slation. For that saith hee, vvhiche is reade euerye vvhere in his name, is non of that incorrupt trāsla∣tion, & that he hath proued by many vnansvverable arguments in his Epistle to Pope Clement himself.
And therefore another graue man sayth, that it can not be proued that euer the church of God oughte to be bound to any certaine translation. But as the Lord in mercy shall encrease and continue that ne∣cessaryThe gift of toungs neces∣sary in the church. gifte of the knovvledge of tongues in his Churche, and shall giue light and vnderstanding, so vve ought euermore to repaire to the founteines, & that vve may be fit for so excellent a vvorke of the ministery of the vvorde it is a necessary laboure to learne to vnderstand it, in it ovvne language, vvhich vvhilest men haue neglected, we see hovv by the  indgement of God, they haue  into palpable darknesse. I wil omit the Psalmes as they are sung in the popish churches, & diuers other places in sun∣dry lessons moste absurd, in euery popish pie and ser uice booke of theirs yet extant. For to reckon them all, vvoulde make a iust volume, and vveary a man. Onely let this be marked, that as Hierome noteth the corruption of the Greeke interpretation of the seuenty interpretors, vvhich eyther came through ignorance, or negligence, or both, so the common translation, done by an vn knowne aucthor, drawne from them, strayeth further. The Greeke I will passe ouer, and only note some fevv places out of the lat∣tin, sufficiētly cōuincing the translatiō that is, to be none of Hieroms, because it differeth so much both from the Hebrue & the Greek, as in the 65 Psal. ver. 11. where he saith thou shalt water the riuers, in sted of the furrowes. & in 68. Psalme verse 19 day and daily, in steed of daily, and in the 87.  vers. 6. there is read, Nunquid de Syon, vvheras  is nei∣ther in the Hebrue not Greeke, and so there he saith Many were, For many vvere borne in her, and in the
88, Psalme vers. 14. Lord vvhy doest thou reiect my prayer, for my soule. The places are infinit and haue bene found fault vvith by many, and yet neuer mē∣ded by any, onely somtimes, they set the trueth in the margent, but they keep the errors stil in the text vvhich shevveth their malic, as in the article refer∣red to the seede, and vvhich is masculine, yet that. . they may mainteine their error, they keepe the ar∣ticle feminine and vvould haue it vnderstood of theLuk. 15. virgine. So for  domum shee svvepte the house, they keep euertit domum, she ouerthrevv the house, & 1. Pet. 4. 23. He cōmitted himselfe to him that iud∣geth vniustly, referring that vnto Pilate, if it haue a∣ny sence, vvhich the Apostle meaneth to god For it is contrary. He committed him selfe or his cause to, God to him that iudgeth iustly. These & a nūber of such absurdities there are, some noted also by diuers greate learned men, vvherof I make no mention, & yet forsooth they vvill haue vs onely bound to this cōmon translation and no other. VVe say notvvith∣standing, that vve are so farre from condemning the labours of those 70. interpreters, vvosocuer they vvere, that  thanke God for them: vvherein they haue done well, we praise their industrie, and so doe vve, the labours of him that did that common tran∣slation, and theirs also that since  rendred any thing either out of the Hebrue or Greeke, but ther∣vvithall vve affirme vvith Hierome, that if any que∣stion arise amongst the lattines concerning the new , or if the copies vary, vve must go to the  of the Greeke, or if any doubte occure vvith the Greekes, we must to the Hebrue, read Au∣gustines councell in his booke de doctrina Chr .
lib. 1. If this course had ben held, since God gaue en∣crease of knovveledge from the beginning, many  had bene amended, and the papists vvould not haue ben so obstinat in that vvhich they cannot de∣fend, but it is the proper nature of these  of God, still to vpholde errors, neuer to acknovvledge their  and faults,  the children of God are  ready to amend that vvhich is amisle, and to be thankfull to them that admonish them. Such enemies they are to God, that they ioyne and participate vvithal the heretikes that euer vvere in one pointe of heresie or other. They haue no∣thing sound in the vvhole masse and body of their religion. From Satan the subtil serpēt, vvhose eldestEuagr. lib. 1. hist. cap. 21. sonne this Antichriste is, he carrieth his fathers re∣semblaunce in all things. TheEpiphan. lib. 2. tom. 1. Adamites vvere beastly, againste marriage vvente naked, vsed allIohn . Campégius pighius. kindes & Sexes in common and , as vvee read the frantique Annabapristes did likevvise, and hovv  off are they from these villanies? PopeCrantius lib. 4. cap 43. Leo the 9. and Paschall, the one in the yeare 1150. the other 1100. ioyne both together in the con∣demnation of marriage.Agrip. art. 21 . . 22. & . 16. vt habetur in cap Si concubina desent excom & gratia. 34. dist . 40. Their ovvne diuines teach their priesthoode to be defiled vvith marriage, but not vvith harlots, yea, that it is  to playe the  then to marrie: It is  for a Christian man, vvho hath not a vvise, to haue a concubine, Neither doe  forsvveare incon∣tinencie but matrimonie. This is the cause that the Pope taketh a  of his Priestes for their concubines, and in  theyIoh . 34. Christia∣nos. haue any or no, they paye their  for it. And Agrippa Bale  Six∣ti  lib. de Rom. Pont. vitis. Syxtus buylded Stevves for bothe
kindes, like an horrible monster, in the yeare of Christe 1474. Herein they likewise ioyne vvithIrenaeus lib. 3. Tatianus, Montanus, and Carpocrates, for theyTom. 3. . lib. 2. Tom. 1. . confu. 162. & . mayntein the , tollerate vvhooredome by lib. 8. bulles and licences, yea in Alphonso. they preferre Sodomitrie. and filthy buggery, before that holy remedy of ma∣riage in their priestes, vvhich God hath appointed sor a remedye to all that haue not the gifte of : and therefore Paul the thirde, besides, his com∣monMant. 2. fast. reuenevve sor forty fiue thousande whoores,Sipudor in vil ,  pati .  paying forty thousand duckets in Rome, he had also as some report; forty thousande ruffians iam tota  nar.  de Clamangis de corrupto ec∣claesiae statu Constitut. O∣thonis. de con cubinis cleri∣corum remo∣uendis. Bucer. kept vppon their charges at an houres vvarning, to do him any kinde of seruice. For euery one of these harlots had a champion to keepe her house, & to be her speciall desendant, vvhatsoeuer other incōmers there vvere besides. And though Parsons, Nichols discouerer defends both the stevvs and the stipends arising to his vnholy holinesse for them, vnder the name of a punishmente, yet vvho seeth not that it is tollerated vpon this condition, and matrimonie cannot be tollerated in priestes, vppon any condi∣tion.Ioh. Filius. vegerius. Ochi nus. , Anselmus. Mark. 10. 4. The  taught the putting awaye of mens vviues for any cause, and so in a manner doe they. For the pope will dispence vvith any,Error, condi∣tio, votum, co gnatio, crimē: cultus, , vis, or∣do, ligamen, honestas: si sit affinis, si forte coire nequibit andDriander. there are tvvelue  alleadged, such as the scrip∣ture  aproued off, why mē may put away their wiues. The  vvoulde haue the vse of o∣the mens wiues, adultery and sornication to bee an indifferent thing, and soIoh de Tur. Crem Laurent. will they, For they teache that simple fornication is no sinne, and though M.  slaunder Luther for pleading the  lib. 1. cap 38  de Sanc. Vict. par. 2. Distinct. 34.  qui.  cap 17. . de .
of marriage, as much as of eating and drinking, yet they say in deed; it is lawful to haue a woman once in a moneth, Thomas A∣quinas. sent. lib. 3.ad de  renes, to purge the reynes. I would haue seene lusty, Campion to haue beene as diligent in  the manifest abhominati∣ons of their  and Canonistes, as hee is to corrupt Luthers sayings, and to dub that whiche before vvas dispr oued, and neither coldly nor fear∣fully defended. But they and their complices haue  vvhole bookesIason pra∣tensis. printed 1549 by Petrus A∣retinus at ve∣nice, vpon vvhich booke  there haue bene written com∣mentaries and many filthie pictures prin∣ted there. de ratione  liberos: de  concubandi, and Ioannes a Casa an Arch∣bishoppe, hath vvritten a booke in the prayse of filthy Sodomitrie, calling it a diuiue vvoorke. Hor∣rible vvere it to read the bookes of these lecherous Locustes, to see vvhat questions andSumma An∣gelica de ca∣sibus consci∣entiae. cases of plexitie they put and take vppon them to handle concerning these things, were it not the iust iudge∣ment of God, that they should bevvray their filthy heartes, and leaue suche dung behinde them to in∣fect the vvorlde, which is to bee cast in their ovvne faces to choake them, seeing vvithout shame they vvill dare to open their mouthes against the euer∣lasting trueth of God. It vvere an infinite vvoorke to reckon vp all their heresies, but this is certaineLut. Cortez in lib. 3. sent dist. 3. Thomae . that the vvhole lumpe of popery is compact of he∣resy. They are Iudasses vvith Iudas, vvhome they vvorship for betraying Christ. They are Ievvs vvith the Ievves, vvhome they iustifie for killing Christe, and they plead that they had sinned deadly, if they had not done it. They vvorship the  vppon vvhich  died, the nayles, thornes,  and instruments vvhere vvith he vvas executed, of which they make as sundry Idols, as they haue increased the number of such  reliques in sundrye
countries. And to the crosse they haue dcdicated a day,  it holy roode day, vvhich they vvorship , the  worship which belongeth to . VVith the  they agree almost in all things in  separation, apparell, pride, &  vvishings, obseruations, & ceremonies, doing  things like , to be seene of men, &  for  then to be  & iustifi∣ed. of . VVith the Saduces some of them haue  the  of the soule and the life to come,  did hist. . c. Iohn the 23. and Pope Leo the tenth, and as they saied, that it vvas in our vvill to doe good . so do they , that a man and . needeth not the grace of God to be good. The. Essees, the , , Melitans, Donatists, ,  and Iusticiaries, vvould be saued. . 2.  de . by their ovvne workes, and so vvill they. Simon Ma∣gus as they them selues take him, vvas one of their first founders, for besides that he vvas a sorcerer, hee vvould haue bought the giftes of the holy ghost, and soMant. lib cal Read Platina & your ovvne . would they of whomsoeuer they lerned it. For as Irenaeus lib. . Syluester the second, Ioh. the 19 Ioh the 20.  the 4.  the 8. Ioh. 21. . 9.  the 3.. lib. 6. . . . Gregory the 6. &  the 7. were sorcerers & cō. multis  cis. . so they make no conscience to buy and sell their orders, and  all their places by monyf . from the  to the lowest hedge prieste. VVith  they  a new , and de turre  as  the  and Tatians ho'd that Christ vvas  the virgin Mary: So they hold that all  tooke flesh of the virgine Mary, and came and  Hel. VVith. .  they  vvater, waxe, Palmes, bread, wine, and
many other things, as may appear by their own Pō∣tificall, with the Gnosticks they mainteineCliutoueus de venerat. images, with Montanus they comād superstious fastings, &Gaspar Rutlā∣dus. forbid meates that God hath cōmaunded to be re∣ceiued with thanksgiuing, with Cerinthus they cor∣ruptSaunders de Typ. ador. imag. 1. Tim. 4. the scriptures, with Marciō & apelles they vrge vncōmāded ceremonies, with the Ande ans, & An∣thropomorphits, they make God like an old man, & with the gentiles they make images of al sorts, of foursooted beasts & creping wormes, with Dona∣tists, thei tie the vniuersal church not to a part of the world, as they did to afftick, but to a lesse place, euen to a citye, & both with thē, with the Anabaptists & Pelagians, they maintein free wil. They offer to the virgin Mary & cal her the Queene of heauen, as did the Colliridians, with the Cataphrigians and others who held that Christ ascended without a body, theyThe heresies are knovven & vvhen they shevv a diffe∣rence, they shall receiue an ansvvere. hold that, that body is stil in their rouud cake, and in infinite places at once. And as Seuerus sayd that a vvoman vvas the Diuels vvorkmanship, and man also from the nauill dovvnward. So Pope Innocent the 8. auouched that they that vvere married coulde not please God, aleadging that place Qui in c  Deo placere non possunt. VVith Manes they make them selues Christe and aboue him. VVith the Catharists they boast of a perfection in this life, & of such wor∣thincsse as deserueth heauen both for them selues and others, agreeing vvith Henrye Nicholas that Arch-heritique, that monstrous head of the frantike Familie of Loue, who peruerteth all the scriptures, and glorieth of an essentiall righteousnes. VVith theBullinger ad∣uersus . Anabaptistes, they deny maiestrates, by cutting thē of from the principall part of their office, & gouern∣ment
in their ovvn , & countries, making thē hogges & swine in cōparison of their Pope, and his annointed ones, to whom no knowledg of god, nor duety in aduancing Christian religion doth belong. Such enemies they are to God, as directly set themselues against all the commandements of God not only breaking them, as all other men do, when they say notwithstanding they can fulfill them (as o∣ther  haue done) but in the vvhole course of their doctrine quite thvvart and ourthrovv them. InThey wor∣ship many gods. steed of one God the soueraine & only Lord, vvho is onely to be worshipped, called vpon, trusted in & praised for al his benefits, they set vp a numberExod. 3. 14. & 20. of gods exceeding the  gentiles, robbing God of his glorye, Euery disease must haue a seueralDeut. 4. 35. & 6. 4. God both in men & in beasts, & must be called vpō with a paternoster for the cure therof, beside the abo minableDurand. In∣nocent de of∣ficiis . , that was made a salue for all soares, that being first had, must prosper al the seers, helpe hūters, purge pigges and preserue hogs, cause rain &Guydon de monte Roch. faire vvether, deliuer out of purgatory & direct gene rall coūcels. VVhat was it the masse coulde not doe. And yet least there should be lacke for any thing, not so much as the toothake, but it had a saint Apo∣linariThis is mani∣festly to bee seene through out all their bookes. & Valentin was for louers, S. Loe for smithes: Chrispiā & Martin, sor shomakers, Nicholas & Cle∣tus for clearks, George for warriers & for England, Andrew for Scotland, Denis sor Frāce. Iames or IacSaints offices many, all rob∣bing God of his glory. ques, for Spain, & Patrike for Ireland. There was no town, , priuate house or country, but they had a sundry saint patrō or God, vpō whō they chiefly de∣pēded.Read the Be∣hiue. foi. 252. 253. 254. Euery church and church stepeple must beare the name of one S. or other, or of al Saints that they
might match the old idolaters, who had theirPaulus Diac. Lib. Ceremo, niarum. Pan∣theō at Rome, & vvhich was more grosse, their stin∣king reliques must be sought to, not so much as Hu∣berts key, but must haue the vertue to heal the bitingLegenda aurea Rom Breuiar. of a mad dog, & vpō relique sunday the Parsōs brich must be hanged out at the top of the steeple. ThesePontifical. detestable idolatries buried in the darke, & scatrered amongst al christians by the light of the gospel, thisHoc est viris auibus quod noctua. &c. horsce owl that seemeth to the birds another won der, & certein other impudent Iesuites from Rome, that they may intangle many in the lime tvvigges,Eglog. 9. and bring them to the spitte of vtter destruction, labour to reuiue, & bring againe from hell, amongst vs.  it can not be, but portende some notable mischiefe, that this Parsons Owle, or ratherAlexander ab Alexandro Ob bubonem aut  Cellum Iouis aut Ca∣pitolium in∣gressum Sul∣phuris & quae lustratione vr bem & Capi∣tolium expia∣runt. vvolfe should thus  into Iupiters Cell, and into our highest Capitolium to schriche and howle so ylfa∣uouredly in the eares of our Prince for the maynte∣nance of cursed Idolatrie against the trueth of God. But I trust, though vve haue not that olde sacrifice of the Romanes, neyther vse brimstone or holy∣water from vvhom those Popish Apes learned such toyes, to purge our cities and temple, yet vve shall cleanse it by a better purgation. ThonghImages for∣bidden. God haue forbidden Images to be set in the temple, that Idolatrie might be auoyded that they might not be as snares to corrupt men, vvhoExod. 20. Deut. 4. 12. are prone and apt vnto it, as beeing too vile and in∣sufficientEsai. 41. to set him out by: vvhoe is a spirite, al∣mightie,Io. 5. 21. incomprehensible, full of all maiestie and glory: yea, though Christ be God and man, and must haue a spirituall vvorship, so that no Image can set him out and beare his resemblaunce, yet ra∣ther
then they vvil not haue *God the father like anAbac. 2. 18. &c Iames praied to  staffe, & there∣fore we must pray to Ima∣ges. old man, decaying in nature with a vvhite bearde, and a balde head, and haue a Roode of sixe foote long in euery churche, they vvill quite leaue oute this Epist. Adrian Act. 2.second commaundemente, and because theyRead the trim arguments in that 2. Nicen Councel, and you shall see good stuffe. vvould not be taken vvith the manner, all the world knowing that there be ten commandementes, they are fayne to vse this bad shift, to chop and slice the last into tvvo, God hauing made it but one, yea hovvsoeuer the heauen The name of God holy.of heauens cannot contein him, neither dwelleth hee in temples made vvith handes, yet these enemies of his, vvil bring him intoHorrible blas∣phem ie. the compasse of the earthe, they vvill dreame of aSee Vauses Catechisme & others that commonly leaue it out, One printed at  by the com∣mandement of the King of Spaine. breaden God, vvherein vvhen wormes breede, they will cruelly burne him vvith fire: in despite of God  vvil worship these images, vvith the same wor∣ship that belongeth to the holy trinity, whome they feigne to speak, to sweate, and to do great . The name of God holy. Though the name of God be precious, and to be honoured of al his children, yet these enemies vvill svveare in vaine by him, and because all their reli∣gion is carnal, & they imagine of God, as they paintTho. Aquin∣super mandat. him, & set him out in all respects like a man, so they prophane his name in all their idolatrous vvorship,Esai. 66. 1.Act. 7. 19. they svveare also horribly, by soule, bodye, bloude, heart, in their common talke. For from them not only sprang the dishonour of his name by their ido∣latries,George VVi∣cellus in his retection swe reth horribly. Masses, Dirges, Trentals, vvyll vvoorshippes, deuised religion, charmings,  of creatures, magical abusing the scriptures, but also that horribleProphaning and svvearing comon vvith  papists. svvearing by al the partes of a body, as if he vvere a man, vvhich is vsed of villaines and Ruffianes vvho are vvont to leaue no part of a body . And
vvhen they haue done vvith him, then they runneEsay. 18. 19. Ier. 12. 16. to their masse, other idolles and creatures, bothe ofSoph. 15.  ovvne making, & otherwise flatly *against theDeut. 6. 13. & 10. 20. scriptures. This is common I say amongst papistes. not onely in their accustomed speeches, but in their Examples of periurie in pa∣pistes, reade Ma Par. of the  of Ro mulus in the besieging of Auinion a Le∣gate of the popes in the yeere 1222. solemne assemblies and places  iudgement, and vvhere they should shevv greatest fayth and trueth: vvhich are the very seede of fearfull periuries. And in al these cases their consciences  vvithout all touch, because they make account of some three halpeny satisfaction, vvhiche they may obtrude to God, and he shall not refuse it, as they say, for a iust recompence. If they vvill charge vs vvith the like,Also before that of the breache of the othe of the cleargie to∣vvard  the first, vvhen they disposses∣sed his heire, and crovvned king Stephen. And in the  of Step. they cannot, and their owne mouths shall vvitnesse for vs, because, they make it a mark of an heretique as they account vs, if he svveare not . As for the The Saboth to be religious ly kept., they neither knovv vvhat it is, nor hovv to keep it by any vertuous or godly ex∣ercises, seeing they haue none amongst them. And therfore al the abuses that haue pestred the  this long time, haue sprong from their idolatries. Besides: they defiled it vvith abhominable stage∣plaies and enterludes, vvith bayting and tearing, ofGardiner, Bo∣ner, & the rest that vvere svvorn against the Popes su∣premacy, and yet after∣vvards reuol∣ted. Buls, Bears, & other beasts, with reuelling & rouing like mad dogges. They cared not vvhat deuise took place, vvhat pastime vvere vsed, though therein the diuell himselfe vvere serued, so they might keep the people quiet and occupied in ignoraunce, holding them from the light of Gods vvord: And therefore their  vpon these holiest dayes, vvere filthy vvhoredome, drunkennesse, misrule and dissolute dealing. Nothing vvas vnlavvfull if once they heard their abhominable masse, vvherein their opinion in
that point vvas not so much to be blamed. For ha∣uing committed the most horrible sacriledge in the worlde, why shoulde they make bones at any other sinne whatsoeuer? True it is, that they blaspemouslyThe Saboth day most vvic kedly propha∣ned by papists both in their meetings, by idolatries, and abrode, by li∣centious and  e∣normities. charge the gospel with these abuses and corruptions but how vniustly, all the vvorld may iudge, and their own consciences shal conuince them, sith they  hatched vnder their ovvne vvinges, and the Gospell doth from time to time disproue them, reform them and hath gained against them. And euen as the , and ill fauoured face of an Ovvle doth bevvray his kinde, and al the birds of the field knovv him, assoone as they see him, follovv him and vvon∣der at him: So these foule abuses bevvray by their fe∣ther, that  & idolatry hatched them first forth into the vvorld, vvhich banished the doctrin of faith and repentance, from amongst the Sonnes of men, and lulled them  in deepe security, so as they vvere carelesse hovv they liued: seeing also that  their death, they might buye out their sinnes for so small a value.  they deny these thinges, a day vvill come vvhē the *iudgement of God, vvhichRom. 2. 2. is according to trueth shal conuince them of them, and they shall feele the vveight of them. As for the second table, they vvho are found suchThe seconde Table. rebelles to God, hovve can they yeelde the duties that are due to men? As therefore they  God, so they yeeld no honour to those chief instru∣ments & preseruers of their life. Their princes, and Magistrats, vvhom God hath  in the highest place that vnder the shadovv of their vvings, they mighte enioy their vviues, children, goods and lands, might haue peace: and be shadovved from  and op∣pressors,
from forren povver and vsurpers; they ne∣uer regarded. Alvvayes they bedavvbed themExod. 20. vvith termes of reproch: And though God, to putDan. 7. 6. both them in minde of theit dueties, and vs of thatDeut. 17. reuerence vve should yeld him, vouchsafeth to com∣municatePsalm. 51. 6. his own names vvith them, and *they areProu. 16.. 12. 10. called Gods, fathers, his ministers & substitutes, yetRom. 13. 1. they called them the seculer povver; layety none of1. Pet. 2. 3. 17. the cleargie; vvhich terme  they vnderstand, char∣geth maiestrats to be none of the Lords inheritanceThey called them the lay and seculer , svvine &c. As for spirituall fathers and pastours, that brake the bread of life sincerely and truely vnto them; they e∣uermore revvarded them vvith fire and svvorde, for their labors. Their natural parents they brake from,1. . 5. 3. Tit. 3. not to follovv the truth; but to be votaries & folow¦ers  sectmasters, such as Benedict, Bernard, Bruno, Augustine, Albert, Frauncis, Dominicke, and such like, and if they married; they bestovved them∣selues most commonly as pleased themselues. And novv, so nevvfangled they are, &  in their pro∣fessions; of Iesus they vvil be called , or of the  Iesus; as though the aunciente name of christians vvere not holy ynough to serue their turn vvherin they iumpe vvith such as vvill he of the Fa∣mily of Loue;  to bee of the housholde of , as to  a name for their  estate. And though that  vnlavvfull Chapiter of Trent . . an. 1215.  this nevve deuised order, yer that it mayConcil. Nicen. 1539.  an euident argument of the constancie of their Councelles, it is against their ovvne ConstitutionsIn capite . that ordered long before their ,  there. de re∣ligiosis domi∣bus.  be no more such  they found them∣selues pestred with For they vvere vveary of the in∣finite
svvarm they had already, and therefore one of their ownPetrus Alia∣censis tract. 4. de reforman∣da ecclesia. Cardinalles 24. yeares before this blas∣phemous sect  out of the bottomlesse pit, ha∣uing a charge committed vnto him, to giue notice of things that vvere to bee reformed, sayth playnly, that if suche beggerly orders vvere suffered to en∣crease as they began, it vvould ouerthrowe all. And in this I hope he shall prooue a true Prophet, And the name of Iesus, beeing of his office, this newe broode, by taking it vpon them, vvhat doe they else but auovv themselues members of Antichrist Of the price of mans bloud, which ought to bee precisely kepte, and preserued, they haue no regard. They poure it out as vvater, & the *earth crieth forExod. 20. vengeance, for that shee hath drunke vp from theirGen. 4. hands, such aboundāce in al places, filling the worldDeut. 5. ful of vvidows, and pore Orphans, They are so farreLeuitic. 29. off: from preseruing life vppon which God the au∣thorMat. 5. of life, hath giuen such special charge, that theyIoh. 8. vvill picke occasions and take the least, forcibly to bereue men of them. And this they vvill doe, not to execute iustice, but for hatred of righteousnesse, and for professing the trueth, without al coulor of iustice deuising al kind of torments, least they should die to easily, worse thē euer did Nero, Dionisius, Dioclesiā or the rest of such like tyrants. They cōplayn of hard dealing, but he that shal enter into their tragical sto∣ries & see their practises in al countries, their proce∣dings and executions, shall see plainly, vvhose chil∣dren they are, by their bloudy murthers, and mer∣cilesse slaughters. But as this is a note that  and his members, whose kingdom stands by bloud,Psalm. 10. 7. shal haue * feete  to shed bloude, so is it a noteRom. 3. 15.
of Christ and his kingdome, to be pursued of these, to be killed and put to death,  vve lye beforeEsay. 53. them as sheepe, not before the sherers, but as beforeMatth. 5. butchers, and yet open not our mouths and are ledIohn. 1. to the slaughter, not for our euil and vnrighteousnes but because vve reproue them of sinne, holde oute the glory of our Christ, and renounce their false do∣ctrine. VVho knoweth not that they must needes confesse, that they are vnable to keep this sixt com∣maundement, if they did vnderstande that vvhiche Christ deliuereth Math. 5. thatAnger, Cho∣lerike passions Taunts. collorique passions and reprochful taunts, vndeseruedly bestowed, were branches of murther, but  Pharasaicall & loose interpretations of the cōmandments of God, both deceiued themselues, and infected the vvorld vvith this contagion, that man being able to fulfill the wil of god needeth not much to be beholding to Christ but of this I haue said afore. As for adultery, vvhere reigned it more, then a∣mongst those contemners of mariage,Adulterie raigneth in the Popes kingdome. See Bale de pontif Rom. in the preface. where were the heads of 6000. children and their bones founde in a ponde, and vnderIouianus pon tanus de im∣manitate ca. 6 Epist. Hulde∣rich ad Nicho. primum. 265. Reade that vile epistle of Clem. . 4. Tom. 1. Conc. and the dist. cap. . causa 12. q. 1. alters, in caues and drye trenches, in their abhominable houses, but amongst them VVere not al their Cloisters, Abbeys, and Nunneries, very stewes and brothelhouses? Despi∣sing Gods ordinance it vvas his iust iudgement to giue them vp as he did the Genriles, not onelye to spiritual vvhoredom, but to bodily, that they should followe the lustes of their ovvne heartes, and defile themselues one vvith another through most beastly filthines, that their Colledges, Abbeys, Nunneries, and religious houses, should be infected  with vnnaturall and vntimely murthers, or vvith liuing
bastards and dead bones, or els that they should be filthy Gomorians and sodomites, that *leauing theRom. 1. naturall vse they should commit vnspeakable vvic∣kednes,The vices in religious hou∣ses. vvhich contrary to this commaundement they nonrished vvith all kinde of pleasant delightes, idlenes, pampering of the flesh in their greatest and most solemne fastes, they made their choysest feasts, with all kind of dainties & finest , drinking al kind of sweet wines, that they might fully feed vpon the pride & lust of the eye, thisEpist. Belgar. ad Nico. . Auent. lib. 4. is so cōmō in Rome as I haue partly sayde before, and smelleth so strong throughout all Christendome, that it hath turnedVVo bee to thē by whom offences come Mat. 18. many, that are euen but naturall men, who other∣wise coulde haue fauoured their religion, from them: and beeinge wonne by the Gospell, pre∣sentlyAugust. contra  lib. 5. c. 3 loue the trueth, and a great number of others stumbling thereat, haue falne to irreligion and flat Atheisme. Herein also they shewe themselues most vnskilfull of that sinceritie Christ speaketh of, when hee forbiddeth the raunging of the eye, when by no meanes they vvill acknowledge concupis∣cence to be sinne, and in respecte of their false doc∣trineM . Fomes peccati non peccatu. are faine to denie the definition of sinne, to vvit, that sinne is the transgression of the lavve ofAll the patri∣mony that the Pope posses∣seth, he hath vvrung and stolne from Emperours & princes. The dukedome of Sicile, & many , Apuleia, &c. God, yet because it is reproued by Christ himselfe, they are faine to yeeld a little, that it is the  of sinne, and not sinne it selfe. As for temporall things, though they be of leaste accounte, yet they steale them both from Princes, and all sortes of people. Neyther vvill their pre∣tenced title of right helpe, though it be confirmed by olde and vvorme  prescription, to ouer∣vvay the commaundement of GOD, vvho
not haue one man to encroch vppon another mans possession, and yet they haueRead Abbas vip sub. 198. made a spoile of all callings, getting into their handes the  of the whole worlde. That they rob fatherlesse chil∣drenDe cons Dist. 5. cap. Disci∣pulos. and vvidowes, vnder the  of long pra∣yer, by their  and trentals, and suche paltrye robbing deuises, yea that they fa∣mis excusat. a . maintein  com∣mitted in time of , it is more then apparant ForLving &  vvitnes  condem∣ned. bearing false witnesse the false papist vvill not sticke to belye the moste blamelesse ChristiansExod 20. 23. in the vvorlde, and to charge them, though with noDeut. 5. colour, vvith moste palpable vntruthes, eyther to. 19. bring the trueth into hatred, or them to the fire.1. Reg 21. They will make no conscience falsly to accufe theMat. 7.Luk. 6. notablest men, & most singuler instrumēts that euerIoh. 7. haue bene in the church of God, the dust of vvhose1. Cor. 4. shoes they are not vvorthy to licke vp. And hereinIam. 4.. 25. they shevve themselues like their father the ,Apoc, 12 10. vvho vvas a lier from the beginning, an accuser of the brethren, malicious and ful of poyson. And most  amongst the rest, hath that notable Apostata vvas  at Geneua. and troubled the Church, bar∣king against the most com∣fortable doc∣trine of Gods , novv he is become a . See , and  al∣so that make mention of . Hieronim Bolsek expressed the image of his father, in that filthy & slanderous booke that he hath writ∣ten of the life of that excellent man of God Iohn Caluin, whom without all shame being layde vp  peace, a great vvhile since, and buried vvith Ho∣nour, he taketh out of his graue, and gnavveth vpon his  carkase and bones, more barbarously then any tygre or carian Crovve, the enuye of vvhose honour and  of Gods , thoughe it haue  his serpentine tongue, and , eythere vppon  or slaunderous re∣portes, yet his  is  confirmed, by so
many rare monuments of learned works, and graue testimonies of those that lamente his lacke in the Church of God, that though he swelt his heart, and burst for anger, he shall neuer bee able amongest the godly to empaire his credite, the value of the paring of a nayle or one haire, much lesse hurt the trueth of God, which dependeth vppon no mans person, but haue credite and authority from God the only au∣thorThe ttueth of God depen∣deth vpon no mans person, neither do vve measure it by mens liues, but rather their liues by it. thereof. Let the vvhole armie of these slaunde∣rers, that ly by tradition one from the credite of a∣nother, doe vvhat they can, the trueth shall stande inuiolable. Howsoeuer men haue their faultes, vvho as they are men haue the infirmities of men, and must plead mercie before that sincere seate, yet this false vvitnesse bearing, reacheth not to men, but to the dishonour of God him selfe, and thetefore that railing Staphilus, Lindane, VVicellus, Vaqueri∣us, Cocleus, Frarin, and others, that belche out their malice againste Luther, Beza, and suche like instru∣mentes of God, doe but barke in vaine, like dogges against the Moone, that is farre from them & with∣out their reach. Their lies are so notorious, as that of Luthers and Caluines death, that vvhole coun∣tries can and are ready to testifie the contrary. But admit that some of these things vvere to be credi∣ted, reported by indifferent men: yet considering these vvretches to be shameles and  ene∣mies, hovv vnequall a thing vvere it to accept them for vvitnesses, beeing of a false and contrarye Reli∣gion, beeing euen  vvith malice and  against them, vvhose learning and rare  they coulde neuer attaine to: and hauing no con∣science in greater matters, vvil make no conscience
to belye them, being aduersaries to their falsehoode and superstition, vvhom they labour to bring into hatred, that they may vvinne some credite to them selues, being in deede but monsters in the shape of men, such lyers and slaunderers, backbyters and rai∣lers, as are more fitte, I am sory to speake it, to  agaynst VVispes, and to be set vppon Cuc∣kingstooles vvith scoldes, then to bee admitted to giue euidence agaynst such godly, graue, and learned fathers. But this hath alvvaies beene the propertye of the kingdome of darknesse, to slander the trueth, and the true professors therof. They haue not* spa∣redMat. 10. 34. the Prophets, Christ himselfe, nor his Apostles,Luk. 6, 40. and therefore vvee must not looke that they vvillIoh. 13. 16. & 15. 20. spare vs. Trueth vvas alvvaies hated of lyers, andIohn 7. 7. none finde greater friendship in the vvorld then the children thereof. He can say little, that being cor∣rupt of nature, can not speake yll: but he that spea∣keth the trueth, is of God. This hath hene the prac∣tise of popish heretikes, vvhen they find themselues too vveake to mainteine their wilfulnes, then they fall to playne rayling and lying. Then haue at Beza, at Caluin, at Luther the dutch Beare, vvhose Mo∣therVVe stand not vpon miracles, but such as vvere vvroght by Christ and his Apostles. vvas a vvhore and slept by the Diuell. Then Caluine to get credite to his doctrine, must be made a miracle worker (wil he nil he:) though the myracle in deede (if any such were) beThe practise of popish ped∣ling preachers and pelting writers. set out to haue bene attempted by one of their ovvne Iesuites, vvhoThis vvas printed in the Dutch tongue and re ported to haue bene done by a Ie∣suite. in steede of raysinge a man from deathe, killed him, and vvas fayne to entreate the VVoman to be contented, and so persvvade the people, be∣cause he could not effect it, that it vvas long of their vnbeliefe. This goodly tale is set out by Surius, and
dubbed since forsooth by that Apostata Bolsecke.Surius . breue. in  gest. But the children of God, they deale by trueth, they in vita Ioa. . take no aduantage of any enuious accusation, nor stand vpon vain coniectures, and ghesses, as they are vvōt to do: vvhat papist hath  taught, in expoun ding this ninth commandement to refrain frō vnsea sonable and vncharitable report of their neighbors faults,  or credite? and yet the truth is, and knovvn to them that scan this commaundement , that the same God which forbiddeth vs to de∣fame our brother; doth therwithal enioyne vs to be as carefull ouer his credite, as ouer our own, and not to speake of our neighbours faultes, but to the ende that they maye bee amended, and other warned to take heed of the like, vvhich is wel known to be only practised amongst the professours of the Gospell, and not amongst them. Lastly concerning coueting our neighbors house, , , maide, Oxe, Asse, or any other thing, they thinke this lust (as before I haue partly menti∣oned) to be so farre from sinne, that they vvill not onely possesse whatsoeuer a Christian man hath, but they vvill neuer be satisfied, till they haue his life al∣so,  his religion please them not. As for concupi∣scence it selfe, flying thoughts and desires, vvhiche the * lavve condemneth, they make no accounte of them, though by them it bee manifeste, that vveeGen. 6. are in that respecte not fully replenished vvith theExod. 20.Deut. . spirite of GOD, nor free from that corruption,. 6. vvhiche vvee oughte dayly by nevvnesse of life to1. . 10. grow vnto.Heb. 13. Such enemies to God are these papists, that theyRom. 7. subuert al religion, teaching for doctrin the vnsauo∣ryIam. 1.
* precepts & traditions of men, they mingle theirMat. 15.Iere. 2. lead vvith the Lords gold, and * fill his haruest full ofIere. 3. darnel They breake, as you haue heard, al the com∣mandements of God, to maintein their own waies, and stop from vs the springes of the vvater of life, that vve might drink of their puddles. For their own dreams they make vs forget the name of our God, and leade vs from that simplicitye that is in Christ Iesus, They are vnthankfull vvretches for al Gods benefits, and toFor this vvas obiected a∣gainst the vvaldenses in quodam libr. inquisitorio. say grace vvith them, vnlesse it bee after some mumbling sorte in an vnknovven tong, eyther before meate or after, is a note of a ranke Heretique. At their tables they neyther loue to talke, nor to heare any thing of God, of his word, religion orReinerius.Panoplia. any godlines, but al their delighte is in idle talke, ie∣sting,Lyndani. scoffing, taunting, mocking and nipping atThis is their common pra∣ctise. them that be absent, or beeing present bee better disposed then themselues. They wil talke also fil∣thilyEphes. 5. and vnshamefastlye, to recreate both them selues, and suche fleshly familiars as themselues be. They naturally hate the word of God, and sit vpon thornes, vvhere the exercises of it are vsed. And if they lay iust accusations and execute iudgementes vppon  offences, yet they doe it not in loue, but deuise things that were neuer hearde, nor thought of. If they be of Parsons Howlets hypo∣crites, and come of purpose to church to deceiue theThough this be too com∣mon a thing among all, yet it specially be∣longeth to the papists. prince, and delude the , and most of all them∣selues, they are there vvithout all reuerence, either nodding and sleeping in the time of the exercise, or else vvalking and iangling, or carried avvay with idle and vnprofitable imaginations, or else occupied
in some popish paltry booke either printed at home or brought from beyonde the seas, or else they are vvatching for some aduantage, agaynst the painfull and godly minister, euermore lying in waite, to stir vp strife, and to disquiet the Church. They are neuer merry, when there is any communication of good∣nesse, then you trouble them, they come to bee merrye, they svveate for anger, vvhen they cannot supresse it. Of diuelish malice and sp ite they hate God, detest their neighbours, and their owne soules  al god ines and honestie, to * whom sto∣lenPro. 9. 17. vvaters are sweete, and a whore is more amiable then a spoused wife. Pighius is commended in an o∣rationStaphi. against . for it, & one Girādus against Bucer, a Colen diuine, sayth, it is better for a priest to haue an hun∣dred vvhoores then one wyfe. Aquinas sayth, that marriage is to be auoyded of them that tend to per fection: Durand sayth it is not expedient. Lighttly they vvil neuer marry, they vvill oftentimes be vvell whitled, & then they can raile roundly, then we are heretiks, Puritanes, & what not? & a golden day will once come, vvhen we shall burne sor it, or else they vvil not bestovve so much cost on vs, a thrust vvith a svvord, a knock vvith a halbert, a pot with a gun or a halfepeny halter shal serue for al. They vvil vvhis∣per from place to place, and from one to another and vppon their ale-bench, vvhat dayes are these, vvhat vvickednesse is in the world,All these goodly tales run amongst them from one to ano∣ther. See the liues of these Gospellers, vvas there euer such couetousnes, novv al for their vvomen, vvhores and bastardes. O the golden vvorld is gone, vvhen vve had 24 egges for a peny, vvhen vvee mighte goe to this religious house and that, and haue good chere our bellies ful,
and no man can saye, blacke is your eye, or from vvhence come you. They say the Masse is naught,The com∣mon speech of . but I can not tell, then vve had a mery vvorld, and all things plentie, O since I can remember, vvhat myrth vvas there in all townes, in our villages and vvakes, vvhat good felowship: vvhen no mans wife vvas in , when few mens daughters were ma∣ryed vyrgins: and as for mens seruaunts, they had more myrth then in a day, then they haue nowe in a hundreth. Then they sang and sponne, they medled vvith their , and  by the fayth of others: Nowe they are so bookishe, become so vvise and learned, that they vvil meddle vvith the scriptures. It was neuer merry vvorld since there vvas so much talke of , since euery cobler and Tin∣ker  vvith it, and a byble must stande in euery vvindovv. VVel, the Queene cannot liue alvvaies, and when our day commeth, vve vvill bee euen vvith them, they shall stand at our receite and , and then our argumentes shall make them to stovvpe, or else  vs a  payre of heeles: VVhen they  of any ouerthrovv, mur∣ther, or cruelty against the professorus of the Gos∣pell, or that some noble captaine that goeth vvith them is , then they banquet one another, they  and laugh together, and looke as bigge vpon vs as if  day vvere  ady come, & they vvere al∣ready become Lords ouer vs. But he  sitteth in the  shall  to , for be seeth that their Psalm. 37. . The  that they haue whetted and drawne a∣gainst vs, shall enter into their owne , & their bowes shal be broken. The Lorde  the armes of these vvicked ones, and  vp vvith his ovvne hande against them. For
they are those false vvoorshippers vvho vvorshippe (as Ioh. 4. Christe sayde to the VVoman of Samaria) they wot not what Deceitfull Mat. 24. prophets they are, that tel vs here is Christe, there is Christe. The cake ouer the altar, the roode in the roode , the image vpon the crosse, and such like stuffe, but vve are cō∣maunded, not to  them. They are such (be∣sides that generall condemnation, that is in Adam vpon al flesh) vpon vvhom the wrath of God is spe∣cially declared frō heauen, for their vngodlines and vnrighteousnes, for they suppresse the truth, & hold it vnrighteously by an vniust possession. They * are. . vvithout excuse, bicause when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, but became vayn in their reasonings, hauing their foolish harts blinded, thin∣king them selues to be vvise & learned, they became fooles, & turned the glory of the  God into the framed image of a mortal mā, of birds,  footed beasts & creping vvormes For they worship a man for S. Mathew, a byrd for S. Ioh. a calfe for S. Luke, and a Lyon for S. Mark. This is the cause (as I haue said before) that they are giuen vp to the lusts of their owne hearts (as the Gentiles were;) that they should from spirituall vvhoredome fall to carnall, & cōmit vnspeakable euils, defiling their owne bodies amongst thēselues. For they haue  the  of God into a lye, and therefore it is his righteous iudgment, that they should be giuen vp to beleeue & delite in lyes, that passing ouer the Creator, who is blessed for euer, they shoulde vvorship creatures. All the vices vvhere vvith the Apostle chargeth the Gentiles in the first to the Romanes, and the roote vvherof he proueth to be in all flesh, are apparantly
in them, not only by nature, but in a full practise & execution. For they are vvholy giuen vp to follovv them with a full foote. They are ful of * vnrigteous∣nes,Rom. 1. . fornication, wickednes, couetousnes, lasciuious∣nes, enuy, murther, debate, deceite, euil cōditioned; they are, whisperers, backbiters, haters of god, doers of wrōg, prowde, bosters. They are false * teachers2. . 2. vvhich bring in damnable sects, denying the Lord that hath bought thē, & through vvhō the vvaye of truth is euil spoken of. Presumptuous they are and stubborne, fearing not to speake euil of thē that are in autho rity. They count it a pleasure to liue heere deliciously for a time, & to follow their own decei∣uable waies, fearing one another: amongst thēselues & backbiting the truth. Read that liuely description of al the Popish clergy, in that 2. epistle of Peter and the 2. chapter. They haue eies  of adultery, and cannot cease to sinne: they lay bayts for instable minds, hauing harts exercised to couetousnes: they are the cursed children of Cain, & haue forsaken the right way: they are gon astray, following the vvaye of Balam, the sonne of Boser, who loued the reward of iniquity. They are vvelles vvithout vvater, and cloudes carried about with a tempest, to whome the thicknes and mist of darknes is reserued for euer. Such enemies of God they are, as exalt the sonneThes. 2. of perdition aboue al that is called god, or worship∣ped for God. They allovv his dispensations againste God and his lavves, and as for his sake (such beastesSee vvhether their dayly practises proue not this to be true. they are) they set them selues againste God. So doe they not care in regarde of him, and in respecte of that idoll the masse, to betray their ovvne coun∣try, Prince, Parents, kins folkes and friends to the ve∣riest
straungers and enemies in the world, yea and to lay dovvne their ovvn liues, Let any come forth & deny this, if they can with any coulor of truth. Our country hath founde it too true, and there is none that haue had any dealing in any place of  vnder her Maiestie, but can confirme it by particu∣lars in their continuall practise, not only for casting abroad their  lil elles, but also for sending into this realme their pestiferous and trayterous sundry books, Sanders, Dor∣man, . bookes, and bulles against the Queenes maiesty, & her honourable councel, state and peace, that haue bene the very sparks and firebrands of rebellion, & vvould haue bene of further flame and greater de∣struction, had not God in his greate mercye, by the light of the gospell, taught and instructed men, how they should hold themselues in dutifull loyalty, and true obedience, Put of this a little more afterwards. Such enemies to God they are, as deuour pore wi∣dows houses vnderSundry  in anno. 1580. very trayte∣rous against the state, and  the mi nestery, scat∣tered through out  realm. colour of long praiers, & sticke not to compasse sea & land, to bring men to theireA common practise a∣mongst them, to be reuēged by Libelling. false fayth, or else to death, as Alphonsus did by his own brotherIoh. Slei. li. 17 Cris. in mart. Ioh.  * Blinde guides they are, wicked fools, tithers of mint, Anise & cumin, omit∣ting faith, iudgement & . Hipocrites they areMath. 23. 14. that make clean the outside of the cup & platter, butMar. 12. 40. within they are full of rauen and * . They are vvith the ; VVolues in sheepes clothing,Mat. 15 14. & 23. 16. 24. painted sepulchres, outwardly glorious, but within full of rotten and dead bones. They beare a shew ofLuk. 11. 24. Christianity, and yet are full of  and mur∣ther:Mat. 7. 15. Luk. 11. 39. 40. &c. they * say, if they had ben in their fathers daies: they woulde not haue slaine the  and a∣postles: and yet marke vvhat they  in all Coun∣tries
against the christians. Let Queen Maries time, the continuall murthers and  that haue  in Fraunce, Flaunders, Spayne, Scotland, Ire∣land, at home amongst our , & abroad, where∣soeuer  hath gotten in a foote, beate wit∣nesse. Are not these therefore enemies to God? Is not Antichrist the Pope, of vvhome all this hellishe rovvt hold, an enimy to God?. . 33. Cantic.  not his seat where he , the doctrine he tea heth, the maners that he , quite contrary to Christe, and playneMarcel. Palin. in Leon li. 5. marks of his Apostasie? Is not Rome (as. Petra. ep. st 20. Franciscus Petrarcha calleth it) the whore of Babylon, the mo∣ther :  and , from vvhence allHier. in Catal. script. eccles. in Ma. co. shame and  is ? Doth not Peter in the first epistle vnder the name of Babylon name. lib 3  537. Rome, by their ovvn confession, and by Hieromes ovvne interpretation, and as Campion him selfeAbb V p 198. Apo. 18. graunteth? And herefore, as Iohn * describeth it, it is that Romane vvhoore that sitteth in her Scarlet robe, full of names of blaphemy, the habitation of diuels, the holde of all soule spirites, the cage of all vncleane & hatefull birds: out of vvhose cup, al the nations in the vvorlde haue drawne the draught of the vvine of the wrath of her vvhoredome. Such enimies they are, as through the * effectual wor2.  2. 9. 10. 11. . king of  all  the word of , to whom God  sent , that they should beleeue lies, and preferre the  fables of a lying legend, before the blessed by∣ble, receiuing as a iust recompēce, the fruits of their  rebellion, to vvit, ignorance, blindnes, a levvd vnderstanding, and in the ende iust demnation. Suche enimies they are, as giue heede to spirites
* of errour, to the diuelish doctrine of such as spea1. Tim. 4. 1. 2. 3. false thinges through hipocrisie, hauing their con∣ciences branded vvith an hotte yron, are * grie∣uousAct. 20. 27. 29. vvolues, making no conscience to teare and deuour the flocke, * concealers of Gods counsayles,Luk. 11. 52. speakers of peruerse thinges, and dravving dis∣ciples after them. For they vvold haue al the vvorlde to follovv them vvithout any examination. They shut vp the kingdome of heauen, and vvill neither enter themselues, nor suffer others to enter. TheyMarcel. Pali. li. 6. de sceler. omnium ordi∣num. are Hipocrites and Gomorrians in deede, of the seede of Cain, children of the diuel, blasphemers & bloudy persecuters. They hedge in the Catholique Church, like the Donatists, into a little corner of the vvorld: They crye, theyRome a parti culer Church, no Catholike Churche, to whom the Greek church vvould not be subiect. are the catholique church, and yet vvould dravv vs to one that is more particu lar then many others of the Greek, that vvere neuer ioyned and continued vvith them. And none must be of their Catholique church, but such forsooth as subscribe to their synagogue, much like as if they should affirme, that all Christendome vvere to bee included in Kent. TheyAbsurditie of transubstanti∣ation. confounde the humanitye of Christ, making I can not tel hovv many thousand bodies,For this point read the fumbling of their ovvne scholemen. turning the Godhead into the manhood, & the manhood into the Godhead, agreeing vvith all the auncient heretiques that erred about his diuini∣ty and humanity: forAnno. 425. vvith the Futichians & Mo∣nothelits, they make him to consist of tvvo natures,Prisceanns & Cyrus the first authors Anno . but not to haue two natures, neither tvvo vvilles: or else they make him to haue a phantasticall body, asNiceph. lib. 18 cap. 45. Marcion Cerdon, and Manes did: to be, in infinit places at once, in heauen and in earth, denying the trueth of the humanity: as Valentinus, they make
him to haue a body of an ayrie, insensible, and inui∣sible substaunce, as also Apelles did: vvhereas his * ovvn vvord teacheth vs, that vve should not be∣leeueLu. 24. 39. 40. him to be present in body, except by our sen∣ses vve could perceiue a difference betvvixt him & a spirite. Such enemies they are, asPope Lucius 24. q. 1. cap. Recta. beleeue they cannot be saued, vnlesse they bee subiecte to the Pope, vnlesseCalixt. dist. 12 Non decet Ni∣chol. dist 22. omnes Greg. dist. 80. cap. 52 qui. they acknovvledge him to haue all authoritie in heauen, earth, hell, purgatorie, and vvheresoeuer. Do not they herein plainly deny God, from vvhom alone is all saluation, as did Hebion, Cerinthus, Ba∣silides, Carpocares, Photinus, Artemon, Paulus Sa∣mosetanus,Mat. 9. 3. Ennomius, AEtius, & Theodotinus, vvhē they vndoubtedly beleeue that the Pope can for∣giue sinne? A grosser heresie, then euer the * ScribesIn vita Gre. 7. Bulla Cle∣mentis. and Pharisees vvere infected vvith, vvho deeminge Christ to bee onely man, thought it extreeme blas∣phemicPanormit er∣tra  cap. fin. for him to take vpon him to forgiue sinne. They are persvvaded that the Pope by hisPope Hildeb. ex plar. Benedi∣ctionSumma Ange∣lica in dictio∣ne Papa. &c. can make thinges more holy then cuer God made them in their creation? that he can dispence vvithSigism. Nea∣po Decisiones rotae in decisi∣onum tertia. Christe, Peter, Paule, Moses, and all lavves both of God and man? VVhosoeuer kisseth his shoe, though hee vvere excommunicated, yet for so doing he hath cleane remission a poena & culpa;, bothAnt. Maia in addit. 1. Decis. rotae. from the punishmente and faulte. VVhat shall I saye they are suche enemies to God, that they be∣leeueNouas. Ekius lorm com¦munum cap. de ecclesia. 5. q 6.  in glossa. Eckius de consid. Statuta canonum. vndoubtedly, thatGlossa in . 11. cap . if a prieste or one in holy orders knovv an harlot carnally, hee sanctifieth and
blesseth her in so doing, & as Petrus Rauennus saith, Though handling & kissing be occasions of incon∣stancie and vnchastity in lay persons, yet in priestes and those that are in holy orders, it is far otherwise: a wife he must disauow & forswear, but not a whore. It is not good to touch a woman, therfore it is euil. And seeing euery priest maketh a God euery day, or as often as he consecrateth, and therefore excel∣lethMant in Alph. Non  incont nentia, sed matrimo∣nium. the virgine Mary, that did beare him but once, and from vvhom he onely tooke flesh and bloud: It can not be that they can intende, commit, or per∣forme any such greate euill. And if they doe, vvhat great matter is it, seeingThis is like the vvay that Iulia deuised for triall of their mortifi∣cation, to laye men and vvo∣men together, and a crucifix betvvixt them Agrip, art 22. Christ redeemed the whol vvorld vvith one drop of his bloud, and left the rest to the pope, his vicar generall at Rome, and from him to all the other priestes, that they mighte haue the ouerplus to make pardons vvithall, for these, ey∣ther waightye, or petty offenders. It vvould vvery a man to reckon vp all their abhominations. TheNon obstan∣tibus consti∣tutionibus, & ordinationi∣bus Apostoli∣cis caeterisque contrariis quibuscumque c Siluest. Prie∣rius contra Lutherum. Pope and his generation are as like vnto Christe, as light is vnto darknes, and as Parsons Owle is to a Nightingale: For Christe being God, became verye man, the pope being an abhominable man, taketh vpon him theClement  one  of this bloud: vhiche Iuli the thir e had at Rome, al England  as pardo∣ned. . office of God, yea and to bee aboue him and his word, Christ humbled himselfe, and put him selfe as it vvere out of himselfe: the pope ma∣keth himselfeAlb. Pighius. equal with God, & not without rob bery, more then God, Christ neuer came amōgst theStanislaus Ecchinius in Chimaera. multitude vpō a barred horse, both with swordes & keyes, like a Prynce and a Prieste, thoughe in deede he vvere both. But the the . and  the  Read  Sabel. pope that wil needes be hisHierarch lib. 1. cap. 2. 16. q. 1. Vicar, he hath done it. The two swords vvith Christ,Quicunque in glossa Dist inc . Lector. . Francis Zarabella. So  . . . .
are both iurisdictions ciuil & ecclesiastical,See the Pon∣tifical & the booke of the  of , that  the em∣peror, Princes dukes, & earls their seuerall places. lib. 1. sect 5. ca . . . cap 20. a Pope in the forenoone, a vvarier in the after, yeaAnton.  part. . Empe∣rours, kings, princes & dukes serue him vvaite vpon his styrrup, leade his horse, holde basen and to vvell, carry in his seruice, vvaite vppon his cup kneeling, and all the rest kneeling vvhile this is a doing. They beare his Canopy ouer his head, they kisse his foote and vvhom the Lorde hath annointed to beare his image amongst men, they abase themselues and be∣come slaues to this prond beaste of abomination. Christ had conuersation vvith the poore, the popeTit 22. ca. 5. 4. looketh at leisure vpon the mighty, and he scarcelyCerem. lib. 1. cap. 80. vouchsafeth them his presence: Christ liued sparing ly and porely, they deliciously and wantonly,Baptista . Popeli  sec. 5. c. 4. Iuly notvvithstanding his goute, vvoulde haue his porke in despite of God, and was in such a rage, al∣so for his pecocke, that he blasphemed God, allea∣ging that if God vvere angrye  an apple hee had greater cause to be angry for his pecocke, Christe vvashed his disciples , the pope treadeth vpon the Lords annointed vvith his feete. Marius. He crouned fol. 13. Henry the sixt vvith his foote, and vvith his foote vncrovvned him againe. Christe  to be made a king, the pope giueth, disposeth, and transposeth. . kingdomes at his pleasure and appoyntmente. He setteth princes and Subiectes together by the eares, and maynteineth factions on all sides, to vpholde his proude Hierarchie, Roger us Ho∣uedenus. Gregory the se∣cond did irritate the subiects of Leo the Emperour agaynst him. As  assoyled Pypin and the rest of the Frenche, from their othe and alleageance to Childericke, vvhome hee made to trotte at his horse hecles three miles together.Pope  1. 15. q. 6. cap Alius. Phocas  and a.
murtherer is by him lifted vp to an Empire, & he a∣gaine for recompence aduaunceth him to be Anti∣christ, by giuing him that which the other sought for to wit to be the vniuersall Bishop, which his prede∣cessors condemned.The places are quoted before ex gres sus Hildbrand Hildebrand that firebrand of hel, of whom al stories write shame, made Henry the fourth with his wife & Sunne to coole his feete, the space of three daies at his gate, before he would ad∣mit him to his presence, and yet that was by the  of his whore. AndClement li. 2 desent. & re indica. cap. 2. Clement the , who pronoūced the empire to belong to him, made Dan dalus a noble man, & an Embassador from the vene tiās, in chaines like a dog to lie vnder his table. The Pope is the Sunne, The Emperor is but the moone.Auentin Rex venitad fores iurans per vrbis ho∣nores. Post homo sit Papae sumit quo da∣te coronam. Emperors & princes be his Vassalles & feodaries, & receiue their crovvns & dignities frō him. They be∣come his men. Euery hedge priest is before a prince, because Priests make God, but al his Princes are the Popes creatures. Christ * sent his disciples to preachMat. 28. the Gospel. The pope & his Cardinals persecute & stop the preaching of the gospel, & their chiefest bu∣sines is to practise  & , that his Soue∣raignty may be maintained in al dominiōs.Read  of the practise of pre∣lates. ChristMat. 5. 6. 7. himselfe taught the gospel, The pope can flye as welMat. 27. 32. as preach. * Christ being both poore & weake vvas. 23. 26. 27. compelled to bear his ovvn crosse: theCerem. lib. 1. se. 2. fo. 33. 35. pope being fat & strōg is born of others. * Christ wore a crownMat. 27. 29. of thorns, the Pope weareth a triple crovvn of gold,Lu 12 13. 14.  with precius stons. * Christ vvold not take vpō him the deciding a ciuel cause, vvhen tvvo bre∣thren stroue for land:pope Inno∣centius 3. D.  cap.  Causa. 2. qu 6. cap ad . The pope vvil meddle vvith al causes & deale with al persons in heauen, earth and hell. Christ died to saue vs & bring vs to heauen: the
Pope liueth to kil vs, and lead vs to hell. Christ tho∣rough his death recōciled vs to his father the Pope continually killeth vs and dravveth vs to his father the diuel. Fire & vvater are not so  as Christ and the pope. Christ vvas true and sincere, heAurea. Leḡ. . temp. is fals and counterfaite and notvvithstanding al the prero∣gatiues of his chayre, (as hath bene partly touched before) vvhich as Cusan saith, hath the trueth clea∣uing vnto it, yet it is euident, thatLuit. Vallan∣de donatio.  Leo,Pu¦gosus de inusitat. mor∣tis generibus. . q. . vino. Liberius, &.  31 Anastasius vvere Arians. in quadam e∣pist. Celestinus andLyra. in Mat. cap 16. Marcel∣linus, Nestorians,Sabe. Ennead 9 lib. 3. Honorius vvas a Monotholite. de∣cade 2. lib. 3 Benno. Vsperg . Ioh. 13. a cruel villain, theIn the accusa. of VV. Plesiu∣ro knight. 14, a tyrant, Hildebrand an helhounde, a coniurer, an incestuous vvretche. Reade his life set out by one of his ovvne Cardi∣nalles. Boniface the 8. vvho entred as a VVolfe, rai∣gned like a Lyon; and died like a dogge, vvas so farre from not erring, that he is tainted vvith all kinde of villanies, and ispope Pascha¦lis Ca¦sulanus Platina. accused to haue affirmed vvhore∣dome to be no more sinne, then the chaffing of tvvoR d hands together. No more vvas Pope Paschall, vvho set the sonne of Henrie the fifte againste his ovvne father. And made PopeChroni. ver∣nacul. Calixte to ride through Rome vppon a Camill, vvith his face tovvard the tayle, and to holde the  tayle in his hande,. in steede of a bridle, vvhiche doeth no more com∣mendeStella. his innocenice then this doeth PopeSi  4. Inno∣centes,Mat. Paris. vvho armed Philippe of Fraunce agaynstePope .  Plat de vitu  King Iohn sometime our souereigne Prince, to the disturbance, vndooing, and spoyle of this Realme. Thinke you not that Pope. Textor.  the fourth also, vvas a holy Father, vvho not onely himselfe vvas giuen to that sylthie sinne of Sodomitrye, but also dispenced vvith Peter , and
Mā∣tuan . 4.  & oratio ad .Hicrome for it, during those three hot monthes of the yeare; Iune, Iuly, and August. I amTheir doctrin is euident, their liues are so horrible that I am a shamed  set them dovvne, see their ovvn stories. vvearie of speaking of all, the stories are plaine, that from that same first Apostata Bonifacius, to him that novve vsurpeth that seate, they haue bene all taynted and infected both vvith corruption of doctrine, & lewd∣nes of life, VVhat shoulde I speak of their cruelty, dissention. liues, and death. Iohn thePraemōstrat. . vvas begot∣ten in adultery. IohVolateran. the 12.  in it. The. 13. was slain as he vvas committing it, the 18.Bucching. was put to death, and both his eies put out, by the meanes and procurement of Gregory, about it, PopeCapgraue. Cle∣ment poisoned LodouikCommenta∣rius super Arti . Volat. Syluester the 2. was a no∣table ,Praemonstrat Benno Card. Sigeb. Gregory the iuuēter of images was giuen ouer to al kinde of vvickednesse.. Sabel. Benedict is said to be the corrupter of Rome with al filthinesse, vvho sold his popedome for a great summe of mo∣ny.Nauclerus. Stephan so raged against Formosus being dead long before, that hee disanulled his decrees, tooke vp his dead carcase, threw it into Tyber, chopt of 3. of his fingers, and cut of his nosePlat. Vrbanus dround fiue of his deerest  in sacks. If this be not ynough to prooue all these Popes, and those that hold of them, and  them, suche vvicked ones (which is * alike wickednes) to be  to god; letPro. 17. their ovvne , I say,  further searched. Ia al thinges they are moste contrary to Christe. The vvhole description of Paule agreeth to them in all points. VVhereas it is further sayd, that he shal  vp  ab ue  that is called God. It is moste euident, he con∣tenteth not himselfe, vvith the  and  that belong to Angels and men, but wilhaue those
that belong to God himselfe. And his clavvbakes and flatrerers, not the grossest but the finest and wittiest, not of those olde flattering Ciuilians, but our new oilemouthed diuines, M Harding and such like hold, that after a  he may beHierom in Daniel cap. 3. called God. E∣uen  Antiochus, Domitian, & Caligula arrogated those names, so do they, & therefore they make no bones to take it thus Marc. in Cencil. . sess. 4. Thou art another God on earth. And Cardillus a spaniard vvriting in defence of that late cōspiracy of Trent, often times caleth the Pope an earthly God. AndCardillus pro Concil Trid. Cardinall Hostensis saith thatQuanto . except sinne, the Pope hath power to do  soeuer God himselfe can do. ChristExtra de . & the Pope make but one cōsistory, &Leo . 39. Extra in sex to lib 1. Christ hath receiucd Peter into the fe∣lovvship of the indiuisible vnitie. And theresore the CanonistsDe Consue∣tudine. Non putamus. haue  vvhole disputations, whether the Pope be God or no: whether he cānot do  God may do: That no appeale can be made from the Popes consistory to God, because. Ioh. 22. ab uno  non . And they confesse plainly to all the vvorl de that hee is Dominus  noster  our Lorde God the Pope. And albeit theCeremoniar. lib. 1. cap. 2. late qualifiers say, that he is  God nor man, but a thing betvvene both, yet they affirme, thatConcil. Later sub Leo dec. in  Ste∣phani. kings reigne by him, which is spoken only of God that he hath allFrancis Za∣rabella. 15. quaest. power in himselfe, aboue al povvers as vvel of heauen as of earth, therfore he doth what himselfe , yea vnlavvsull thinges, and he is more then God. Shall any man checke him? are not the scriptures subiect vnto him, being God, do they not say truly? that the popeAuthoritat. in glossa. can dispēce against the lavv of nature? against theDist. 82 . Ielin. consti∣tutionibus. Cannons of the apostles, against theStatuta Ca∣nonum 6. qu. Quicunqua in glossa. new testamēt, against all the comman∣dements,
de  & obedientia ca. . against Pauls Epistles, In Baptisme he may alter the form,Summa An∣gelica. in litte∣rapp. In mariage he dispēseth with al per∣sons, sauing onely vvith father and mother. A man may marry his ovvn sister, and here of Pope Martin the fist hath left vs an example. Nay one sayth, that the Pope may dispense supra  & of vnrighteousnes he can make lighteousnes, and ofPanorm ex∣tra Hostien. de trans episcop.  no sentence, hee can make a sentence, and ofHaruaeus de  pape nothing, he can make something. HeCard Cus. ad  epis. 2. challengeth suche authoritye to ex∣poundQranto. and declare the scriptures, as it is not lavv∣sull for any man to holde or thinke the contrarye. Of the fulnesse of his povver he can do all thinges. If this be not the * mouth that Daniel spake of thatDan. 7. 8. vttered presumptuous things, let themselues iudge if they haue any shamefastnesse in them. If this be not that beast, before vvhome the kinges and prin∣ces of the earth haue fallen dovvn and vvorshipped: Let master Censurer or Parsons Hovvlet together vvith all that darke broode tell me. But this is that * Beast, to vvhom they haue yelded their povver, &, 13. the vvoman that sitteth vpon this beast, is that filthy  of the vvorld, (as they speake of their stevves vvhich they tollerate) I mean the citty of Rome, to vvhich povver is giuen ouer euery tribe, language & nation: vvhich all the inhabitantes of the earth shal worship, whose names are not vvritten in the book of life. And hovvsoeuer this mōster come vnder the pretence of , & vvil haue theseDe maior & . vnam sanctam. In glosla.  & presumptuous titles of most blessed and holy father,Dist 40. Non. nos. yea, vvilbe called. in Iob cap. 34. lib. 25 cap. 14.  it selfe, and vvil be pla∣ced in such absolute and spiritual estate of holinesse as none can be in, but him selfe, and therefore must not be  of any fault vvhatsoeuer without sa∣criledge,
yet herein also he is plainly proued to bee that Antichrist, that being a damnable man and no spirit,Ansel. in 2. by lying he feigneth himselfe to be God, and therfore feigneth himself to be religious; that vnderThes. cap, 1. the couler of godlines hee may deceiue, yea he cal∣leth himselfe God, and causeth himselfe to be wor∣shipped. There is nothing belonging to Christ and to his special office, that he doth not take vpon him: he forgiueth sinnes, chaungeth the nature of things,Euseb de pre∣parat.  7. will be head of the Churche, an vniuersall by shop, Lord of the vvorlde, a commander of Angels, with∣out error, and what not? This is a plaine token that. he hateth God, seeing he will be called by the nameAgatho. of God And being a thiefe, an Apostata, and a slaue will yet be worshipped as God, and proclaimed as a king. This is he,  holdeth that hisDist. 16. decrees, must be esteemed as spoken by the instincte of the holye Ghost from Peter himselfe, who hauing full autho∣rity mustBonif. extra∣uagant. cap. de obedient. conclude, decide and define al things, who is the wonder of the worlde, and therefore of in . Papa is called Pope, before whom not onely al creatures but the greatest princes of the worlde must doe ho∣mage. God the iudge of the whole worlde vouch∣saueth oftentimes to communicate to vs miserable  a reason of his doings, but this monster must yeelde no reason: No man vvhatsoeuer he , must aske him vvhy he doeth it. The very heauens svveate at his abhominations. And therefore I con∣clude this first part, that this is the very Antichriste, that sitteth in mens consciences: And that vvhole body the head and members is that Babilon, Aegipt and Sodome, enemies to Iesus Christ, the true and onely head of his Church, and to all his members.
Novve it followeth to prooue that they are e∣nemies The papistes are enemies to al christian princes. to Christan princes, and namely the moste daungerous and greateste enemies, that oure Soue∣reigne, the Queenes Maiesty that novv by the grace of god reigneth ouer vs, hath. Being proued (as they are)  to God, hovv can they be friends to his ministers & magistrates vvhome he hath appointed vnder him? If true christiā obediēce to princes must necessarily flow from dutiful obediēce to God, how can they obey christiā mē, that haue no fear of God: wel they may couch and crouch for fear of the whip, yeeld an outward & ciuil reuerence, such as M.  speaketh of, but they can neuer loue truely as children, but feare as slaues, vvhom true knowledge hath not framed, for in respect of God, to  obedience and duty. That this true obedience hath bene taught, aduanced and established in the heartsThe gospell teacheth obe∣dience  al persons the pope resisteth it. of men by the gospell, it is apparant to  men that vvill not be vvilfully blinde, and of mallice kicke a∣gainst the pricke. For vvhere hath there bene grea∣ter and more godly , humble, lowely and faithfull loyalty in the hearts of subiectes tovvards their princes, vvith the willing bearing of al burdens & paying of al taxes, impositions, and such like ciuill duties, but vvhere the gospell hath moste florished? let all the countries in the vvorld, where it hath bin receiued, speake the truth thereof. Contrari vvise, the troubles that haue arisen (as it cannot be denied, but that there haue beene greate troubles by occasion thereof, in many places of the vvorld) yet they haue al sprong from the vnquiet and hammering heads of faythlesse and trayterous Papists, vvho in fauour of their idolatry haue alwayes with a deadly hatred
persecuted the trueth, and the true professors of it, And be they what they mighte be, of what estate or condition so euer, superiors or equals, MagistratsThis needeth no confirma∣tion, for the trueth hereof appeareth in all stories. or vassals, Princes or subiectes, they haue alwayes bene set against, vndermined and ouerthrown with out all respect, if once they haue made but shevv to embrace the Gospell. And hereof haue Christian princes found their troubles, common, weales their vvastinges and ouerthowes; Christian people pitiful effusion of bloud, ioyned vvith hideous cruelty, such as vvas neuer exercised amongest heathen Ty∣rantes. And though all the simpler sort of papists a∣mongst the common people bee not to be dravvne into this companye of  conspiratoures,  and , but rather are to be deemed as ignorant deceiued, and reduced by the finer sorte of heads, yet these greatest and , their captains, and  beeing politiques, haue offended of knowledge: and making that reckoning of the pope that they doe, they must needs be enemies and trai∣torus to oure souereigne prince the Queene, euen such as they are to God. For they being fully persua ded in cōscience & in deed, that the pope is Christs vicar, that princes must reigne by him, muste needes deny that those princes who allow not his  and are so , off from being  by him, that they are excommunicated and deposed (as much as  in him) from their crownes and dignitye; they must deny, I say, as in deed they do, that such at  princes, & therfore deny them al obedience. And hence it is, that popery is alvvayes accompanied  treason, rebellion and consparacye, vvhereof, as our  Lad hath  more then her
highnes noble progenitors, in regard that she hath more aduanced the gospel, & yet God be praysed, hath bene deliuered frō thē, so they making but the least shew that could be, of fauoring the  religiō (such as those dark times cold afford thē) which Henry the se∣cond. very dim; haue yet had their hands full, being many times put to their shifts, & hardly escaping the losse both of their crowns & liues.See our ovvn stories. So was Henry  2. dealt withal whē his crown was plucked frō his head & he cōpelled like a priuate man; to the no smal dis∣grace of the maiesty of a Prince. to creepe to the  legat, to be restored againe, So was king IohnKing Iohn. dealt withal, whē frō the pope; by the means of the  & monks, he was discharged frō his gouern mēt, his subiects released frō their alleageāce; his no  in arms & in field against him, & at length fini∣shed his miserable life, by the treasō of a monk that poisoned him & himself with him, as their own sto∣riesMat. Pari. 1211 haue deliuered vnto vs. So dealt they with Hen∣ry the 8. a famous prince, stirring vp the emperor a∣gainst him, the french king & others, wherein thoseCard. Pol. lib. 3. same notable traitors, the one a negromācer Cardi∣nal VVolsey & Cardinal Poole, both special dealers; doing as much as lay in them to depriue him of his kingdōe. As for that blessed  king Edward, al theIn Northfolk, Deuonshire, & other places. cōmotiōs & treasōs that were stirred vp & practised against him. both at home & abroad came from the pope & papists at Rome. Let the stories be searched I speake not so much of those former times, I could shew how king Harrold lost his kingdome, for bani∣shingCapgr. . VVestmon. one Robert,  of Canterbury, who flying to the duke of Normandy, was not only resto  to his Archbishopricke again, whether the king
vvould or no, but the said duke being  by theAnsel. VVilli. the second. pope, got the whol kingdō. So did Anselmus a trai∣tor trouble VVilliā the 2. about the election of by∣shops, which vvas by his ovvn right, that in spight of the kings teeth, he brought it to the pope that  christ. I could also shevv hovv one Raphe; a pilde &Rase Byshop of Chester. shorn bishop of Chester, did so iustle vvith the king,Barus . about a tribute for vvhoores, that he suspended the churches, stopped vp the dores vvith thorns, & com pelled the king to yeeld vnto him, vvhich he coulde neuer haue done, had not the pope & diuers of that traiterous ciue assisted him. So one Stephan LangtōSteph.  an archbishop caused the realme to bee enterdited, stirred vp rebellion in Ireland, & prouoked the pope to cōquer it, til the king became the popes tenant, & receiued the crovvne at his handes; So Thomas A∣rundell,Tho. Arundel. All this is  in our owne chroni∣cles. being also Archbishop of Canterbury and chauncellor (for then all offices might  in any of their men) in the time of king Henry the second, beeing exiled vvith the earle of Darbye, belike for some treason, vvhen the king vvas abient, they de∣posedGuil. of Malm. Guil. Newbri. Barns. him, & aftervvards put him to death. So raged they also against good duke Hūfrey, the stories shew ing that he began to see, and smel out their knauery the bishop of VVinchester set first vpon him at Lō∣don and aftervvards in a parliament time, not  from Bury they murthered him. VVhat shoulde IRich. Scrovvp. speake of Richarde Scrovvpe Archbyshoppe of  in the time of Henry the fouth, who vvas in the fielde againste the king, and had the revvarde of a Traitor. And hence vvas it that they made suche lavves against the procuring of excommunications, Bulles, or ecclesiasticall censures, from the pope or
See of Rome, against the king or any of his Auncient presidentes to shew what they vvere  that procured any Bulles or  from Rome. in those dayes, when popery moste flourished  the time of Edward the first, one for  an excommunication from Rome, againste one of the  subiectes, vvas  the realme, and had suffered, as in case of high , had not the Chan cellor and treasurer of England made speciall suite for him. Theresore also it vvas enacted that no for∣reignAnno. Edvv. , . power, should hold any plea without the kings protection vvithin this realme or take any vvith∣out.Anno 27. Ed∣vvard. . The pope should giue no benefices, nor byshop rickes here. They that procured cytations or pro∣curationsStat  in anno 30. from Rome, fell into a Premunire, So didEdw. primi. they that tooke letters of Attourney, lormes or ad∣ministrationsAn. 25. Edvv. . for benefices, vvithout the kings spe∣ciallAn 27. Edvv. tertii. licence. It was made death, to , procure or cause to be procured any Summons, excommuni∣cationsRichardi pri. or  from Rome. If any tooke vponAnno. 30. them the  of any byshop, sued any pro∣ces or sentence, excommunication, Bull or , touching the kings crown or regality, broughtAn. 16. Rich. them in, or receiued them, notified them, or made execution of them, vvithin the Realme or vvithout, both the offenders and mainteiners vvere out of the kings protection, their Landes and goods vvere con fiscate, and Bulles from Rome for  was a .An. 2. Henry. 4 I speake not of our late parliamentes and lavves, because they vvill holde they are , as not being ratified by their Pope and themselues. This being so manifest & plaine, I maruell at Campions impudencye that vvill auouch the Romish religion, not only by , and philosophy, but also by law both ciuil & temporall yet in force; and yet herein I
appeal to those lawyers that are his best frends &  his  mostè, (the laws stāding as they do) if they vvould plainly shevv their iudgment.  must the trial of Gods religiō, that is alway one & perfect, be subiect novv to the changeable  of men? and yet it may appeare in al ages and times, sith Antichriste displayed himselfe, that hee and his members haue beene the  practisers of trea∣sons that euer , and being such euill men haue brought forth those good , that hath ben made agaynst such vsurpation, and vnnaturall trechery a∣gainst God,  naturall prince, state and country. I could  that  from their practise, specially vvhen princes began to see some  of the truth, And this vvas the cause that vvhen king Henry began to banishe the Popes aúthority, he and his land vvere interdicted And didPolus. . 3. not Cardinall Poole  Charles the  in an oration, being bent against the , to leaue all that businesse, & to bend his  against , encouraging the subiectes of the  against their souereigne Lorde? The gospell and the  thereof, hovvsoeuer  be charged by viperous, &  tongues, such  as Surius, VVicellus, ,  and the rest, (vvho seeme to haue  that faculty aboue the rest) that from it and the preachers thereof, hath sprung , blodshed, disobedience, contention, and  in france, Germany and other countries: The trueth is, that from themselues and vnder their ovvn vvings these  of treason and rebellion haue e∣uermore bene hatched, or else from suche  as . I mean the , vvho,
howsoeuer they differ in some heads, yet they are fast tied together by the . For Caluine, Beza, Luther and such other excellent instruments haue bin from time to time, the onely oppugners and resisters of these heretiques, and their rebellious proceedinges: when papists haue clapped their handes and laugh∣ed in  sleeues at them, because hereby truth was brought into hatred vvith Christian princes, & theyThe impuden∣cie of Hovvlet  the aduantage to set vp their  I do∣latry and heresie: And therefore I vvonder not a litle at this platterfaced ovvle of Parsons, that vvith his staring and shamelesse countenance, dareth euen to the maiesty of a prince, vvhom the Pope his maister and al the right Papists, such as he calleth the hotter sort of Catholiques, condemne as aSand. lib. 7. 30. Schismatique & heretique, and therfore think themselues dischar∣ged of all obedience, and her highnesse to haue no : of gouernment ouer them, that he should thus savvn vpon her vvhō he condemneth, and loueth as vvel as the light of the gospel, vvhich neither he, nor any of that darke broode could euer abide, yet I say, that he dareth thus shamlesly to flatter, as thogh she were so simple to be caried away with vvords, when she seeth & vnderstādeth their deeds, hath selt their practises, and (if God of his wōderful mercy had not kept her highnes) had tasted of their cruelty, as other Princes & noble gentlemē haue done before her & round about her. VVhat should I blot paper, in set∣ting down such things as euery book soundeth forth only let vs hear out of theSanders the mouth of , in his booke dedica∣ted to the pope, appro∣ued by the Cardinals, & allovved by the popish  of . mouth of the papaists on of their own doctors, how they  of her . I meane not to set dovvn, that might yeelde me some aduantage against them, as neyther standing vvith my  to  it,  spoken to the
dishonoure of her maiesties person, not beeingSo doth Brist. . 5. fol. 72. 73. fit to be noted by vvriting in the face of the world, but rather to receiue, a punishment due for suche presumtuous : onely I vvill mention, howeStorie, Felton, the Nor to , VVodhou e, Plumtre, and al the northen men that vver in actuall re∣bellion , the other in  & , . he maketh Story, Felton & others, that vvere con∣demned not in any cause of religion, but for high treason,  he maketh them Martyrs. The moste , that refuse without al reason the meanes of , and haue bene for  & iust  yet , he calleth con∣stāt , but I hope, some of thē are ashamed (I know whatsoeuer they ar, they may be) to haue their names in such a kalēder. Of those same rebels, in the north, that appeared in actuall rebelliō against her highnesse, he maketh a solemne kalēder, he putteth in a Catalogue their names & cōditions giuing it thisLib. 7. de visib. .  qu:  fidem , & Monarch pag. 730. pag 734. , arma , &  & . The names & cōditions of those englishmen vvhich tooke arms, & are yet in exile for the Catho∣like , & for the primacy of the church of Rome. He reherseth the Bull of  Quintus against her highnesse, & plainly asseuereth, that it vvas for iuste causes declared & published. He calleth her maiesty the pretended Queene, and sheweth hovve Doctor Morton was sent into England to admonish  catholike noble mē, that Elizabeth that then gouer∣ned vvas an , & that for that cause she was by very right fallen from all gouernment & power, vvhich she vsurped ouer the catholiques, & that she might be  of them without any danger,  an heathen & publicane, neither that they were frō , bound to obey her laws &  he sheweth, that  noble men
to deliuer their brethren ab  de from the tyranny of heretiques, and albeit thinges fel not out to  expectation, yet he  their attempt. In another place he affirmeth that  in some cases, kings and Emperors that gouern christi∣anLib. 20. cap. 4. . people be not subiect to Christes , yet by the vertue of the keyes of the kingdome of hea∣uen, vvhen their gouernments hurte the  of , and the saluation of souls, they are to be depo∣sed. Did  any professor of the  a sentence? Alack, they  out of , for an  which  gathered and forged many yeares after his death, that princes being in deadlyIn .  Conci. Const . . sinne are no longer princes, nor  are to yeld thē any longer obedience, vvhich yet the article (as it vvas first set dovvne in the Concil of Constance) speaketh of Priestes and . This Ovvle a so vvhopeth against vs of obedience, that we break the book, that we dispise aucthority, that we do this and that, but look vpō the face of this babe, mark the fea ture of this cub, view his claw, and tell me who is his damme &  we or these  papists? ,  first a , and  an , or an  amongst Catholique pe ple  be  of  kingdom And a Li. 2 ca. 4. 78. , If  A  , that Christians being  common  vnder them,  esse  born that  should of their  set . . d.  suffered an : que  them?   thou must not say  Aue,  of  their .  they serue  or  not more to obey :  to ? Do you think the Queen is the  o . not like to haue good  &  of  as may not  to salute ? do not they cal her
their mother, Gods substitute, and their  Queene, in mockage, when they cry thus all , and yet buffet her, breking the very neck of her . The same Sanders , that it is the special  of bishops,  their  or an , Pag. . they  the  the , as that  as may , may ,  in  non , It is the , by  soeuer  they , , that  in the  of  not in the  of . This traytor throughout that vvhole chapter laboreth to proue, that  del ought not to  the faythfull,  he asketh whether he be  the name of  man,  shall  that  not  be  to , ,  after one , if , ob  a , , per  &  & : For the same  they may  ought  of  to be  from i  they holds . After a long  he  conclusion, Pronus , , , , eum  non vult, , & It is  for the Church of Christ, to remoue a king that is , ,  and ,  a  not , from his , and  place. It amongst a multitude one  man or tvvo, haue  their  opinions, not in cō mon, but , not by , against such as they , but tyrants in deede, O hovv they yelpe, , , crovv and vvhoope, to bring all the  into , and yet these are their : in them forsooth catholike and religious,  in vs  and .
This made Byshop Fysher and Syr. Thomas Moore vvith  others, to loose their heades. supposing to dye Catholiques, they had in deede as they vvere and deserued, the  of  The pope that then vvas, I meane Pope Clemente that was the sonne of a Curtesan, This was Leo the tenths ba∣stard also, as some thinke, sente out  Bull againste king Henry the eyghte, but thankes bee to God, it neyther shooke his seat, as he had thought it should  depriued him of his kingdomes, as hee vn∣doubtedly looked ; but it vvas a meanes to bring many of those Romish calues to a iust , though many ventured but to late vpon his absolution,  they tooke it after his life in purgatory. Of this wholesome doctrine confirmed by the popes practise, haue sprong all rebellions, Treasons , tumults, , and vprores, in al com mon vvealths and , vvhere the pope hath had any thing ado, not of any right, but by vsurpati∣on.Plat lib. 10. 2. Tom. Conci. For Emperors were wont  depose euil popes, now euil popes despose good kings. So vvas the go∣uernmentIn  & .  Parisiis cap. 14. of France once by such a deposing, trans∣posed from the right heires for euer. VVhen  deposed Chilperick, & Pipin his Marshal became, q 6. . king, so did Vrban depose Perse the king of Spaine, setting in  Henry a . I  notAlius. ,  Henry the fourth, because I haue men∣tioned them before. So would Pope Pius impiously haue done,  his povver had , to our graci∣ous Queen, vvhom the Lord long preserue, to hold vp his icepter among vs Neither say we as Parsons  woulde  vs speake, that euery con∣trary profession  in any state or  is by and by treason, or that they  any
contrary religion  by and by traytors. For false∣hoodThe :  M. Charkes booke v.  it ; the name of  or any others. is many times defended and perketh vp, when trueth is in  and hardly  face. The vvorld loueth her ovvne, & all princes be not true professors and  of Prophets: But this  saye, that  and treason are commonly inseperable  and . The foundation and vvhole building is naught  but treason and trechery. Christe and his  the trueth, taughte true obedience, gaue to Caesar that vvhiche vvas Caesars, and to God that vvhich vvas Gods, Christe  tribute  and for Peter: and though  bee contrarye to falsehood, yet there is no  in  againste falsehood, but in  against trueth Our gra∣cious  therefore by the grace of God mainteining trueth , true religion against , vpholding the Gospell of righ∣teousnes, and reigning by Christe, they that shall  it, seeking together her  vvith it, from a forraigne Italian vsurper are not onely tray∣tors against her, but agaynst God. They that shallIf the  any  land, hee must  haue it frō the vvord of God, or  our laws & so from both, or else . pinche her ,  it,  to  povver,  her ,  againste her,  the  of obedience,  in Bulles to roare out her , discharge her  from , holde her as an  and labour to vvithdravve the louing  of her sub∣iectes by any newe pardons or , all whiche the papistes haue doone, and doe ? they are enimies to God, to her High∣nes, to the vvhole state, and to them selues: and ex∣cept they , God in  vvhen they
think least of it, wil finde out their vvickednesse, and as he did vnto Story make thē feele the punishment of their vvicked treason? If this be not their dealing, let me be reproued. If their rebellion in the North, their conspiracie in Norffolke, their calculating her byrth, their practises by Sorcerye, by imagery, and such trumpery, their libelling  slaundering, their threatning and monstrous flattering, their  inuading of her highnes territories and dominions, with giuing placards to the meanest of her subiects to shed her blood, that hath beene alleaged before, be not ynough to conuince them to bee , let mee beare the shame of it. I coulde set downe the particulers, but that the same are handled, and it may please God, one day, besides that whiche is already declared, that a iust  vvil be published of it. I referre the reader for further satisfaction here∣in to the vvorthye vvorks of M. Norton publi∣shed at that time, when the Bull roared so  in our eares, and to his vvarning giuen to our Nor∣then rebels. I referre them also to Howlets checke nowe in publishing. VVho did these things but pa∣pistes? vvho procured the Bull, broughte it into the Realme, set it vp, and published it? And what vvas the matter, against vvhome, for vvhat, and to vvhat purpose? VVhat vvere ? vvho platted the deposing of the Queene, and  vp of another Mary amongst vs? VVho conferred vvith the Di∣uell? sovved  reportes and  to effect their mali ious purposes? VVho had their , their Seminaristes and landleapers to gadde from place to place, and from country to counrrye, and from gentlemans house to gentlemans house to
shedde the seede of , but ranke and  papistes?  that are in high places, knovve to whom the knowledge of these thinges speciallye belong, that  conspiracies, treasons, practise of her maiesties death, hath bene found in that nest, For  they glauer, their minds are known, and their  are seene, and to the discomfort of all  be it spoken, God of his goodnesse hath from time to  brought their secretest  and attempts done in the darke to light; he hath thrown their ladden treasons into our lappes, vnfol∣ding thē & laying them open; in tender regard of his churche, and to the ende her highnesse taking good heed might more & more be confirmed in the truth & learn to rest in the assurance of his protection, that hath bene her mighry , in al her greatest dan¦gers, And thanks be to his goodnes, he hath done it  any great blodshed or hard dealing, either of rack, or of any other torturs, and though it please  M. Censurer to vtter his malapertnesse,  into the iudgement of her  dealings concerning the racking of those lately in the tower,  the worlde in hande, that it was for religion, yet he might haue considered, that it is much better for one or two bodies to be scaired and feared, then that a vvhole countrye shoulde bee betrayed; that one member shoulde bee cut off, then all the reste shoulde , and had hee beene so  seene, as he vvould seeme to be, he had had sufficient  to consider, that they comming ouer at suche  as they did, their complices the Popes souldiers appearing in actuall rebellion in , and diuers
commnig ouer in companies and troupes, to scatter (were it) but their errours, their Honours had good cause finding them obstinate against religion & her highnes Iawes, to distrust their sidelity, and to regard  safety, rather to  them vvith the racke, then we should be seared with the ouer∣throwe of our florishing peace and country, vvihch God in mercy turne from vs. This also hath God done for her, that her highnesse may cary alvvayes a thankfull heart towardes him, vvhen shee shall haue such experience of his mercy in preseruing her, whē she shalbe established in iudgement, not to bee af∣fected vvith euery Syrens voyce that seemeth very sweete, but yet bringeth a sharpe destruction, as this Howlet, that with his yuybushe at the first is verye humble, lowely and lovv, but resteth not there. For as it groweth and getteth strength, it claspeth and girdeth so harde, that within a little time it will kill the hart of the greatest oake. and get aboue it; to be an haborowe for such owles and vncleane birdes as himself is. And euen so did the first pope deale vvith the Emperour, he crept alow, till  aurhotity bare him vp, & so he crept vp by litle & litle,  the  decayed; was remoued and ouerthrowne, and novv he is become the  for al the silthy byrds in the world. I will make on farther application, the wise I hope vvill see light at a little hole. VVho haue bene those traitors that haue stirred, vp other princes agaynst the Quecne? vvho haue procured their forces, and labored for an alteration by colourable practises, but papistes? VVho haue beene suche trayterly fugitiues as them selues? vvho are the authors of erronious & traiterous bookes,
forth as wildfyre, & throwen as fyr:  into our church & cōmon wealth, to kindle the sire  rebellion, but papistes? For who hath vvritten a∣gainst her highnes by name, against her trusty  but you Papists? agaynst such as you moste hated, because their vvisdome and care in the Lord was against you, fome being  frō your ma∣lice, &  yet liuing maugre your heads, to helpe (as lōg as it shal please God) with their faithful  against you? vvho  taken vpon  to decide  to discouer, as they say, priuy treasons to de∣bate of state matters, and to make heires apparant, but papists? VVas there any one protestant that can be named that did these things. No goodman How let, hovvsoeuer Surius, Frarin, & such scurrilous ray∣lers charge the gospell and the profestors of it, it is vvith the same trueth that the  their master is vvont to speake against the truth, & no otherwise. It is as fit  a papist to speake of obecience, and as yll it be cōmeth him, as vvhen an Ovvle counterfai∣teth to become an Eagle, or when he wil take vpon him to sing like an Nightingale. You must bear with me, the name you haue chosen, vvhether truely or like a counterseite, maketh some prouerbs to fit my porpose. Is not true obedience to God in his true religion and vvorship, the mother of all true obedi∣ence and duety to princes and peeres? And hovve then can a , that is a traitour to God in his worship, be saythful & true to princes? VVhat cōsci∣ence is there, vvhere there is no knowledge? & what knowledge can there be vvithout his word. & with∣out the gospel, to teach either obedience to God, or duety to Princes? The subiect that feareth God, the
instructed Christian, he only knoweth how to obey in and for God. He  knoweth what duety is to be rendred to Gods Liuetenants. They are not the best , that are readiest to fulfill all Prin∣ces commaundementes and pleasures, but they are  subiectes, that loue and honour their Princes in the Lorde, not of custome but of con∣science, yea for conscience sake, though they bee euill, both to pray for them and to  in  due∣ty  their conuersion vnto God; and if they cannot be vvonne, patiently to beare  is layde vppon them. The other are seruauntes and , these are children. The one obey of feare, the other of loue. Those fulfill their willes with the breach of Gods. These submit themselues to suffer, and pray the chaunging of their mindes, that they may enioy a kingdome, vvhere there shall be no re∣spect of . If any  obiecte the troubles of Fraunce, and Flaunders, and  countries, vvhere they  to haue colour of charging the professours of the Gospell to haue taken armes against their prin∣ces, as I haue sayde , to I say agayne, they  arisen by occasion from  owne vvicked and wretched , for that through treason and  haue  drawne moste dis∣honorably to break  ovvne fayth and , to goe  their  lawes and , whiche armed subiectes,  against their Princes, but vvith and  the  of them, againste the  & heady  of  singular per∣sons And therefore they haue euermore bene  by their ,  de  and
discharged from all disloyaltie by their publique in∣strumentes and vvritings, their souldiers haue bene payed from their Princes paye, and so haue bene discharged. As for rebellion and the schollers there∣of, haue alvvayes sprong out of the Schole of Po∣pery, it is a vvhelpe of your ovvne litter, and an egge of your owne nest. Macke Morris vvas a Papist, so is Saunders (if he be yet ) that set in of late for Ireland, & brought a company thither, out of Italy to get a kingdome, to  a place vvherein to lay their dead , and to bury their bones. It is your doctrine, Hovvlet, and those of your fether, that holde that  be duely discharged from subiection, andBristovv in his Motiues. Mo∣tiue 40. In the  of obedi∣ence.  Prince from dominion, by the  authoritie of the common Pastor of . VVe haue and do acknow∣ledge our selues subiect of duetie, by the institution of God, vve confesse her Hyghnes lawfull authori∣tie to extende to and ouer all sortes, and no mans profession to exempt him from obedience & fealty, vvhich you do not: for if you yeelde any, you saye, It is but  common  sake, , and so farre  as  for the accustomed vse of a natural . and onely in temporall thinges. You haue no cause therefore, to storme in suche , nor to take it in suche dudgeon, for beeing sayde to be enimies to God, and to her royall Maiestie. And it is a levvde lye that this broadefaced owle vvould face downe that Papistes set her  into her gouernment, and wilHovvlet Praef. likewise be ready to maynteine her in it, vvhen all the  knovveth, and euery Court vpon record soundeth, that they haue shaken her seate, and endeuoured from time to time, as muche as laye in them to de∣pose her from her peaceable and rightfull Scepter. To conclude therefore, The Papists erring in doc∣trine,
and beeing members to  that  of sinne, aduersary to  Christ, and beeing the most  liuers that euer vvere, setting them selues  agaynst the righteousnes of theThis is  by all their p  be fore. Gospell, and beeing playnly proued to be deadly enimies agaynst all gouernment, the  of treasons, the styrrers vp of strife and rebellion, in all  vvheresoeuer they become, beeing per∣svvaded that the Pope can not erre, vvho hath pro∣nounced our Soueraigne to be a Schismatique, and hath  his Bull to depriue her of  royall  and dignitie, and to discharge her Subiectes of all loyaltie and duetie, reconciling, persvvading, and vvithdravving her subiectes to the pretended autho∣ritieAgainst the last statute. of Rome: I conclude that they are enimiesto God, to their ovvne Realme and countrie, to their naturall Prince, and to them : and I beseeche God, either to turne their hearts, or els to giue them the  of traytours. And thus muche to re∣quire this Papist in asseuering that vvhich I set downe in my dedicatory Epistle. Novve a vvorde or tvvo concerning the Fast at Stamford, and so an ende. VVhereas this  Ovvle, to bring the trueth into hatred vvith her Maiestie, by vvaye of comparison, setting his quiet Catholiques, and their doctrine of obedience, a∣gaynst vs and  of the same matter, to The common  of  to  and  men with that where,  they haue no . me, vvho haue (as he sayde) so falsly infamed them, promising to set dovvne certayne propositi∣ons  out of tvvo  of my Prea∣chers. &c. I  no farther credite of the vvhole Church of God, of her , & of all indifferent men, then I shall be able to proue the same by suf∣ficient
testimonies to be most shamefull and . And first, before I enter into it, vvhat colour of  can it haue, that those propositions out of their Sermons should be gathered by a Minister, vn∣lesse it vvere some such  as Euerard Hans vvas, alias Ducket, vvho  thereabouts before his going ouer? Thinke you there vvas any Minister so familiar vvith this Ovvle beeing of the darke broode of Papists? If he vvere a Minister, ey∣ther he must be some such hypocriticall lyer and an accuser &  of his b. , or els this ougly owle hath out of his ovvne heade to declare him∣selfe a  like his father,  these shameful vn∣truthes. He  that this  was forbidden, by the L. Superintendent of Lincolne, by his letters bearing date the fifth of Septēber, & yet that these Preachers vvould not , that the letters vvere di∣rected to the  & Comburgesses there. In deede it is true, that after the allovvance of this Fast, by former letters  the Byshop, and at the request of others, all vvhich  are set dovvne, that the Bishop sent some such restraynt,  by some rumor , that his appoynted order should not  obserued, both as touching theGood thinges neuer lacke .  of , & also  bringing in some , for vvhose doings he could not answer: but M.  & his brethren very wisely considering that the  now already ap∣pointed and vvarranted, and beeing cleare in their  knovvledge from any  of altering that vvhich vvas prescribed and ,  they should seeme to yeeld to suche suppositions as they  dreamed of, & so shew them selues : they
kept their determinatiō according to thorder whichOthervvise they shoulde haue shevved themselues . was prescribed. And therfore, thogh Parsons Howlet by some of his inteligencers gat notice of such a let∣ter, yet he was not acquainted with the premisses, nor with al that belonged to this matter. And it might well be, that by practise of some enemy giuing false insormation (as lightly there lackes none to hinder good things) vvhen the fast had beene in diuers pla∣ces of the Realme els where,  the fearefull earth∣quake, a token of Gods anger, and vvas ordinarily sought for, by the Alderman and Comburgesses there, to the ende they might shevve their forward∣nesse, to humble them selues beforc the Lord, as  had done, it may be, I say, that that exercise vvas then sought to be stayed, as the first vvas, but thankes be to God it vvas both orderly kept, and vvell obtayned. For vpon better information giuenThe Lorde Treasurers honourable readinesse to further the fast of Stam∣ford. to the Right Honorable the Lord Burleigh, Lorde high  of England, vvho by reason that his Honour is Lord of that towne of Stamford, and for that also his Lordships house of Burleigh is hard ad∣ioyning , and beeing othervvise very good Lord vnto the tovvne, he vvas the rather made ac∣quaynted vvith their good desire and proceeding, and by the letters of M. Robert Iohnson also satis∣fied. To vvhich letter his Honour vouchsafed to giue an honourable and fauourable aunswere, retur∣ned to the sayd M. Robert Iohnson from the Court then beeing at Otelandes, bearing date the 25. day of Iuly 1580. vvherein his Lordship shevveth his good contentment and forvvardnes to so holy an exercise testifying that for the sayde M. Iohnsons readines and paynes in preaching, in teaching and
reading in those partes thereabout, he hath cause both to esteeme and loue him. His Lorship exhor∣teth him to continue in his vocation. I set not dovvne his Honours letters in respect of duety, not hauing communicated my purpose vvith his Ho∣nour, trusting of his Honors fauour in this behalfe, seeing it is against an enimy of God, and in mainte∣naunce of the truth. But this is true, that therwithall his Lordship vvrote also a louing letter to the Al∣derman and Burgesses of the sayd towne of Stam∣ford, bearing the same date, approuing any thing, that the Bishop should direct or order in that be∣halfe, & another also he vvrote to the Bishop of the Diocesse vvhich they foorthvvith sent by a speciall messenger & a letter frō themselues: and this vvas the copie of the letters sent from the towne. To the right reuerend Father in God, and our Diocessan, my L. Bishop of Lincolne. The letters of th  of the  of  to the  his allow∣ance  the .RIght reuerende Father, after our dueties most humbly premised. It may please your L. to be aduertised, that vvheras of late vve made request to the godly learned  about vs, to afforde vs their godly trauel, in a days exercise to be spent with vs in the seruing of god, in fasting prayer, godly me∣ditations, and  his vvorde & relieuing of the poore, vvhich orders we vnderstand to the great , edification, instruction, and comfort of Gods people, hath of late bene obserued in many  of , & in sundry such places with∣in your good Lordships Diocesse, as lawe thought conuenient for that purpose: vvhich our
determination vvas misreported of to the Lorde Treasurer our especiall and very good Lord, vvhere∣vpon by  letters of the second of this moneth, he required & aduised vs, that the said en∣tended exercise for some considerations should be stayed and forborne, vvherevpon vve haue made staye of it hitherto. So it is nowe that vpon some  and more particuler declaration made to hys Lordship, by letters sent from M. Iohnson a prea∣cher to his Lordship touching that matter, it hath pleased his Lordship by his letters of the 25. of this moneth, to graunt vs his good and fauourable al∣lowaunce, to the hauing of the say de exercise, and further hath aduertised vs in the same letter, to be∣seech your good Lordship of your direction & con∣sent therevnto, to the vvnich purpose he hath sent a letter to your Lordship, included with a letter sent to me, and my brethren the Comburgesses of this towne, vvhich letter vve sende vnto your good L. by this bearer, most humbly beseeching you to graunt vs your good furtheraunce in this our re∣quest, vvhich vve  and  make to your good  in  vve nothing doubt,  godly zeale and care to the  and  of Gods glory. And thus  Lordships fauourable  by  vve most humbly take our leaue.  this 30. of Iuly. 1580. Your  humble  the  and  of the Borough &  of  &c. To these letters and by occasion of the others the
Bishop gaue his consent, and returned in effect this answere, gathered out of his letters by M. Frauncis Harington Recorder there. superscription. To my very  friends, the Alderman and  of Stamford,  this. THE order that I do  good of is this, thatThe summe of the byshops answer to the town agayne. you of the towne of , by conference vvith your Preacher M , should agree vpon some  or dayes, vvherin you vvil vse that godly  of preaching & fasting, vvithout the con∣fluence of other  that apperteine not vnto your town. And that M. Hanson on the Sunday be∣fore the  appoynted, do in a Sermon exhort the people  to  thēselues to so conue∣nient & godly an exercise, & that on the day it selfe there be two sermons, one preached by M. Hanson, and  by M. Liuely, the residue of the time, ei∣ther before, betwene, or alter the Sermons, you may  in open or  prayer, or in cōtri∣bution to the poore, in such  as you shall thinke conuenient. This maner I thinke in my  sufficient, neither would I  you to do it other∣vvise, for I know, and haue signification giuen me al∣ready that it  be very offensiue, & breede more  then I vvould gladly haue come to . These my letters  you keepe. sor the  of my ,  the matter  come in contiouersie. Thus fare you hartily . Your very louing friend, .
Hereby may plainely appeare the shamelesse lye of this staring Owle, that blushed not in the eares of her  to vvhoope, that this exercise vvas kepte  against the Byshops will, that the prea∣chers disobediently stepte vp in the pulpit, and vtte∣red such sedicious , as he and his infor∣ming scribe haue patched together, as farre from all coulor of trueth, as any of the rest, to the slaunder, not onely of those godly and learned preachers, but also of the magistrates, and vvhole corporation of that town, vvho did nothing, but according as they were directed by aucthority, sauing onely that M. Iohnson preached in the second place, in steede of him that vvas appointed by the byshop, he vpon some occasion failing (as there may  out in such a case many ) M Iohnson being notwith∣standing requested of the magistrates there: both by letters at the first & at that instant, & that after the viewing of his : and as for M. Liuely the first preacher, let him be heard, as able to speake for himselfe in this matter. Richard Liuely minister in Market Dee∣ping and first preacher in the publique fast at , to Iohn Howlets acculation, answe∣reth as followeth. IT is not without great cause, that Saint Paule in his first Epistle to Timoth. cap. 5. 19. setteth down this rule, and leaueth the same as a  order in the Churche, that againste an Elder no accusation should be admitted, but vnder the testimony of two or three witnesses: he did well consider, that the
minister being stained, his doctrine is in hazard, and the gospell thereby like to receiue some wounde. Therefore he woulde not that the minister without true proofe should be condemned, but rather iudi∣cially called, and heard to aunswere for himselfe, A∣gain, as nothing more hindereth or plucketh down the kingdome of Satan, and setteth vp the kingdom of Christ, then the worde and Gospel, and the com∣fortable preaching thereof: So there is  vvherein he is more diligente, then to accuse and slaunder, to deface and depraue the Preachers of the worde, as the readiest meane to hinder the credite and course of the Gospell, to retaine the wicked in their , and so to holde the worlde (as it were) in his clawes. That this hath bene the practise of Satan from time to time, not onely by his ovvne vncleane mouth, but other conuenient instrumentes for that, to forge accusations and slaunders, to carrye and recarrye misreportes, espe∣cially agaynst the ministers, experience of all ages, and examples in Scriptures doe plentifully recorde, He moued Corah, Dathan, and Abyram, to accuse and slaunder Moses and Aaron in the open face of the congregation, he procured the Priests and false Prophetes to accuse Ieremy, and Amaziah to ac∣cuse Amos, he  the Scribes and Pharises to slaunder Christe himselfe, hee stirred vp the elo∣quent Orator  to accuse Paule. So it is a  of the Gospell till this day, to be subiect to captious enimies, and the preachers thereof to the persecution of  lous tongues, vvhich no doubt vvere able to discourage vs from oure duties, and vvounde vs to the very heartes: if vve had not that
good shield left vs, Mat. 5. Blessed are you, when men shall speake all manner of  sayings against . Now Sir, if you bee founde in the rable of these accusers, and youre accusations, though in manye vvoordes, yet most of them vntrue, then vvith what Spirite you vvere led in penning these things, your conscience will tell you, euen with the Spirit of him vvho as a liar, from the beginning, and the father of the same thing. And all men may easily coniecture that malice in your heart exiled trueth from youre tongue, and bashfulnesse from your countenaunce. For if to report a lye to a meaner person, hath bene euermore counted shame and dishonesty; Then so malepertly to insinuate suche manifest vntruethes into the eares of a prince, yea of so wise, godly, and vertuous a Prince, because you vvould do the grea∣ter hurte, I doubte not but it shall purchase to your selfe perpetuall discredit and . You lay to our charge the odious crime of diso∣bedience, and contempt of lawes and magistrates, and this you seeme to proue, partly by our actes as violent rushing vp into the pulpit being forbidden, partly, by certeine propositions of doctrine publi∣shed at the generall fast in Stamford as you are in∣formed by a minister there present. Now hovv greatly your minister that gratified you with these  did therein abuse you, and consequently you abuse others, you shal soone per∣ceiue. First, concerning the note of disobedience, I say, that the  of Stamforde, vvho  the  person in that towne, vvith the other , by one assent and consent, and by earnest suite requested mee to  that
good worke, my , which is my L. Byshop of , by his letters  date the  day of August did nominate, and by speciall name ap∣point me to that , to occupy the place that day: Therefore,  by the alderman and his bre∣thren requested, and by the Byshop appoynted, and neuer after had, nor heard of any restraint or countermaund, nor any  tending to that purpose, what trueth can be in your assertion, that I would not obey? my charge lieth not in that place and therefore no cause why I shoulde intrude my selfe against authority. Concerning youre foure propositions of Do∣ctrine inferred as it seemeth altogether from the Prophete Ionas, hath not so muche as any face of trueth, seeing my text vvas in the prophesy of E∣say. Vppon these Articles as false , you grounde a moste vvicked conclusion, that vvee vvoulde haue no ruler nor gouernour at all. Not∣vvithstanding I doubte not to approue my loyalty to my Prince, and my good affection tovvardes ma∣gistrates vvell ynough, hovvsoeuer you dare so ma∣liciously  port it. In that place, and not long time before, I pro∣ued,In a Sermon vpon  seuē teenth of No∣uember, Anno 1579. that neyther City nor Kingdome, nor Socictye of men vvas able to endure, but by the benefite of good and vvholsome Lawes, and that Lavves were nothing vvorth,  there should be Magistrates to execute the same, for Lex ,  autem est lex . The lavve is a dumbe Magistrate, but the Magistrate is a speakinge lavve.
I declared openly that by them vve enioye our landes, liuings, goods, and possessions in safety: that by them our controuersies are decyded, & the vvea∣kest, vvhich els vvere like to go to the vvalles, by this meanes godly defended. And therefore the sunne in his brightnes not more needefull for the increase of the fruites of the earth, nor meate and drinke for the sustentation of this our nature, then the vse of good and godly magistrates in euery cōmon vvelth. As occasion then required, I styrred vp the peoples heartes to thankfulnes to God, for the happie and peaceable gouernment of this Realme. All vvhich may argue hovv farre I am, from suche Anabaptisti∣call opinion of vvishing no ruler or gouernour at al. At that instant time of the generall Fast, I made prayer my selfe, and exhorted the people to pray as∣vvell for her Highnes, as her most honorable Coun∣sell, and all other the Nobilitie of this Realme, all Iudges, Iustices, and ciuill Magistrates, and by special vvords for her Maiesties preseruation, agaynst all trayterous practises eyther of domesticall or for∣reyne enemies, for the multiplying of her dayes and yeres, in abundance of peace and godly lyfe, & for the continuance of her and the Gospell, if it vvere his good vvill and pleasure, euen to the days of Me∣thushelah. And can any man thinke that in the tur∣ning of a hande, out of one fountayne should flowe svveete vvater and sovvre also. first to shevv honest and hartie affection to Magistrates, and immediatly to breath out hatred and contempt of Magistrates, to make a diuorse betvveene my vvords and my heart, to vvishe there should be no ruler or gouer∣nour at all?
No it is you and your sect of stisnecked Papistes, that pinch at Magistrates, vvhile you exempt your selues from  obedience, you knovve vvho ground them selues vpon that saying of the Psalme,  meos, Touche not mine annoynted, doe vvrest this and suche like places, & retche them as Shomakers do their lether, to serue your purpose for the Popes shauelings. A learned father confu∣ting your vanitie, sayth, you might aswell make aLatimer in Serm. habit. syllogisme of Quem terra pontus, to proue of no∣thing something.Stamford. VVhere you are pressed, vvith the authoritie of S. Paule, Rom. 13. Let euery soule submit himself to the authoritie of the higher powers, you knovve vvho shift of the matter vvith this glose, Onnis anima secularis, non item , Euery secular soule, and not eue∣ry spirituall soule. But Chrysostome confuteth your saying, Omnis anima  Propheta, siue Apostolus, siue , Every soule whether he be Prophet, or whether he  an Apostle, or Euangelist. But this is beside my purpose. And therefore to returne to your propositions, al∣beit by charitable instruction they might be mitiga∣ted, from that rigour that you vvould enforce vpon them, yet to do not onely that vvhich is iust, but to do the same iustly, faythfully & truely, I say I ne∣uer spake them, yea as surely as the Redeemer of the vvorld liueth, and I my selfe hope to be partaker of that redemption: so surely I neuer vttered thē. How far they vvere from my vvords, the vvhole company then present can testifie, how far from my hart, God himselfe doth know. And albeit my nay ought to be as good as your yea, & my flat deniall in mine owne defence, in good reason ought to counteruayle and
preuaile with your bare and naked affirmation, yet to put the matter out of all doubte, I haue craued the  of such as did heare me, not of the simple, rude or ignoraunt, but of the better, the more learned sort, and such as be of good credite and calling in the common vvealth, as followeth. WE the alderman & comburgesses of Stamford knowing the premises whiche the saide Ri∣chard Liuely hath alledged to acquite himself of the abouesaid slaunder of disobedience, to be most true, haue thought good to ratifie the same by the sub∣scription of our names as hereafter followeth. Comburgesses. Iohn VVimbleby Alderman VVillam Lacy Gent. Iohn Houghton Gent. Reinold Harrison. Richard Euely. The true report of Iohn Hanson Bacheler of diuinity, and preacher in Stamford, concer∣ning the  of Richarde Liuely, and Ro∣bert Iohnson, at the generall fast in Stamford. 14. Sept. Anno. 1580. I Iohn Hanson with great  writing and gathering the  of the  sermons, and ha∣uing examined &  the same with eight propositions of Iohn  promised, wherevvith  charged the  parties, do find no such ,  vvordes, but , that they are  therevvith, and this I am ready, if neede be to verify by othe. By me Iohn Hanson.
The faithfull information of Robert Cros∣dale preacher, concerning the abouesayd ser∣mons of M. Richard Liuely, and M. Roberte Iohnson, at the generall fast in Stamforde. 14. Sept. Anno. 1580. I Robert Crosdale, gathering the notes of the sayd Sermons, and conferring the same vvith the pro∣positions vvhich are layde to their charge, doe stedfastly and truely affirme they haue great iniurye to be so vvrongfully accused, and to this I am ready to be sworn, if I shall be thereto ordinarily required. By me Robert Crosdale The testimonie also of the righte honoura∣ble, the Lord Zouch: M. Frauncis Harrington Recordor of Stamford, & M. Shepheard Arch∣deacon of Northhamptonshire, concerning the saide . TOuching the propositions set dovvne by Iohn Hovvlet, which (as hee sayth) vvere gathered at two sermons, by a Minister presēt at Stamford at a generall Fast. These are to certifie, that hovvso∣euer the minister youre informer, mistooke the matters by gathering and setting dovvne his notes, or for want of diligence or readinesse of his pen, or for vvant of memory, capacity, or vnderstanding or howsoeuer, the said Iohn Howlet hath altered them to serue his purpose, the truth is so, that I am certen ly informed, by some both of honorable & worship ful callings vvhich vvere then present, that he hath very much abused the prechers in this his report, by
setting downe that which they neuer vttered; and that in truth, ther was nothing then & there taught, which was not spoken with all loyall and dutifull o∣bedience, and in good termes, and whiche mighte; without iust occasion of offence giuen, haue beene preached before any estate in this land, both for the matter and manner thereof. And albeit it must needes be confessed, that both  & after the order was set downe, by the Lord Superintendent of the Diocesse (as you terme him) that sayde exercise was secretely vndermined, and some wayes crossed, by false intymations and vntrue , yet in the end it was reuerently and pro∣fitably kept, according to the true meaning which was permitted, prescribed and allovved in vvriting by the letters of the said superintendent, the procee ding herein vvas after this manner At the requeste of the Aldermen and , not without some allowaunce from the righte Honourable the Lorde Treasurer, to whome the inheritance of that Borough , vppon such good liking and allovvance as should thereof be made by the ordi∣nary (to vvhome his honor vvrote about that mat∣ter) the exercise vvas helde and performed in suche sort, as nothing vvas taught corruptly, disorderly or seditiously, but the godly order set dovvne in that behalfe, by the right honourable the Lordes of her maiesties priuy Counsell, being first kept in euerye point, for the more better edification of the people according to the Byshoppes letter, there vvere tvvo sermons preached by tvvo such as vvere lavvfuly & sufficiently allovved and aucthorised thereunto, one of the sayd preachers being earnestly entreated to
preach by the Magistrates and  of the Tovvn, by occasion of the defect of one of the tvvo vvhich vvas named in the Byshops letter, and this vvas thonly difference of the order obserued, from the order prescribed in the bishops letters. Both the sermons vvere neither tvvelue nor  houres long, nor yet much aboue fiue houres, which time vvas thought to bee little ynough for them, considering they had to  and  the manifold corruptions and abuses of the popish and Pharisaicall fasting, and to teach the true order and ende of true Fast, with the doctrine of true , and humbling of their soules and bodies by true repentance and newnesse of life, vvhich necessarily ought to accompany , as without the vvhich it is vnprofitable, which being done, ther vvas a liberall contribution and collection made for the poore, and so the action vvas peaceably and profitably ended. And thus much briefly touching that matter. Edward zouch. Nicholas Shepheard Francis Harringon Recorder of Stamford. The credible report of Tobie Houghton of Cliffe in the County of Northhamp. Gen∣tleman, for & concerning the summe and ef∣fect of the late Sermons of M. Richard , and M. Robert Iohnson preachers, at the  generall Fast at Stamford, the 14 of Septem∣ber. 1580 as follovveth. The Text of the sayd M. Liuely being conteyned
in Esa. 22. 12. 13. 14. 15 verses, vvhereof  the sayde Tobie Houghton, vvrote the quantity of one sheet and a halfe of large  in notes, gathered from the say de preacher, out of his ovvne mouth, and by these presentes do iustifie, that the sayd M. Liuely is  and vniustly charged by Iohn  in his late booke dedicated to the Queenes moste excel∣lent maiesty. And further, I am in like sort to cleare the sayde M. Iohnson of the sayd Hovvlets like slander against him. I hauing gathered out of his sermon at the said ; to the quantitie of one vvhole  of paper in notes as he spake them, his Text being the 2. of  12, 13, 14, 15, 16. verses. And to conclude, I vvill by the grace of God, bee ready to iustifie, that they or eyther of them at that present, spake not anye of the articles obiected a∣gaynst them by the sayd Hovvlet, neither did they vtter any manner of speache agaynst the good and godly gouernment of the estate of this our Realme of England. In  vvhereof. I haue vvritten this same vvith mine ovvne hand and set my name to the same, this xii. of February. 1580. Houghton. By these testimonies alleadged by mee, concer∣ning the Fast of , it appeareth (I )  hovv vayn the accusation is, that these eni∣mies of God, and of her highnes, haue made against those Godly and learned men the Preachers that preached there, against the vvhole Borough & Ma∣gistrates therof, and against my selfe vvho neuer was
acquainted with the matter, neither had any dealing at that time or at any other  any suche thing. And novv because I haue sufficiētly discouered this vvhol trovvp of papistes vnder Antichrist the Pope, to be enemies to our Lord & Captain Iesus Christ, to his religion, to our gratious Soueraigne for pro∣fessing it, and to vs, as  as vnder her highnesse gratious gouernment hartily embrace it:  that he hath seuered vs from them, to the ende vvee should holde out his glory against them, and not be ashamed of his Crosse in the groatest  they shall be able to laye vppon vs, and, that  should haue no fellovvship vvith them. And there∣fore I moste humbly befeech her Maiestie vpon the  of my heart; vvhome God hath  to that high top of honour, to honour him, & to holde vs  in al obedience vnder his septer and gouernment (vvhich these enimies ,  their  both against God  of , and against her  of it:) that she vvil (in that  knovvledge of the truth, wher∣of by the singuler  of God shee is made measure, and in that , the Lord in mercy hath  in her gracious heart, agaynst )  vvithout famting, to the  on of all , her most  and louing : vvherein as  haue by Gods: assistance pitched our staues to stand fast, so  fully  our selues of her gracious defence euen to the ende. It is no time  for vs to looke backe: All the boastinges land proude challenges in the vvorlde, of  and nevve , cannot  to any suspence of the trueth.
VVe are not ignorant of their great speech & proud vvords: we know that Antichrist shal come with po∣wer, yea with lying signes & wonders: his bulke shall be big, & his men shall appear as  as great as euer were the Anakims and Goliah: yet we are not by the grace of God, afraid of thē. VVe haue had suf ficient triall of their weapons & armour, vve knovv their standings & their studies, and euermore when we haue crapled with them, by the  of God, we  ben to hard for thē. A tast was giuen in the be∣ginning of her maiesties most , & since at sundry times, at VVifbich of late: & this other day at the Tovvre. And as euermore God hath knit vic∣torye vvith his trueth, so hee giues shame and con∣fusion to salsehood, vvith vvhat vvisedome of man soeuer, vvith vvhat learning or pollicie it bee main∣teined. And therefore hauing by the grace of God founde the trueth, vvee are fully determined to liue and dye in it. And it is , that as God and Satan can not be serued together, so vve can not be faith∣full Subiects to Elizabeth our Queene mainteining , if vvee serue Antichriste. VVee can not be  to her, if vve yeelde  to her eni∣mie, and a  vsurper. And  as vvee are made one vvith Christ our heade, & are sorted and  into his folde, as his Confederates, vn∣der the leading of our Christian Prince on earth: vve meame by his assistance faythfully to fighte his battels. Neither can they  vs, thoughe they shoue in amongst vs, as long as they come in, vnder this Antichristes standered and ,  the Markes both of false , . Ty∣ranny and vvicked life.  if they  to
be vvith vs as friends, and yet craftily vndermine vs to coole vs and hinder vs, vvee maye for a time bee deceiued, but our  vvill at the length disco∣uer them, and vvhen they are found out, oure eyes shall not  them. They shall be vsed not as con∣federates to him, vvhich only the fathfull are: but as enemies, vvhom vve being commaunded to strike, vve dare not spare, neither reserue: hovve goodly and fatte Oxen soeuer they bee, and vvhat good shevvs soeuer they haue. VVe dare not trust neither the  & whining of these Curres in this time of their bondage & tying vp. The time vvas vvhen they vvere lose, and then they played their partes, they shewed their kinde; and we knowe that there is no change, but by regeneratiō. Their snarling, their barking agaynst the trueth, their lying in vvaite, and continuall looking for aduantage, vvhen they maye crush vs, euen in this time, testifieth vvhat vve vvere like to finde, if they had any power ouer vs. And thoughe in this  of them vp, as VVolues they haue licked out hands whilest we sed them to traine thē to humanity, yet lying lose, they wilbe the more  against vs: God of his gracious goodnes keep vs out of their handes. And we giue him most hūble & harty thanks, who in so exceeding mercy & won∣derful patience, waiteth for our conuersion, euen o∣uercomming our sinne vvith his goodnesse, in pro∣tecting and defending vs against the madnesse and  of these open and deadly enemies. VVe hum∣blye thanke him for defending this Realme, oure Queene, her Counsailours, and all her people. For it is vvell knovvne, and vve  it, that if he had looked vppon our vnthankfulnesse, vve should haue
bene as a pray vnto them and they would haue ea∣ten vs vp aliue: he hath done it: not vnto vs, that is, not for our sakes, but vnto his owne name, that he may haue the glory of it. And surely, if we faint not, but go cheerefully sorward in that glorious trueth, in  he hath called vs vnto, if we labor to approue our selues to him, giuing him a pure woor∣ship & seruice according to his own appointment & will, striuing to sincerity aud cleansiug our churches from that popish filth, this man of sinn hath left be∣hind him in thē, if we giue him the honor of leading vs, & will bee ruled by his woord, renouncing mans wisdome, pollicie, and strength in the worke of our saluation, then shal wee not neede to feare, though these enemies be neuer so many or mighty: If God be vvith vs vvho can be against vs? Though their Parsons be taule and terrible, their furniture vvell appointed, their strength in the iudgement of men inuincible, their knovvledge in martiall affairs equal vvith ours, their learniug, vvealth, riches, and pollicie aboue ours, yet in the name of the Lord of hoastes vve vvill not feare them: if God be in the middest of vs, compasse vs about & fight for vs, if vve be vnder his leading howe can they preuaile against vs? And surely cōfortable experiēce we haue had of his good nesse these many late years in protecting this realm, so beset with enimies, our gracious prince by nature a vveake vvoman, and subiect to many infirmities, her counsellors exercised vvith many difficulties & hard tentarions, her people giuen vp in peace, as commonly common people are in suche times, to  their profites and pleasures: that God, I say, hath yet so mightily defended them, and enriched
vs all, with so many blessinges both of this life, and of the life to come which are moste precious, vvhat other argument can it yeelde vnto vs, then of great incouragement? This shoulde euen encrease oure hope, and adde newe strength vnto vs, to make vs stande fast to our God: The trueth is, that our polli∣cie and arme hath not wrought it, but our  God who hath kept continuall vvatch ouer vs, to the end vve should vvalke in holy and  obe∣dience, in fear and trembling as in his presence: not that vve should be secure and carelesse, arming these enemies of ours, vvith our sinnes and transgressions against vs, but that vve should feare before his , & trust in him, being armed vvith the righteousnes of Iesus Christ our head, which shal not only shroud vs from their fury, but from his ovvne vvrath and  damnation. Thus muche I thought good, beeing specially dravvne in by the aduersary to speak in the defence of Gods euerlasting trueth. If I giue any iust offence to the godly, by any slippe of humaine infirmitie, I craue pardon for it: but I protest beefore him, that knoweth the secretes of all heartes, that I haue not of any malice, sinister affection or desire of reuenge, vvritten any thing, but for & in the simple desēce & maintenance of the trueth and to the end to discre∣dite error and . And concerning one Hovvlet, vvhome I  in my Epistle dedicatory to aym at, and since haue vnderstood that the name by all likelihood shoulde be counterfaite, and taken vppon, by one  a runnagate Iesuite: I am very sory for the wrong (if any be) that I haue done to Howlet, vvhom I supposed it to be. And I vvould
the vvillingliar crye him mercy for it,  the Lorde vvoulde vouchsafe him an happy conuersion, from that false religion of popery, which I vvill vndoub∣tedly pray for, vvith all my heart. The Lorde God of all glorye, vvho is king of kinges, and Lorde of Lordes, preserue our gracious Soueraine Queene Elizabeth, and all her honourable counsellors, , inferior officers and people, and so streng∣then them in the trueth, as all may haue iudgement to discerne those thinges that differ, and in their se∣uerall callings knovve vvhat belongeth vnto their speciall duties, that they may all detest popery, false doctrine and heresie, and vvith the glorious profes∣sion of the truth, ioyne a sincere and godly conuer∣sation in life, & so hold out the glory of Christ their heade, through the sanctification of his blessed spirite, till they be gathered the vvay of all flesh, and arriued at that happy Hǎuen of  rest, vvhich hee hath purchased. Amen. I haue hated the Church of the Malignant.
FINIS.
