11539 99855689 21191
AN ABRIDGMENT OF CHRISTIAN PERFECTION. CONTEINING Many excellent Precepts, & Ad∣uertisments, touching the holy, and sacred my∣sticall Diuinity. Written in Italian, by Fa. Achilles Galliardi of the Society of  & translated into English: By A. H. of the same Society. THE SECOND EDITION. Imprinted Anno M.DC.XXV.
TO THE RELIGIOVS MEN AND WOMEN OF OVR NATION. AND To all others who desire to attayne to the eminent state of Christiā Perfection: health in our Lord. THIS Little Booke (Deuout Religious in Christ Iesus) being
first written in Italian by the R. Father Achilles Galliardi, of the Society of IESVS, and de∣liuered ouer, in written papers only, vnto an Honourable and very deuout Lady of Millan, for her priuate instruction, and better aduancement in spiritu∣all matters, was some yeares past gotten out of her Closet, and communicated to more, then it was at first intended. For a little after it was carryed into France and there transla∣ted, and printed in the French tongue; but with so many o∣missions, obscurities, and other faults, contrary to the Authors meaning, that in many places it could hardly be drawne to a∣ny perfect
sense: the which some persons of great zeale, & well experienced Maisters of Spirit perceauing, and lamen∣ting that so excellent a Trea∣sure shold be obscured & clow∣ded in such darknes; did care∣fully labour to correct what was amisse, by making cleere the obscure places and by re∣storing of many passages to their proper sense, which were before corrupt and intricate: that so being published anew, it might appeare worthy to be presented to the view of poste∣rity. In this little Worke then, is conteyned, and set before our eyes, Doctrine of so great Per∣fection, endeauouring so to
purify the intention, & reduce the mind of man to conformi∣ty and vnion with the Will of God, that the view of so great a light, may perhaps dazle the eyes of such, as yet do looke throgh the clowd of selfe-loue, and are not fully resolued to re∣pell their inward enemyes; & in that respect it is not inten∣ded, or directed to any such. And much lesse is it offered to sensuall minds, who cannot iudge, or discerne the worth of such a pearle, but would ra∣ther trāple it vnder their feete, then tread the pathe which leades to such a treasure.
But I doubt not to deme it fitly presented to the reading of all such, as haue entred, or resolued to enter the pathes of Perfection, by imitation of Christ our Lord, in practise & performance of the Counsells Euāgelicall. For of such minds we may with reason hope, that first God for his part, as he hath called them from the pursuite of worldly vanities to the veri∣ty of his diuine loue: so he will be no lesse bountiful vnto them in assisting their endeauours with plenty of grace, vntill he haue perfected the work which himselfe hath begun in their soules. And of their part, as they haue receaued from God so much light,
as to find this Trea∣sure, and so much wisdome as to know the value therof, and so much fortitude of mind as to contemne their former worldly estate, for the purchase of this field or state of Religious life: so we may iustly expect at their handes, that according to the light, wisedome, and fortitude which they haue receaued, they should be desirous, and glad to labour in digging out the sayd treasure, and getting it entierly into their owne possession: and therefore also that they ought neyther to be loath to vnder∣take the labour of digging, nor yet to thinke much, if hauing gotten the gold, to seuer it from the earth and
drosse which ad∣hereth vnto it. And this true in∣tention of benefitting them∣selues (which is neuer wāting in any wise man that hath foūd but an earthly Treasure) is as much as this Book requireth, in the practise of whatsoeuer is heere prescribed. For first we be heere aduised to dig & descend into our own nothing by Anihilation: then to cast vp and throw from vs all the earthly substance which lyeth betweene vs & the trea∣sure, and this by Disappropria∣tion, or as it is called in the Ghospell, by Renunciation of all thinges which we possesse. Then we be led by the vertue of Indifferency to cleanse it also be∣ing
found, from the dust of our priuate affections, and self-in∣terest. And thus the gold being gottē into our possession it thē teacheth vs first how to puri∣fy the same from the drosse of all self-loue, by the Conformity of our will to the Will of God. Secondly, to refine it yet more from the baser kind of mettall, which is oftē much mixed with this diuine gold, and yet hardly by the eye to be discerned, but the touchstone of Christ his example doth try it, & the fire of Charity doth refine it, so that it then comes to be Aurum igni∣tum, spoken of in the Apoca∣lyps, and one thing, as it were, with
the fire it selfe; and this is therefore called Vniformity. Then remayneth only, that this gold thus feruent and plia∣ble to the will of him that wor∣keth it, receaue the stampe of the heauenly King, that so it may be currant coyne in his di∣uine Court: in which it is only a Patient, and nothing is expe∣cted of it, but that it take, with∣out resistance, what impression the workman is best pleased to impose. This is the worke of Grace in the soule; the worke∣man is God himselfe, and the stampe he imprinteth in it, is his owne Image: and so this sixt and highest degree of per∣fection is called Deiformity.
In this state the Soule hauing first reiected al impediments to her well-doing, rooted out all euill habits, planted in her selfe the habits of solid vertues, and seuered from her intention all selfe-loue; yea hauing by the help of Gods Grace, purified euen her most inward desires, & all sensible inclinations, frō the infection of selfe-interest, then is her will not conformed only, but vnited vnto the will of God, and so transformed in∣to the same, that now it see∣meth not to be her will that worketh, but the will of God which worketh in her: as though she had giuen her own hart vnto Christ, and (as we read
of Catherine of Stena) had receaued his in exchange, to be in her, from that tyme for∣ward, the beginning and first motiue of all her operations. Of which estate also we may vnderstand the wordes of the Apostle Gal 2. when he sayd, V∣u autem, iam nonego, viut verò in me Christus: And I liue now not I, but Christ liueth in me. Much like as we see the graffe which is inserted into another stock, which liueth indeed in it selfe, & bringeth forth fruit, but not by the life it had before, from it owne naturall roote; but by the sap & life it now re∣ceaueth from the new stock in∣to which it is graffed, in which it growes, & by which it liues.
many aduises in the booke, (especially in the Chapters of the second & third Estate) were i is tught that the sou∣le must be content to frgo first all actiue operaton, and practise euen of vertues themselues, and lastly to be depriued euen of the pastue also so farr as it may seeme sensible vnto the soule that it is her own work. And this to the end that Gods will may be the pure, and only mo∣tiue of her will and workes whatsoeuer; thou must beware in these, & the like sentences, of two seuerall doctrines or errors, wholy contrary to that which is beere intended. The one, least thou thin∣ke that a soule being come to that estate, doth not indeed work with her owne will, but that God then worketh all in her, so that those workes be not really the actons of the soule, but of God him∣selfe; which thing is both false and ab∣surd The other error is, that a soule in this state of Perfection should not doe any thing, but as seeing her self to be
cleerly moued therunto by the will of God, and in a manner compelled by the same to doe all her actions, so that she in the meane tyme should be idle, vntill the feele this impulsion from God. This doctrine would nourish slouth in the sou∣le, yea and breed, if not bring forth, he∣resy also against the freedome of our wil, and against the necessitie of our concur∣rence with the grace of God: all which are not different only, but contrary to the intentiō of the Author, as (besides the authority of the Parisian Doctours who approued this booke, when it was tran∣slated out of Italian, and set forth in their owne language) the diligent & impartiall Reader may also by himself easily discerne, if he mark wel the whole discourse. For he shall find it here requi∣red, that one omit no practise, or proofe of likely meanes, either in rooting out of euill, or in planting of good habits. Also that all the rules, & aduises of this
boo∣ke, are to be applied to euery mans estate and that he omitting no part of his du∣tie, doe practise the same, togeather with the actions which his estate and institu∣te require. Lastly that this Subtractiō of actiue and passue Will, touching the acts of vertue, is the worke only of God in the soule, with which (when the soule doth perceaue it to be so) it must con∣curre as with the will of God, to will the same thing, as our dutie doth bind vs. And this is no other thing then we find in daily practise, though all doe not feele it a like, nor all follow this rule, as they should, when they feele it. Ye happeneth vnto vs more or lesse whensoeuer any de∣solation by Gods appointment doth fall vpon vs, for in that case we finde our sel∣ues lesse apt then before to will, or worke any good, yea, or to suffer the proceeding of that good (which before we desired) with any contentment: and this desola∣tion may so increase, that it shall seeme to vs, our desire carrieth vs wholy to the contrary of that we had
resolued. But all this is only in the inferiour part of ou soule to wit in our naturall inclination, which for the time is left to it self, by Subtraction of that effect, and fruit of grace by which it was before comforted, strengthened, and enabled to performe good actions, and concurre to supernatu∣rall vertues, with desire and delight: which to be the effectes and fruits of gra∣ce, the Apostle teacheth, Galat. 5.22. when he saith: Fructus autem spiri∣tus est charitas, gaudium, pax, pa∣tientia &c. So that all this while gra∣ce is not diminished in the superiour part of the soule, nor the vertues lesse perfect which are placed therin, but only there-doundance, fruit, and effect of that grace is stopped, and subtracted for the time, from the inferiour part, to increase the battale which the soule is to bane, and the victory which it is to obtaine, by constantly conforming, and vniting her will to Gods, notwithstanding that in∣creased difficultie; yea by
renouncing her owne naturall will and inclination, transforming the same into the will of God, and so saying with our Sauiour Christ in the like case: Non mea, sed tua voluntas ia, Pater: not my will, o Father, but thine be done. In whose example we may see, that the practise of this point may stand with all Perfe∣ction, which could not be wanting in his actions. So that the scope of this doctrine is not to make vs idle or remisse in wor∣king, nor to expect that God should doe all in vs, and that our will should haue no part in the action: but it requireth, that we doe cooperae with Gods grace, and labour with all diligence, whilest we can. And when by Gods ordinance we feele that our sensible forces do faile vs, and that we are not now able to creep, who before were able to runne in the wayes of God (as the Prophet saith, Psal. 118.32.) cùm dilatater cor nostrum, whilest he dilated our hart with ioy and
comfort; we must then con∣forme our will to God, yea, and be glad to transforme our weake will into his strength of goodnes, to vnite our drop of water to his sea of graces, and to say with our actiue will (though our incli∣nations striue against it) that his will shall be ours, and therfore that we desi∣re his will may be done with vs in all thinges, howsoeuer our inerour part doe, according to nature, desire the con∣trary. This is the Perfection vnto which this Booke leadeth: the practise wherof we may see both vsed, and declared by God to his beloued Apostle, as may be gathered out of the first Chapter of the 2. Epist. ad Cor. and it is the highest which the soule can arriue vnto in this life. For as the will of God is infinitly good, and euen goodnes it self, so the nearer we come vnto it, the more we ap∣proach to a good and perfect estate. Ney∣ther can there be, euen by imagination conceaued, a higher Perfection, or
grea∣ter happines, either in this world or the next, then to be vnited vnto God, the fountaine of all goodnes. In this life it is to be done by grace, and in the next by glorie. This le Booke, genle Reader, will lead thee to the one, and thy dili∣gent practise of what it teacheth, will bring thee to the other. Christ IESVS grant vs grace to seeke this treasure with true desire, & finding it, to vse it to our best commodi∣tie. We shall doe it the better, if we pray hartily for one another, which I purpose to doe for all, that will endea∣uour to practise this Booke, & do craue the like of them for my greater needs. Farewell. A. H.
AN ABRIDGMENT OF CHRISTIAN PERFECTION. WHAT PERFECTION ought to be presupposed in the Soule that entreth into the practise of that, which is treated off in this discourse. CHAP. I. THIS Perfectiō requi∣reth a firme and reso∣lute desire in the
soule that vndertaketh it, & a determinate and seted purpose to attayne vnto it, and aboue all, it must be as the marke at which she aymeth, and the end which she pretendeth in all her actions. It requireth also, that she giue her selfe to mortification of her senses and passions, endeauouring to sub∣due the repugnance and contradi∣ction which riseth of them, and to obtaine full dominion and vi∣ctory ouer them. Moreouer that she apply her selfe wholy to the mortification, and abnegation of her will, and proper iudgement; vnder an entire obedience and a ful direction of her Superiors, euen with all the forces of her soule. That likewise she so apply her self to vertue according to the occasiōs occurring, or in any other sort; & principally to charity, to the loue of God and her neighbour, that she be not in this way alwayes rude, and as a beginner, but well ad∣uanced
and profited by progresse of time; at the least she must haue attayned a firme resolution, to be willing rather to dye, then to of∣fend God, yea although but veni∣ally, or to commit one of the least defects against perfection, in such sort, that the sinne she doth com∣mit, be by meere occurring frail∣ty. The cause, wherefore all this that hath byn sayd ought to be presupposed, is, for that a firme purpose of al these things in gene∣rall, is most necessary for the ob∣tayning of Perfection. And it is certaine that whosoeuer without a very earnest desire of these things doth with coldnes, and negligen∣ce seeke after vertue, giuing him∣selfe to his proper commodities, & selfe interests, liuing like a liberti∣ne, and with a will to remayne in his old
habits, without amend∣ment; can neuer attayne, nor come neere to Perfection, & much lesse to this that is the highest of all. TWO PRINCIPSES in which consisteth Perfection. CHAP. II. ALL the building of so high Perfection is foūded in these two Principles, which consist in practice: and therefore by the vse of them, being attentiue to the dai∣ly actions of his vocation, and in∣stitution, assuredly he shall come to the toppe, and full height of all his building. The first principle is, to haue a meane, & base esteeme of things created, and aboue all of himselfe: frō which esteeme ought to be deriued at least in affection, an entire forsaking of al creatures, and arenouncing of himselfe. And concerning his affection, to haue
alwayes this firme in his will & resolution, but to put it in practise principally when it is needfull. And from this ought to be deriued also a true knowledg of the with∣drawing that God worketh in vs, admitting, and accepting it with a ready will, to wit, to content our selues, and with great ioy of hart to accept it, when our Lord retyreth himselfe a little from vs, or depriueth vs of anything what∣soeuer. The second Principle is, to haue a most high esteeme of God, not by the way of penetration with Theologicall conceipts, or the like high pointes of Diuinity, for this few can reach vnto, and it is not necessary; but rather by the meane of a great promptitude, & entire submission of the will, and of the whole man, to the maiesty of God, to adore him, and
to doe whatsoeuer he exacteth of vs, for his greater glory, without any in∣terest of ours, how holy soeuer it be. For which esteeme it sufficeth, that the soule with the light of fayth apprehend God (as we are taught in our Creed) as Almigh∣ty, the soueraigne good, our end: and that for the great loue he bare vnto vs, he was mooued to make himselfe man, to suffer paines and death for our sakes. Moreouer that he is alwaies present with vs, and in all things gouerneth vs, as well in those of nature, as of grace: and in particuler calleth vs with a sin∣gular vocation, to labour for so high Perfection, & the like; which speciall fauours our Lord giueth to euery one conformable to his capacity, & according to the mea∣sure of grace.
Of this so excellent, and high esteem ought to spring a full and entire conformity with the diuine Will, which alwayes must be the rule of all our designemens, affe∣ctions and dayly operations. This māner of working by the foresaid meane, with the vse of these two Principles, bringeth the Soule to the vnion, and transformation in God, which is called Deification, not by the mysticall way of raui∣shing out of our senses, and eleua∣tion of the vnderstanding, nor by most vehement affections, that are deriued, and proceed from thence; for this is subiect to a thousand il∣lusions, and to great labour, with danger of infirmity of body, and ruine of spirit, and such payne for the most part auaileth little, and few do attayne vnto it: But it is by the beaten and common way, to wit, by the will wholy confor∣med, & with great stability trans∣formed into the diuine Will, by
perfect loue, the which maketh it to worke all in God, and for God euen without light and of this all are capable, and any that wil, may come vnto it with ioy, and com∣fort, but yet not without payne and labour. And after this there followeth ordinarily many other giftes of light, and diuine affecti∣ons, but they are to be taken as graces that are giuen gratis as truly they are, and we ought not to be too carefull for them, or to rely much vpon them. They are diuers according to the variety of soules, to some more, to others lesse; and there is no rule on our part, but all dependeth of God, and ought to be wholy submitted to his diuine pleasure.
OF THE FIRST Estate: & first of Anihilation. CHAP. III. THE foresayd principles ap∣plied to the diuersities of our occasions, actions, and motions, do make the soule to walke with continuall progresse, from the be∣ginning, euen vnto the end of Perfection, and all is reduced into three estates, euery one of which, and principally the first, contay∣neth diuers degrees, that maketh the soule mount, as it were, by cer∣tayne degrees, going from one e∣state vnto another, euen to the last. In the first estate, the soule walketh by the way of the knowledge, & base esteeme of her selfe, which is done in diuers manners, and prin∣cipally in foure.
1. The first is in acknowled∣ging, and esteeming herselfe pure∣ly nothing, seing that of nothing she was created, and should be cō∣uerted into nothing of her selfe, if God did not conserue her. Vnto which it helpeth much, to com∣pare herselfe to the whole world, to all men, to heauen, to Saints, & to God himselfe, in respect of which things, she knoweth her∣selfe to be not so much as a little drop of water, compared with the sea 2. Secondly in houlding her∣selfe for the most vile, and vnpro∣fitable creature of all, how vile soeuer they be, as is dust, a sinke, an Aposteme &c. all these things being good for some vse, but she for nothing, but to offend God. 3. Thirdly in thinking herselfe the greatest sinner in
the world, yea greater then all the diuels put togeather, and worthy of more chastisement, attributing to her∣selfe al the sinnes that are commit∣ted, and that all their tormentes duly might be inflicted vpon her. For there is no sin but she might haue committed it, if God had not preserued her. Exāples of this may be seene in the liues of S. Francis, and S. Catherine of Siena. 4. The fourth consisteth in this, that she ought to descend to the knowledge of the thinges of the world, the better to contemne them: and for the reiecting of them, she must make choice of the vilest and basest of them, as con∣cerning her place, garments, and any thing els; yet so notwithstan∣ding, that she affect not singulari∣ty: and she must esteeme the most abiect corner in the house the fi∣test habitation for her, and that
the office, or charge she hath, exce∣deth much her merits; and that she is not worthy of them, much lesse of greater. The foresayd practice bringeth a man to a true anihilatiō of himselfe. And although he doth not apprehend such conceipts in his vnderstanding, as may clearely represent such basenes vnto him, as he would; yet doth not he leaue to haue that esteeme of himselfe, seeing that he, who willingly abaseth himselfe, and preferreth all creatures, how vile soeuer they be, before him, esteemeth and repu∣teth himselfe alwayes the least: & he that knoweth not the practise of this anihilation, knoweth not the profit, and commodity there∣of. Thirdly in the soule that is foū∣ded thus in her owne nothing, there followeth also the disappro∣priation or true abnegation, the
subtraction or withdrawing that God accustometh to worke in the soule, and the conformity with the diuine will, which maketh a man to be transformed into God: & these things as they haue diuers obiects, so they haue diuers de∣grees, according to the order that followeth. OF THE FIRT degree of Abnegation, Subtraction, Conformity: and of the Abiecti∣on, and Anihilation of our selues. CHAP. IIII. FIRST, and principally there is wrought in the soule a full, & entire renunciation of al things created, that are indifferent, as life, death, health, all commodities, tast and interest of them, offices, dignities,
possessions, and other the like things; and this is to be done, first with the affections, re∣nouncing them entiely, and all desire or will she may haue of the: and for her owne part, she ought to cast all desire, and affection, & ntētion that she may haue therin, and the hopes of any commodity, tast and pleasure that may be had therby, euen as if she were dead. Secondly by worke, leauing actually that which is superfluou, and retayning only that which is needfull to her, according to her state, with the counsayle, & con∣sent of her Superiors. To this doth correspond the subtraction, or withdrawing, that God doth in vs of the like things, to wit, of life, by sending vs death, of health, by visiting vs with sicknes, of com∣modities and meanes when they are taken from vs, of pleasures and solaces, sending
vs paynes: and fi∣nally of any other worldly chāge, whereof we haue experience al∣most euery houe. All being done by the dume prouidence in such sort, that there passeth not any day, in which our Lord doth not take from vs, and depriue vs (ac∣cording to the variety of his pro∣uidence) of many obiects, & com∣modities, concerning these transi∣tory, and fading things. And he that is free from all affection to the like thinges, admitteth with great alacrity all priuation of them, and easily contemneth them all, how great soeuer they be. Likewise to this subtraction, & priuation correspondeth a mer∣uaylous conformity with the di∣uine Will, not desiring any created thing whatsoeuer, but that which our Lord willeth, and that which he giueth vs, reioycing to be, by the meanes of these changes & va∣rieties.
resaid conformity, a very great, & true loue of God, seeing there is taken away al the hinderances of any created thing, that was bet∣weene God & the Soule. And by this meanes the soule commeth to vnite herselfe perfectly with her Creatour, & to tranforme her self perfectly into him: from which ordinarily followeth great gifts, as lights, affections, and diuine motions: but for these we are not to be much carefull, but to seeke aboue all, to separate our selues with all our power from created things, and wholy to resigne our selues vnto God. And this is the extasy, and rauishing of the will, and not of the Vnderstanding, which is much greater, and high∣er, and which Deifieth the soule more.
THE SECOND Degree. Chap. V. VVE ought to passe fur∣ther in subtraction, or withdrawing our selues from things created. For not only this subtraction ought to be of indiffe∣rent thinges, as is said, but also of holy and spirituall, that are mea∣nes to vnite the spirit with God; yet not, as of such, must we de∣priue our selues of them, but for so much as vnder the colour of holi∣nes, there may be hid proper loue, and particuler interest; & of these there is to be noted many degres. The first, and that which is com∣monly vnderstood of spirituall men to be the lowest, or basest,
is touching spirituall consolations, redounding euen to the affections of the hart, that are sensitiue, to wit, tendernes, feruour, teares, sweetnes in our operations, & great facility surmounting diffi∣culties, by aboundance of spiri∣tuall delight: of which things we ought to depriue our selues, and not to cease vntil such time, as we haue no more feeling of any desi∣re to them. The depriuing our selues of these, consisteth in not making any esteeme, or any accompt of them, considering that these faci∣lities, that induce vs to worke, proceed not of any habit, or par∣ticuler gifts or graces, nor princi∣pally of charity; but only of this sweetnes and pleasure taken ther∣in, which is an obiect very pro∣portionate to selfeloue, and
parti∣culer interest, which nourisheth it selfe with selfe contentment, & pleasure, and commeth in tyme vnto a spirituall gluttony: and to receaue satisfaction in this, or to make any great esteeme therof, is no other thing, then to conuert holy obiects into our delights & pleasures, and abuse holy things, accommodating them to our gust, and feeling. A very great vice, al∣though it be secret and hid, from which easily may spring diuers vaine delightes, proud illusions, and diabolicall deceipts, and a thousand other euills. Also we must not thinke that vertue de∣pendeth of them or cōsisteth the∣rin, but we must know, that this is a childish thing, and that with this sweetnes & facility, a litle strength and vertue is sufficient to make vs imbrace the hardest, and most difficult matters: therfore we must depriue our
selues of al desire of them as of a meane thing, & of little esteme: and by the foresaid anihilation, acknowledge our sel∣ues most vnworthy of them, with a totall indifferency to haue them or not, being incited by vertue & perfection, to vse them when we haue them, only for the end that God sendeth them, to wit; ac∣knowledging them with great submission, and referring them vnto God, from whome they proceed, directing in them our in∣tention to establish vs, and to in∣crease so much the more in true & solide vertues: taking alwaies heed least being transported, and made drunk with this swetnes & spirituall tast, we do not make purposes, or dangerous promises of vertues, or workes that surpasse our forces, and which, when that sensible delight and
pleasure cea∣seth, wil seeme most difficult, yea impossible vnto vs. And to auoid such danger, the submission already spoken of, hel∣peth greatly; that is, when we admit with great promptitude of hart, the taking away of such con∣solations as God is accustomed at times to take from vs, and then to make greater estimation of God, and of vertue, then of any such consolations, yet labouring still according to those former motiōs, with a greater, and more ardent desire then euer, without hauing regard to the contentment of self∣loue, but only to the loue of ver∣tue it selfe, and for the diuine glory. The Conformity with God heere is cleare, and is of great im∣portance; for that to vnite him∣selfe with the diuine will, he de∣prieth himselfe, on his part, of such
consolatiō, contenting him∣selfe with his spirituall crosse whatsoeuer it be; and so much the more, for that such tasts, and mo∣tions surpasse all things created, and all the pleasures that they can affoard: and how much the more a man depriueth himselfe in this sort; so much the more he trans∣formeth himselfe into God, and perfect loue, and Deification in∣creaseth in him. THE THIRD Degree. CHAP. VI. AFTER the foresaid degree, there is accustomed to suc∣ceed & descend into the soule ce∣lestiall lights, desires, and affectiōs of stable and solid vertues, that are without comparison much
more high, then the sweetnes already spoken of; for that they are most effectuall meanes for getting of the said solid and stable vertues, & haue their being in the superiour part of man. And then the soule ought to mount to the highest de∣gree of forsaking and renouncing his owne will, & of subtraction, and cōformity to the diuine will, with the help of the anihilation, & humble esteeme aforesaid. Therfore it is necessary to be aduertised, that although such lights, & affections be from God in the beginning, and that presen∣tly vpon the receiuing, & imbra∣cing of them, they produce in the soule excellent effects, mouing & inciting it to vnite her self with God, by the meanes of firme & so∣lid vertues: neuertheles soone after if a man be not well aduised, but suffer himselfe to proceed accor∣ding
to his naturall inclinatiō, he ordinarily will imbrace willing∣ly such lights, & affections, with a certaine satisfaction, and a very great contentement in himself: which is a hidden delight of him∣selfe in them: and to cooperate with such lights he setteth himsel∣fe to discourse at large, and to for∣tifie the naturall forces of his vn∣derstanding, wil, and affections, with the which it seemeth vnto him, that his first lights much in∣crease, & are interiouly dilated: which yet is not so, neither is it any effect of God, but only a pure reflection of the soule, and a great contentemēt and pleasure, which she takth of their first beginning. And thus by little and little, the infusion of such lights com∣ming to cease, the naturall, and reasonable strength of the soule remaineth alone, which ordina∣rily is self-loue, which by this de∣light
goeth dilating this little that he hath of diuine light, esteeming that to be very great which is not: and in this sort he falleth into blindnes of pride, & vaine per∣swasion of great vertue, frō when∣ce do spring a thousand falshoods, deceipts & illusions; our Lord withdrawing his hand, because of the barre of self-loue which man hath put in his way: and yet such do thinke that they haue great grace infused, & great light, and it is nothing (the beginning only excepted) but only discourse, and naturall strength. And in the end, abandoned of the diuine in∣fluence, they fall into great faults, & errours; and from hence often∣times proceed very great illusions which notwithstanding had good beginning. Presently therfore when the soule receaueth such motions,
she ought to humble, and anihilate her selfe with great submission, euen as nothing. And this act roo∣teth out, and cutteth off all the force of this delight already spo∣ken of. Afterwards she must pro∣test, that she will not seeke any selfe-contentment, reputing her selfe most vnworthy, as a most vile & abiect persō; & this to fe her soule of al selfe-loue, which by reason of such lights may enter into it. And heere she depriueth herselfe of a much more noble thing then before, & by this grea∣ter vertue is obtained: & although it seeme vnto her that she dimini∣sheth, or decreaseth, yet notwith∣standing it is not so, but the hin∣derance is taken away that kept the soule backe, & did hurt her greatly. And our Lord finding the soule by such abnegation dis∣posed,
increaseth with his particu∣ler concourse, the like lights and motions, by true & solid meanes, although it be not with so great tast, & pleasure, and guideth her with great safety in the way of Perfection. The soule thus depriued by the meanes of such pure & diuine lights, commeth to refer and attri∣bute them vnto God, feeling her self in them affected only to the diuine glory, and not vnto any other thing, with great acknow¦ledgement of the diuine bounty, who vouchsafeth by diuine infu∣sions, to abase himself to so vile a thing. And this rule of spirituall motions is a matter of great im∣portance: for that, if they be not of God, presently they wil be dis∣couered by this abnegation; and if such lights come from God, we shal be secured, that neither selfe loue, nor
the diuell can haue any part in them. And moreouer refer∣ring them vnto God, who hath giuen them vnto vs, we come to make more esteeme of the giuer, then of the gifts, and by this mea∣nes get true and solid vertue. There followeth afterwards another conformity of most pure lights, and motions, with the act of the will, and affections, purged from all selfe respect, and vested with the diuine will, pretending in such diuine influences only to obey Almighty God, & his diuine pleasure, and nothing our selues, where with the soule passeth into God, & transformeth her selfe more highly, and profoundly then euer; & heere she offereth, & giueth, & dedicateth her self who∣ly vnto God.
THE FOVRTH Degree. CHAP. VII. AFTER that the soule is exer∣cised thus in purging & dis∣appropriating her selfe in these spirituall motions, and in desire of solid vertue, as hath bin said: there wil follow a higher degree which is this. It happeneth often, that hauing such desires, the soule can∣not attayne vnto that she preten∣deth, and that for some worldly, or humane cause which doth hin∣der it: as for example, when we must leaue prayer, by the which the soule findeth her selfe prompt, apt, ready, and as it were inuited to vnite her selfe with God. And obedience on
the other side, or charity requireth to leaue it for another worke of great distractiō, but profitable to our neighbours. And this wilbe necessary not on∣ly in one worke, or at one tyme only, but it shalbe needfull also concerning our manner of liuing, to leaue the quiet, and contempla∣tiue life, in which the soule felt her selfe greatly inflamed with ardent desire of solid vertues, to busy her∣self in the negotiations of the acti∣ue life, in which she shall haue great repugnance, and by which she shall receaue many occasions of distraction; neuertheles she se∣eth clearely, that she is called by God to leaue that for this, & some∣tymes also shall find hinderances which proceed from God, to wit, when God giueth vs not so quick∣y as we would, this vertue & per∣ction, which he inciteth vs to esire.
In the like occasions the soule is accustomed to feele payne, an∣xiety, and sorrow, for such hin∣derances, and is therewith very much afflicted. It is needfull heere that she consider, that there may be selfe-interest in this busines, al∣though it be very secret, and hid∣den, which she ought to cast away wholy, with a noble and coura∣gious abnegation. The sorrow then, and anxiety that afflicteth the soule in such de∣sires, and maketh it vnquiet, pro∣deth ordinarily of selfe-loue: and although it be without sinne, ne∣uerthelesse it is a hinderance bet∣weene God, and the soule; seeing that as a thing created, it hindereth perfectiton, and keepeth the soule backe from arriuing to the top of the same. Also the propriety is dis∣couered plainely, although it be of a holy thing, and it seemeth
ther∣by (althogh indirectly) that a man will giue a law vnto God. And fi∣nally the vnquietnes that afflicteth the soule inwardly, is not of God, whose spirit is sweet and gratious, and full of peace and tranquility: & to take away such vnquietnes, he must forsake such desires, & the vertue it selfe, in the manner that followeth. First a man ought to accept, & receiue this desire as a gift of God, without resting or staying him∣selfe in his proper delight and sa∣tisfaction, as hath been sayd in the degree before: and he ought to procure with all diligence to put it in execution, neuer letting passe any meanes, that he doth not try by experience, & put in practice, that thereby he may come to such vertue and perfection: for so much as doing this, he chaseth far away all tepidity, & negligence.
When these hinderances before declared happē, he ought present∣ly to thinke that the diuine boun∣ty is not pleased at that time in the execution of his desire, and there∣fore he ought to renounce it quite, with protestation that he will ha∣ue neyther vertue, nor perfection (I meane, the execution, or act of desire only, for the ground or es∣sence of the desire ought to re∣maine) but euen such, and in that manner, & when God will giue it; renouncing vtterly al the rest. He ought then to take away all anxiety, and griefe, discouering plainely his selfe loue, & his owne interest, that was hid vnder such desires, although they be holy: & also learn this most high doctrine, which is, that such a desire euen of martyrdome; with this anxiety, although it seeme to
be a great thing commeth to be very base, & little, for so much as it is selfe-inte∣rest, & a hindrance between God and the soule: which being taken away, the desire remayneth as great as euer, and insteed of the anxiety, it is accompanyed with a meruaylous tranquillity in God, and in his diuine Will. And note well, that the soule that hath such a desire with repose, & tranquillity, without the vertue and perfection desired, is more a∣greeeble to God then any other who hath such a vertue; which if she had not receaued, or had not attayned vnto, would haue beene much grieued and troubled, seeing that he obtaineth most perfection, who is most conformed to Gods will and pleasure, and exchangeth the vertue created, for the diuine will increated, which doth farre surpasse, and infinitely exceed the
other: notwithstanding the desire will remayne, not with humayne feare, that afflicteth & disquieteth the soule, but with a diuine feare, which is annexed necessarily vnto the desire. For to desire a thing that we cannot haue, bringeth feare, which is accōpanyed with paine, vntill such tyme as it is obtayned: but this is a paine from the which doth proceed a meruaylous con∣tentment, and a resignation vnto God, knowing wel that our Lord is pleased greatly with such a pain, to wit, to see a soule quiet, and full of peace in her payne, to resigne her selfe and accomplish his will, who for to please her Lord, wil∣lingly and of her own accord, wil remaine depriued of a good, that she so instantly doth desire, because her loue vnto her Lord, is more then vnto any perfection, or ver∣tue.
In such a soule remaineth ordi∣narily a diuine light, that doth in∣struct & teach her, what great dili∣gence she ought to vse, without uer relenting, or waxing cold & negligent; but a soule must not rely vpō the same, seeing she doth not come to this that she desireth by her diligence, and industry, how great soeuer it be, but by the will and pleasure of God, who sometymes giueth it, & sometimes not, euen as he best pleaseth. Ther∣fore by reiecting, and loosing all esteeme of our owne diligence, & industry, is gotten a certayne con∣fidence & filiall security, that God, who hath giuen the desire, will al∣so giue the perfection, when he shall please, and according to his will. And thus for his owne part, the soule putteth, and casteth her∣selfe as a little infant into his ar∣mes, and is most contented with∣all, thinking no more of
it, but with a pure & sincere resignation vnto God, worketh as out of her selfe, and, as we may say, at ad∣uenture leaueth all care of her selfe to our Lord, as a little infant, with a kind of diuine tranquillity. To this so high renunciation, and disappropriation doth corres∣pond the subtractiō, or withdraw∣ing of our Lord already spoken of, when he doth not giue the vertue we demand, which we ought to admit with ioy, and cooperate in the manner aforesayd. Also there is discouered clearely a conformi∣ty with the diuine will, very se∣cret, and knowne but vnto few, seeing that man leaueth God for God, that is to say, leaueth and re∣nounceth God, in as much as he bringeth any selfe interest with vee, and perfection, to hau him more excellētly, to wit, with∣out
any interest. From whence followeth a most high trāsforma∣tion, and an admirable Deificati∣on, from which is accustomed to proceed excellent gifts, and very rare lights, worthy of such a loue, and so great vnion with God. In particuler the aforesayd do∣ctrine ought to be applied to three sorts of desires, besides the place it hath in all others. The first is of eternall glory, in which she ought to be resigned in the manner be∣fore specifyed, when our Lord de∣ferreth it, esteeming much more of the diuine will, to the end she might entierly forsake al self loue, althogh it be of the most excellent good that is. The second is, the desire of this anihilation, renoūcing of her selfe the conformity with God, which she must also moderate with the selfe same rule aforesayd, when our Lord doth not giue it so much as
she would: where it is well to be noted, that to forsake willing∣ly the loue of the same vertue, which is with anxiety, and super∣fluous propriety, for the desire to haue the same vertue with satisfa∣ction, and be content to beare the burthen of her imperfectiō against her will, & to conforme her selfe wholy vnto Gods will, is a most great renunciation, and surpasseth all other vertues. And here must be taken away the anxiety, & griefe that we haue to obtaine it: & note well, that the more diligence we shall vse with anxiety, and pro∣priety, for to obtaine it of God, the lesse shall we haue it. The third is the desire of suffe∣ring, althogh our nature repugn, as a thing contrary to sense: it may happen neuerthelesse, that the de∣sire to haue it, is too great by ex∣cesse of anxiety, and selfe loue in
and indure, taketh away such con∣tentment, and hindreth the perfe∣ction of operatiōs; the soule ought to take away, & cut off the thoghts of crosses, and paynes, when it is not time to suffer, conuerting and changing all into this cherefulnes of conformity with God, to the which, the thinking of pleasant and delightfull things (so they be holy) helpeth much, for that such thinges are conformable to perfe∣ction. Of this cherefulnes springeth a promptnes to all operations, strength to surmount difficulties, and ioy of hart & vnderstanding, as the Apostle sayth: Gaudete in Do∣mino semper, iterum dico gaudete: Re∣ioyce in our Lord alwaies, againe I say reioice. Agility also to take in hand any good worke, facility to execute and end it, and
sweetnes in all things, euen in the crosse it selfe, when it is taken only for the loue of God, and to please him. And if we haue not such cheerful∣nes, at the least we ought to desire it, and inforce our selues to haue it in resisting al hinderances that the diuell shall oppose. Our Lord was singularly in∣dued with this alacrity, and shew∣ed it in his countenance, rendring himselfe very amiable, whereby is manifest that he thought not al∣wayes on his passion, but that he diuerted and retired his mind and thoughts, except when he knew that it was the will of his Father he should; and thought on ioyfull things with a pleasant aspect,
and with a sweet and gracious counte∣nance, accompanyed with graity and words of weight, to draw th harts of the people with mild and authority; and with this al∣crity he indured, and suffered af∣terwards the subtraction, o ta∣king of it away, in the tyme of his passion. THE FIFTH Degree. CHAP. VIII. THE soule being in this con∣formity, tranquillity, and cheerfulnes which hath byn sayd, with progresse in perfect vertues, and with great power of the supe∣rour part ouer the infriour, by reason of the long habit, and great facility she hath gotten in repres∣sing, and subduing the motions of her passions; God is wont after this, or when he thinketh good, to permit her to begim to feel great tentations, the lie, or grea∣ter then those which she suffered in the beginning
of her cōuersion, to wit, of the flesh, of impatience, of feare, of difficultyes, and other the like, in such sort, that she be∣ginneth agayne to feele a great re∣bellion in her inferior part against the superiour, & the diuel sharply tempteth her, in so much that she is forced to returne to fight, & that with great difficulty: but notwith∣standing, the superiour part gene∣rously fighteth, gayneth, and bea∣reth away the victory. This mutation and vnexpected change resembleth the imperfect state of a nouice, or beginner on∣ly. The rebellions of the inferiour part agaynst the superiour, the re∣presentations of diuells, the moti∣ōs of sensuality, & the newnes vn∣accustomed, are as it were against the common stile of grace, that happeneth to vs ordinarily after the first assaultes of temptations, & the victory ouer them, hauing gottē the
habits of perfect vertues, and in such sort subdued sensuali∣ty, that scarcely it dare once kicke or repugne. All these things are ac∣customed to put the soule in great perill, of thinking she goeth back∣ward, and that she hath giuen oc∣casion of her being in so euill an estate, whereby is wont to rise in her mind vnquietnes, despayre, & great decay of wonted force: and therfore it behooueth that she stād well vpon her guard, and before all thinges consider and obserue, that the will, by the grace of God is resolute, rather to dye a thousand tymes, then to offend God in the least thing that is. And for that sin consisteth in the will, she ought also firmely to perswade her selfe, that she is farre from committing of it, seeing that all her griefe com∣meth of those contrary motions, her will being so earnestly
bent, not to offend God. And which is more, she ought to be secure, that she hath not on her part giuen oc∣casions to such tentations, seing that she abhorreth, and detesteth them greatly: and principally for that she desireth to conforme her∣selfe altogeather to the diuine wil, and to disappropriate herselfe of al thinges created. She must likewise be aduertised, that she doth per∣forme this while diuers actes of vertue with the superiour part, for so much as hereby through diuine grace the spirit is made more vi∣gorous, although the flesh be mo∣ued and incumbred with no small perturbations, and this so much the more, for that she shall find manifestly & assuredly, that there is no offence therin: and if she find that she cannot sufficiently resolue her selfe, for her continuall feares, and remorse of
conscience, let her remit her selfe, and repose wholy on the iudgment of him, that hath the guiding of her soule. Moreouer she must be aduerti∣sed, that such temptations, althogh they seeme vnto her to be the same that she was wont to endure in the beginning, are notwithstan∣ding very much different, if she consider the cause from whence they proceed: for that then the su∣periour part being destitute of good habits, vertues and graces that giue great strength, and the inferiour part full of euill habits, very strong and stubborne, togea∣ther with the fraudulent sleights of the diuell concurring therin, no meruayle that the flesh did fight and rebell against the spirit, vntill such tyme as the superiour part were made strong and vigorous, and our Lord giuing strength to resist, and vanquish the inferi∣our part; which
being thus tamed, the battayle ceaseth soone after, with a submission and tranquilli∣lity betweene the one and the o∣ther; our Lord permitting al this, to the end, that by the way of cō∣bat, to his imitation, we may ob∣tayne the victory, and also by this meanes be made partakers of his celestiall gifts and vertues. But when after all this the tēp∣tations returne, the soule being al∣ready fortified, and not hauing gi∣uen any occasion thereunto, the she must assuredly know, that this is an expresse prouidence of God, who will haue it so, and that such temptations doe not take their be∣ginning of the interiour, to wit, of default that is in her, but come of other causes: and this great and se∣cret instruction helpeth much to what end our Lord worketh and permitteth all this. For first it is to the end, that the repose and peace
that she had before, be not occa∣sion to her of so great satisfaction, and contentment that she come to delight much in herselfe for it, & so be in dāger to fall into pride. Secondly, that selfe-loue which subtilly vseth oftentymes to enter therein, be quite extinguished. Thirdly, that there may increase, & cōtinue in the soule the know∣lege of her basenes & little worth. Fourthly, that she may attayne to a new light, and know that per∣fection doth not consist in being free from temptations and in ha∣uing peace betweene sensuality & reason: for it may so fall out, that these temptations wil be more ve∣hement, then those that she had before, and that she shall suffer much by them, and therefore she ought to hold her self assured, that our Lord by such meanes will bring her to greater vertue.
Wherfore when she beginneth to enter into such afflictions or troubles she ought before al things to humble her selfe & descend into her owne nothing, and acknow∣ledge herselfe worthy of all temp∣tations: and in the same manner, as she was already before accusto∣med, to receyne with contentmēt the contempt and afflictions out∣wardly: so ought she to inforce herselfe to reioice in that our Lord is pleased to humble her, and to permit her thus to be buffeted of the diuell. Secondly she ought to be willing to want the peace and repose that she felt when she had no great temptations, and likewise all the contentment which she had therein. And how much the more such repose is a high and ex∣cellent good, so much the greater sacrifice it is, & more
pleasing vn∣to God, to be willingly depriued thereof for the lue of him. Thirdly, she ought to admit with the same affection, and promptnes, as is spoken of before, the subtraction or withdrawing that our Lord doth vse, which cō∣sisteth in this, that he doth not per∣mit the vertue or power of the su∣periour part, to redound & worke in the inferiour, by giuing it such force as that it shold not feele these temptations: (which would be, if God did concurre therein as be∣fore:) but our Lord withdraweth such concourse, and from hence proceedeth anxiety and affliction. Fourthly she ought not to inforce herselfe to due away these temp∣tations with great pennance and mortification of nature, as she did at the bginning when she was a Noce, for by that way (as is read of some Saints) the temptations increase rather then otherwise, but
she ought to submit herselfe vnto God with humility, for to suffer them willingly, as long as it is in his will & pleasure, and then not to care for them, but to contemne them. Afterwardes, of this followeth the conformity to the diuine will greater then euer, seeing that to conforme her selfe vnto him, the soule is content to be left comfort∣lesse, and to suffer such paine and confusion, which is most pleasing to his diuine maiesty: besides that, it is very cōformable to that which our Redeemer did, when being in the garden he would that the in∣feriour part should find difficulty to suffer, & neuerthelesse he said, non mea, sed tu voluntas fit, not my will (o Father) but thine be done. And of this conformity riseth in the soule not only a loue of vnion that trās formeth
it into God more highly, but also a loue and desire of the crosse, in conformity with our Sauiour, when as to accōplish the diuine will, she is content to suffer temptation. And heere she doth not only offer, and dedicate herselfe vnto God, but doth also sacrifice herselfe vnto him. THE SIXT Degree. CHAP. IX. BESIDES all this that hath beene sayd, the affliction and payne is accustomed to passe fur∣ther, and come euen to the superi∣our part where vertue and spirit make their residence. And so she shall perceaue her selfe to fayle & want light in her vnderstanding, and good purposes, and desires in her affections, promptnes to doe well, strength
and patience & the like, in such sort, as where before she did fight with great force and vigour, now it will seeme vnto her, that she is without strength and vertue, and that she cannot re∣sist, and euery little straw will seeme vnto her a blocke, and so shall feele and perceaue nothing but obscurity, and blindnes, great darkenes, aridity or drinesse, grief, tepidity, rebellion, pusillanimity, confusion and great oppression, seeming vnto her vnpossible to re∣turne to her first designementes & good purposes. And heere in very truth is great danger, if she do not inforce herselfe to remedy it as she should, to the end she fall not in∣to sundry great inconueniences, whē she is thus abandoned, which happeneth in diuers manners. First in apprehēding too firme∣ly all this that hath beene
spoken of, to be a great misery, & for this cause afflicting her selfe, & grow∣ing sad. Secondly, too earnest set∣ting her selfe to thinke of what cause they proceed, attributing all to her owne defaults, and infor∣cing herselfe to look curiously in∣to them. Thirdly, of set purpose, procuring with great diligence to free herselfe of them, to take order to remedy all, and returne to her first estate, esteeming the present to be miserable, and yet neuerthe∣lesse leesing all this labour: for this being not the true way, nor the remedy of her euill, she findeth the trouble to be thereby increased. Fourthly, for this cause, the soule is accustomed to fall into impati∣ence, feare, and pusillanimity & in danger to despayre, it seeming vnto her that nothing doth help her, and that she goeth from euill to worse. Supposing
thē the soule to be exercised in these foresayd degrees, it is needfull she consider with her selfe, & principally with the help of him that guideth her, the secret and meuaylous myste∣ries that are hidden herein. For the first thē, let her know that the true cause of all that is sayd, is the di∣uine prouidence, who willing to make proofe, and to purify a soule, after he hath enriched her with ver∣tues, and great strength in the su∣peiour part, is wont to retire his accustomed succours, without the which these vertues cannot work: wheof it commeth, that although she haue them, yet do they seeme to her that she hath them not: and from hence followeth darkenes, aridity, and other miseries already spoken off; notwithstanding the graces and foresayd vertues remai∣ning in the soule as before. For the second, this subtraction or diuine withdrawing doth not
proceed of the absence of vertues, giftes, and graces, seeing that they remayne entierly in the soule, & it doth lesse proceed from the acti∣on of thē, for so much as indeed the soule is depriued thereof. But we must consider that in internal and spirituall actions, there is a direct act, that tendeth directly to God, to wit, the same internall act or o∣peration touching his obiect: as for example, the practicall know∣ledge and election, or lawfull de∣sire, to haue a wil to suffer, to haue a will to loue God, to haue a will to be temperate, chast, obedient, not to consent vnto sin &c. There is also the act reflectiue, that tur∣neth to wardes it selfe, to wit, to discerne & iudge whether he doth such an act, whereby he may re∣ceaue contentment, and reioyce therein for the glory of God, for that he discerneth himselfe by
the same to be strong, and victorious ouer temptations, with great re∣pose of the soule. Of these two, the first is the pure act of vertue: the secōd is the fruit that redoundeth in vs, & the fruition of the same vertue: & this is most cleare that the act of tem∣perance doth not consist to per∣ceaue that he ath it, or to reioyce in it, or content himselfe therein, but to desire it, and effectuate it. Now God concurreth in the first, and by that meanes the acts of ver∣tue are performed, but he with∣draweth the second, to wit, our knowledge, reflection, iudgment, and satisfaction to haue done thē, and therfore it seemeth to vs, that we do them not, & in the place of the knowledge withdrawne, hap∣neth darknes & blindnes, in place of the ioyfull affection succeedeth aridity & drynesse: euen as it hap∣neth
to him that is almost starued, who receyuing food into his sto∣macke neyther feeleth nor tasteth it: it is cleare that he eateth, and notwithstanding it seemeth vnto him he eateth not, and hath in a manner no more satisfaction of such an act, then if he had not done it. Seeing then that it is not pro∣perly vertue to perceaue our inte∣riour actions, and that therin doth not consist vertuous effects and o∣perations, being only satisfaction vnto our selues, our Lord preten∣ding to bereaue vs of all our pro∣per tast & interest, as a hinderance betwixt him & vs. leaueth vs the purity of vertue, which is no o∣ther thing but to desire it, & put it in effect, and taketh away the se∣cond, which is a certayne selfeloue more subtile then those that haue yet beene specifyed, & an
interest with the which the soule nouri∣sheth it selfe, and such as diuerteth vs from greater vnion with God: and this being so, it is plainely to be seene, that there is not only no euill heerin, nor any danger to be feared, but that the soule by such a diuine work is purifed the more in vertue, and is purged from all proprieties, and selfe in∣terest, although it be very hidden, and is raysed to a degree, and dis∣position of greater grace, & much more vnion with God then be∣fore. For to make all this mani∣fest, the soule that is come to this estate, must be aduertised of two pointes. The first, that if she will examine the purity of vertue, she shall see the same in her actions more then euer she did. For if one should demaund of her in these griefes, obscurities and rebellions, if she would offend God, she would presently answere, that
Sauiour Iesus Christ, of whom it is written in the beginning of his dolorous passion: Coepit pauere, a∣dere, & moestus esse; that is to say, he began to be troubled, to feare, and became sad: and after he said, Tri∣stis est anima mea vsque ad mortem, my soule is sorrowfull euen vnto death. Now we must consider three pointes. First the greatnes of the paine & torments that he was presently to endure. Secondly that then was with drawne from him the concurrence of strength, pa∣tience, magnanimity, & the like vertues, concerning the feeling of them in the manner aforesaid, and for that cause he presētly fell into so great anguish, feare, & heauines, that the least of his sorrowes see∣med vnto him insupportable, wherof before he
reioiced so much in thinking of them, saying: Bap∣tis hab baptizari, & qumdo c∣arctor vsque dum perficitur: I haue to be baptized with a Baptisme, & how am I straitened vntill it be dispatched. Thirdly, that with all this, the stedfastnes of vertue was most firme & more stable thē euer, seeing that in these words to his Apostles, Surgite, amu, arise, let vs go (that is, to meet them that came to apprehend him) he discouered a meruilous promptnes to suffer, patience, strength, and a genero∣sity of hart, not to be ouercome or quailed by such a withdrawing or subtraction before mentioned by which the holy Doctors say, that our Lord merited then for the holy Martyrs & other Saints, who in their torments and paines were so richly armed with patien∣ce, strength, magnanimity & other vertues in the superiour part, that by the same
vertues they did so triumph, & reioyce euen in the middest of their paines & tormēts, as we read of many holy Martyrs. When thē, it shall please our Lord to take away, & bereaue a soule, for the loue he beares it, of this garment, with the foresaid subtra∣ction, or withdrawing, as he doth in this estate; then it is cleare, that he bringeth her to a higher imita∣tion of himselfe, then was the o∣ther, seeing that the same subtra∣ction was vsed to him by his eter∣nall Father. And besides this reason of the most liuely imitation of our Lord there followeth others also, to wit, that how much the superior part is more noble then the inferi∣our, or then the body: so much more the suffering of it, or both together, is more noble then any martyrdome whatsoeuer of body only, if it be without the other. And moreouer to suffer
with this fredom & liberty, or sensible force of vertue, with which the Martyrs were indued was as easye vnto them, as if they had bene in the middest of roses. But with this subtractiō or withdrawing it see∣meth not only difficult, but also impossible. So that with all this difficulty to be thus magnani∣mous, and couragious with all ef∣ficacy, maketh vs more apt, and prepared for higher vertue, and greater merit. And finally to find our selues so freely & highly ray∣sed vnto vertue, naturally it is an occasion of perill & danger of pride: wherfore vnto S Paul (Ne magnitudo reuelationum extelleret eum, least the greatnes of his reuelatiōs should extoll him) there was giuē to preserue him the temptation of the flesh, so to counterpoise the daunger which might follow: by this height of vertue the soule is
plunged into this extreme low estate, by the feeling which she hath of troubles & feares &c. And therfore she is secure, that is, she is preserued from danger, which is a signe of higher estate, for that she hath a great foundation of humi∣lity, and knowledg of her owne basenes. This as it seemeth, may be gathered of the temptation of S. Paul, which was giuen him for auoyding the perill wherin he was: wherof it followeth, that the hauing of that temptation of the flesh, was a higher estate, then the first, seeing that by this mea∣nes the hinderances and imperfe∣ctions of the first are taken away. and he is made more secure ther∣by, in such sort, as this estate is a certaine probation, that God ma∣keth of his elect, a liuely imitation of our Lord and
Sauiour Iesus Christ, a more excellent Martyr∣dome, then the exteriour, & foun∣ded vpon profound humility, which is more sure then any other whatsoeuer, and is of greater me∣rit, and a disposition to receiue greater gifts & graces, & which is more, an enemy to proper loue; for that it taketh away the satisfa∣ction and contentment that is re∣ceaued of vertues, and so by con∣sequence increaseth, & commeth to be of greater conformity with the diuine will, & is enkindled more in loue towards God, then the others before mentioned: see∣ing, that for to satisfy Almighty God, a man depriueth himselfe of so great a good, and remayneth with the pue actes of vertues, na∣ked of all sensible ornaments, and selfe contentment. That which ought after war∣des to be practised, is: First for
so much as the diuell is wōt to trou∣ble the soule with many thou∣ghtes, as if all this happened for some great defaults, that were in her (which afflicteth her much:) to deliuer her selfe from this, she ought to repent herself of all her defects, sinnes, and occasions that she may haue giuē in this case, but in generall, without any more thinking therof; and the rest, to remit herselfe wholy vnto her Su∣periour, belieuing in all things his aduise, and renouncing her owne iudgment, keeping her selfe in peace, and repose of conscience, supposing this maxime, which is greatly necessary in this sixt de∣gree, to wit, that a man ought not to iudge of himselfe, nor of what he feeleth in himselfe, seing that that the subtraction maketh that he can haue no light, reflection, nor perfect iudgmēt of his actiōs; but he ought to content himselfe,
and reioyce in this darknes, and aidity, and ought to humble and submit himself to the iudgment of another, anihilating & acknow∣ledging himselfe worthy of this, and so much worse, vnworthy of all light, and in such basenes he ought to glorify God. Although that the motions of impatience, and other the like na∣turall motions be great, and make the soule to become sad and me∣lancholy, without feeling any comfort, or solace; yet must she know, and labour for, & to trie by experience, the for said submis∣sion, which doth also consist in resigning, & remitting her self wholy vnto God, euen as one that is sick, who althogh he cry throgh the vehemency of his paines, ne∣uerthelesse in will, is submitted entirely vnto God, and is content to suffer any thing.
As for feare & pusillanimity (besides that which naturally she feeleth, which is not euil of it self) she ought not to admit any more, not to consent vnto it, but ought to endeauour herself to performe acts of submission, confidence in God, familiarity, & the like. And doing all this that is a∣boue said, and with the same, de∣nying herself in all things, and conforming herselfe vnto God, not willing any thing, but what he willeth, if she feele these trou∣bles, and darknes to increase, she must not for all that, be afflicted for any thing whatsoeuer it be; but without any kind of murmu∣ring, she must seeke to forget her euill, & ought to know that God is accustomed to doe this: that is to say, to withdraw all consola∣tion and help in our
temptations. Therfore she must then redouble her conformity & thanksgiuing vnto God, and quiet herselfe, and repose with assurance that in the end God will not leaue her, not permit that she be tempted about her strength, which heere doth cōsist wholy in resistance against them, or putting them away, see∣ing that is not so much in our power by reason of the subtra∣ction: but in this, to suffer and support them; & this is more sure & perfect, then extasy. OF THE SECOND Estate. CHAP. X. VVHo would thinke, that there shold be any thing yet left in the Soule which she might renounce, forsake & with∣draw her selfe from,
besides this that hath bene said, & especially the soule being brought to the on∣ly pure and direct act of vertue, in the which it seemeth there is no∣thing but true vertue, & also be∣reaued of all proper interest. But if we consider that such an act al∣though it be thus purged, is a pure act of election, and of our will, the which, with his actiue vertue imperatiue, in respect of the other powers, worketh and produceth the acts of vertue; it cannot be denyed, but that there is proper will, and interest therin, although much purged, and by consequēce there is somwhat yet to forsake, and to be purged. The soule then that is left without any other action but to doe in the manner aboue explica∣ted, being ariued to the foresaid sixt degree, our Lord is accusto∣med to withdraw by little, and little, the power to do such
actes, taking now one, now another vntill such tyme, that indeed he taketh away all, except the power to conforme her selfe vnto the di∣uine will. And by experience it is proued, that somtymes the soule findeth her selfe so oppressed with griefes and afflictions, and assay∣led with so many distractions, & miseries, that willing to enforce herselfe, yet she cannot performe any act, neyther of thākes giuing towards God, nor of fortitude, nor of patience, nor of any other vertue, no not so much as to will that which is aggreable vnto God. And she must remaine in this suf∣ferance, pierced through inward∣lie with a thousand temptations: so that as the Martyrs could not defend themselues, from their tor∣ments & wounds, but receiuing them, conformed themselues to the
diuine will; euen so must the soule doe in this case, in whom it may be, there remayneth not any actiue force, but only the passiue, enduring all for the loue of God, and remaining content with the same. But which is more, he is ac∣customed also to take away such an act of conforming herselfe to the diuine will, in such manner, that she hath not any sensible fee∣ling to do it, & also lesse can she execute it and there remayneth no other thing; but a passiue tran∣quillity, by which, as a lambe be∣fore the shearer, she remaineth quiet, and suffereth God to accom∣plish whatsoeuer he pleaseth. This is an entire and absolute subtraction of the actiue power of the soule, to wit, that God with∣draweth in such sort his diuine concurrence that the soule camot
in the superiour part, how holy or raised soeuer she be, make any actiue operations, but only can remaine peaceable, & quiet, endu∣ring willingly that which God permitteth to happen vnto her. To such a withdrawing the soule ought to be correspondent with anihilating and acknowled∣ging herselfe to be pure nothing, and full of infinit sinnes, and ther∣fore vnworthy to performe any action of vertue: and she ought to reioyce in such contempt, that God worketh in her, taking from her the power to lift her hart vp vnto him, with a free renuncia∣tion; she ought to be contented to want wholy the actiue, and all the acts of vertue; the which how much more they were pure, so much greater is the gift that God imparteth therin. After this it of∣ten happeneth, that the troubles and
afflictions will be not only as before, but much greater, for ha∣uing lost the rampire and fortresse of the actes of vertue: and more∣ouer in the concupiscible and in∣feriour part, there wilbe raised motions so vehement and disor∣dered, that she neuer felt the like in her life, in such sort, as it will seeme vnto her, that she is euen in hell it selfe: and heere she must not arme herselfe with any other ar∣mour, then with submission and passiue tranquillity in supporting all to satisfy almighty God, who will haue it so. And she ought to know, that such submission and tranquillity giueth to the soule a very great strength, not actiue but passiue, by the which he giueth and leaueth herselfe to be as a prey vnto God; and so like a most pa∣tient lambe suffereth all, in great debility & feeblenes. Of this peace and
trāquillity followeth a com∣formity with the actiue will, al∣though passiue, but without com∣parison greater then the foresaid, and an inexplicable deification in an act yet passiue, not of oblation, nor of gift, dedication, or holo∣caust, but much more excellent & more perfect, as to giue themselu wholy, as it were a prey vnto al∣mighty God. In this estate she must be ad∣uertised of some things of much importance: one is, that the inte∣riour, and imperatiue actions of vertue are not lost, but are made more actiue then euer, in such fort that a person hath strength to worke and exercise the partes and powers of her body and soule in speaking, thinking, and doing, all that is conuenient to be done, ac∣cording to her vocation, yea euen in performing acts of temperance,
patience &c. Also when she ought to ayd and help her neighbour, it is with the accustomed affability: for the act of commaundment, & practice resteth in the soule, to commaund, and to direct all her actions of commaund or execu∣tion. For the subtraction, or with∣drawing ought to bee vnderstood in the vnderstanding and will, concerning the proper interiour acts of the will, intention, fruitiō, election, reioycing, satisfaction, & the like, which indeed are ta∣ken away. Another is, that it must not be vnderstood, that our Lord ta∣keth away the gifts, or habits, but the acts, not giuing his help & concurrence, notwithstanding he doth not so alwaies: for that often in this estate, he letteth the soule be free, and at liberty to worke, but sometymes he suspendeth it, and this is done without any cer∣taine
rule, and when he pleaseth. Therfore the soule ought to be wholy resigned, to be depriued of all acts, or not, as much, and when it shall please God, and to be alwaies ready to renounce thē with this admirable indifferency. When the actiue is taken away in she manner aforesaid, then the soule remaineth in the passiue state in two orts. First, for that with prompnes, & great tran∣quillity she submitteth herselfe to all the afflictions, and foresaid troubles, and miseries, induring them most willingly, although she be transpierced, and wounded by them, for the great resolution she hath made rather to suffer a thousand deaths, then to offend God, and for that she suffereth so many euill motions: and also for that she cannot performe any act of vertue, but only suffereth such
affliction for the loue of God. Secondly, the soule in such estate being retyred to the deepest part of her hart, (which the My∣sticall Deuines call Pax anima, the peace of the soule) operatiō being withdrawne, she giueth and sub∣mitteth herself with great prōpt∣nes vnto God, who worketh within with the passiue consent of her freewill, much more higher acts, then of thanks-giuing, loue, vnion with him, election, or any other vertue, without tast; only admitting them, and cooperating with all her hart, and affection, in such sort, that as the vnderstan∣ding retyred from the sense in ex∣tasy cannot be attentiue with her naturall forces to actiue vertues, as she was before, but receiueth di∣uine light, that worketh most high vnderstanding & knowledg in her (which the mysticall Deui∣nes
call pati diuina:) now if in the vnderstanding raysed aboue her naturall forces, our Lord wor∣keth this, the same may be done, much more in the will, when re∣nouncing wholy the actiue, she forsaketh the same, & then our Lord raising it into an extasy, & a most vertuous practise, worketh in her entirely what he pleaseth: and this pati diuina, which is an estate much higher then the fore∣said, for that extasy of the vnder∣standing is dangerous, and few at∣taine vnto it, full of infinite occa∣sions and subiects of curiosity, & propriety: but heere the will re∣nounceth and humbleth herselfe, and with a most assured confidēce submitteth herselfe vnto God: and of such an extasy all are capable, and it is much higher then the o∣ther, rendring the soule most ag∣greable and pleasing vnto God.
OF THE THIRD and last Estate. CHAP. XI. FINALLY our Lord is accusto∣med to take away not only the actiue, but also the foresaid passiue, the will remayning in all, and by all, naked and impotent for any thing. It is true, she doth not resist, or oppose her selfe to this, but she suffereth herselfe to be bereaued of all. And for the vnderstanding of this last Estate, which is the highest of all the o∣thers, it must be noted, that the vertue and force of the liberty which the will hath, is so great, that she can renounce wholy her will, and wholy her liberty, and indeed bereaueth herselfe of them, as if she neuer had them; and she doth this freely with her good
will: and by such a renunciation the will is made as it were no wil, in the like manner, as S. Pauli made himselfe a slaue to deliuer another slaue: euen so the soule hath power to doe with her inte∣riour, and with her free will and liberty. Then our Lord taketh away the actiue, and the passiue by sub∣traction, and all acts whatsoeuer, as if she were not at all: and she doth not resist this, but with an entire exhibition of such a renun∣ciation, concurring therwith, cō∣meth to be no practicall will, to wit, that all the operations that she doth, or can doe concerning herselfe, she doth not will them, nor doth them as of herself: yet willing them neuerthelesse with a will conformable to the diuine will, in which sort
she willeth & worketh them; and therfore she doth them as commaunded im∣mediatly by the diuine will, with∣out bringing therin any concur∣rence of her owne, putting the will of God in the place of hers. For in as a large & spacious Pal∣lace, of the which one only is mai∣ster, when he is absent, he lea∣ueth some friend of his, absolute mayster, and there is done all, that was done before, but only by the commaundement of the friend, & not of the other: euen so the will renouncing it selfe wholy, aswell in the actiue as in the passiue, al∣though pure, & holy, not willing but what God willeth; and now not willing indeed neyther more nor lesse, to haue this satisfaction, as is afore sayd, she renounceth in all thinges, and wholy the sayd actiue and passiue, being resolued not to worke at all, as with her will,
notwithstanding she doth al euen as before, but as thinges willed & ordeyned by God, not of herselfe, leauing entirely & imediatly to the good pleasure of God, the commaundment of her body, soule, actions, motions, and feelings, as if truely she had no mā∣ner of will: and to this God cor∣respondeth as is sayd, with the withdrawing of all acts: & if per∣aduenture she leaueth, or doth the like acts of vertue as before, then she leaueth and doth them, not ac∣cording to her proper will, but for so much as she seeth the will of God to be, that she leaue, or doe them. Our Lord and maister him∣selfe made this subtraction & re∣nunciation in the garden, when he sayd, non mea, sed tua volunta fiat: O Father, not my will be done, but thine: to wit, my will would, as conformable to thine, Eternall Father, suffer crosse, and torments
his power: in the same manner he inforceth himselfe, and seeketh as much as he can to deceaue vs, as often as he representeth and put∣teth before vs, any proper interest or commodity of ours: and as our Lord cast him off, and vanquished him, in refusing all things, & not admitting any thing, so ought we to ouercome him, and driue him away by the meanes of a perfect anihilation of will, and to pray vnto our Lord, by this his holy & entiere renunciation he will giue vs his gace to obtaine full and en∣tire victory ouer the diuell & sin. The first point. MAN, & whatsoeuer is created concerning their first ori∣gen, proceedeth of nothing; & of himselfe, by a thousand wayes, to
wit, by infinite myseries of soule and body (to the which he is sub∣iect) is ready, and tending to re∣turne to the same nothing, if God by his boūty did not cōserue him; and a man sinning is made worse then nothing. By the meanes of this consideration of this our first origen, and of all thinges created, we must endeauour or esteem our selues, and all thinges created as nothing, and not to loue, desire, seeke, or will any thing for our selues: and thus we shall get a per∣fect anihilation of our will. The second point. VVE must consider, that this true anihilatiō ma∣keth the soule to become a true portraict and resemblance of the soueraygne greatnes of God, for that it taketh away the hindrances that are betweene God
and the oule; which is done by not wil∣ling, or desiring any thing: and thus she becometh a most faire, & cleare mirrour or looking glasse. For euen as when we would, that a glasse should receyue in it selfe perfectly and entierely the image & figure of some obiect, it is need∣full, that so much the further the one be set from the other, as the obiect is greater in it selfe; so the greatnes of God being infinite, by the meanes of this anihilation, the soule only taketh from it selfe all obstacles that do hinder it from vniting it selfe with God; but which is more, by a great submis∣siō in her basenes, & a true know∣ledge of the infinite greatnes of God, she draweth herselfe infinite∣ly far from the same, and by this meanes commeth to be disposed, and able to receyue in her this
in∣finit obiect of God; and the same. Lord by the pleasure he taketh, & infinit loue that he beareth to this soule, imprinteth and engraueth presetly in her, a true resemblāce image, & portraict of all his great∣nes, euen to the last Center of the same. This anihilation is of great force to purge the soule of passions, ta∣king away entierely al the obiects of them, seeing that he that hath no will to any thing for himselfe, hath not what to desire, loue, feare, or hate: whereof commeth also that it purifyeth the soule, concer∣ning the intention, taking away all pretence of any created end whatsoeuer in all our actions, & maketh it truly capable to haue no will to any other thing then to the pure glory of God in himselfe, see∣ing she careth for nothing els; frō whence also proceedeth an entire and totall
victory ouer all temp∣tations; seeing that vnto him that desireth nothing, the diuell hath not any obiect to present: and if he doth, he is presently reiected, and driuen away with this resolu∣tion of not desiring any thing, & by this meanes he is in all thinges vanquished and put to flight. The affects and principall signes of this anihilation are these that follow. The first is, that the gifts & gra∣ces that our Lord communicateth to the soule that is endued there∣with, she receiueth them not, nor retayneth them in herselfe, for so much as that which is nothing cā∣not receyue in it selfe any thing, but receaueth them in God, & re∣ferreth thē vnto him from whome they proceed. Secondly, that she doth not ap∣propriate thē to herselfe, nor reioi∣ce in such graces in herselfe, ney∣ther is she troubled if they be
taken from her, or that she happen to loose them; but equally, whether she hauing them or no, she remay∣neth content in her nothing. Thirdly, she maketh no accompt of this grace, but for so much as our Lord wilbe serued by the mea∣nes of the same. Fourthly, she doth not esteeme the grace in it selfe, but for that by the meanes of it, she commeth to a greater knowledge of the giuer, and esteemeth him the more. Fiftly, she doth not exalt her∣selfe for any gift or grace that she can receaue, but alwayes keeping herselfe in her nothing, remaineth in the same conceipt, and opinion of her basenes. Sixtly, in the workes that she doth, she knoweth truly that of herselfe she doth nothing, but dis∣couereth in a high manner the di∣uine
assistance in them, and that it is he which worketh all, & what∣soeuer happeneth vnto her, al∣though neuer so grieuous & hard to support, yet with an entire pea∣ce she reposeth in him. Seauenthly, in the tyme of sub∣traction, and drynesse of spirit, she is not mooued with it, neither see∣keth any remedy, or consolation, but with all submission imbraceth it, and giueth herselfe in prey vn∣to it, as vnto a proper obiect of nothing. THE EXERCISE of Disappropriation. The Prayer preparatory accustomed. FIRST we must con∣sider how truly was verified in our Lord
IESVS Christ, that which he said of him∣selfe: Vulpes foueas habent, & volu∣cres cali nidos, filius autem hominis no habet vbi caput suum reclinet; that is to say: the foxes haue holes, and the birdes of the ayre their nests, but the sonne of the virgin hath not where to repose his head; and how much are we obliged to seeke with al our power, to imitate him in disappropriating our selues of all things, for to answere the infi∣nite loue he beareth vnto vs, Se∣condly, we must pray vnto our Lord with great feruour that he would impart vnto vs this grace: and we must make a firme & con∣stant resolution to be willing to accept it, with all our hart & affe∣ction, & to dispose our selues per∣fectly, & wholy to the exercise, and execution of all that it requi∣reth of vs.
The first point. VVE must consider, that this disappropriation is a resolute will, that cōmeth from God, to be willing to be entierly depriued, cōcerning our affection, and, as much as possibly is conue∣nient, in effect also of all that we haue, and this because there re∣doūdeth therby greater glory vn∣to God. And by this is vnderstood that we must depriue & disappro∣priate our selues, not ōly of al crea∣ted things, in as much as they nou∣rish, & intertayne in vs selfe-loue, and all other faultes, and imper∣tections that may be found in vs: but which is more, we must also depriue our selues of that which toucheth vs nearer, euen of ver∣tues, and graces that we receaue of God, of all satisfactiō,
cōtentment, consolation, & of any other good, that by the meanes of them we may attribute to our selues, resig∣ning all this truly vnto God, not desiring in them, nor in any liuing thing, other tast and contentmēt, then that his holy will be entierly and fully accomplished in vs and all persons. And in the end being depriued of all proper interest and the vertues, and celestiall graces remayning in vs, euen in their purity and perfection, we then ought to acknowledge out selues most vnworthy of them: & the more perfect they be, so much the more do they belong vnto out Lord. And therefore with an en∣tire, and perfect resignation we ought most freely to offer them vnto him in this their naturall pu∣rity, simplicity and perfection, re∣mitting them vnto their first ori∣gen. And moreouer we must
alwayes prepared to depriue our selues of all giftes, graces, & ver∣tues, as if it were to giue, & make a present of them, vnto any crea∣ture whosoeuer, as it shall please our Lord to ordayne, and this for his loue, and for his greater glory and honour. The second point. THIS perfect disappropriatiō or renunciation, is a depen∣dance, and participation of the di∣uine, which is infinitely proper to God, if we may so say: and neuer∣thelesse concerning the affection, our Lord depriueth himselfe, with a meruaylous great and excellent perfection, of al that he hath, with peace, tranquillity, repose of spi∣rit, and infinit magnanimity. This we see in God the Father, who re∣ally communicateth
himself to the Sonne, and Holy Ghost: & which is more in effect, he communica∣teth his gifts vnto vs in creation, conseruation of his graces, as he doth impart them to all his Crea∣tures, & in permitting sinnes. And in the worke of the Incarnation, and in all other mysteries of our redemption, we see how he deba∣seth himselfe in thinges most base, disappropriating, and depriuing himselfe of the contrary perfecti∣ons. And then when so many An∣gells departed from him, and so many soules yet doe the same, in∣curing eternal damnation, he de∣priueth himselfe of them, and of so many graces which he hath im∣parted to them: we see in him the same disappropriation also in infi∣nite other manners which cannot be explicated. Of this may be ga∣thered, that this is a most high per∣fection to
imitate God himselfe in foresaid manner, by the means of such a disappropriation. The principall effects that this disapropriation worketh, and pro∣duceth in the soule, are these that follow. First, that the gifts that she re∣ceyueth of God, she receaueth and vseth them, as if she had not re∣ceaued them, not putting any affe∣ction in thē, but offering the loue which she might haue to them, & the gifts of God themselues to him from whome they proceed. Secondly, that she reioyceth in the gifts that she seeth in another, although she hath them not her∣selfe, as if they were her owne. Thirdly, it maketh her rea∣dy and prompt to depriue herselfe of the graces and giftes which she hath reccaued, to enrich her neighbour therewith, and she re∣ioyceth much in this.
Fourthly, when she findeth herselfe depriued of all giftes, as∣well spirituall as corporall, and of all graces in what manner foe∣uer, she remayneth also content, as if she had not receaued them, and is not troubled, nor disquiet∣ted any thing at all. She know∣eth well all her necessities, and mi∣seryes, but neuertheles she con∣tenteth herselfe in them, know∣ing truly that she hath nothing of herselfe, and that nothing apper∣taineth vnto her, being vnworthy of any thing.
THE EXERCISE of Indifferency. The Prayer preparatory, as accustomed. FIRST, we must pro∣foundly thinke of the sense of these words, Se∣dere ad dexteram meam & sinistram, non est meum dare vobis, sed quibus paratum est à Patre meo: that is to say: To sit at my right hand, and left, is not myne to giue you, but to whome it is prepared of my Father. And how much more in reason are we obliged to be in all thinges subiect, and to remit our selues wholy to the good pleasure of God by the meanes of a perfect & totall indifferency?
We must demaund humbly this grace of our Lord, with firme re∣solution, willingly to accept of it, and to put in execution the diuine inspirations by which we may be conducted & guided to the same. The first Point. FIRST, Consider that this in∣differency is a most excellent, diuine, and high perfection, for that, although our Lord be of na∣ture, and of will most resolute to all that he will doe, and to all that which he doth, neuerthelesse con∣cerning his affection, he is wholy prepared to doe, or not to doe any worke whatsoeuer, if it were so conuenient for him, and if he had, or might haue any superiour of whome he depended; and more∣ouer concerning the effect, we see that he doth put in execution this diuine indifferency, in communi∣cating
Secondly, this indifferency cau∣seth one to haue a great & magna∣nimous courage, & by it we are disposed, and made prompt, and prepared to all thinges: and of this springeth a sincerity of hart, that maketh the loue of God to in∣crease in the soule. Thirdly, the soule that is indif∣ferent, accepteth, and with all her forces consenteth to, all that God will worke in her, and with great promptnes putteth it in executi∣on, although it seeme vnto her troublesome, sharp, grieuous, and vneasy to support, repugnant to her inclination, and her proper iudgement, or of what sort soeuer it be: in which oftentymes many soules doe fayle euen of spirituall persons, who for want of this in∣differency, and deceaued by selfe loue, doe hinder oftentimes that which God would work in
Fourthly, it maketh the soule prepared to liue or dye, to receau consolation or affliction, and to take all thinges in good part, that can happen eyther to herselfe, or others, and all the vniuersall mi∣seryes which our Lord permitteth to happen in his Church. Briefly she receaueth all thinges equally, & in one manner, from the hand of God. Fiftly, what thing soeuer she hath she setteth not her affection thereon, how good, or spirituall soeuer it be, in which many soules willingly stumble, proposing vn∣to themselues in their actions, a good intention truly in it selfe, but according to their fashion, and make great accompt of certayne exercises that they doe, and which they much esteeme. But the soule indifferent, setting all things aside
, considereth, and stdi∣eth with great diligence, how to follow, and put in execution the pure, and true interiour motions of grace, and diuine inspirati∣ons, and to doe whatsoeuer she knoweth may redound to the greatest honour & glory of God. Sixtly, in tyme of consolation, she doth not purpose to doe diffi∣cult matters, and of great perfecti∣on, neyther doth she suffer herselfe to be transported by the excessiue gust, and sweetnes that she feeleth therein; but all that she purposeth to doe, is done with repose, & ma∣turity, alwayes conditionally, ac∣cording to the will of God, to the end, that afterwardes in the tyme of desolation, she remayne firme. stable, and constant in the same good purposes. Seauenthly, in great Solemni∣ties, and like occasions she
doth not consider, nor rely vpon her owne industry, neither doth she make too long preparations: but vsing therein conuenient diligen∣ce, dependeth wholy, and with great simplicity on God, suffering herselfe to be gouerned by him, as he best pleaseth. THE FOVRTH EXERCISE Of Conformity. The Prayer preparatory in the man∣ner accustomed. FIRST we must con∣sider in these worde ( volumtem Patri , that is to say, y meat is to doe the will of my father which is in heaen:) in other like speaches, the gr conformity that our Saio
had with the will of his eternall father, so that in all his workes he protested, that he pretended no o∣ther thing, but entirely to put the faine in execution. And of this we may gather how much more we are obliged to do the same in his imitation, inforcing our selues as much, as shalbe possible, and with the greatest affection, to bend & submit our wil to be conformable vnto Gods, and to conceaue an earnest and vehement desire ther∣of, which ought to moue vs hum∣bly to beseech his diuine maiesty, that by the vertue of the merits of his deare Sonne, our Lord Iesus Christ, and by the same confor∣mity aforesaid that was in him, he would vouchsafe to impart vs aboundantly his grace.
The first point. VVE must consider, that this Conformity is no other thing then a totall and reso∣lute dependance, & subiection of our will, to the diuine, in al our works, occurrēces, chances, what∣soeuer they be: and moreouer that all things whatsoeuer they be, are neither good nor holy, but in as much as they are beautified & san∣ctified with the will of God; and although they be indifferent, yea & seeme somtimes impertinent & not to the purpose, in so much notwithstanding as they proceed and depend of the will of God, they are very good, and tend to a very good end, and to the glory of God; and therfore we ought to weigh wel, & attentiuely to
con∣sider, how high & perfect a thing it is to be thus cōformed to what∣soeuer we find to be Gods will, in all things & at all tymes; and how much the endeauouring, & pra∣ctising of it importeth, and how necessary it is, if we desire to at∣tayne to great perfection. The second point. CONSIDER, that this is a most high perfection of God him∣selfe, and which we see to shine in the diuine attributes; which in their workes, and in themselues are infinitly conformable to the will of God: & from hence sprin∣geth this vnspeakable harmony in them, as is seene uailously also in the diuine diuine persons, in all exteriour and interiour actions, aswell in that concerning created things, as in all increated acts of knowledge, loue,
enioying, ioy and infinit others. This confor∣mity is seene also amongst the blessed spirits & soules in heauen, who at the least signe they per∣ceaue of the will of God, are al∣wayes prepared to obey, and do obey it with great proptnes: it is also seene in all created thinges, and euen in insensible creatures, as is read in the Gospel, qui & venti ebediunt , for that the sea, and the windes obey him; but a∣boue al things it is most apparent in the sacred Humanity of our Lord Iesus Christ with the secōd Person of the Trinity (to whom it it vnited) and with his eternall Father, and in the inferiour part with the superour in all his pow∣ers, affections, and operations: & likewise it is seene truly and per∣fectly in the naturall repugance that he felt, in cōsideration of the torments, pains, and excesse o∣lours that he was to suffer:
and how much the more he did really & sharply feele them, so much the more he conformed himselfe with an vnspeakable repose to the will of his Father, in desiring them; so much the more increased in him the repugnance, and sensibility of the griefes, in such sort, that the contentment in this conformity, did not bring him any asswage∣ment of his sorrowes, but only made that his will sweetly repo∣sed in them, and with so prompt and ready mind, he willed and desired thē, that if the Iewes had not crucified him, he himselfe (if such had bene the will of his Fa∣ther) was prepared to haue done it. We see also the like conformity in his most holy mother; which, next vnto this of our Lord Iesus Christ, was aboue all things crea∣ted most singular & most perfect. And we must
consider that all the foresaid conformities are represen∣ted in the diuine Essence, which conteyneth in it selfe all things, & shineth infinitly in them, and in a manner that cānot be explicated, from which proceedeth great ho∣nour and glory vnto God. THE EFFECTS OF this Conformity in a soule endued therwith, are these that follow. FIRST it causeth that the said soule studieth, & laboureth with great affection, and diligen∣ce to vnderstand and know in all thinges what is the will of God, & to put it promptly and readily in execution, and not to care for any other thing. 2. She findeth in all thinges repose, & tranquillity for the assu∣rance she hath, that in all thinges the will of God is accomplished.
3. She enioyeth great liberty of spirit, free from all scruples, vn∣quietnes, and inward bitternes, saying often vnto our Lord, Thou knowest Lord, that I desire no o∣ther thing but the accomplishing of thy holy will, make me to know it, I beseech thee. 4. She accepteth, and recea∣ueth afflictions, & tribulations as presents sent immediatly from the hand of God, attributing them to no other cause. 5. She is not troubled for thē, neither doth she lament, nor cō∣plaine vnto God, but to the imita∣tiō of our Lord Iesus Christ, saith, Non mea, sed tua roluntas fiat; not myne but thy will be done. 6. She taketh pleasure, & reioi∣ceth in them: and the greater they are, and more contrary vnto her, she maketh her commodity
the more by thē, by a greater know∣ledg of God, and a perfect submis∣sion vnto his diuine will. 7. When she is calumniated, & persecuted without any fault of her owne part, or any occasion giuen, she doth not seeke to iustify and excuse herselfe, but leaueth all entierly in the hands of God, for to ordayne the whole as he shall please. 8. Yf by wearyne, and la∣bour she feele some vnquietnes, yet she finds repose, considering that this is the will of God, con∣forming herselfe vnto the same, without seeking in this any parti∣culer interest, or good vnto her∣selfe.
THE FIFTH EXERCISE of Vniformity. The Prayer preparatory is to be made as accustomed. FIRST, to consider in these words, Pater mi, non mea sed tua voluntas fiat: Father, not my will, but thy will be done, the great vnion that the Son of God had with the will of God his Father in a matter so difficult, contrary, and grieuous to nature, and so vnbeseeming (as may be thought) his greatnes, as his passi∣on was; and of this we must ga∣ther, by how much greater reason we are obliged to doe the like, in
the imitation of so rare an exam∣ple of our Lord Iesus Christ. Secondly we must with an ex∣treme desire seeke to obtayne this grace, and instantly to pray vnto the eternall Father, that he will make vs worthy of it, by the m∣rits of his deare Sonne. The first point. VVE must consider that this vniformity, besides that which is contayned in the Conformity, doth more vnite the will, with that of Gods. This ta∣keth from vs all repugnance, and difficulty, for that in all things we not only wil, what our Land wil∣leth, but moreouer we are incied, and mooued to will it, only f the reason that God wil and all our contentment i ∣tisfy the diuine will, fo the
vnion that we haue with it: and this for the loue of it selfe, and not for any other respect. And the same loue inciteth vs to the same vnion with our euen Christian: according to that which is writtē in the Acts of the Apostles: Erat credentium in Domino cor vnum, & ani∣mavna, al the faithfull of our Lord had one hart and one soule in the primitiue Church. This vniformi∣ty shineth, and is plainely seene, first in thinges wanting life, the which by an instinct of nature in so great diuersities of operations agree altogeather to execute mer∣uailously whatsoeuer they are or∣deyned for by God; and altogea∣ther accomplish vniformely this most beautyfull, most excellent and meruaylous order, and har∣mony of this world; as we see for example in a house well ordered, that many seruāts
performing du∣ly diuers offices that are cōmaun∣ded them by their mayster, come finally to accomplish, & finish all, as one only affayre. But this vni∣formity shineth much more perfe∣ctly in heauen amongst the happy spirits, and soules, in whom by the efficacy of loue, the diuine will causeth one hart, spirit, and will, as if truly all togeather were but one, by a most singular vniō with the supreme will: but aboue all it shineth most highly and meruay∣lously in the diuine attributes, that agree, and accord in the essence, & diuine will, in the diuine persons, & in the actes that they produce. THE EFFECTES of this Vniformity in a soul, are these that fll THE First is, that the soule that is endued with this
vni∣formity, not only contenteh her∣selfe in al that which is Gods wil, but moreouer vniteth herself with the same of God, and by this be∣ing made one selfe thing with it, she reioiceth equally in all things, only for no other cause, but for that the diuine wil is pleased ther∣with, & will haue it so. 2. In all places, and in all thinges she findeth God, and vni∣teth herselfe with him, & all crea∣tures serue her as a ladder to rayse her vnto God. 3. For the that sinnes she fal∣leth into, she is grieued for the offence that is against Almighty God: but euen of them also she taketh occasion to abase herselfe, and that with so much greater submission, penetrating into the consideration of the loue, with which God hath permitted them, she vniteth herselfe vnto him.
4. How much the more it see∣meth to her sometimes that she is depriued of all grace, abādoned of God, and left as ouerwhelmed in her miseries; so much the more, by the meanes of them, she vniteth herselfe with God, knowing well, that the graces that she first felt in aboundance, are retyred into God, and that they are kept, and preser∣ued more securely in him, then when she felt them in her selfe; & is contented, and more reioyceth to see them in God, then in her∣selfe: and therefore raysing and v∣niting herselfe with God, goeth to find them in him, as in their pro∣per origen, and conuenient place. 5. Being afflicted with any temptation eyther of the diuell, or other creature whatsoeuer, she re∣iecteth, and resisteth all the euill that might happen vnto her by it, and withall acknowledging such
creatures to be ministers of God, who permitteth them for his grea∣ter glory, euen by the meanes of these temptations she commeth to vnite herselfe with God. 6. How much the more she feeleth herself fauoured of God by imparting his celestiall graces, and how much the more excellent, & of greater consequence they are, she comming afterwardes to leaue them for to vnite herselfe more fully & perfectly vnto God, from whome these foresayd graces pro∣ceed: so much the more she shew∣eth, that she made much lesse e∣steeme of the giftes then of the gi∣uer. 7. In all her interiour and exteriour operations in a moment & twinkling of an eye, she vni∣teth herself with God, to know in them his will, & to put it present∣ly in execution: and by this all her
actions are done without any dis∣ordinate affection, propriety, or particuler respect. THE SIXT EXERCISE Of Deiformity. The preparatory Prayer accustomed, before the Exercise. IN the beginning, & in consideration of these wordes of our Lord, Ego dixi Di estis: I haue sayd, you are Gods &c. and in this that he sayd vnto his Father, vt vnumsint, st Pater in me, & ego in te, vt & ips in nobis vnumsint, that all may be one, as thou my Father art in me, and I in
thee, so also that they may be one in vs. Heere we must end∣uour to penetrate into the excel∣lency, & greatnes of the perfection we are called vnto by our Lord Iesus, to wit, to vnite our selues in such sort by efficacy of wil, and by the vehemency of a louing affe∣ction, to the diuine wil, that being transformed into the same, we be no more, as we may say, our selues, nor that which we were before, but like vnto God, & in God him∣selfe, Deified to the imitation of the vnion of the Sonne of God, with his eternall Father. 2. Being prostrate, with a most profound submission in the depth of our nothing, in the pre∣sence of the height of his greatnes, as altogeather astonished, and re∣lying on the loue which incited him so much to abase himselfe, e∣uen vnto vs, thereby to rayse vs vp to himselfe, we must craue of this loue a correspondence of
affe∣ction, which may liue in vs with a vehement desire of this true and perfect Deiformity in him. The first point. VVE must consider, that this Deiformity consi∣steth to haue our will vnited by such efficacy of loue, with the di∣uine, that she feele no more from henceforward herselfe, as if verily she were not at all, but that only she feele in her the diuine will, & that all her actiōs, desires, & works tend to the only accomplishing of the same. In such sort, that euen in vertues, and holy thinges, she wil∣leth them no more, with a created will, nor by it, but only by the in∣created, made hers by an etir transformation into it; considering that our Lord Iesus intended to shew this in these words,  sd vluntas fia.
The fourth point. THAT the humanity of our Sauiour Iesus Christ, and of his most holy mother, & of all the blessed, by the working of God in them, and by the knowledge, and enioying that they haue of the di∣inity, are as it were swallowed vp, and raysed into this foresayd being, and vnity, and in the same most perfectly deified: and finally that all the Saints, and the iust yet vpon the earth, are trāsformed in∣to God, & from thence afterwards returne to their being, as a drop of water being cast into a great vessel full of wyne, is changed into the same, & after being out of the sayd vessell, returneth to his first being.
The fifth point. VVE must consider, that after the soule is ariued vnto such an estate, that she hath taken away, by the vertue of this Deifying loue, and of the other aforesayd lights, all that might hinder the working of God in her, then hath she attayned vnto this Deiformity; and this Deiformity produceth these effects that fol∣low. 1. She is Deiformed in all her actions, doing them, as if God did them, and not herselfe; & th in them, & by them entreth wh∣ly vnto God, and acknowledgeth him, & enioyeth him. 2. Euen a a sinner doth  action but out of God, being ed of his grace, euen soon the such afoule doth not find
or doe any thing in which God is not, and by meanes whereof, she doth not enter, and vnite herselfe vnto God. 3. She esteemeth not of any thing, but in as much as it cōmeth from God, or that it be done for God, & in God. 4. Although that somtymes our Lord hide, and withdraw him∣selfe from such a soule, yet in this subtraction, & hiding, she retireth wholy into God, hiding herselfe in him, without any sweetnes or feeling: yea how much the more, that by meanes of this rigour, lea∣uing, sharpnes, and bitternes, it seemeth that she is far from God: so much the more she returneth, is Deiformed, and reposeth in him. 5. Being most certains and as∣sured, that she herselfe, as of her∣selfe, cannot performe any thing that is good, by
reason of her to∣tall vnability, knowing truly that she is nothing, hath nothing, and can doe nothing of herselfe; she is not confounded, nor any whir troubled, yea euen in the middest of confusions, she findeth herselfe much assured, & cōtented, know∣ing certainly that she seeketh not any thing proper, & that nothing of hers is therin, but God doth all imediatly. 6. Although she should raise the dead, and do such meruailous workes, & great things, yet she would neither care, nor esteeme of such workes, or be moued with them; but in as much as God would, she should: & although she should possesse al the treasures of heauen & earth, she would not esteeme of them in themsel, nor for herselfe, but refer, and offer vp all thinges vnto their first ori∣gen, from whēce they pded.
7. Although she knew sensibly that she had God in her, yea and though it were in the same man∣ner as our blessed Lady his holy Mother had, she would not be moued any more, then if she did not perceaue any such thing at all or that she had him not in her∣selfe, but in God, only imitating heerin the glorious virgin Mary, who hauing in her armes our blessed Lord, held him, as if she had not had him, but as if her ar∣mes had ben Gods, & as though he held himselfe, & this was the most excellent Deiformity of this most pure soule. 8. When the soule that is come to this Deiformity, seeth herselfe to be praysed, she taketh no maner of pleasure therin, neither is she troubled, afflicted, altered, or mo∣ued any whit at all, for
so much as she is wholy in God, and recey∣uing the praises that belongeth to God, referreth and offereth them all vnto him. 9. Two soules Deiformed, hauing betweene them great con∣formity of affection, interayning one another with mutuall loue of very great efficacy, & with great disappropriation; and therfore being to be separated one frō the other neuer so farr, for the greater glory of God, do care nothing at all, nor are they any thing dis∣quieted, for whatsoeuer accident, how great or grieuous, that may befall them. 10. If God would publish to the world the Deiformity that he hath giuen her, she would not be disquieted or troubled, but would say, Lord thou hast done it, doe whatsoeuer it pleaseth thee, for the whole work is thine.
OF SELFE-LOVE. THERE are three fortes of selfeloue; the first is in a worl∣dly person, who liues amidst the honours, greatnes, and dignities of this world. The second is in a spirituall, person, who desireth to serue God, & this maketh him to seeke swet∣nes, consolation and light, hauing a desire to serue God. The third is in persons that haue made some progresse and are aduaunced in the seruice of our Lord, which is such that with the same, they mingle a desire to pro∣fit greatly, and to striue for perfe∣ction. Therfore great watchfulnes & heed is necessary, to be able to know it: & for this end, it is need∣full to examine very exactly thy
interiour, and to weigh well, whether such a desire be with paine and anxiety, or not: and when it is found to be with af∣fliction and trouble, the person may be assured it is selfe-loue, and it is the more subtile, in that there increaseth with this payne, a grea∣ter desire of perfectiō. Now he that will profit indeed, must be wary to tak away the hindrance, which is selfe loue, & to hope alwaies in God, & to haue a firme confiden∣ce, that vnto whō almighty God giueth such a desire, he will also giue strength & meanes to bring thē to perfection, when it shall be expedient for his honour and glory. And we must not think that for any diligence the soule can performe, she can ariue therunto, but rather with a sincere
submis∣sion vnto God, and with an ope∣ration as it were insensible, she shall come to haue the accompli∣shing of her desire. And so in this estate, she must be as a little infant that sucketh, whose operations are of that quality, that they giue ioy and consolation to the crea∣ture, and this for the innocency & purity which is in them, which maketh such creatures not only agreable to the Creator, but also to those that behould them; euen so a soule that would be depriued of proper loue, ought in this man∣ner to imitate such actes, that is to say, that euen as a litle infant desi∣reth neither this, nor that, but on∣ly that which maintaineth his life to wit, milke, & this without any selfe respect: euen so a soule ought to do the like, that is to say, to de∣sire only that which giueth her life, which is God himselfe: and with
how much the greater sin∣cerity, fidelity, & constancy she seeketh God, in the ineiour of her soule; so much the more she maketh herselfe agreeable, & plea∣sing to his diuine Maiesty. THE CONDITIONS that a soule ought to haue to per∣forme that which hath bene specified, are these that follow. 1. THE first, is to desire to be euen as perfect as God would haue her, and when, & in the manner he pleaseth. 2. To take away all hinderan∣ces that may any way impeach the executiō of such a desire in her and endeaour that there should not be any thing betweene God and her, no not God himselfe, in regard of the pleasure,
and con∣tentment that is accustomed to spring of the knowledg and fee∣ling that she hath of God him∣selfe: for although that the sayd pleasure, and contentment be not euill, nor any sinne, yet notwith∣standing it hindereth, so that the disappropriatiō doth not ariue to his perfection. Therfore if somti∣mes the soule take contentment or pleasure in her selfe, & remaine busied in creatures, vnder the sha∣dow and pretence of the Creator; she putteth God himselfe as a hin∣derāce, between him & her soule, & disuniteth him from the same, for the respect she hath of that which proceedeth from his diui∣nity, or is appertaining vnto him. 3. Not to take care, or be to much grieued if she attain not to that height of perfection, vnto which she findeth herselfe called: for God is infinitely pleased to a soule in paine for his
diuine , the Kingly prophet Dauid ha∣uing said so much in his Psalme 90. Cum ipso sum in tribulation: that is to say, I am with him in tribulation. For the interiour tri∣bulations make a soule more ca∣pable then the exterior, to receaue particuler graces from God; yea sometymes so great, as cannot be thought or imagined: Therefore a soule ought to tak great heed, that she doe not grieue or tormēt her∣selfe, if she attayne not to the top of the perfection so much desired; for that sometymes God giueth great perfection, and yet with the same a soule shall not be so agrea∣ble to his diuine maiesty, as ano∣ther that hath it not, but doe on their part al that possibly they can to haue it. For hauing the said per∣fection she will haue a sati∣on, and contentment in herselfe, the which although it be good, it
will not be so pleasing to our Lord, as the payne and affliction that a soule suffereth for his loue: but with this payne and trouble she ought to be wholy conformed to his diuine will, without dis∣quiet, and not to separate herselfe any thing at all from the loue of God, for otherwise it wilbe selfe-loue. THE EFFECTS of Selfe-loue. THIS Selfe-loue, although it be called in this manner, ought rather neuertheles to be cal∣led want of loue to our selues, ha∣tred, death, a selfe-venome, or poi∣son: for that it hath no regard, nor respect, eyther to life or health, to body or soule, nor to any other thing: it esteemeth of nothing but what it affecteth, it regardeth not God himselfe.
This selfe-loue was first in Lucifer whē he made grea∣ter esteeme of his owne excellen∣cy, then to be with God in Para∣dise, wherby he incurred presently death vnto himselfe, to wit, to be separated from God: the like also happeneth to a soule, for it separa∣teth her from God, maketh her be∣come insensible, taking from her the light of reason, to be opinia∣tiue, churlish, and voyd of ciuility. Selfe-loue is like vnto the heath called Dogs-tooth, which being not rooted out, commeth by little & little to haue such force, tha marreth all other heathes, that are neere vnto it: euen so, if this Selfe-loue be not taken away and ∣ted out of our hart, it wil take suck increase in our soule, that it will spoile and corrupt all vertues and graces that are in the same; for only it corrupteth the vertues
that we haue gotten by our industry; but also those that we haue recey∣ued in Baptisme, and in the other Sacraments. It doth also the same in our soules, as the opilations or obstructions doe in our bodyes, which are the causes of infinite di∣seases. It maketh a man proud and high minded, and afterwardes ca∣steth him into the depth of des∣paire. It giueth him a presumptu∣ous strength, and hope to do what he will, and afterwards makes him vnable, and cold in the seruice of God. It cloatheth the soule, & co∣loureth it with diuers colours vn∣der the pretence of sanctity, after∣wards despoyleth it and maketh it naked of the meanes that might bring her to her Creatour. It is a venome by which the soule becō∣meth senselesse, and is ruyned and destroyed. It is like vnto the most hurtfull venome of the Aspe: it gnaweth and consumeth
without being perceaued, and inchaunteth and betwitcheth in such sort, that she knoweth not what she doth, nor what she would; but passing from one thing to another, she tor∣menteth herselfe, and not being a∣ble to come to what she desireth, she grieueth, fretteth, and pyneth away; & if any counsell her for her help, comfort, and profit, she re∣maineth as a senseles body, not ap∣prehending any thing, like to one that had no life: finally the orna∣ments that the foresayd selfe-loue giueth vnto a soule, are these that follow. First it maketh it vnlike vnto God and like to Lucifer: it causeth it to be hurtfull vnto other & dis∣pleasing to herselfe. It maketh it a vessell of contumely, or sea of ini∣quity. A soule infected therewith may be likned to a ship that is ex∣posed to the waues, and
tempests of the sea, that is shaken with all sortes of windes; like vnto a stin∣king water, a barraine ground that produceth no kind of fruit that is pleasant, an infected carren, and in a word it is like an vnbridled & vntamed horse; but which is most of all, such a soule deceyueth those that she conuerseth withall, for she sheweth herselfe as though she were full of vertue & holynes, & hideth inwardly the qualities of a venemous serpent. A DESCRIPTION of Selfe-loue. SELFE-loue may be figured, & represented, as a man without eyes, and notwithstanding hath foure, but none for God, but for himselfe: with two he seeth, and with other two forseeth only that which is for his commodity.
He hath no eares to vnderstand the voyce of God that soundeth mediatly, or immediatly, to wit, he is not attentiue, when he is ex∣cited inwardly to know his de∣faultes, and imperfections, but he hath six earers to appropriate any thing to himselfe: with two he heareth his own praises, with two others he hatkeneth vnto that which may augmēt this selfe loue, & with the other two he is watch∣full and attentiue, that nothing be sayd agaynst him. He hath three harts, notwithstanding he hath not one that may bring him any profit for the good of his soule, or whereby to come to perfection, for he hath not any affection, tast, or feeling of good. The first hart is for that which concerneth hi exteriour, or interiour commodity in regard of his body.
The second is for such things at he doth negotiate with others, to the end the world may haue him in good reputation. The third maketh him to shew a mild, and gracious countenance to be beloued of all, hauing his lookes very humble, his wordes sayre, and well placed; outwardly an Angell, but inwardly a raue∣ning wolfe; in summe, seeking no other thing then to please himself. HOW SELFE-LOVE entreth, and intrudeth it selfe into all things. THIS Selfe-loue is most sub∣tile, and hideth it selfe, entring and intruding into all things, euen into the Sacraments. First causing persons to frequent them for the proper gust they find therein.
Secondly to be well esteemed off by others, & also to couer some defectes: it thrusteth it selfe, & en∣treth in the same manner, in hea∣ring the word of God for the plea∣sure they take therein. It entreth into holy Orders, when the are receaued or vsed for vanity, for some commodity, ambition, or o∣ther euill designement. It thrusteth it selfe into marriages, when they mary for to satisfy their concupis∣cence, and appetites. It intrudeth it selfe also into the practise of ver∣tues, procuring that great paine & trauell be imployed in it, without hauing any good, right, or sincere intention for the glory of God, but rather for some other respect. It thrusteth it selfe, and entreth into the exercise of Prayer, pretending to receaue therein tast, light, and feeling, vnder pretence to be vni∣ted vnto God; and in doing this, the persō so infected, seeketh him∣selfe,
vnto God. It entreth also by a cer∣tayne superfluous, ouer great, and excessiue desire of the crosse, but it is for the pleasure that one taketh oftentymes in the same crosse, in which self-loue much delighteth. PROPERTIES of a soule infected with selfe-loue. SELFE-loue robbeth from God, what appertayneth vnto him, for it stealeth and taketh from him his honour, by seeking to attribute the same vnto himselfe, as the Pha∣risy robbed our Lord of his honor, when he sayd, nou sum sicut coeteri b∣minum, I am not like vnto other men. First this loue maketh the soule vnlike vnto God, being a most simple obiect, an infinite purity; Self-loue maketh the soule
double, crafty, and dissembling, and cau∣seth it to seeme other then it is. Secondly, it maketh her like vnto the diuell, for euen as the di∣uell is neuer cōtent, nor reposeth; so the like miseries doth selfe-loue cause in the soule, for it causeth much vnquietnes, and many trou∣bles in her, not being able to find any repose or contentment. It ma∣keth her a lyar, and an enemy to truth, and by this meanes she be∣commeth hatefull vnto others; for that such qualities are insupporta∣ble: moreouer it causeth conti∣nually fretting and vnquiet, for neuer finding any repose, and not daring to desire death by reason of this selfe loue, she tormenteth and afflicteth herselfe without ceasing. It bringeth her also to beavessell of contumely, for that to satisfy herself she doth euen
her best acti∣ons, desiring prayers, the Sacra∣ments, and such like thinges, ha∣uing for a foundation of all this her selfe-loue. And thus the works become defiled, soule and infected with this selfe-loue, and the soule by this meanes is a sea of iniquity: for the bottome of her imperfecti∣ons not being able to be found, she is a sea without bottome, that is mooned and troubled with con∣trary winds, & swolne with mer∣uaylous great, fearefull, and hor∣rible waues, being angry, and euer opposing herself against those that would affoard her any help or re∣medy. She is also like vnto a ship, exposed to the tempests & raging of the sea, for this soule sayling in the sea of selfe-loue, euen as a ship in the sea, so is she combated on e∣uery side, making ship wracke for a smal matter. She may also be com∣pared to a stinking
water, for she runneth on euery side (as water that hath no stay) to seeke if she cā find contentment; but by reason of her imperfections she is very noysome, and yeldeth an euill fa∣uour vnto those that are pure, and cleane. She resembleth also a bar∣rayne ground, that produceth no∣thing but thornes, thistles, and o∣ther such vnsauoury weeds, spoy∣ling all the fruit of good workes. She is like vnto a stinking carren, for this self-loue infecteth the soule and maketh her serue him as food to a rauen, and afterwardes to be∣come a prey and repast to that in∣fernal fiend whom she resembleth. Briefly this loue thus qualifyed, is as an vntamed horse without bit, or bridle; it will not be ruled by any person, nor cōtaine it sele, neither by counsell, not by skilfull aduise, but it maketh the soule to mayne as rooted in her proper sen∣se, and selfe iudgement, whereby
she becommeth incorrigible: and this happeneth sometimes to so∣me spirituall person, vnder colour of sanctity, which is very hardly cured. This foresayd Selfe-loue sprin∣geth of the delight that the crea∣ture hopeth to enioy in those thinges she seeketh, and which do appertay ne vnto her, and it grow∣eth to that passe, that she esteemeth not of her life, nor of any other thing els: in respect of arrayning to what she so liketh. It procee∣deth also of the nature wounded & corrupted in her irascible and concupiscible powers, and euill habits, and customes which haue gotten root in the soule. And this is vnderstood, not only of the first kind of self-loue which is cōmon & familiar to worldly persons, but also of the second, wherwith of∣tentimes spirituall
persons are in∣tangled, the which may be called self-loue, for the tast, & pleasure that they seeke in spirituall thin∣ges. It is vnderstood also of the third kind of self-loue in spirituall persons, who are already aduaun∣ced, and profited in the way of vertue, which may be compared to the poyson of the diamond, that gnaweth a creature, interiourly by litle, & litle, but it leaueth no exteriour signe, as other poysons do: so this proper loue gnaweth oftentymes in wardly the consci∣ce, but it leaueth no mark or signe in the soule, but killeth it, and bringeth it in the end to death, & damnation. It is a very euident signe of the forsaid self-loue when our Lord hath giuen any particu∣ler grace to a soule, and when it pleaseth him to depriue her of it, she falleth into great griefe and sadnes.
The root of this forsaid Selfe-loue lieth hid vnder the colour of faygned holines, and guideth the soule by a very strait, and narrow way, and maketh it appeare, to those that conuerse which such a person, that the way to serue God is very strait, and more difficult, then in truth it is. It engendreth a great wearines of sanctity, aswell in the parties that haue it, as in the persons that conuerse with them; which is no true holines. It exci∣teth a great meruaile, and an asto∣nishment with vnquietnes, which procureth to the parties a disgust and confusion, in seing that they cannot arriue to that perfection and holines, which they see in o∣thers, wherby they remaine with∣out repose, which is a great signe that this holines proceedeth of selfe loue. And he that wrote this discourse witnesseth to haue pro∣ued
& found this many tymes in isele, to wit, that in thinking on the sanctity of some such perō, he much meruailed, but notwith∣standing he did not fall into vn∣quietnes and confusion. REMEDIES against Selfe-loue. 1. FIRST the soule infected herewith must seeke to haue a person very much enlight∣ned by God, that hath the discre∣tion of spirits, with whom she must confer of her troubles & de∣sires, and according to his iudgmēt esteeme herselfe to be sick, and to haue need of help, as in truth she hath, and is not able to help her selfe. 2. Secondly she must mortify all her desires & affectiō, aswell, of
those thinges that are good & holy, as of those that are indifferent, and not to run after them, especially, when she is most prouoked vnto them, and for this effect it will serue her much to lay open her hart to her spirituall fa∣ther, and suffer herselfe to be gui∣ded, and conducted by him. 3. Thirdly the remedy is to thinke that all thinges, how good and holy soeuer they be, are not alwayes pleasing to God, but on∣ly those that come from him, and are required by him. And by this we may know, that they come from him when the said things do not moue vs, nor lift vs vp vnto pride in hauing them, nor tormēt & afflict vs in hauing them not, but bring with them a peace and tranquillity to the soule: in such sort, that she remayneth in as great repose in the execution of them, as if she did not execute them at all.
4. The fourth remedy is to cō∣sider, that to accomplish such de∣sires of this self-loue, is to contem∣ne God, and to contradict, and be opposite to the diuine will, for so much as Diuine loue, is altogea∣ther contrary to Selfe loue; and all our actions that we are induced vnto by it, are contrary to the blessed will of God, and by that meanes we become opposite, and contrary vnto him. 5. The fifth remedy belongeth to the spirituall father, who to take away, and cleere the soule from all selfe-loue, in all that she pre∣tendeth in her actions, and desires, must first seeke all the meanes to penetrate into her hart, that is, to gaine her good opinion and esti∣mation, and to be gratefull vnto her; & afterwards he must begin with great sweetnes to apply his remedies, and so to cure and heale
her: which must not be done in such open manner that she may perceaue it, but with some kind of dissimulation, and as it were in iest, making her to doe all thinges contrary to that she herselfe dis∣poseth off, or desireth to doe: As for example, if the said person be desirous to goe vnto one place of recreation, to make her goe to a∣nother: somtymes also not taking them away altogeather, but cor∣recting them, as if she would mor∣tify herselfe with long disciplines, to make her to vse short, for sel∣dome it doth profit to withstand proper Loue altogeather at one blow, as to forbid her wholy dis∣ciplines, except it be to a person already aduaunced in the way of perfection, & in the exercise ther∣of. And as this his dexterity ought to proceed of charity, & loue:
so also ought she to be ruled with the same loue, for so much as in such cures and sicknes, seuerity profi∣teth nothing, by reason that this selfe-loue is sweet & gracious, and maketh the soule very tender and delicate: so that if she be vsed with sharpnes & roughnes, she entreth presently into disdaine, flieth and abhorreth the cure. And by this may be seene, that Selfe-loue is healed with loue, and by loue. This sweetnes is most necessary in superiours, & principally when they treat with those vnder their charge, of thinges appertayning to the superiour part, and spirit: for ordinarily in this affaire all the euill proceedeth of this roote, and seuerity procureth anger, and dis∣daine, and hindreth much: & mo∣reouer the Phisitian of Selfe-loue must note, that he ought to be cō∣tinually diligent, & not to
aban∣don the cure, but to doe as a Phi∣sitian doth, who hath one grie∣uously sicke in his charge, for he visiteth often his patient, and ma∣ny tymes feeleth his pulse, and ne∣uer abandoneth nor leaueth him, vntill he perceaue that he is in bet∣ter estate, and that he beginneth to amend. He must also note, that there be two sortes of persons that are sick of this selfe-loue: some of thē are as it were in a consuming fea∣uer, the euill wherof hath already very much penetrated into the in∣ward part; and although oftenti∣mes they are incurable, or at the least very hard to be cured, yet notwithstanding, he must not al∣waies despaire of them, but must performe in their behalfe what the said corporall Phisitian doth to those that hath the forsaid disease, to wit, to performe on his part, whatsoeuer he can, and to leaue
the rest vnto God; but he must take great heed, that he doe not beare himselfe to harsh & to austere, for that would be very domageable, and pernicious. The others that are sicke, are such, and of such an humor, as they may be healed: and although it be needfull to vse great swetnes, & dexterity in their behalfe, as hath been said before, and that there is great difficulty in the cure, yet not∣withstāding he must not despaire, by reason of the difficulty that he perceaueth in the beginning; for the cause of this difficulty is, that this proper loue, doth so much blind the soule, that it doth not permit her to see clearly her faults, and imperfections: and therfore she not acknowledging herselfe to be sicke, the euill can hardly be cured, so that one ought to imploy all his care, and
industry to make her to enter into this knowledg, which in the end wil serue very much for her remedy and cure. First the said spirituall father must take great heed that he speak not any thing of self-loue, & that must be shunned from the begin∣ning, least the infirme should be too much dismayed, and fall into too much feare: but he must a far off put before her, and cause her to practise the exercise of disappro∣priatiō, depriuing her first of some things not very difficult vnto her, afterwardes make her returne to herselfe, and cause her to know how she was hindred in this loue, although in chiding her, he ought to say nothing that may cōtristate her, or to seeme to blame her, but rather by little and little make her know her euill; notwithstanding when she knoweth it, or when she is cured, then he
must mak her vn∣derstand, how great, and dange∣rous it was, for he must comport himselfe in this behalfe, as a guid doth in a iourney, who being to passe some dangerous strait, sayth nothing to the passengers of the perill and daunger, but only en∣courageth them to follow him, & afterwards hauing passed the strait, hath no more care, nor looketh backe vnto it; euen so, those that treate with such kind of persons, ought to be haue themselues dex∣terously without making them to thinke of the difficulty that they shall haue to mortify the said selse-loue, sometymes speaking to them in parables & similitudes in a third person, sometymes by good coun∣sell, making them to vnderstand & to come to the knowledge of their defects; then with sweetnes, and taking euer some good occasion to make them to returne, and
enter into themselues. Whilest I was writing a copy of this booke, our Lord inspired this vertuous Dame for whome it was first composed, that she should ad∣uertise me of this that followeth, that I might set it downe in the end of this worke: to wit, that as there is an Angell appointed ouer proper loue to repesse it, and fight against it; so there is another ouer the loue of God, to conserue, in∣crease, and augment it, who from the beginning of their creation were deputed to this function, the one, & the other not passing fur∣ther then their charge. S. Gabrid was deputed ouer diuine loue, by the meanes wheof he was chosen to be the messenger of the sacred mstery of the Incanation of the God, a work of most singular loue of Almighty God
towardes man∣kind, vnto whome it was especi∣ally reuealed in heauē by the most Blssd mity, when the diuine persons made their actes of reci∣procall loue. S. Michael was also appointed ouer proper loue; and therfore whē Lucifer rebelled in heauen against God, seeking to be like to the most high, & equalling himselfe with him, he was ordey∣ned by our Lord to resist him, as one that had a great zeale of diuine loue, contray to this selfe-loue. Our Lord then reuealed this secret to this holy Lady, and sayd vnto her. Aduertise thy spiritual Father, that he may learne, that when any one would heale a soule, infected with Selfe-loue, he demaund my aydand succour, by the prayers & intercessiō of S. Michael the Archā∣gel: and when any soule shalbe touched, & surprized with diuine loue, it is needfull that she
implore the fauour of S. Gabriel, to the end, that by this meanes she may more easily attaine vnto the soueraigne perfection of the said loue of God. AN APPENDIX TO THIS ABRIDGMENT, whereby to ascend to a most high Perfection. THe perfectiō, presupposed of all the estates before de∣clared, euen vnto this pre∣sent, cosisteth in an vtter forsaking of al pretēces whatsoeuer, & not to pretend any other thing, but God only, in a most excellent, and a most perfect manner, in all our actions, whereby we may attayne vnto a most high perfectiō, which consisteth in the
examen follow∣ing, distinguished into seauen points. 1. The first is, when the soule apprehendeth any trouble or affli∣ctiō, that of new is presented vnto her. For that then by the suggestiō of the inferiour, or infirme part, the apprehension of such a crosse is accustomed to be very vehement: and with this, a thousand exagge∣rations wilbe presented, that will cause it to appeare more violent, wherby the soule is accustomed to take this affliction with much dif∣ficulty, and many repugnances. To remedy this, and to prouide for it throughly, it is necessary that the superior part of the soule, pro∣pose all this before her, as a iudge doth, who before he giue his sen∣tence, harkeneth to the reasons of both parties, prouided alwayes that she be not mooued any
thing with their reasons, but that she re∣mayne without passiō or any kind of alteration, suspending her iud∣gement, vntill she find out what may be according to reason: and that she may the better vnderstand it, these two meanes will ayd her. The one is, that she enter into her∣selfe, and consider how Almighty God knoweth, and seeth all her troubles, and whatsoeuer she en∣dureth, and therfore she ought to remit it wholy into his hands, to dispose thereof as he seeth most ex∣pedient. The second is to consider, & belieue assuredly, that euen as the diuine boūty desireth nothing but our good; euen so his diuine prouidence (which is hid from vs, not being permitted vnto vs to seeke too curiously into it) know∣eth very well how to prouide & remedy all in time, and manner, as it shall seeme best vnto him, and not
as best liketh vs, nor as it may best please vs. Of this suspension, and repose of spirit follow two things; the first, that she putteth a∣way, and reiecteth all the hinde∣rances, and trouble, and the de∣ceytes that might happen by this apprehension: and secondly it wil follow, that she shall come to con∣ceaue a true, pure, sincere, and ma∣ture apprehension of all her af∣fayres. The second point is, that when the soule is come to receaue, and accept this affliction, as comming from God. REMEDIES. SHE must not rest herself heere, or permit herselfe to accept of it, as often many soules are accu∣stomed to doe, to wit, basely with an infinit number of difficultyes, of excuses, and seeking of them∣selues, but she must accept thereof
o offer it, & returne it vnto God, accepting it only in him, and for him. 4. The fourth point, is to know, in what manner the supe∣riour part must suffer with the in∣feriour, and with the exteriour senses, in the repugnances, & con∣trarieties which they feele, as hath bene said before. REMEDIES. THE superiour part ought to doe all, that hath bene said before, in the behalfe of the inferi∣our, and weakest partes, in such sort, that it be not with a certaine excessiue violēce, which may cause thē wholy to loose their strength, and vigour, or so as may trouble, or make the soule pusillanimous and fearefull, or els vtterly vnable to support so great a blow; but she ought for this cause
somthing to suffer with them, and encourage them with all the reasons the can imagine, and she must doe all this with the greatest discretion that she can possibly, in giuing now and then some relaxation vnto their trauailes, and afflictions, & in seeking the most conuenient remedies that she can aduise her∣selfe of. Euen as one that would haue a horse, or any other beast to serue his turne, will giue him more meat, to the end he may be strong, and able to trauaile better when there is need. And when by rea∣son of diuine subtraction she can∣not vse the force of any act of cō∣solaiō, or rasing vp of her mind, she ought to repose in this, and procure the partes that are inferi∣our, to repose in the will of God, and this by meanes of the diuine conformity, which will bring much more true and strengthning
consolation, although it doth not seeme so. 5. The fift point is, how she ought to comport herselfe with selfe-loue in this case, or the like. REMEDIES. SELFE-Loue is accustomed to pretend & seeke in all thinges her owne interest, and particuler cōmoditie directly, or indirectly; and it doth so also in this, vnder pretence of many good reasons, yea euen of vertues, and purposeth many thinges that are not to the purpose; & for this cause the soule with the purity of a right intentiō ought to discouer by the light of the loue of God, all his deceipts, & oppose herselfe against this selfe loue very freely, and effectually; & by the force of a pure & cleane loue, she ought to reiect all parti∣culer
and selfe respect, and follow purely that which God shall in∣spire, and teach her. 6. The sixt point is, how that the superiour part ought to ans∣were to the propositions or offers, that our Lord will make vnto her concerning these paines, and affli∣ctions, or other greater. REMEDIES. AFTER this that hath byn a∣boue said, our Lord is accu∣stomed to make many propositiōn to the soule: as for example, that he will send her many other affli∣ctions, or els make her endure this present affliction along tyme, yea that we will cause her to suffer euen the paines of hell; and then ought she with great promptnes to be wholy resigned vnto God. He also is accustomed to giue the choice of two kindes
of afflictions for her to accept of one. And in this case raysing & ixing the eyes of her soule wholy in the perfect loue of God, with a meruailous purity, she ought to make her ele∣ction in God, and this choice must be alwaies of that which will re∣dound most to his honour and glory. 7. The seauenth is, in what manner she ought to behaue her∣self, that she may vse all her pow∣ers in the execution of this affaire, or of this affliction, and of all that which shalbe necessary, to come to the height of this perfection. REMEDIES. FOR as much as ordinarily in the exercising of all these thinges, it is necessary that all the powers, & faculties of the soule concurre therunto, to put it duly in execution; she ought fully to
resolue with herselfe to obserue all that she hath deliberated vpon, in such sort, that aswell in generall, as in particuler, she may perfectly accomplish, & put in execuiō all this that she hath already chosen, and resolued to doe in the present affliction, or in any other thing: and she ought to take heed dili∣gently to correct the faultes that may happē in the executiō, yther by reason of her imagination, and representation of afflictions, or of the vnderstanding, or of the will, or of all the other powers. And thus the soule that is perfect, shall become much more perfect: and all this is a disposition vnto the state, that rēdereth the soule who∣ly diuine.
THE DAYLY EXAMEN of our Conscience, especially at Night. §. 1. TO giue God thanks for al be∣nefits formerly receaued, and especially of that present day. 2. To demaund grace & true light, to know & hate our sinnes. 3. To call our soules to ac∣compt, wherin we may haue that day offended God: hauing special consideraiō of such defects wher∣unto we are most inclined. 4. To craue pardon humbly of God for al sins & defects, wher∣of we find our selues guilty. 5. To make a firme purpose, through Gods grace to auoyd sin heereafter, with intention to con∣fesse those wherein we haue trans∣gressed. Lastly, say Pater noster. Aue Maria. Credo.
THE PARTICVLAR EXAMEN to be made at three tymes, very ne∣cessary for the better disposing, & searching into our selues. §. 2. THE first is in the morning when, assoone as we awake, we must purpose to keep a diligēr watch that day ouer our selues, for the auoyding of some sinne or im∣perfection, which we are desirou to amend. The 2. is at Noone, when we must demaund Gods grace, that we may remember how often we haue fallen into that particuler sin or defect, & be more heedful heer∣after. Then, let vs make our first Examen, calling our soule to ac∣compt, & running ouer euery houre of the day to that present, how often we haue fallen therin∣to: & let vs make so many
marke in the former syne of the ensuing table. This done let vs purpose to keep our selues more warily the rest of the day. The 3. Time, shalbe at Night after supper, when we must make the second Examen, running ouer euery houre from the former exa∣mination vntill that, calling to mind, & nūbring the times wher∣in we haue offended, making so many markes in the second line of the table mentioned before. FOVRE ADDITIONS very profitable, for the more easy & speedy rooting out of any Vice, or sinne. §. 3. THE 1. is, that as often as we commit that particuler sinne, we be sory for it from our hart, in witnes wherof let vs lay our hand vpon
our brest: which may be done at all tymes, without being perceaued by others. The 2. is, that at Night we number & compare the mathes of both lines togeather, the former line being appointed for the first examen, & the later for the secōd & let vs see, if from the former hath followed any amendment. The 3. is, that we compare the examinations of the first & second day togeather, & marke whether any amendment hath byn made. The 4. is, that by comparing two weeks togeather, it may ap∣peare what amendment hath byn made, or omitted. It is also to be noted, that the first of the lines following, which is longer then the rest, is ap∣pointed for the first day, the second somewhat shorter for the second day, and so likewise for
euery day, shorter & shorter. It being meet that the number of our faults be dayly diminished. Sunday — Mundy — Twesday — Wednesday — Thursday — Friday — Saturday — CERTAYNE ADVERTISMENTS necessary for the better making of our Prayer. §. 4. BEFORE Prayer, the Soule must exercise it selfe in some acts of Humility, by considering its owne basenes, and the greatnes of God, with whom it is to treate, and falling down vpon our knees we must begin with the signe of the Crosse, blessing our selues, and crauing of the
diuine Maiesty grace, to spend that short tyme well, which we are to imploy in that holy Exercise; so as all out thoughts, words, and workes may be sincerely addressed to the grea∣ter glory of God. Moreouer we must imagine a certayne Compo∣sition of place, and therein accom∣modate our selues in such manner as is taught vs, by our spirituall Father and Directour in that case. Finally we must perswade out selues, that we stand in the pre∣sence of God, who is both within & round about vs, to the end that the imagination therof may incite vs to greater attention, cōfidence, and reuerence. Next we must aske of the diuine goodnes that, which we desire, answerable to the mat∣ter wherof the meditation is to be made. For example, if I meditate of sin, I will craue pardon for my owne &c.
We must also make one, or more Colloquies at the end, according to the motions, & affection which the soule shall feele in it selfe, in speaking sometimes to the Blessed Trinity, sometymes to euery one of the three Diuine Persons, or to the B. Virgin, or the Saints, giuing thankes other whiles for benefits receiued, other whiles crauing Gods help, for getting of some one vertue in particuler. The repetitions, that our B. Fa∣ther S. gnatius teacheth in the first Weeke of his Spirituall Exercises must be made after two, or three meditations, in such manner, as is specified in the same place, making three Colloquies, to wit, to the Father, to the Sonne, and to the B. Virgin.
THE TABLE. 1. VVHAT Perfection ought to be presupposed in the Soule, that entreth into the practice of that which is treated of, in this Discourse. 2. Two Principles wherein consisteth Perfection. 3. Of the . Estate: & fist of Anihilatiō. 4. Of the first Degree of Abnegation, Subtraction Conformity: and of the Abiect on, & Anihilation of himselfe. 5. The second Degree. 6. The third Degree. 7. The fourth Degree. 8. The fifth Degree. 9. The six Degree. 10. Of the second Estate. 11. Of the third, and last Estate.
THE LADDER of Perfection. THE first Exercise of Anihilation. The 2. Exercise of Disappropria∣tion 3. The Exercise of Indifferency. 4. The Exercise of Conformity. 5. The Exercise of Vniformity. 6. The Exercise of Deiformity. 7. Of Selfe loue. 8. Of the Effects of selfe loue. 9. A Description of selfe-loue. 10. Properties of a soule insected with selfe-loue. 11. Remedies agaynst selfe-loue. 12. A supply of this Abridgment, to ascend vnto a most high Perfection. 13. The Examen of our Conscience. FINIS.
