13103 99855004 20474
THE VVhole and true Discourse of the Enterprises and secrete Conspiracies that haue bene made a∣gainst the person of Henry de Valois, most Christian king of Fraunce & Poland. VVherupon followed his death by the hand of a young Iacobin Frier, the first day of August, 1589. Whereby the e∣nemies of the Crown, thought to haue reduced & brought all Fraunce to their will & deuo∣tion. Together with the assembly that the king before his death made of the Princes of the blood; Lordes and Gentlemen that were in his Armie, with the heads of the straungers, to whom he declared his last will. Englished out of the French copie, printed at Caan in Normandie Imprinted by Thomas Purfoote, and are to bee soulde at his shoppe without New-gate, ouer against S. sepulchers church, 1589.
The true discourse of the enter∣terprise made against the Person of the late deceased King, wounded (wher∣of he dyed) by a yong Iacobin Frier, the first of this moneth of August 1589. YF the holy scripture, yea God himselfe, expressy forbid vs, (& that with threat∣ning vs to fal into ye indignatiō & iugd∣mēt of the higher power) that we should not in any wise couch or hurt the anoynted of the Lord: It is a matter worthy to bee wondred at, that hee (who calleth himselfe the preacher of the gospel) should so far forget himself, as yt he neither knewe nor vnderstoode the will of God, who so greatly esteemeth, and ordaineth to be honoured & respected, the partie to whom hee committeth the the gouernment of a common weale: although he vse rigoure and seueritie. And who (I pray you) from time out of mans memorie, can giue vs testimonie of so wretched an act, and so worthie of euerlasting blame, to haue hapened, and to haue bene committed and perpetra∣ted in all christiandome, as that which is yet all bloodie in our Fraunce, committed against our so gracious and mercifull King, Henrie de Valoys, King of Fraunce, and Polande? An act verily vt∣terlie vnworthy a christiā, & that would not be be∣leiued to haue bin exercised amongest the most bar∣barous
nations of the world. We find, yea in the holy scriptures themselues, that there haue bine reuoultings, discontentmēts, contradictions, and murmurings, and that in the ende many people haue raysed wars, against their kings and princes, by reason of the great subsidies impostes, and heauie burthens, and other charges that were layde vpon their shoulders very h & vneasie to be borne. But it is not found that there hath an assault and murder ben done nor conspired against the Soueraigne authoritie. Wee read of Salomon who had imposed and layd vpon the backes of the people that were com¦mitted vnto him by the authoritie of God, impor∣table burdens wherewith the subiects felt them∣selues  and wholy ressed. Ieroboam  welbeloued srimt, albeit he had receiued  by Aas the auncient prophet of God that  raigne  ten tribes of Israell, and that  but o of the tribes remaine in the , yet the said Ioboam being at  had rather  aomon, and  him. Not∣ , and his  the kingdome,  of the people was  when hee
supplication to the king, to ease them of those hea∣uie burdens that his father had layde vppon them. Whereto king Roboam woulde not yeilde, and they went there waies very greatly discontenced. And the sayd Ieroboam raigned ouer tenne of the tribes of Israeli: who crowned him kinge & ruler ouer them. But they long continued not in that estate, but the vengeance of God fel vpon them af∣ter the death of the saide Roboam: And amongest all that is written of this goodly historie in the booke of Paralipomenon the 13 and 14 chapters, & in the first booke of Kings, the 1.2.3.4. & other Chapters following, there is no mention made (though ther wanted no means of the peacusing amongest them of any other meanes, nor of any o∣ther kinde of assaulting the king (though he were constrained to flie vnto Ierusalem:) nor of Abias his sonne that raigned after him. VVee finde also that in the warres many kings haue bene smitten & slaine. Others also by the iust iudgment of God haue bene killed and wounded by diuerse straunge mortall woundes. The reuerence due to the king aswell in the warres, as otherwise, hath bene and yet is in so great accoumpt, that there is an obser∣uation in the warres, when the King is there in person) to crie alowde: Saue the Kinge: faue the King. They will aledge, it was done vpon wrath and indignation, for that which was executed vpon Mounsire de Guyse, by hys Maiesties commaun∣dement.
I aunsweare them, it is not the part of a seruant nor of any other whomsoeuer to make himselfe e∣quall and euenlyke, nor to compare himselfe with the authority, power, or highnes, of an Emperor, King, or Magistrace, who executeth and disposeth of his affaires, as pleaseth himself, and according to his good counsell. After whose example, and in imitation of hym, if perticuler persons, shoulde take vpon them to make ordinaunces, and to enter∣medle in the rule & gouernment of the ciuil estate, & the affaires of the kingdome. What order, what gouernment, what iustice, should we haue therin▪ To whom might it be said that the obedience were due, which we protest to yeild in the name of God, to our superiours, whome he hath ordeined and e∣stablished ouer his people. There is no question, nor controuersie, but that a long time there hath bene verie secret practising against the king. For his maiesties owne selfe, hath often discouered verie euident tokens ther∣of, whereby hee might easilie bee perswaded, of their canckred hearts toward him. As may ap∣peare by the serching and sifting that the house of Guize hath made, as being descended from Char∣lemaine, vpholding the Bulle of Pope Stephen, in the behalfe of Pepin king of Fraunce, and of his wife, with their two issues males, one of the which was the saide Charlemaine, the which bull (next after the consecrating & anoynting of the regality
in the person of the said Pepin and his wife, by the same Pope) conteinech a iudgmēt of curse against them that should presume to enterprise the french scepter & preuaile to obtaine the same, except they were such as should discend from the said Pepin, & his race. There haue ben other sufficient occa∣siōs brought to light, which I will passe in silence. But I wonder why they laid that so long aside, and opposed not themselues, to them that haue raigned sithencs that time. I wotte well that they haue ruled and gouerned in Fraunce in their time, and that nothing was done, but what they allowed for the most part. And to alleadge at this daie, that the king had hardely dealt with them: hee that had brought to light so many sinister dealinges, and enterpri∣ses, They indeuoring and purposing to aide and defend themselues with a league and associa∣tion (in a manner) of all the townes and commu∣nalties of all Fraunce, where they could get audi∣ence. This kinde of proceding was in truth con∣cluded and determined from the councel, of Trent: And being assured of a great number of people as well Churchmen, as Gentlemen, and of the thirde estate, vnder colour of the revniting of fayth and religion, and also of the asswaging and lessening of the impositions taxes and subsidies that the kinge demanded by reason of the necessity of the affaires of his kingdome: and of other prankes, wherwith I may well say a great number of folke were be∣witched,
forsaking their king, who onlye hath po∣wer and authoritie in his kingdome to take order in all such matters, the which people stayed them∣selues vpon certaine perticuler persons, that haue not any meane to accomplish the same, but only by taking their swordes in hande, and altogither to inforce the king to graunt to their minds, or else to constraine him to yeild vp his scepter: and intend¦ing thus to winne the authority that they seeke to haue ouer all Fraunce: to bring all things into con∣fusion and disorder to murder all them that should refuse to bee obeidient to their will: to sease their goods and possessions, to recompence the heades of these warres, for their good seruice imployed for this league, at their coses. These matters are wel ynough knowne to many, by the actions that they haue cōmitted, yea & after what sort they haue led the kings maiestie about, who for a certaine space distrusted not their hipocrisie & dissimulation. But they could not so couertlye and cunningly playe their game, but it was espyed, how they had deli∣berated, to shutte the king vp in a religious house, there to finish the rest of his dayes. Now when this confederacie and league was thus confirmed and setled, and the time of the exe∣cution of their intent drewe neere, wee know howe the kinge was constrained to withdrawe himselfe from Paris, and all those matters that ensued ther∣vppon, vntill the assembly of his generall estats at Bloys. At which-place, in the beginning, the king
of Nauarra, and all those of his race, are declared to be vomcet and vncapable to succeed, to the crowne  Fraunce, as men attainted & conuicted of heresie in their onely iudgement, with confiscation of all their possessians. In which place they thought ve∣ryly to haue accomplished and attained to the per∣fection of their secret intents and complots. But when matters stirred and turned otherwise then they expected, and the estates ceased: They must needes open the closet of their heartes, whereby were reuealed their fautors and assuters. And e∣uen as there was left but one tribe of the children of Israell in the house of Dauid, in the handes of king Roboam, the lawfull and naturall sonne, and rightfull successor of his father Salomon: so did the king finde himselfe stripped of all his good townes, noble men, and an infinit number of men at armes, so that he had no sure accesse nor place of retrait, sauing in the lesser part of his kingdom, though there were many of his side in the prote∣stant townes, but the force was not in their hands. Seeing themselues then thus strong, they cried. God saue the League, God saue the League, The which word, beeause it seemed odious, they haue changed into Vnion. The king weighing and considering this kinde of proceeding, and perceuuing their demeanors, pride and ambition, setling & tooting in the harles of these bypocrites, the taking of his townes, bor∣roughes, castels, and strong holdes, with double as∣suranes
of men in pay, and out of pay: it was s∣farie for him to craue aid els where, and as he was alwaies well assured of the good will of the ki of Nauarra his brother in Law, toward him, so did e not sticke, nor make any difficultie to call him to his aide: Whereto the said Lord would not in any re∣spect disobey: notwithstanding the rigour of the e∣dicts and declarations that the said king of Fraunce had made against my said Lord the king of Naurra and his alders, and had caused their goods and pos∣sessions both mouable and vnmouable to bee solde, acording to the desire of his enemies the leaguers, besides other matters which they caused the sayde deceased king to doe by force, for the most part, and wherein most often hee knew not what hee did. Which matters the said Lord the king of Nauarra hath sufficientite set downe at large in all his pro∣testations that he hath made to his Maiestie. Now Sathan, seeking like a roaring lion whō be may deuour, perceiuing this good and holie ∣greement and reconciliation, with the good will of the faithfull protestantes of the kings side, he could no longer stay him selfe in assurance, forasmuch as his deuises went euill forward. For these of the kinges side, taking courage, haue brought ma∣nie sheept backe againe to their owne fold. Here∣withall, he perceiued howe the straunger tooke the cause in hand, and stirred against the disturbers of the tranquilitie. They coulde not other∣ie iudge, for the behoof of the cause, but to per∣secute
the head that the mēbers might be yt steker In this iudgment and opinion, there bee many sortes of folke. For some of them ought to bee∣plaine and continent in their willes: Others are holde and ignorant, ledde by their owne affection without iudgment: Other some contrarie to their solitarines, are forerunners: who contrarie to their profession, entermeddle to doe things cleane contrarie to all honest conuersation, which causeth them to be euill liked, of such as desire to walke plainlie in their vocation. All the which kindes of folke thus put together, cannot in their particular passions, which are without all holines and pietie, rightly nor fitly giue any good counsell for such matters as are to be done: for they prefer their wicked intention which is transported with pride and vnsaciable conuetousnes) before all good affe∣ction, and the saftie of the common weale. And all of them so put together, without foresight of that which is to come, reiecting al māner of know∣ledge of God, cannot deliverate any other thing sauing onely the cutting away of the head of the tree, that the braunches might wither away the sooner. This Counsell was holden at Paris, whereat were present at that time the principall heads of this league, in which place, Sathan offered one worse then Iudas, for Iudas kissed his maister af∣ter be had sold him, and acknowledged his offence afterwards. But this yong man, a Iacobin Frier
of religion, hath made no difficulty nor sticking, to wound to death him, that so hartily loued ye order aboue all the whole nations of religious persons, who had cherished thē, as they that were welcome about his person. This will I say, it is no nouel∣tie that they begin to doe euill: I will produce an Emperour that was poysoned by a halowed ast, empoisoned notwithstanding, which was presen∣ted vnto him by a Iacobin. This order of Friers preachers haue alwaies bene very desirous to bee welcome amongest men of high calling, and to vn∣dertake odious offices, as to be of the inquysition of fayth and others. These of the League, vpon consideration thereof, prouoke and styrre more and more, thys poore cursed wretch, within whose hart Sathan lodged; to keepe, him alwaies in this cursed mind. Upon the resolution hereof, they pre∣pared him a knife for this purpose; which they dou∣ble poisoned with such kind of poyson, that though the party stryken with thys Instrument dye not presentlie yet it shall not be possible for him to e∣scape, nor liue long after. Vpon tuesday the first of August, very early in the morning, this diuelish person, taketh his ior∣ney, purpesing to find his Maiesty at S. Clou, two small leagnes from Paris: Attending his vp∣rsing, for feare of lsing the occasion to speake with him: being well assured to haue entrance to him, in respect of the auour that the king bore vnto them: hauing in his hand a letter or missiue to de∣liuer
liuer vnto him from the first president of Paris, as the report goeth, whom they detaine prisoner. Assoone as he was aduercised that he might cō∣ueniently speake with the king, he entereth with a bolde face, as hardy as a lyon, and like a bloody traitor gaue him the Iubé with a very low & hum∣ble curtesie, offering vnto him the said pretended writing of the same President, and comming neer to his Maiestie, he signified vnto him how bee had another secret to declare vnto him. The king hea∣ring the same, caused two Gentlemen to goe out, that serued him at his vprising. Then this Iaco∣bin cōtinuing in his wicked mind, drew this knife and therewith thrust the king into the litle belly as they call it: the which strok entred not into his body, neyther dyed he presentlie. The king seeing this, and being mooued, laid hold of a dagger that lay neere vnto hym, and therwith stroke the sayd Monke, who being hurt with the stroke, and much affrighted, fell presently down for feare: Howbeit not dead, but as is commonly sene, a malefactor is neuer setled and assured in conscience when he go∣eth about to eecute such a crueltie. Thys wret∣ched Monke, being worse feared, then hurt, had leysure to speake. Vpon the which noise, the said gentlemen soden∣ly came in againe with others, who by the kings cōmandement, slue him not, but tooke him vp. Af∣ter the king ws dressed, euen so far that hee had se∣uen stitches with a needle, as the report goeth, he
gaue cōmandement for the examination of the saide Monke, which was accomplished, and be declares who set him on, the authors, and all other informa∣tions, with his name, and vocation, & that he was not counterfayted, but of the sayd order. Which being finished, through impatiency he was kylled, suffering aboue a hundred thrusts with daggers, & which is worthy the maruayling at, it is reported that the sayd Monks flesh became as blacke as a very rauen, which ys easie to be beleeued, because Sathan dwelt wythin hym, and then the Iudge∣ment of god that appeareth to men in diuerse sorts: behold here a pytyfull tragedy. But as God will serue his purpose with men, by many and diuerse sortes, the king being yet of good there, with the hope which hee had conceiued that his wound might mend, sent with speede, for his brother in lawe the king of Nauarra, the lordes of his Court. Gouernours, Captaines that were in his armye, & specially the heads of the straung∣ers that were in his countrie, to the intent that if it so fell out that hee died, the disorder and misrule should not be so great, that all the army should be broken vp, no an vnmeasurable confusion ensue therevpon. When they were all thus assembled, God put into the kings mouth so stedfast and  speach, as though he had felt noe griefe, and began to signify to the assemblie: hat the lawful successi∣on of the royall estate of Fraunce, fell not to anye o∣ther, sauing in the person of Barbon, and declaring
at that time the kinge of Nauarra first successor, he prayed and exhorted the whole companie so to ac∣knowledge him, and to be fayth full vnto him: and to protest all with one voice the acknowledging & taking in good part of this deede, and true obedy∣ence, as to the true and lawfull heire, and to cause the like promise & acknowledgment to bee made in the campe by all true and faithfull Captaines and souldiers that could not bee present at the sayde as∣sembly, aswell naturall frenchmen as straungers, who all with gladnes of hart (though otherwise sad and sorowfull for his maiesties wound) swore to execute the kinges will. Vpon the ordering and disposing of all matters in this sorte, the kinge sent letters into all places, where he had yet the full gouernment, & especially to Caan to Mounsyr de la verune Gouernour and Baylly at Caan, and to the court of parliament esta∣blished at the sayd place, with hope, that there was no daunger of death. Asmuch was written vnto them from Mounsyr de Mountpensier Gouernour general for his maiestie in Normādy, who was thē at Andely vpon the riuer of Seyne, where becaused his whole armie to take the like oathe: exhortinge the heades to maintaine the kings will. Whiche was accorded vnto him, with hope as the said lord gouernor demed, that there shold be no daunger of the kings death, by Gods helpe. But the next daie following, the said lord gouer∣nor chaunged that kind of language, writing to the
sayd Bayly of Caan, whereby he gaue him to vn∣derstande how the king dyed the wednesdaye next following the date wherein he was wounded. An assembly was holden at Caan vpon sonday the sixt day of August, of all the Citizens and In∣habitantes of the same place, in the presence of the Bayly of Caan, and the Court of Parliament, the bodie of the towne, and the gentlemen of the coun∣trie, where the skilful person Mounseur de Lisores, Presidēt in the said court of Parliament, did sit as President, and when he had deliuered and shewed to al the whole company what matters had happe∣ned, with admiration of the speach of thys Lord, as protesting perfect loyalty on his owne behalfe: publication of his Maiesties letters and of Moūt∣pensiers letters was publiquely made, where all vniformally sware their acknowledgment & fide∣lity, euery man protesting to mayntayne the will of Henry de Valoys thus deceased, in all thinges that it conteineth.
