16783 99843425 8157
ANNO QVARTO Henrici octaui. royal coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MALO Y PENSE These be the Statutes establi∣shed in diuers Parlyaments, for the mistery of the Pewterers of Lon∣don, and concerning the search of pew∣ter, brasse, and vntrue beames and weights, and for deceiuable Hawkers, with diuers other orders and redresses to be had in the sayd mystery, with the renewing and confirming of the same Statutes,
¶ An acte made the fourth yeere of our Soueraigne Lord, King Henry the viij. concerning Pewterers, and true weights and Beames. the vij. chapter. FOR as much as a certaine Acte was made and stablished, in the Parlyament holden at Westmin∣ster, the xix. of the raigne of the last most famous King, your Father, Henry the vij. (whom GOD pardon:) concer∣ning Pewterers and Brasiers, hawking and walking about the Countryes, and also concer∣ning false Beames, Scales and Weights, with a prouision for casting of fine Mettall and of per∣fect goodnesse, which acte was made to endure to the next Parliament, the tennor whereof insueth. That where many simple and euill disposed persons, of thys your Realme of England, vsing the sayd crafts, daily go about this your Realme, from village, from Towne, and from house to house, aswel in woods and Forrests, as other pla∣ces, to buy Pewter and Brasse. And that know∣ing theeues and other pickers, that steale aswell Pewter and Brasse belonging to your High∣nesse, and vnder your marke, and to the Lordes spirituall and temporall, as to other your Sub∣iectes of thys your Realme, bring soch stolen ves∣sels to them, in such hid places to sell, and sell it for little or nought, and about they bring it to pri∣uie places, or into corners of Citties or Townes,
and there sel much part of it to straungers, which carry it ouer the Sea by stealth. Also, the sayde persons so going about, and diuers other vsing the sayde craftes, vse to make newe vessels, and to mixt good mettall and bad togethers, and make it nought and sell it for good stuffe: where in deede the stuffe and mettall thereof, is not worth the fourth part that it is solde for, to the great hurt, deceyt and losse of your Subiects. Nota. Also, dyuers persons vsing the sayde crafts, haue deceiueable and false Beames and Scales, that one of them wyll stand euen with twelue pound weight at the one ende, against a quarter of a pounde at the other ende, to the singuler ad∣uantage of themselues, and to the great deceyt and losse of your Subiects, buyers and sellers with them. The ordi∣naunce. For reformation of the premises, it woulde please your Highuesse, of your most aboundaunt grace, with the aduise of your Lordes spirituall and temporall, and the commons in this present Parlyament assembled, and by the authoritie of the same, to enact and stablish, that no person, nor persons, vsing the sayde craft of Pewterers and Brasiers, from henceforth shall sell or chaunge any Pewter or brasse, newe or olde, at any place, or places, within this your Realme; but onely in open Fayers or Markets, or in theyr own dwel∣ling houses, but if they be desired by the the buy∣ers of such wares: vppon paine of forfeiture to our Soueraigne Lorde the King, Penalttie x. pound. for euery such Default, ten pounds.
Nota. Also by the same authority, may it be establi∣shed, that no person, nor persons, of what con∣dition or degree so euer, hee or they bee, from henceforth (wythin the Cittie of London, and Yorke, or without,) eyther cast, or worke any Pewter vessels, or Brasse, at any place, or pla∣ces, within this your Realm: but that it be as good fine mettall, as is the Pewter and brasse, cast and wrought after the perfect goodnesse of the same within the Cittie of London, and by the statutes of the same ought to be, vpō payne of forfeiture of all such Pewter and Brasse so cast and wrought, of worse Pewter or Brasse than ought to be wrought in the same Citties. The one halfe of euery such forfeiture, to bee to the vse of your Highnesse, and the other halfe to the vse of the finders therof. Prouision Prouided alwayes, that thys forfeyture in no wise extend to brasse or pewter, being in the possession of any person, other than the wor∣kers of the same, or such as haue the same to sell, and beeing of the craftes or mistery. Nota. Also that it may by the same authoritie be enacted and stablished, that no maner of person, or per∣sons, of what degree or condition soeuer, hee or they be, frō hence forth make no hollowe wares of Pewter. That is to say, Saltes and Pots, that is made of pewter, called ley mettall, but that it may bee after the assyse of pewter ley mettall wrought within the Cittie of London. Penaltie. And that ye makers of such wares, shall marke the same with seuerall markes of theyr owne, to the intent that the makers of such wares
shall auowe the same wares by them (as is a∣bouesayd) to bee wrought. And that all and euery such wares, not suf∣ficiently made and wrought, and not marked in fourme aboue saide, founden in the possession of the same maker or seller, to bee forfeited. Penaltie. And if the same ware be sold, the saide maker to for∣feit ye value of ye same, so vnlawefully wrought and sold, the one halfe of the saide wares, or the value thereof, to be to the vse of your Hignesse, and the other half to be to the vse of the finders or searchers of the same. Beams & weights. Also that it may (by the same authoritie) be enacted and stablished, that if any person or persons, heereafter vsing buying and selling of Pewter or brasse, that hereafter occupy and de∣ceaueable or false beames, or weights, of ye said wares, that euery such person or persons vsing or occupying such deceiuable & vntrue beames or weights, to forfeit twentie shillings: the one halfe to the King, and the other halfe to the party that therefore shall sue by action of debt. And that in the sayde action, no protection nor essoyne shall bee allowed. And also the sayde party so offending, shall forteit hys Beame to him that shall sease it. And if the saide offen∣der, or offenders, be not sufficient to pay ye sayd somme, or sommes, by them so forfeited, that then it shall be lawful to the Mayors, Baylifs, or other head Officers of such place, or places, where any such offenders shalbe found, to put them in the Stockes, and them so to keepe till the next Market day, next adioyning, and in
the Market place to put them in the Pillory all the Market time. And furthermore, that it be lawfull by the sayd authoritie, Search. that the Mai∣ster and Wardaines of the sayd craft of Pew∣terers, within euery Cittie or Borough of this Realme, where such wardaines are. And where no such wardaines are, the head officers or gouernours of the same Cittie, or Borough, to appoint certaine persons most expert in the knowledge of the same to make search wythin the said Citties or boroughs where they dwel. And ouer this, the Iustices of peace wythin e∣uery shire, at the generall Sessyons holden at Michaelmas, shall assigne and appoynt two certayne persons, hauing experience therin, to make search in the premises, in euery part of the shire, as wel within the franchise as with∣out, sauing in Citties or boroughs where sear∣thers be appointed by the heads or gouernours of the same. And that all such vnlawfull pew∣ter or brasse, as the sayde searchers shall finde, the one halfe to the vse of your Grace, and the other halfe to the searchers. And that in the default of the sayde Maisters and Mardaines of the saide occupations, not searching in forme as is aforesaid, and whereby that any such vn∣lawfull Mettall is cast or made, or vnlawfull weightes vsed, that then it shalbe lawful to a∣ny person, or persons, hauing sufficīet cunning & knowledge in the saide occupations, by ouer∣sight of the Maiors, Baylifs, or head Officers of the said Citties, and boroughs, and townes, to search all the saide places, and to put those
saide authoritie and acte in execution, in forme aforesaide. Please it therefore your Grace, and wisdomes, in so much as the said act is thought good and profitable, that it bee ordayned, en∣acted, and established, by the Lordes spirituall and temporall, and the commons in this pre∣sent Parlyament assembled, and by the autho∣ritie of the same, that the saide acte may endure for euer. For true mettall¦ct work∣manship. And ouer, that it bee enacted by the said authority, that if any vntrue, or deceiuable mettall, or workmanship of Tinne or Pewter, bee founden, eyther in Platters, Chargers, Dishes, Sawcers, Potengers, Trenchers, Basons, Flagons, Bottles, Pottes, Saltsel∣lers, Goblers, Spoones, Cruets, or Candle∣stickes, or in any other such wares of Tinne or Pewter, where soeuer it bee cast, made, or wrought, within this Realme or without, and brought to bee solde wythin the same Realme. That then it shall bee lawfull to the Mayor of the Cittie of London, and the Mayster and Wardaynes of the craft of Pewterers of the sayd Cittie, for the time being, and theyr depu∣tyes, to haue search of the same, within the cit∣tie of London, and the suburbes of the same, and that in all other Citties, Boroughs, and Townes, where any Mardaines be, or shal be, the Mayors, Baylifs, or head Officers, and Mardaines to haue like authoritie. And where no Mardaynes be, then the head Officers or gouernours of the same Citties, Boroughs, and Townes, to appoint certaine persons most expert & cunning in knowledge
of the same, to make search within ye sayd citties, Boroughs, and Townes where they dwell. Pewter being de∣fectiue to be forfei∣ted. And if any such new wares, wrought of Tin and Pewter as is aforesayd, be found defectiue, and being in the possession of the seller, that then the same person or persons, that putteth any such new wares of pewter to sale, shal forfeit the same wares, the one half to the vse of our Soueraigne Lord the King, and the other halfe to the search∣ers or finders of the same. Prouision Prouided alway, that this act concerning ye for∣feiture, be not preiudiciall or hurtfull to any persō or persons, hauing graunt of our Soueraigne Lord ye King, or of any of his noble Progenitors by his letters pattents of such forfeiture, but that they and euery of them shal haue & enioy the same according to their former graunts and liberties. An Acte concerning Pewterers, made in the xxv. yeere of the reigne of our So∣ueraigne Lord, King Henry the eyght, in the minth Chapter. Peticion. IN theyr most lamentable wise show∣en, and pitteously complaine vnto the Kings most royall Maiestie, & to this most high Courte of Parliament, the Kings most humble poore and obeysaunt subiects, the Maister, wardaines, & poore fellowship of the craft & mistery of Pewterers, as wel of the Citty of London, as of all other places within thys Realme of England, that where the said craft or
mistery, before this time hath been one of the best handicrafts within this Realme, which hath not onely growen and contiuued by meane of diuers good acts and statutes made for the true exercise of the same, whereof one was made in the xir. yeere of the Kings most renowmed Father, whose soule God pardon. And one other was made in the fourth yeere of the Kings most victe∣rious raign, concerning the crafts of Pewterers and Brasiers, of & for the true making, mixting and selling of good and true pewter, and brasen vessels. And also for exercising and vsing of true weights and beames, to be occupyed by the sel∣lers of any such pewter or brasen vessels, within thys Realme, so that none of the Kings Subiects, nor any other person, should (by any sale of any false mixed brasen and pewter vessell, or any vn∣true weights) bee deceiued, as by the sayde sta∣tutes more plainely dooth appeare. Which good Statutes duely put in execution, hath caused the saide craft to encrease and mul∣tiplye, to the great profite and vtilitie of a great number of the Kings Subiects, and the commo∣ditie of pewter vessell much to be had in reputa∣tion, in all straunge Regions and Countreys, vn∣till now of late, diuers euill disposed persons, bee∣ing the Kings Subiects borne, which haue been apprentises and brought vp, in the exercise of the sayde crafte of Pewterers, haue nowe of late, for their singular lucre, repayred into straunge Regi∣ons and Countreys, and there doo exercise the saide craft of Pewterers, teaching straungers
(not onely the cunning of mixting and forging of all manner of Pewter vessell) but also doo teach all thinges belonging to the sayde craft of Pew∣terers. By meanes whereof, there is not onely brought (daylie into this Realme) out of strange Regions to bee solde, great number of thinges made of Pewter, vntruely mixted, and made of Tinne, where with the Kings Subectes bee dai∣he deceiued, and the people of strange Countries greatly instructed, in the cunning of the said craft of Pewterers, in such wise that thereby not one∣ly a great number and quantity of pewter vessel, and other things of pewter, made in diuers sorts and fashions, amounting to a great value, which was dayly and continually wont to bee carryed and conueied out of this Realme, by Merchants, into straunge Regions and Countries, and there to be sold and vended. Whereby the commoditie of Tin made into Pewter vessell, which hath bin had in great estimation, as things very necessary and commodious, & the kings customes thereby much aduaunced, is nowe lyke vtterly to cease and decay, and not to bee esteemed as heere to fore hath beene but also the sayde craft of Pewterers, which at this day setteth and keepeth in worke and occupation, a great number of people, shalbe be vtterly vndone. And a great multitude of the Kings natural subiects, thereby fall into idlenes, to the great impouerishment of this Realme, if speedy remedy for the redresse of the premises bee not prouided. In tender consideration wherof, and for refor∣mation
of the premisses, Any man∣ner of Pewter wrought out of this Realm to be forfei∣ted. it may please your high∣nesse, by the assent of the Lords spirituall and temporal, and the commons in this present Par∣lyament assembled, and by the authoritie of the same, to ordayne and enact, that no person or per∣sons hereafter, at any time now inhabiting, or which hereafter shal inhabite within this Realm shall buy, or otherwise take by exchaung for other wares, any wares made, or hereafter to be made out of this Realme, Search & seasure. of Tin, or mixt with Tin, as Platters, Dishes, Sawcers, Pottes, Basyns, Ewers, Flagons, Goblets, Salte, Saltsellers, Spoones, or any other thing made of Tinne or Pewter as aforesaide, whatsoeuer it bee, vppon paine of forfeiture of the same ware, in whose hands soeuer it may be found or taken: and also, lawfull money currant in this Realme to the va∣lue thereof. The one halfe of the same forfeiture to be to the vse of the Kings Highnesse, and the o∣ther halfe to the vse of the finders of the same. Penaltie. And furthermore be it enacted, that it shall bee lawfull for the Maister & wardaines of the sayde craft of Pewterers, as well within the Cittie of London, as within euery other Citty, Borough, and Town of this Realm where such wardaines bee. And where no such wardaynes bee, to the head Officer or gouernour, head Officers or go∣uernours of the same Cittie, Borough, or towne, for the time beeing, to appoynt diuers persons most expert in knowledge of the same, to make search and seasure, and to take into theyr hands and possession all such wares as heereafter shall be brought contrary to the true intent and effect
of thys present Acte, in whose soeuer handes or possessions any such shall be found. Prentises or Iour∣ney-men straūgers borne. And also be it enacted by the authoritie aboue∣saide, that no person or persons, occupying the sayde craft or occupation of Pewterers, wythin this Realme, shall set on worke, or retayne in hys or theyr seruice, any person or persons, to be his or their Apprentice or Iourney-man, beeing straun∣ger borne out of this Realme, vppon payne to for∣feit for euery such Apprentice and Iourney-man, ten poundes sterling. Straūgers shall not worke pewter within the Realme. And that no straunger, borne out of this Realm, shall occupy, exercise, or vse from the feast of Penticost, next comming, the saide craft of Pewterers, nor worke any manner of vessell or other ware aforesaide to bee made of Tinne or Pewter, within any place or places of this Realme, vppon payne of forfeiture of tenne pounds sterling: and also, vppon payne of forfei∣ture of the same Pewter or Tinne so wrought, in whose hands soeuer it may be taken or found. Exercise beyond Sea. And also, bee it enacted by authoritie aforesaid, that no person nor persons, beeing borne within this Realme, occupying or excercising the sayde craft of Pewterers, shall at any time heere alter resort to any straunge Regions or Countreyes, there to vse, teach or exercise ye said craft of Pew∣terers, vpon paine to loose the priueledge and be∣nefite of an Englishman. And if in case any of the Kings Subiects at this present time, beeing dwelling in any straunge Countrey or Region, and there occupying the sayde craft of Pewte∣ters, doo not repayre into thys Realme, within three moneths next after request and warning
to him be giuen, by writing sealed with the com∣mon seale of the Wardaynes of the sayde craft, within the sayde Cittie of London, and heere in this Realme continually from henceforth dwel inhabit, that then & from henceforth he shalbe ta∣ken & reputed as no Englishman, but shall stand & be from henceforth out of the Kings protection. Hawkers. And forasmuch as sundry euil disposed persons which commonly bee called Hawkers, by autho∣ritie of the Kings letters pattents or placarde, do not only goe about from place to place, within this Realme, vsing buying and selling of brasse and pewter. And by coulour and pretence of the same Lycenses and Placardes, vse vnlawfull and deceyueable Weights and Beames, but also do vse to sell both pewter and brasse, which is not good, nor truely, nor lawfully mixt nor wrought, to the great deceit of the Kings true liege people, contrary to the fourme and effect of the sayd good Act and Statute made in the sayde fourth yeere of the Kings most noble raigne. Be it therefore enacted by authority of this present Parliament, that all such lycences and placardes heeretofore had, made, or graunted to any such person or per∣sons, contrarie to the true meaning, fourme, and effect of thys Statute shalbe from hencefoorth by authoritie of this present Parliament, cleerely voyde and of none effect. And where as in the saide acte of Parliament, (concerning the craft of Pewterers & Brasiers) made in the sayde fourth yeere, for diuers causes and considerations in the same contayned, among other things, it is expres∣sed that no person, or persons, vsing the said craft
of Pewterers or Brasiers should frō henceforth fill or chaunge any Pewter or brasse, new or olde, at any place or places within this Realme, but onely in open Fayres and Markets, or in theyr stone dwelling houses, but if they were desired by the buyers of such wares, vpon paine of forfei∣ture for euery such default, ten pounds. Hawkers. For as much as the same forfeiture is to the only vse of the Kings highnesse, & that any partie searching or finding the same, is not intituled to haue any benefit therby, it hath not been knowen that any person, or persons, haue taken any paine to insearch or make any inquiry thereof. By rea∣son whereof, diuers and many euill disposed per∣sons, vsing buying and selling both of brasse and pewter, and not regarding the saide good act, nor the said penalty, daily goe about from village to village, Towne & towne, and from house to house, to sell such pewter and brasse, which is not good. And also vse deceiueable Weyghts and Beames as they did before the making of the sayd acte, to the great hurt and deceite of the Kings true liege people and Subiects. Penalty for Haw∣kers. Wherefore be it enacted by the authoritie abouesayde, that as well the moytie of the sayd forfeiture of ten poundes, limi∣ted in the saide estatute made in the sayd fourth yeere, as also the moytie of all other forfeitures before expressed, and euery of them bee and shall bee to the vse of the Kings highnesse, his Heyres and Successors: and the other moytie of the same forfeitures, and euery of them, to the vse of him, or them, that shall seaze, finde, or present the sayd forfeitures, or any of them, or that shall sue for
the same in any competent Court or Courtes, within this Realme by action of debt, bill, plaint or information, wherein the defendant shall in no wise be admitted to wage his law, or any protec∣tion or essoyne to any person or persons, which shalbe impeached to haue offended contrary to the forme and effect of this Statute, shall be al∣lowable. This acte to endure to the last day of the next Parliament. ❧ The annotations of the confirmacions and renouations of the aforesayde Statutes. Confir∣mation. ANd it is to be noted that the saide last act was reuewed in the Parliament holden at West∣minster, the viij. day of Iune, in the xxviii. yeere of our sayde Soueraigne Lorde, to and among other actes. And that all causes, articles, & pro∣uisions therein contayned, to stand in their force and strength, to the last day of the next Parlia∣ment. And also, the sayde acte was renewed a∣gayne in the Parlyament holden at Westminster the xviij. of Aprill, in the xxj. yeere of our sayde Soueraigne Lorde, amongst other actes, as is a∣foresayde. &c. An acte concerning Pewterers made in the xxxiij. yeare of the raigne of our Soueraigne Lord King Henry the viij. Chap. iiij. Recitall of the Statute made the xxx. yere WHere at the Parlyament begun at London the third day of Nouember, in the xxj. yeere
of the raigne of the King our Soueraigne Lord, and from thence adiourned to Westminster, and there holden, and from that time continued by diuers progenitors, vnto the xv. day of Ianuary, the xxv. yeere of his most noble raigne, it was or∣dayned and established by the assent of the Kings Maiesty, his Lords spiritual & temporal, and the cōmons in the said Parlyament then assembled, and by the authoritie of the same, that no person, or persons, from that time than inhabiting, or which after that time should inhabit within this Realm, should buy, or otherwise take by exchange for other wares, any manner wares made, or heereafter to be made out of this Realme, of Tin, or mixt with Tin, as Platters, Dishes, sawcers, Pots, Basins, Ewers, Flagons, Goblettes, Saltes, Saltsellers, Spoones, or any other thing made of Tin or pewter as aforesayd, what∣soeuer it were, vppon payne of forfeiture of the same wares, in whose hands soeuer it might bee found or taken, and also lawfull money currant in this Realme, to the full value thereof, the one halfe of the same forfeiture to be to the vse of the Kings highnesse, and the other halfe to be to the vse of the finders of the same. And further it was enacted, that it should be lawfull to the Maister and Wardaines of the Pewterers, as wel with∣in the Cittie of London, as within euery other Cittie, Borough, or Towne within this Realme where such Wardaines were, and where no such Wardaynes were, to the head Officer or gouer∣nour, head Officers or gouernours of the same Cittie, Borough, or Towne for the time beeing,
to appoint diuers persons, most expert in know∣ledge of the same, to make search and seasure and to take into their hands and possessession, all such wares as thereafter should be brought, contrarie to the true intent and effect of the sayde act, in whose soeuer hands or possessions any such hold be found. And it was also enacted by the authori∣tie aboue sayde, that no person, or persons, occu∣pying the sayde craft or occupation of Pewte∣rers, within thys Realme, should set on worke, or retaine in his or theyr seruice, any person, or per∣sons, to be his or their apprentice, or Iourneyman estraunger borne out of this Realme, vpon paine to forfeyt for euery such Apprentice and Iourney∣man, ten poundes sterling: And that no straun∣ger, borne out of this Realme, should occupy, ex∣ercise, or vse, from the feast of Penticost then next comming, the said craft of Pewterers, nor worke any manner of vessels, nor other ware aforesayd, to be made of Tin or Pewter, within any place or places of this Realme, vpon paine of forfeiture of ten poundes sterling: and also, vppon payne of forfeiture of the same pewter or Tin, so wrought, in whose handes soeuer it should be found or ta∣ken. And it was further enacted by the sayde au∣thoritie, that no person, or persons, beeing borne within this Realme, then occupying or exercising the sayd craft of Pewterers, should from thence∣forth resort into any straunge Regions or Coun∣treys, there to vse, teach, or exercise the saide craft of Pewterers, vpon paine to loose the Priueledge and benefite of an Englishman. And if in case any of the Kings Subiects, at
that time being, dwelling in any straunge Coun∣trey or Region, and there occupying the said craft of Pewterers, dyd not repayre into this Realme, within three moneths next after request & war∣ning to him to be giuen, by writing sealed wyth the common seale of the Wardaines of the sayde craft, within the said Cittie of London, and here in this Realme continually (from thencefoorth) dwel and inhabit, that then and from henceforth he should bee reputed and taken as no English∣man, but should stand and be from henceforth out of the Kings protection. And it was than further enacted, that where sundry euill disposed persons, which commonly were called hawkers, by authority of the Kings Letters patents, or Placarde, did not onely goe about from place to place, within this Realme, v∣sing buying and selling of brasse and pewter, and by collour and pretence of the same Lycenses or Placardes, did not only vse vnlawfull & deceiue∣able weights and beames, but also did vse to sell both Brasse and Pewter which was not good, nor truely or lawfully mixt or wrought, to the great deceit of the Kings true liege people, con∣trary to the fourme and effect of a good and lau∣dable acte and statute, made in the fourth yeere of the Kings said most noble raigne, that all such lycences & placards, afore that time had made or graunted to any such person, or persons, contra∣rie to the true meaning, fourme, and effect of the sayd estatute, should bee from thencefoorth by the authority of the sayd Parliament, cleerely voyde and of none effect. And where as in the sayde
acte of Parliament (concerning the sayd craft of Pewterers & Brasiers) made in the saide fourth yeere, for diuers causes and considerations in the same act contained, amongst other things, it was expressed, that no person or persons, vsing the said craft of Pewterrrs or Brasiers, should from henceforth sell or chaunge any pewter or Brasse, newe or olde, at any place or places within thys Realme, but onely in open Faires and Markets, or in their owne dwelling houses, but if they were desired by the buyers of such wares, vpon paine of forfeiture for euery such defaulte tenne poundes. And so than the same forfeiture was to the onely vse of the Kings highnes, and the party searching or finding the same was not intituled to haue any benefite therby: it was not knowen that any person or persons had taken any paines to insearch or make any inquiry thereof. By rea∣son wherof diuers & many euill disposed persons than vsing buying and selling as wel of brasse as pewter, and not regarding the said good acte, nor the saide penalty, went dayly about from Village to Village, Towne to Towne, and from house to house, to sell such pewter and brasse, which was not good, and also vsed deceiueable weights and Beames, as they did before the making of the sayd acte, to the great hurt and deceit of the kings true liege people and Subiectes. Wherefore it was enacted by the authoritie of the sayde Par∣liament, that aswell the moytie of the sayd forfey∣ture of ten poundes lymited in the saide statute made in the saide fourth yeere, as also the moytie of all other forfeitures and penalties, expressed
and specified in the sayd actes, and euery of them should be to the vse of the Kings Highnesse, hys Heyres and Successors, and the other moytie of the same forfeitures and penalties, and euery of them, to the vse of him or them that would feaze, finde, or present the same forfeitures, or any of them, or that would sue for the same in any com∣petent Court or Courtes within this Realme, by action of debt, byll, plaint or information where∣in the defendant should in no wise bee admitted to wage his lawe, or any protection or essoyne to any person or persons which should be impeach∣ed to haue offended, contrary to the forme and ef∣fect of this Statute, should bee allowable, as in the sayde acte more plainly appeareth, which acte was appointed to endure onelie to the ende of the next Parliament, then next following, & which act was afterward renewed in the Parliament holden at Westminster, in the xxviij. yeere of the raigne of our said Soueraigne Lord, to endure vntill the ende of the next Parliament then next following: And which act was also renewed at the Parliament holden at Westminster, in the xxxj. and xxxii. yeeres of our sayde Soueraigne Lordes raigne to endure vntill the last day of the next Parlyament then next ensuing: Confir∣mation. Prayen therefore in this present Parliament our sayde Soueraigne Lords true and obedient Subiects, the Pewterers of this his saide Realme, & other the true commons of the same, because the same acte is beneficiall and necessary for the common-wealth of this Realme: That it may be enacted by the Kinge our sayde Soueraigne Lorde, the
Lordes spirituall & temporall, and the commons in the present Parliament assembled, and by au∣thoritie of the same, for as much as the same act, and euery thing therin contained, is good and be∣neficiall to the Common-wealth of this Realme, that all and euery the sayde actes and statutes, and all & euery article, sentence, and clause com∣prised in the same, may from henceforth stand and abide in as full strength and effect, for euermore from henceforth to endure, according to the pur∣port, tenour and effect of the same act and actes, as though the sayd articles, sentences, and clauses, were specially lymited, recited, or declared in this present act. Wares made & brought from be∣yond the Sea. And that no person, ne persons, from hencefoorth buy or take by exchaunge, or other∣wise take into or within this Realme, to the in∣tent to sell any such thinges or wares, aboue re∣hearsed, made or to be made out of this Realme, vpon paine of like forfeitures & penalties, as are and were expressed in the sayde seuerall acts, the same penaltyes and forfeitures to be leuyed as is afore expressed. Maister and War∣daines shall not be let to search. And that it may be further enacted by authori∣tie aforesaide, that if any person, or persons, doo vnlawfully withstand, interrupt, disturbe, or let the Maister and Wardaines, or their deputies of the sayd craft of Pewterers, for the time beeing, or the head Officer or gouernour, head Officers or gouernours of Citties, Townes, & Boroughs, within this Realm, wherin no such Maister and Wardaines are, or shalbe, or any of them, in sear∣ching, seasing, and taking into their handes and possessions such wares as shall happen to bee
bought, or brought into thys Realme contrary to the purport and effect of the sayde estatute, made in the sayde xxv. yeere of the raigne of our sayde Soueraigne Lorde, that then euery such person, and persons, so offending, in letting, disturbing, or withstāding the sayd seasure, or taking of such wares as is aforesaide, shall loose and forfeit for euery time so dooing, the summe of fyue poundes sterling, the one halfe wherof, shalbe to the Kings vse, and the other halfe to him or them that will or shall sue for the same, by action of debt, writ, byll, playnt, or information in any the Kings Courtes of recorde, in which action or suite, no Protection, Priuiledge, nor wager of law, shall be allowed nor admitted. God saue the Queene. Thomas Wood Maister. William Mayor Wardens. Walter Hyll. Wardens. AT LONDON Printed. Anno Domini. 1593.
