16945 99839710 4157
OBIECTORVM REDVCTIO: OR, Daily Imployment for the Soule. In Occasionall Meditations upon severall Subjects. By Donald Lupton. 1 Tim. 4. 14. Despise not the guift that is in thee. LONDON, Printed by IOHN NORTON, for IOHN ROTHVVELI, at the signe of the Sunne, in Pauls Church-yard, 1634.
TO THE RIGHT Honourable LORD, George Earle of Rutland, Baron Roos of Hamelake, Belvoir, and Trusbutt, Encrease of Honour, and Happines, temporall, and eternall. My LORD, REligious, and Reall good∣nes establish Greatnes: thout these Supporters,
Mole ruit sua. Let Vir∣tue keepe Court within and Honour will atten the outward Man. Clouds cannot long obscure that Sunne which moues directly. As Goodnes make all men Honourable, so it makes the Conspicuous. Thos whose Actions are pious, will be Eminent i Place, and Person. Th firmest Basis for Honou to mount upon, is Practicall Virtue. Indirec and Oblique Ascen
may be more speedy, and early, but they are subiect to sodaine, and certaine Praecipices, those which are Raisd upon Virtue are durable, and perma∣nent. Others may shine sooner, but these surer, & longer. Those are as bla∣zing Meteors, these as fixed Starres. I know (my Lord) your Intendments this way to be Methodicall. So that your Actions are warran∣table directions to others, and I in avouching your
Honour to bee truely Noble, cannot Iustly b censured for a Parasite. The knowledge of this, and the Experience of your Honours Candide disposition, giues me En∣couragement to present my Worke to your Tuition. I know your Honours de∣light is to bee a Lord Protector of Virtuous Endeavours. Comfort it may be to you, disparage∣ment it cannot be. It showes your Affection to Learning, and Religion,
truely preserves your Me∣mory sacred to Posterity, and giues courage to the Heart of the Labourer, even to future underta∣kings. That ReverendL. Bb. of Exon. Fa∣ther in our Church, first began to enter this Path, and sent his Labours to the World for a patterne, under the Protection of a Right Honourable Pa∣tron. His Exhortation was my Incitation, I am beholden to him for Me∣thod, but the Matter was
mine owne. What is thus mine by right of Composing, I entreat your Honor to make yours by way of Patronage and Protection. Thus your Honour, One of the Worthies of Israel, in our Salomons Court, shall haue the Prayers of him, who desires to be, and is, Your Honours Servant, Donald Lupton.
The Table. VPon the sight of a Iew, p. 1 Vpon Pilate, washing his hands, p. 4 Vpon the sight of a Toade, p. 6 Vpon hearing a Woman to die in Child-bed, p. 8 Vpon Sauls going from Hierusa∣lem, to Damascus, p. 10 Vpon Davids Adultery, p. 12 Vpon Cains murthering his Bro∣ther, p 14 Vpon the wounded man, and the good Samaritan, p. 17 Vpon Demas leaving S. Paul, p. 19
Vpon the 2 Disciples, going from Hierusalem to Emaus, p. 21 Vpon a Dogge tyed up in a Chaine, p. 24 Vpon a beautifull, and faire Virgin, p. 26 Vpon seeing a man Arrested, and carryed to Prison, p. 29 Vpon the sight of an Hive of Bees, p. 32 Vpon a Mans shadow, p. 34 Vpon the sight of the Raine-bow p. 36 Vpon a Winter-day, p. 38 Vpon the Sunne, p. 40 Vpon the sight of a brave new House, without Means be∣longing to it, p. 43 Vpon sight of a Butcher killing a Lambe, p. 46 Vpon a Doore turning vpon his Hinges, p. 49 Vpon the sight of a Sword, p. 51 Vpon a virtuous Wife, hauing
many Children, p. 54 Vpon the sight of a Gras-hopper. p. 59 Vpon the sight of a dead Man. p. 59 Vpon the sight of a Lottery, p. 61 Vpon a great Candle, in a faire Candlesticke. p 64 Vpon a dead Coale, p. 65 Vpon seeing the Sunne setting, p. 67 Vpon a Stone in a River. p. 69 Vpon the ill, and idle Servant, Mat. 25. 27. p. 72 Vpon the Watchmen of our Sa∣viours Sepulchre. p. 75 Vpon the Ethiopian Eunuch, converted by S. Philip. p. 81 Vpon seeing a Bird caught in a Snare, p. 84 Vpon the sight of a Thorne-tree, full of Blossomes, p. 86 Vpon visiting a rich man in his sicknes, p. 89
Vpon hearing of a faire Shippe come home richly loaden, p. 92 Vpon the sight of an Infant fed with Milke, p. 95 Vpon sight of the Moone, p. 99 Vpon the falling of leaves from a Tree, p. 102 Vpon Reubens Divisions, Iudg. 5. 15, 16. p. 105 Vpon Sleepe, p. 110 Vpon the sight of a faire Garden p. 11 Vpon Fire, p. 115 Vpon the sight of a Beggar, p. 118 Vpon the sight of a Frontier Gar∣rison, p. 121 Vpon a King, and Traytors p. 12 Vpon the Angels, p. 12 Vpon a Physiian, p. 12 Vpon a Soldier. p. 12 Vpon seeing a Man looking up the Sunne with his eies I∣mediatly, p. 1
Vpon seeing a Tent pitcht up, and sodainly removed, p. 134 Vpon a covetous Rich man, Luk. 12. 19. p. 136 Vpon the sight of a Pismire, p. 139 Vpon Heaven, p. 143 Vpon Fish, in the sea, p. 146 Vpon Sauls sparing Agag, and the richest Booty. p. 149 Vpon his owne thoughts, by way of conclusion. p. 153 Vpon his reading Dr. Halls Oc∣casionall Meditations, p. 156
Maij 2. 1634. PErlegi hunc Librum, Donald Lupton (cui Titulus) Dail imployment for the Soule, Qu continet folia 80. aut circiter, in quibus nihil reperio sanae doctrinae, aut bonis moribus contrarium, quo minus cum utilitate publica imprimatur ita tamen ut si non intra 5 menses proxime sequentes typis mandetur haec licentia sit omnino irrita. Guilielmus Haywood
DAILY Imployment for the Soule. MEDITATION. 1. Vpon the sight of a IEW. WHat have I, or this Man, in Vs? that He should be reiected, received. It might seeme o have beene as easie to
have kept him In who was In, as to place me In who was Out. But who dare dislike, what the high Court and Parliament of Heaven hat pleasd to enact. Thou are a good (O God) in thy Iusti as in thy mercy. If his fa be my rising, the number o thy Elect is still certaine. see it is more necessary t have Iesus Christ our Brother then onely Abraham to b our Father: that covenant Circumcision must be crown by that of Faith. If I ha his seat in the Church gven to me, who was, and as yet excommunicate for comming there; Who or dare accuse the Lord
that Court for unjust: I de∣sire hartily of God to make him my Pew-fellow, let him see his error, and be joynd to the glorious Assembly of the Saints. God excluded none who first did not ex∣clude themselves, We all are bound and I doe heartily pray, that all Israel may come In. My perfection and theirs shall be together, ha∣sten both (O Lord,) and make the Children of A∣braham and Christ all one in the vnity of the same Spirit, and the same Faith.
MEDITATION. 2. Vpon PILATE, washing his Hands. SEe how this Roman De∣puty seemes to affect inno∣cence, He will appeare to bee though he will not be a sin∣cere Iudge, While he washes his hands, He pollutes his heart. What a vaine folly was it to dippe in water, to swimme in blood? What a strange delusion was this? to seeme the cleaner, to be the foler. Outward pre∣tences may, and are often voyde of sincerity. Many Roman Pharisees doe often
sprinkle themselves in Holy water, yet vnder this wal∣low in the blood of Prin∣ces, and Gods weaker mem∣bers, and so many Hypo∣crites amongst us under the forme of sanctity com∣mit the deepest and despe∣ratest impieties. The worst complexions, and sordidst natures are deepliest pain∣ed. The grosser villanies have the fairer excuse. That great Imposter when Hee meanes worst, appeares as n Angell of Light. We e not to relye upon ap∣pearances, I desire not to ash with him, I had ra∣her have a cleane Heart nd foule Hands, then
cleane. Hands and a soule Heart. Praestat essequam i∣deri. MEDITATION. 3. Vpon the sight of a Toade. VVHich of us tiro are of the Ancienter House? the Earth is our mo∣ther. This creature may plead antiquity of nature, I of sinne. My originall Polu∣tion makes this so loathsome to the sight. I am beholden to it, for▪ bearing so patiently some part of my burthen. By nature I am as full of poyson as It. Every sinne is not one∣ly
venemous, but mortall. In my corrupted nature, I doe appeare in the Eyes of God as ugly as this deformed beast. It would perhaps be better if it could; I may bee, if I will. This creatures de∣formity comes from mee; mine from my selfe and Sa∣tan. How am I beholden to that God, that did not, though hee iustly might have made me so. How am I bound to praise Him, who to make mee comely, lets the whole creature suffer un∣der vanity. Rom. 8.
MEDITATION. 4. Vpon hearing a Woman to die in child-bed. THE unlawfull desire to taste fruit, made her di in bearing fruit. Eves sinne procurd her suffering. The opening her wombe is a pre∣parative to her grave. It may well bee called a Travaile when the Mother takes her journey out of the World. I see truely what a dange∣rous thing it is to conceive and breed sinne. St. Iames spoke true, That sinne when it is conceived brings fortdeath. Children (I thinke)
have good cause to love their Parents who are willing to part with life themselves to give it these. How ought ve then (O Saviour) to love thee, who to give us eternall life was so willing to lay downe thine owne life in the grave. And in the case of regeneration, so must every Child of God doe. His body must die wholy to sinne, that soule and body may live wholy unto righteousnes, unto glory. The onely way to live hereafter, is to die here.
MEDITATION. 5. Vpon SAVLS going from Heirusalem to Damascus. VVHither posts this deepe-learnd Phari∣see with such Eagernes and Zeale? did Gamaliel his T∣tor ever read such a Lecture of bloody persecution to him? where found he this Axiome in the whole Law to persecute the Gospell? where learnt he ever to make Mose fight against Christ? Could he so deeply love the Seruant and yet kill the Master. Al knowledge and Religion in
y professor is but zeale blin∣d without Christ. It may eme strange that the Pro∣fessors of Divinity should ave such arres and so deep∣ uyed. Behold! the great oodnes of God. In the depth of darknes▪ Saul is caught nd compassed with the great ght of a glorious Sauiour. We re not masters of our Owne houghts, It was a true peech of Ioseph, ye thought ill but God brought it to Good. VVhen wee thinke many times to doe most, ee then cannot doe any hing. I see it's vaine figh∣ing against the Church of Christ. God does well know ow to catch a Sinner at
adantage. Even all thing persecution it selfe work for the good of Gods Saint He beganne his Iourney Saul. But ends it a Paul. if I be asked where Saul I may safely answere. Is Saul now among the Prophet and Apostles blessed for Euer. MEDITATION. 6. Vpon DAVIDS Adultery. IS it not pity such a Ros should have such a Can∣ker? so faire a face such a Blemish? But what Saint is priviledged with the state
f Perfection here? This ll (as it proved) was but for is surer standing, better eed taking. The greatest enesit (I see) that God nds to recover Him, is a od Sermon preacht, and Well pplyed by a Worthy and well arned Prophet. send (O God) such alwayes (upon eed) in the Courts of earth∣y Princes. They deserue there laces with reverence, with espect. No Member of Christ can expect a Freedome from tentation▪ Our head ad his trialls, and those harpe ones too, by that wick∣d One. the fairest Sunne sometimes meetes with Cloudes. So the purest lights
of the Church want their blemishes (O God let not me so much that he fell, as reioyce he did in time recover. me looke well to my self For I may be sure, that if S∣tan durst invade such a religi∣ous Crowne. He will not the weaker subiect. The be course to keepe out Satan to avoyd idlenesse. MEDITATION. 7. Vpon CAINS murther his brother AL. VVHat? but two ∣thrn in a who
World? and they together the eares. What's the uarrell? for wealth? or ho∣o? the one was not knowne, he other not affected. Was religion? this would have aught Cain love, not revenge. This was an early persecution, he divell began Warr be∣imes; goodnesse can no soo∣er be begun, but it shall eete with opposition. We must not loose our religion, though we bleed for it by our brethren; All in a family not the children of the father, Grace is not tyed the first-borne. God may hoose the youngest, leave the ldest. Cain scornes to hate nder blood-shedding. The di∣vell
is a murtherer from the beginning. Brethrens divi∣sions especially in matters of Religion are hardly reconci∣led, But though this one dyes, God knowes how to bring up another, goodnes shall be sure of Enemies but it cannot be utterly rooted out. Abell hath had abundance of brethren, Cai did not so much kill Abe∣as himselfe. It is a true Maxime that Sanguis mrtirum semen Ecclesiae. S. shall conclude it in thi saying. That he that borne after the flesh persected him that was borne afte the Spirit.
MEDITATION. 3. Vpon the good Samaritan and the wounded Man. SEe how we poore wret∣ches are beset with dan∣gers, our life is but a coninu∣ed passage through robbers & Free booters. It's the safest to keepe our selues at home. When we goe forth; we expose our selues to haz∣ards. It's not every Mans happines to have such a compassionate Passenger. That man liues safe whose minde keepes within. A retired life hath the fewer incon∣ueniences. This Man found
most good at the hands o a stranger. A friend is more Neere then a brother. It is grace not nature, affection not affinity that are most sensible and sympathizing of distresses. I see plainely that those Iewish ceremonies are not so Helpfull, as the mercies of God in Iesus Christ, It's not the Eye the passenger but the heart which does good to miseries. I doe desire to keepe home, but if thou (O God) shall be pleased to imploy in publicke, eyther protect▪ me from these spirituall murtherers, or send me speedily such a comfortable Physitian.
MEDITATION. 9. Vpon Demas leaving Saint Paul. VVHat a poore condi∣tioned truant was this having such a good master. It was a miserable sequel of instruction Apo∣stolicall to forsake God and goe to the Divell, upon what warrant, did he ground him∣selfe to be so sodainely besot∣ted with the lust of so base a strumpet? Where had he this posture to turne tempori∣ser? Was it feare of any Per∣secution? What made hee then in that Spirituall war∣fare if blowes would daunt
him? did hee suppose this present world the safer or the sweeter? why then did he so Hypocritically joyne to tha Heavenly Doctor in Divinity what made he in this Col∣ledge if he did not intend to proceed? His non Proficiency is an Argument of weaknes. And the leaving of this society, argues enough to prove him an ideot. And such is every one that leaves Heaven for Earth. How many have beene, and are sicke of this malady: The naturall mans faith, is his sence, and his Present Pos∣sessions are his Heaven. He prefers the things that are seene before those that are
not, for want of fayth. I would he had beene the first and the last of this nature; I pray thee (O God) to weane my heart from cove∣tousnes. And since thou hast pleased to admit mee into the schoole of grace, let me so order my affections that I alwayes may be a Student of that society. MEDITATION. 10. Vpon the two Disciples going from Hierusalem to Emaus. SEe what may fall out by the way. I doe verily sup∣pose
when these two began there journey, they little thought to have had such a good Companion to have gone along with them. But God takes his advantagious opportunities. There dis∣course is politicall, yet feare∣full; commendable from the subiect, they talkt on; relish∣ing of distrust, from the par∣ty they spoke too. Its not safe opening the Closet of our hearts to every Traveller, wee may lend our eares and our tongues to many whom wee will not trust with our hearts. (O God) I doe en∣treat thee in all places let my words be such as relish of sanctification. In the high way
upon my journeying; as well as at other times, good society makes tedious things seeme pleasant, and is a Whetstone to give an edge to a doubting soule. Thou dost (O Savi∣our) allow us wisedome with the Serpent, as well as inno∣cence with the Dove: we may safely discourse of thee, but we must not deny thee: our policy must not exclude our faith. I doe intreate thee to take that advantage of eve∣ry one that doubts of that high point of thy resurrecti∣on, or his owne, as to catch him and confirme his wave∣ring heart in that point of faith. Lodge thou Oh Savi∣our in my soule, so I shall
know thee truly, and raig with thee eternally. MEDITATION. 11. Of a Dogge in a Chaine. THe malice of this Creature is great, but it wisely limited. His poner, and his will are not proportio∣nable; though being chain he cannot bite with his teeth yet his barking showes what he would doe at liberty. Ad∣mirable is that divine Powe of God limitting, permitting that great Dogge of Hell when he persecutes by bonds imprisonment, and captivity▪
then he bites sore: when he slanders, reviles, and envies, then hee snrles, and barkes onely. If God should not permit this Curre, few would feare his justice: if he should not limit him, many would question his mercy. It shall be my comfort to know that my greatest Enemy is at my Fathers disposing: if I bee barked at, or sorely bitten, I know it is his malice, and Gods permissive Will, I will not feare him, though I will endeavour to shun him. Sen∣nacherib was a whelpe of this litter, let loose, but sodainely puld In againe; he may bee to warne me, not to worry me: He shall speed never the
better though God him. I doe not much griev that there is such a Dogg nor doe I much feare hi breaking loose, being s strongly chaind by such a wise master. My prayer to God shall be, to tie him up shorter, and I could wish h were alwaies musled, but Gods will be done. MEDITATION. 12. Vpon a beautifull and pure Virgin. VVHo would thinke that corrupted Na∣ture could send forth such
rich jewell to the world. How seemely and decently is very Part proportioned; hat a curious Tabernacle, s here wrought by the will f Heaven, how gloriously And richly covered, while many others either want this resplendancy, nor counter∣feit it by impostures, and paintings, give mee that all not adulterate; native, not artificill beauty, No Ague, Aches, diseases, have as yet seizd upon, or im∣paired her Perfections: Any genious and well quali∣fied Spirit desires such a Mate. How lively an em∣bleame is this of our soules, before eyther corruptions,
or imperfections have taynt them. But she doth plaine describe that mysticall Virg the Church tryumphan which shall be presented t her Husband undfiled, with out any blemishes, spots or wrinkles, all her Part keepe harmony, and decency; she shall bee gloriously moulded in immortality, and incorruption; Her covering shall then bee the glorious Roabes of her Husbands righteousnesse. The Church of Hypocrites, though now in show, and appearance beau∣tifull, shall then prove but a strumpet; (O God) Hasten that day of happy union, and let me be but in the re∣motest
and extreamest part of that mysticall Body, I shall be sure to taste Ioy and Comfort enough. MEDITATION. 13. Vpon seeing a Man arrested, and carried to Prison. SEe the power of Law and justice transgressed! That Party broke his bond, wants Bayle, and is fallen into the pawes of a mercilesse Creditor. What can bee expected but a full satisfaction, or else a Per∣petuall imprisonment. It was no otherwise (O God)
with thy Law and thy Iusti by all transgressed, we bro our Bonds, and our Cove∣nants, and so fell into th danger of that great jayler Satan did plead for a writ and an execution at th Barre of thy Iustice, and being seald turn'd Serieant and arrested us. Wee all wanted sufficient Bayle, and were not able to give Satisfaction. This grand executioner seizd upon all. But (Oh Eternall Saviour) we are for ever bound to love thee who of thine own mercy and free love diddes rescue us from our Credi∣tors hands, by thy merits paiedst the Debt and set
us wholy free, how Carefull ught we to be to shunne sinnes, which make us ll such desperate Debtors. Oh let mee ever bee paying hee with thankes, who to et me free didst willingly oe to Prison thy selfe. MEDITATION. 14. Vpon the sight of an Hive of Bees. I Doe not a little wonder at this Common-wealth of Flies. Every one by his proper diligence in particu∣ar, aduances the riches of the state in generall. There
are 4. things remarkeable this little busie-body. 1. The make no strangers Deniz i 2. They bring home store wealth but transport littl 3. They harbour no sluggis droanes. 4. They goe fort well furnished with wing, an sting, for defence, or offence. A good patterne for Nation and societies of men, happy Republiques where store o wealth flowes in, but littl goes out: where All are kep from idlenes, and are well im∣ployed, and where ships go forth like Bees, that can up on all lawfull occasions, eythe fly, or fight, well stored with Ammunition. It's no other∣wise with the soule of a faith∣full
Christian. It must not mit of strange Gods, or range worship. It must fetch grace by spirituall labour and diligence. It must hate dlenes as the ruine of it's wel∣are, and when it goes out in er spirituall warr, must e furnished with the whole Armour of God. I doe eseech thee (O Go) to ake me a subiect of this na∣ure, and a Bee in this Hive. MEDITATION. 15. Vpon a Mans shadow. I See not this mourning Seruiteur attend my corps
in a Cloudy day, nor in darke night, Nor when I still in a close study. It onely my attendant in th Sun-shine, or in the Moon∣light, or else in such plac as are capacious of bo these Celestiall Candles. plainely see that flatte most followes a prosper state. Parasites hide the heads in dangerous occa∣ons. A reserued life vtuously imployed admits such Hang-byes. Men who lives, and actions are public and courteous, are pester most with such vermine, th doe me this fauour, that th make the world beleeve th I am a substance, or else ha
t. And this is the state of he soule. What is the world? he lesh? Wealth? Honour? ut meee shadowes, which n perilous times eyther ap∣peare not, or to no good purpose. He shall bee my friend that will bee my ompanion in a storme. Pros∣perity gets followers, but Adversity makes the true distinction of them. There s no trust in such Reeds; or he sung truely. Quem Dies vidit veniens Superbum, Hunc Dies vidit fugiens Iacentem.
MEDITATION. 16. Vpon the sight of the Raine-bow. THis Bow is bended bu without an Arrow, bu God hath abundance in hi Quiver. He forbears to pu∣nish, not for want of instru∣ments, but because hee i patiently mercifull. I do admire the Maker of it, an the faithfulnesse of his pro∣mise, I may well belee him, who hath kept hi word these five thousand yeer and upwards. It is usually seene before and after Rain
when I see it before, I may xpect a shower, not feare a eluge: when I see it after Raine, it doth confirme my aith, summons my Repen∣ance, and doth strengthen y obedience. Lord thou rt willing to teach us by ll meanes, Thou art so indfull in this, and in all other thy promises, that we may safely take them for erformances. Oh then I pray hee quickly to show that igne of thy Sonne comming o Iudgement.
MEDITATION. 7. Vpon a Winter day. HOw cold and darke is this season? and how un∣comfortable? it's well it is contracted, and so long a night succeeds, with the hopes of a ioyfull Spring-tide, how diligent is every one to pro∣vide wrme houses, good cloaths, restorative diet, sufficient fewell for the house. How easily in this doe I see that Winters-day of sicknes, persecution, and death: with∣all, I take comfort, because they are limitted; violent they may be, long they can∣not
be. Sorrow may endure for Night, but ioy commeth in e Morning, these Mysticall oods may bee great, and ge horribly, but they shall sse over mee. This pit of eath may be deepe, but it annot shut his mouth upon e: under I may bee, above shall bee. Howsoever my grave shall put a Period to the greatest of these outward, and temporary sufferings. I know▪ I shall sleepe in rest, untill the ioyfull day of the resurrection, as a glorious Spring-time doth advance me, (Lord) I pray thee give me wisedome to provide that Habitation, and Tabernacle which is eternall, the warme
Roabes of Iesus Christ hi Righteousnes to adorne me thy Spirit to heate my af∣fectio; So I shall be sure that though it be bitter with me here, it shall be sweet to me hereafter, and since this Winter day shall come, let i not take me unprovided. Conturbatus mundus, Caelum seenum est. MEDITATION. 18. Vpon the Sunne. THis heavenly Candle is comfortable For his light and heat, admirable for his beauty and motion; necessa∣ry to all the inhabitants
the world. He is wisely, and orthily placed, and he keepes his station, and honourably performes the will of his Master, he moves not ob∣iquely, but directly in his course. It is a great blessing when good men are advanced to preferment. When Mo∣ses, and Aaron-rule the ship of the Church, and Common-wealth, it then goes safely, stands firme, and feares not winds, or waves. What respect, and reverence ought the Magistrates of the Church, and Common-wealth to have of Inferiors. Such glori∣ous lights ought to be much and highly honoured; Our afety and wel-being comes
from them, These keepe all the Heavens in an order, and comely motion. It is a mani∣fest symptome of a diseased Commonwealth, when these are not esteemed: These are the eye and heart of the body politique. All inferiour mem∣bers receive comfort from their wisedome. Learne me (Oh God) a quiet subordina∣tion and a conscionable sub∣mission to these worthy lights. I see the Sunne gives heat to all. Gods blessings are not to be impropriat. He that gives to others shall not have the lesse virtue in Himselfe. It is usuall for one Candle to light up another. Bonum quò commuius, eò meli▪
MEDITATION. 19. Vpon the sight of a Brave new House without Land or Meanes to it. I Suppose that stately edi∣fice was scituated there for pleasure, and health, But neyther see good furniture within, nor proportionable meanes without to mantaine t, It hath nothing but a faire prospect to move enuy, and high Turrets to show the Pride of the owner, and to expose it to flormes, and windes, when as yon∣der little Cottage close by, seemes poore and base
without, yet is admirably well furnished with Olive branches within, to comfort the two aged Parents. How plainely doe I des∣cribe beauty, and outward comelines, without any en∣dowment of the minde, alwayes the fairest face hath not the soundest harte, outward perfections are not a generall argument of in∣ward goodnes. The Caske may be faire, and gilded, yet have poyson in stead of pearles within it. Naturall parts at the best are but meere blemishes without Grace. All is not to be trusted that is faire in show, pride
and oenation may please the passengers eye. But give me that little low grace of Humility, I had rather not seeme, and be rich, then to seeme, and not be so. The one is close retirednesse with con∣tent, and safety. The other is onely empty formality with inward vexation. How many Pharisaicall professors are faire, and plea∣sing to the eye, yet rotten at the soule. May I ever pro∣fesse the power of godlines, & not strive onely to hold the forme of it. Reall performan∣ces of good duties are that which God looks for, not fai∣ned and counterfeit seemings, the one are but high clouds
without water, the other Wel full of lively springs. Give me an humble heart full of grace, so I shall be satisfie when they shall be emptie and shall have a sure corner∣stone, when they shall moul∣der to rottenes. Respicit Deus Humiles, reijci Superbos. MEDITATION. 20. Vpon the sight of a Butcher, killing a Lambe. I Cannot but thinke o that saying of St. Paul The creature doth groane un∣der the bondage of corrupti∣on. How meekly, and patiently
It submits to the Knife. At sight of this, I may say, Ece Agnus Dei, who so quietly suffered all the iniuries offe∣red him, & as a sheepe before the shearer, so opened he not his mouth: His adversaries were not so violent, and eager in their thirsting for his life, as hee was ready, and willing to lay it downe, and whereas they thought to conquer him by malice, hee did conquer them by meeknes, and mercy. How different was thy desire from theirs, Thou (O Savi∣our) camest to give them all eternall life, and they hunted with bloody wils to take a∣way life from thee. I see al∣so the lot & share of all thy
holy ones, They are Tanquam oves, and Agnelli. They are but counted as sheepe for the slaughter: Oh Butcherly and bloody world! will not the blood of that One satisfie thy madnesse? must thou needs swim in the blood of his poore members also? persecu∣tion even to death is the por∣tion of Gods children. The head hath suffered, and must all looke to follow: all that will live godly in Iesus Christ must suffer persecuti∣on: (Oh God) learne mee courage, and chearefulnes in all tryals, for thy name sake, for I know this, if I suffer with thee here, I shall reioyce with thee herefter. Per Crucem Itur ad gloriam.
MEDITATION. 21. pon a Doore, turning upon his Hinges. THis is contented with its owne motion. It turnes ackwards, and forwards con∣tantly: sometime for want of Oyle it skreikes, and makes n unpleasant noyse; but it will not bee gotten of from hat motion without violence. In this see the sinner Ha∣bituated and accustomed unto evill courses, can the Black∣ore change his colour; or the Leopard his spots? then may he that is accustomed to evill, doe well. How he winds himselfe from one sinne to
another, but ends in the sa Center. Sometimes wea with the motion in one wickednes, he turnes to another but his whole life is nothing else but a gally-mophrey of sinnes, he moves as in a cir∣cle, from ill desires to cove∣tousnes, so to usury, so on to oppression, then to exaction then to grinding the faces of the poore, and at last eates up Gods people, as if he would eate bread. His remoueals are but from one evill to a worse, and dies in the highest straine of all impiety. But perhaps his conscience now and then gals him with horror. Then Satan oyles him with some new pleasure or profit, and
keepes him eyther as fast ound or faster then before. here is little or no hopes his ceasing, unlesse it bee the strong Hammer of ods Word preacht home his conscience. Let me (Oh od) hate and leave all sinne, ast I be too soone accustomed any. I pray heartily that ne may bind themselves Apprentises to that unlawfull rade. Consuetdo altera Natura. MEDITATION. 26. pon the sight of a Sword: THis defends our persons, and offends our Enemies,
use makes it bright. Vp some occasions the scabbe is either the best, or worst pla for it; It's terrible in hand of an expert Warriou Many should use it, who for feare, or favour, or both, it rust. Three sorts of ought to use it discreetly, publique Magistrate, the Sdier, and the Traveller. It so showes mee the nature that spirituall word of tru which is the safest Buck and sheild for our soules, bodies, in all conflicts combats, destroyes all power, and Armadoes of th Prince of darknesse; the ner it is used, the more exclent it is. The mouth of
diligent Prophet showes the Energie of it. They doe ill hat debarre the use of this weapon to Gods people. It's ll when 40000. Israelites can scarce have it, or use it rightly, but it's worse when the Magistrate will not, and when the Prophet cannot handle it. Lend me courage (Oh my Saviour) in my calling and this weapon. So I need not feare the malice, or multitude, faces, nor forces of those pre∣sumptuous Philistins. Teach thou my Hands to Warr, and my Fingers to fight, then I need not question the conquest. If I perish, it's mine owne weakenesse
and cowardize, not the insuficiency of the Instrument's Diabolus Hostis. Scutum Christus, Verbum est Gladius. MEDITATION. 23. Vpon a virtuous Wife, having many Children. IT's not Every mans happi∣nes to enjoy such a blessing without fruit, how well is it with him that hath good administred to him in such plentifull, and rare Models. I am perswaded that her husband feares God: For she is promised a portion onely to men of that qualification.
Hee need not feare his Ene∣mies, because his Quiver is full of these Arrowes. It's well when goodnesse multi∣plies, such Seed cannot bee sowen too soone, nor spring up too fast. Sterility is fittest when the wombe is not holy. God threatens to give dry breasts, and barren wombs as a curse to sinfull, and disobe∣dient Husbands. Thy Church (O Saviour) is as this virtuous Matron well stored with Daughters, and Olive branches to adorne the Courts of that new Hie∣rusalem, in her Husbands Ab∣sence how she mournes, how lovingly and patiently she desires, expects, and prayes
for his comming, how pru∣dently shee governes her fa∣mily? and how carefully doth shee provide for there diet, and sustenance? And just so it is with thy Syon, Thy long absence makes her seeme as a Widow, and how earnestly, and often hath, and doth she pray for thy second comming; and I as one of her youngest sonnes doe cry and pray to see my Fathers presence. Come Lord Iesus, come quickly. Ecclesia ut Sponsa, Christus Sponsus. Math. 25. 5.
MEDITATION. 24. Vpon the sight of a Gras-hopper. WHere doth this Summer singing Souldier, take up his quarter in Winter time? No man can know from whence he marches, nor whi∣ther he retreats. Thus much we may learne, to be obedient to God, for here is an Army of potent Souldiers ready fur∣nished to punish where there Lord commands. God hath 4. Regiments of such forceable destroiers, the Locust, the Pal∣merworme, the Canker, and the Gras-hopper; These have beene alwaies found able and wil∣ling to execute judgement having had their Commission.
But what strength or pow can reside in these poore little Wormes? or what weapo are they able to manage? as all Egypt, and it will tell yo with amazement. It's good to keepe in peac with, God, least he arme hi Creatures against us. Go can, and doth bring great Ations to passe by small, an weake Instruments. All ha force enough when He imploies them. The Flie, an Worme are as able as the Ly Its not so much to queston with what a man is pushed, as to learne from who and whence it commeth, I (Oh God) acknowledge th power in all thy creatures,
thou makest me an Example of thy Iustice by the least, for despising their seeming im∣potencies. Non in quantitat, sed qualitate virtus. MEDITATION. 25. Vpon the sight of a dead Man. TEach us (Oh Lord) so to Number our daies, hat we may apply our harts nto wisedome, for so soone asse we away, and are gone, All flesh (I see) is Grasse, nd all the beauty of it is as he flower of the feild, Thou Oh God) hast determined he number of our dayes
which we cannot passe. See what followes the seperation of the soule, and body. As long as this Tabernacle lodg∣ed the soule, It was sensible, active, could heare, see, speak, or move, now that guest is driven forth by the Maker, there is nothing in it, but breeds loathsomnesse. I plainely see that all con∣fidence in man is vaine, and deceitfull, we must all dy for sinne, but keepe me from dying in sinne, since I mus dye, let me end in grace, no in nature. I descry the natrall mans unfitnes for an spirituall exercise, what he performe without Christ And as the body is dea
without the soule, so both soule and body without grace, Oh let me alwaies be as a dead man unto sinne, so this death shall end in life, and this dissolution shall be the onely meanes to have both happily, and gloriously united. Mortuus pecato, vivus Christo. MEDITATION. 26. Vpon the sight of a Lottery. HOw cunning the world is to deceive the world? here are a thousand Blankes for one Prize. The World deales all upon cheating, It's a thousand to one if any good
man gets any good by it, from it, or in it. See what a throng is heere, Every man strives to be first to cheate, and deceive himselfe. I doe see places of more profit, and pleasure stand empty. The world hath more Clyents then the Church, we cannot conclude the greatest company to bee the best. Goodnes cannot bee justly numbred by the Pole. There is more Earth for the Potter, then for the Gold-smith. It's no safe argument to follow the multitude. Every one that drawes hopes for a prize. but hee that hopes to be a Winner in this world, shall be a Looser.
The folly of the worldly ans wisedome is here easily ene. Here he will willingly st away Pounds vpon un∣rtaine hopes: but in Gods ottery the Church, hee will udge his farthings, nay his esence: Yet here he gaines me, and saves his estate, ere hee looses both. (Oh ord) I beseech thee to give grace to come to thy tore-house, where I may fur∣ish my selfe with rich com∣odities at a low rate. I eed not feare to adventure, or all that comes from thee advantageous.
MEDITATION. 27. Vpon a great Candle in a fai Candle-sticke. HOw comfortable, ho comely is this? an how wisely is it placed. It's pity but such Candle should have such seat, and such a Candle-stick deserves such a Light. Ther is not any but affects it, if h well disposed. How easily doe I in thi see a good, and painfull Prea∣cher, well, and wisely placed i a good Pulpit. His Doctri is no lesse comfortable, the convincing. My Prayer shal
that every such light may ave such an Eminent Prefer∣ent. Those whose lives, and Doctrine are both holy, and anctifiedare indeed burning, nd shining Lampes, and doe race the Temple, and Gospell f Christ. Let me (Oh Lord) e but even a little Candle n thy Temple thus qualified, nd I cannot dislike my lace, nor doubt of Accep∣ance, and Approbation with hy Saints. MEDITATION. 28. Vpon a dead Coale. VVHy this sooner ex∣tinguishd then ano∣ther?
or why at all? that heate, so sodainely, an totally vanish from the suiect? or being dead is it not be revived? It's manifest th remotenesse, and solitarines makes it die. But joyned the whole Company ho soone recovers it the form virtue. It's no otherwise with th Elect Children, want of go exercises, and Company ma abate, and lessen their hea of zeale, but thou wilt suffer it to bee extinguishe Satan by policy may cau some remissenes, but he sha not procure absolute deadnes. Graces in the Act are no alwaies so sensibly operativ
yet the habit may remaine firme. The Sunne may bee hid with clouds, but we know It doth then move in his Orbe. It's not a meane bles∣sing to enjoy the company of Gods Saints, who are not onely warme in Grace them∣elves, but also make others so to be. MEDITATION: 29. Vpon seeing the Sunne setting. HOw glorious, comforta∣ble, and pleasant was his light, this last houre? now how darke and disconsolate is the Heaven, and what
a sable Mantle spreads ouer our heads, and how are the Earthly Inhabitants Canopi∣ed in Darknes. How doth it shadow out, the vncertaine condition, and fraile estate of the greatest Monarchs, & the mutability of all worldly lustre. Scepters have their periods, and the greatest honours, and prefer∣ments their appoynted dates. Nothing under the Sunne but is subiect to setting. Iust such is the case of the body without the soule, and such is the state of the soule, without Christ, miserable, un∣comfortable. I entreat thee (Oh Saviour) never to de∣prive my soule of thy presence,
but let mee alwaies bee com∣forted with the light of thy countenance, so I need not feare the darknesse of the Grave, nor that of Hell, being alwaies in thy presence, who art that Light, and that Sunne which never sets, or changes. MEDITATION. 30. Vpon a Stone in a River. HOw unmoveable, obdu∣rate is this, though the waters are about it, above it continually. It changes not the forme, seldome the place, and is absolutely unfit for any building, or necessary
Imployment, when as others that are heavier, and greater then it, with a few drop of Raine onely, are mollisied, re∣ceive impression; are squared, and fitted for many excellent imployments. I cannot but behold (Oh God) the severall conditions of sinfull men, some are so desperate, and accustomed in wickednes, that neither the often showring downe of mercy, nor iudgement will worke any thing upon them, such Phaaohs are they in selfe-will, perversnes, custome These are setled upon their Lees. Others though heauier, and more loaden in sinne, yet with
one drop of mercy, or at the first showre of punishment, relent, mollifie, and so, are sen∣sible of their miserable con∣dition, and are often fitted by the Goodnes of God, and the Ministery of a diligent Prea∣cher, for excellent uses in his Church. Keepe mee (Lord) from hardnes of heart, and insensiblenes in sinne, let my soule be mollified by thy mer∣cy, and terrified by thy judg∣ments, that thou mayest em∣ploy it in some service for the glory of thy Name, the exam∣ple of others, and the comfort of it, at that great day of Reckonings.
MEDITATION. 31. Vpon the ill, and negligent Servant, Mat. 2. 27. HE ought to have put his Masters money to the Exchangers, but Why not he labou∣ring as well as his two other fellow servants? Where was he priviledged to bee idle, while the others were wor∣king? why not he performing his duty though others were careles? he shall answer for himselfe. It's dangerous sin∣ning by example, or patterne of others, but this man sin∣ned against precept, and with∣out
patterne: and I feare hath olly made himselfe a Pat∣erne, and Example to others o sinne by. It is bad to follow ickednes, but it's damna∣le Impiety to lead others. That seemes to be one aggra∣ation of Ieroboams wicked∣es, That he made Israel sin, hat excuse can this idle oule make? will hee plead norance? or impotency? not : His conscience galls him ere, what then? was it a spitious feare of loosing? he ew this way of managing was the onely warrantable, advantagious course, this as one principall end why had it bestowed on him, see how impudent hee
is in a lye to his masters face, I knew thou wast an hard man, &c. While hee is ashamed to father his himselfe, he villanously seekes to disgrace his Lord. I see thus much that many a wicked and ungodly wretch may be under a good master. VVithall that many wicked man hath had fair means of saluation lent him The only way to bee crow hereafter, is to be Diligen here: It is not the enioyin of the meanes, but the righ employing them that giv Happines. I may read o Lecture to my selfe, and other Ministers, and One Gods people. That the rig
nd constant excercising my alling is best in the Royall Exchange, The Church. That those which are Gods actors for soules must imploy hemselues in this place. And for the people, that he only thing that will give ontent to their conscience, nd that will bee approved f GOD, is to turne there Talent of Hearing into oing. MEDITATION. 32. pon the Soldiers that watcht the Sepulchre of our Saviour. VVHat a stirre is here on all sides? The
Priests, the elders, and Sdiers all plotting to sha themselues. The first folish in their Commande the second Corrupters, base by bribes of money, third careles, & suborned uon so high a point of suice. What a folly was to watch him, who did them? see how greedy th were of monyes, these spoake words against the owne lives, what? Watch-m and sleepe? and upon the guard? at any time is pushable by death; much m upon such a case as this wa Yet further, All of them, well there Commaundeire the Soldiers? and yet mo
his for to colour other mens lts. Nulla sides, pictas{que} is qui castra sequuntur. But will they say it was a ge Summe, It Enriched thē The baser they were that it, and they onely the her lyers, gaines cannot sup∣nt a heart resolued upon euth. ill do those become oses chaire who would nder the virtue of Christs surrection. What they will urge yet, at they were Soldiers? and but an Ideot would re∣se such an offered Prize? had they beene such deed, they would have dis∣ined unfaithfulnesse, and for the receiving of gains
It may be the easier admted, if it neyther doth piudice faith, trueth, conscien nor the life of any, but th receiving is liable to It's a part of Iudas to all these for money: what effected this there ¦orned untrueth? did it wea or overthrow the fame of Saviours Resurrection, no noe! the Sepulchre, T great stone, the Seale, the Watch could hold him minute beyond his tim the third day shall him glorious, maugre all malice, God will get glory, even by the actio wicked men. But how many hath
wages of unrighteousnes cor∣rupted, and spurd on to bad seruices? Bribes make wise men purblind, shipwracke Con∣cience, and truth. It's a cleare case for the Conscience, that Rewards are not to be taken hen, when Gods glory, and ruth must be declared. Yet seldome hath it beene knowne that wicked men have wanted Assistants for here worst intentions. Liars re well furnished for the ost part with Excuses. Sup∣lanters of trueth as they are olyticians, so they are well tored with Instruments. Re∣ellion seldome marches with∣ut Complices. The Execra∣lest murthers as they have
had their Plotters, so they have found Vndertakers fo the Execution. Lord I beseech the keepe mee from withholding the trueth in a lye Let not any gaine seduc or draw mee to conceal what I am bound to mak knowne. Let mee learne prize truth, more then wealt and to speake trueth thoug I should loose by it. Th man paies deare for gold, wh sels himselfe to damnati to purchase It.
MEDITATION. 33. on the Aethiopian Eunuch converted by Philip. THis noble Courtier tooke good paines to take so ng a journey to goe to hurch, and it did please God to reward him well go∣ng Home-wards. The Church s the most likely place to be lessed in. He made the rea∣ing of the Scriptures as a leasant History, though he virtue, and the mysticall meaning was as yet hid from him. Hee was neither idle, or ill-imployed in his Iour∣ney. Reading is commenda∣ble,
especialy of such thing as may make for the bettring of vs. Vpon this how God salutes Him wit an Occasionall wing'd precher. God knowes the Opportunities to worke vpon vs. Phi∣lip must ioyne to him, tha he may be ioynd to God. I read not that this Great Lord Treasurer in his Coac disliked this Preachers com∣ming, nor yet the seeming bold question that hee pro∣pounded. I see in this Religiously af∣fected Noble-man good De∣sires and good Motions to know, and also God secon∣ding his pious Endeauors and
orkes his happy conversi∣n. It's no small blessing to joy the company of a faith∣ll Preacher. Wee cannot ppose what great Things God may bring to passe by hese too much despised Em∣assadors. It's not every one that can xpound Scripture aright. But ere was one that rightly di∣ided and applyed the word of Trueth, and see the ope∣ation of one Sermon preacht ffectually. God send every true Be∣eiver such a man to meete him, and bid him deliver his Heart to God: these two met well, and parted better. Their salutation ended in
salvation. Let mee upon doubts light upon such Expositor, and bee store with such a Commentary. MEDITATION. 34. Vpon seeing a Bird caught i a Snare. HOw Agile, sweetl framd, beautifull, an Pleasant, was thi prety Quirrister, before was thus captived; now, ho heavy, mourning, and disconlate is it: having not onel lost her freedome, but epos'd her selfe to open struction.
The use of liberty without wantones is a pleasant bles∣sing: but ayming at some unlawfull pleasure, or profit, proves dangerous to the En∣ioyer. (O Lord) it was the soule of Man that was thus beautifull, pleasant, pure, and active in the state of Inno∣cence. What a spacious iberty had it eyther for Exercise, or Recreation? but eing enthrald by that too oo cunning Fowler, by he snares, and traps of sin∣ull pleasure; How heavy, ow irkesome, and how oathsome is it, even to it elfe? Sinne makes us loose all ur spirituall mirth, and
liberty, and exposes us to manifest perdition. (Oh God) since there are so many snares, and politique fowlers. Let my Soule, keepe Above, and not settle here Below, so I shall escape their devises, and preserve my owne liber∣ty. Columbaest Anima, Aucepse Diabolus. MEDITATION. 35. the sight of a Thorne Tree, full of Blossomes. VVHat makes growing, and flourishing
in so good a piece of Ground? It doth deserve a ire rather, then such an happy Scituation being naught in it selfe, and choaking the good Seed. It's well when wic∣kednes is barren, better when it's quite rooted up, (may some say.) But I admire thy pati∣ence, and thy wisedome, (Oh God) even towards these vessels of wrath. It's thy will, and wisedome to place them here. Who dare then question thy Action for un∣iust? it stands here eyther for an open conversion, conviction, or confusion. We must not be our owne sharers in our Petitions. All
is not best that seemes so in our desires. We should re∣venge eyther too hastily, o two deepely in our owne, or our friends wrongs. Thy Lil∣ly was troubled, and thy owne Israel was molested by these, yet both by thy Per∣mission. (I believe they shall have a hot day of it when it comes. I enuy not the felicity of the wicked, but patiently waite to see thy wisedome manifested. Wee are but foolish Logicians, if we con∣clude hapines from tempo∣rall blessings, the wicked may surfet with them, and thy Elect want them. Let them grow where, and how
long thou pleasest, I beleeve hy words, That the wicked shall be rooted out at the last. MEDITATION. 36. Vpon visiting a Rich man, in time of his sicknes. VVHat resorting to His house, by kin∣red, friends, and Neighbours? Hee wants not their compa∣y, Councell, or helpe: when s an honest poore man may lie long enough under tedious sicknes, and have o such Visitants. They ome for his Goods, rather hen to doe him any good.
much like greedy Gleaner when the Corne is cutting downe. He makes his wi against his will, settles his state, assures all for the World At last sends for a Preacher who finds him unfitting fo God, or the World. Sicknes, and death (I see are bold and impartiall Ser∣nts. The World, and weal are but poore Baile upo deaths Arrests. All mean are nothing when God stri us. The wisdome of the wo is but an  for He∣ven. The Rich are unwilling dye because they know n a better life, and want to beleeve it.
Wealth, and riches often re but Percullisses let downe o stoppe the passage through he Gate to saluation. Rich orldlings have Gods Word n least, and last considera∣tion. Soe let God order mee, hat in all estates I may be eady to part with All to nioy Him. But it is truely poaken, Oh! How bitter s the Remembrance of death o a man in his full pos∣sessions.
MEDITATION. 37. Vpon Hearing a faire Shipp come home Richly laden. VVHat dangers Poore Vessell hath passed? what Rockes, Pirat Sands, Waves, and Winde hath it encountred with What hunger, cold, heat, an blowes hath she indured What a greene, tedious knowne, moueable way hath shee flowne over? What world of water hath she pled through? With wh strange Nations hath sh traded? And yet what mo is, how often hath shee been reputed and given for
et safely at length arrived ith Drums beating, Trum∣ts sounding, Colours dis∣ayed, and rich Prizes in er. GODS Name bee aysed. Every sonne of man comes to, and goes out of this world a Shippe to Sea. What iseries, afflictions, cala∣ityes, poverty, disgrace oe encounter them? Happy he that keepes the Vessell f his soule by Patience to he End. Many split, and sinke, me are taken Prisoners, hers die with hunger. All are able to Combats, and fiery rialls. More specially I thinke f, and pray for that Royall
Shippe of thine (oh Saviour called the All-saints, the Church militant. Which hath beeee long forth, hat endured Heauy things, (as I hope) shall ere put happily into her safe Hbor of rest, and repose. VVhat reioycing, an gladnes shall there bee Her approach, which com laden with so many sands of pure Soules to put into that Royall change. Fetch home thy (Oh Lord) and thy ∣deemed one with much peop Let mee bee any Prize her, and I shall be rich en. Ecclesia Navis est, Animae piorum sunt Merca
MEDITATION. 38. n the sight of an Infant fed with Milke. it were not for this inde of foode the poore ant might starue. See how proportions to all Nou∣ment sitting there Age. quietly you may see receive it? How kind∣ Nurse giving it? How grees with his tender Con∣ution, and digested, fits him stronger diet. How doth (Oh God) Heavenly Wisedome peare, in giving us sincere ilke out of thy Heavenly
word. While we are in Christ, how meekely the thriving Child in receive it, which is able save his soule. How lovin∣ly doe thy faithfull Mi∣sters feed him with it; being rightly received, mak him grow up unto the p∣fect stature of a Man Christ. God is carefull to pro∣vide food for mans The Preacher ought to be ligent in the distribution it, and the hearer ought be constant in the receipt it. Children that will not ceive Milke, eyther sicke, die, or else prove Dwarf
Seeing (Lord) it is uncome∣y, unnaturall, alwaies to be Child, ever learning, but ever comming to perfecti∣on. Let mee so receive thy Word that I may grow from strength, to strength, nd from virtue, to vir∣ue. They are unnaturall, and nfiting Nurses, who ey∣ther doe not give Children Milke at all, or else a∣dulterated, and sophisticated with many dangerous In∣gredients to hinder their growth. The first are careles, and unlearned Ministers: the se∣cond are superstitious, and dolatrous false Teachers,
who presumptuously mix their humaine Traditions t Gods Word, hindring th growth and encrease Gods Church. Gods Word admits mixture; it's desperate boldnes eyther to withhold it, to adde to it, being first, necessary: secondly, so per∣fect in its nature: Both wil undergoe that heavy curse of God, the one for Sub∣straction, the other for Ad∣dition.
MEDITATION. 39. Vpon the sight of the Moone. THis Creature is now in the full lustre, in the re∣olution of a few daies, how is the beautifull light of t diminished, because it is not of, or from it selfe, but borrowed from the Sunne. That is absolutely perfect whose subsistence is in it selfe. That body is but imper∣fect whose Fundamentals are Externall dependances. Those Princes are counted weake, whose Forces are borrowed from their Neighbours. Mi∣serable
is that man who in His necessary imployments must have a Legge from one, a Hand from another, and an Eye from a third▪ That party dares not disobey him, by whose power his Head stands on his Shoul∣ders. Seldome doe they accom∣plish any great Actions, whose Materials are other mens Beneplacits: To borrow another mans faith to goe to Heaven, would seeme but the Errand of a beggarly Christian. The body of the Moone Encreases, and Decreases, to our sence, it is as subject to change, as it is to momotion,
If Phylosophy will serve for an Argument. Mans mutable state of his body sympathizes, or else is caused from it. But howsoever it is no such mervaile if men bee unconstant, faulty, and fa∣ding, since those more Cae∣lestiall, and Superior crea∣tures stood not all stedfast, The Angels kept not their first Integrity. Worthy Cal∣vin hath it, Si peccare norunt Parentes in paradiso, quid mi∣rum si Nos in sterquilinio? It is (Oh Saviour) with our soules, as with the Moone, shee hath light onely from the Sunne. The light, and lustre wee have in our soules
is thy comelinesse and beau∣ty. We are darknes▪ but thou hast made us light in the ord. Let mee (O Lord) cast away now the workes of darknes, and put vpon my soule the Armour of of Light. Lux mea a Te. MEDITATION. 40. Vpon the falling of Leaves in Autumne. VVHat a strange alte∣ration is here in this Tree? The last quarter how flourishing? how repleni∣shed? and decked with thou∣sands
of Attendants in greene, romising much to the sa∣isfying of the beholders, but his was in Summer. How many such seeming Parasites are there, which will spread Saile with us in faire gale of Wind, or in a prosperous terme, promising idelity, but in the tempests, and violent stormes of ad∣versity, or affliction are so∣dainely gone with a Non Novimus. Few men make haste to that Market where there is nothing to be bought but blowes. It showes also to us the fraile condition of the bo∣dy, and worldly prefer∣ments, how beautifull, and
comely hath this man beene, and how honourable this day, when sodainely but one it of a feaver, or one frowne of a Prince hath opt both in a moment. Sodainely have such Meteors, and Co∣mets beene extinguished. God make mee so resolute in perseverance, that I may hold my first love. So nei∣ther the heate in Summer shall make mee too proud, nor the frosts in Winter affright, or displace me.
MEDITATION. 41. Vpon Reubens divisions. Iudg. 5. 15. 16. I wonder much, and grieve more at this unmatchable seperation. Can those hearts which should alwaies bee u∣nited, in so small a distance be divided? was it any dis∣content that this Tribe har∣boured because it lost the priviledge of the first borne? Indeed lawfull Heires sel∣dome part with their Pre∣rogatives, but threaten re∣venge, or intend it to the present possessors with Esa, could not the Equall Testa∣ment of a father so inspired
be admitted for just, in so many Generations, With∣out malice, or revenge. This had beene a faire op∣portunity for Reuben to have gaind that honour in the field which he lost in an unlawfull Bed. Was it because De∣borah a Woman was then the Generall in the Feild? And so Reubens Regiment scorned to be led up in Armes by o weake an instrument? but certainly he was then the more culpable, being so potent a Tribe, and absent. VVill he put the fault in Iordan because he could not Passe over his high sweld VVaves? Oh no! A willing minde slights such poore ex∣cuses,
and will affront the reatest perills. VVas it the force of the Enemies Army that affrigh∣ed him, or did he thinke he should come too late? For he first, he could not have azarded his life in a fairer quarrell, nor amongst nearer friends, and if he had come, though after the Battaile, no question but Deborah, and all the Lords would have beene glad to have eene his Colours in the Feild to tryumph, though not to Fight. It would have shewed a readines, and propensity of minde, and would have made an Apology for his whole Tribe.
Howsoever hee should have renewed his old fami∣liarity with his brethren and more then that, I would have caused a great feare in the Army of the Aduersaries, to have heard his Drummes eating to succou his Brethren: The union of Brethren is terrible, but their divisions are alwaies spurres to their Adversaries, and great advantages. But briefly to lay him forth, hee was busie about his private Commodities, his Flocks, and his Heards, workt more with him, then Gods cause. It is a great fault to slip opportunites in doing good, especially to
our selues, and brethren, how ong could he thinke to have njoyd his flockes at home, f his Enemies had got the eild from his Brethren. Our rivate gaines must not be referd before our Countries. And such, and no other are worldly men, when I am assaulted by the power of Satan, or tentations. What comfort will these afford my soule? Noe: they will ney∣ther lend me Comfort, Coun∣cell, or Prayer. So his fault was in respect of the Cause, the Time, his Person, his Freinds, Aduersaries, and Ex∣ample. Concordiâ Res parvae Crescunt, Discordiâ evertuntur Maximae.
MEDITATION. 42. Vpon Sleepe. THe naturall sleepe is cessation of all labor, motion, action. With excesse i brings poverty, shame, disgrace, sicknesses, diseases Hee that is given to sleep shall not bee rich. It stupefies, besots the best sences and faculties of the sou and makes them unfit so any good imployment, o virtuous action. It is th Rust of the whole man. Nature cannot move t Grace in its owne condition The spirituall sluggard i
he onely poore man. Hee at lies downe in the sleepe f sinne, shall rise in shame. No such diseased person s the spirituall sluggard. is poverty, and shame may ome slowly, but violently as n Armed man. I beseech thee (O Lord) o waken mee from slum∣ring, or sleeping in sinne. So may worke powerfully, and herefully while the time, nd day of grace doth shine: he night of death will come, hen no man can worke. I ould wish that all would ake St. Pauls counsell, Awake thou that sleepest, arise, ud stand up, and Christ shall ive thee light. Somnus animae periculosus.
MEDITATION. 43. Vpon the sight of a faire Garden. I Question not the Gard∣ners skill, nor his diligenc neither doubt I the goodne either of the Ground, of the Seed sowne in i Yet I see more Weeds, the Herbes, or Rootes, wha base vsurping, intruding Hinderers are these of beter things. Pull them up what make they growing so choyce a Piece, to th disturbance of those whole some, and medicinabl Hearbes and Flowers, se
the patient Wisedome of the Master. They must grow, for that place is not priviledged here. This Mixture is tolerable as long as the Master per∣mits it. The best Wheat may be fanned, but yet there will some Chaffe be amongst it. (O Lord) thy skill, and diligence, is admirable in the Managing of that of spi∣rituall Garden the Church. Thy Word which is the seed is good, and pure, thy Mi∣nisters, which are the true Labourers, are watchfull, and carefull over it, Yet the purest Congregation is enterlac't, and mixt with
Hypocrites. It was not that Heavenly Iury of Apostles that was free from a Iu∣das. I pray God, I may truely, and faithfully discharge my duty. And leave the successe, and end to the wise will of my Lord, and Master. Gods Congregation is no more to bee forsaken for Hypocrites being in it, then a wedge of fine Gold is, for having two, or three graines of drosse in it.
MEDITATION. 44. Vpon Fire. THere are five speciall gifts that make this In∣strument admirable. Heate, Light, Purity, his nature of Ascending, and Consuming. If wee come too neere it, it will prejudice us, if wee stand too farre from it, it will not benefit us. A wise Me∣diocrity is the profitablest station. I doe lively (Oh God) in this see, and acknowledge thy heavenly spirit of trueth, it is that good Spirit that enlightens our understan∣dings,
that by his power, and Energy eats our Affections, who by his onely Purity, and Sanctity cleanses our Soules, and Bodies, making them fit Temples for Himselfe, and Peculiar Vessels for his owne use, who by his worth tea∣ches vs to set our Affections, and Soules not on Things below, Temporary, Worldly, and such as are subject to sence, and corruption, but to mount Higher, and to seeke those Things which are A∣boue, who doth expell, and drive out of our Soules all infull lusts, and rebellious corruptions. Learne mee (O God) Humility, not with too too
bold a Presumption to pry into thy Closet of Divine, and reserved Secrets, and withall, giue mee that care, and wisedome to frequent those spirituall exercises, for as the first is forbidden rash∣nes, so the other is forbidden sloath, and negligence. Lord let me alwaies have a Coale of this Fire, in the House of my soule, to warme me by, in the coldest day of Affliction, and let mee ever have a vigilant care that I suffer it not to be quenched, or extinguished. Ignis hic Fovendus.
MEDITATION. 45. Vpon the sight of a poore man Begging. HEe makes the High way the place of his gaines, his Rags and Soares, the Orators of his necessity, and the induction for mens cha∣rity. Oftentimes Petitio∣nates some Nobleman, by relation of his long suites in Law, or of his losses by the casualty of Fire, or Water, or that hee is destitute of Friends, and Meanes, and so findes Reliefe, Compassi∣on, Cloathing. What a good Policy is this for our poore,
and miserable soules, Ie∣sus Christ in his Word, in his Sacraments, and Church, is the road way of our gaines. Our sicke, and distressed Soules, and Consciences, ou wounded and broken Spirits are the Sores and ulcers, which moue us to begge, and cry out for mercy: which also are the onely and best meanes to get thy Pity, fa∣vour, compassion. Prayers are our Petitions to turne away the Rigour of thy Law, and the Fire of thy Iustice. Shew thy mercy (Oh Lord and Saviour) or wee are wretched. No Friends, or meanes but thy Selfe, Me∣rits,
Pardons, Indulgences, Pu∣gatory, Pilgrimage, Supererro∣gations have no force, or virtue. Lend us thy Roabes of Righteousnes to adorne us, Thy selfe to cherish us, so our Persons, and Prayers shall bee accepted, otherwise thou mayst goe by us, and we never the better. Lord, make us common, and arnest Beggars at thy Doore of Mercy, so wee need not bee ashamed of thy Gifts, nor of this Profes∣sion.
MEDITATION. 46. pon the sight of a Frontiere Garrison. VVHat care, provision, policy, and guar∣ing is in this place. What alles, Moates, Halfe∣oons, Horne workes, Draw∣idges, Ramparts, and Palli∣does do I behold, to secure emselues within, from the olence of a threatning foe thout. How fitly doth this obiect arne me to Barricadoe my ule from all the entrances, d approaches of my bloody, d spirituall Aduersaries,
those Out-guards, and for lorne Sconces of my Eye Eares, Words, and Actio are to bee well lookt too and that priuy passage of m thoughts must be warily kep for vsually the Enemie wi be Vnder-mining that Plac or else closely in the Nigh of ignorance will enter th too too weake Passage. S I must looke that my wil judgment, Memory, affe¦tions, and understanding b alwayes ready prest for th Holy performance of sanctifi duties. Bee thou alwayes ( Lord) the Commandeire, wa thou the Round, and g Orders to mee, how I sh
atch, so I neede not feare y Surprisall, nor Onslaught, thou who never sleepest kest upon Thee to be the ouernour in the little Citty f my soule, and except thou ou doest keepe it, all my atching will be in vaine. MEDITATION. 47. pon a King, and Traytors. He Law apprehends, Ar∣raignes, Conuicts, and ondemnes these Malefac∣rs, They not onely loose eir owne lives, and honours, t disgrace and overthrow eir Children, the King may
of mercy, power, free lo and his princely Prerogat save, or execute, Some, or None. Yet the Offendors themselues without Plea, E¦cuse, or Merit. It's just the case of by Nature, God by his La Iustice, Severity may; could condemne us: we a Vnable, undeseruing, witho excuse. It's therefore (O Heavenly Father) thy merc and free lov to save Any o All, when as thou Ius mightest have destroy'd (good God) grant me Pardon royall for all my Rebellions, and seale it I bseech The with the Blood Iesus Christ.
MEDITATION. 48. Vpon the Angels. Hese Creatures are agile, Powerfull, All perfect, d good by Creation, dif∣ent by sinne. Their Nature, umber, Imployment, show e Mercy, Iustice, Power, d VVisedome of their reator. Their imployment owes the Iust wages of O∣dience, & Pride, their num∣r, what a Large, and Royal ourt Heaven is, and what a st prison Hell is. Their Of∣e proves that the Righteous e alwaies well guarded with eruants, and Defenders: and at the wicked are alwayes
vext with tormenting Exetioners. Let me (Oh God) ware of sinne, which ma Angels, Divels. Thou didest punish it in these verely, wilt not Allow it any. My Calling gives the same Name, let me found faithfull in it, lest loose Honor, and life. and Men are the chiefe thy workes for Mercy, Iustice. They both are the and the worst of all thy Crtures. I may learne these, what I had beene, I must not be, and what shall be. Corruptio Optimi pssima.
MEDITATION. 49. Of a Physitian. GOD hath made him a fit Instrument for Health. perience, Knowledge, and thfulnes warrant, and ommend him. The dis∣ed must receive his Pre∣iptions with Preparation, Approbation, Thankesgiuing: here's little hope of any without him. These adde Efficacy to his Medicines. Some neglect the , others the second, some All. So they justly groane, nd greive under a continu∣ sicknes.
It's no otherwise with and our Soules. Hee sent Iesus Christ the Auth of our Spirituall Healt his Knowledge, Experience, faithfulnes are wonderful His Prescriptions are all wrantable, and Soueraig Many have Vlcerated Cosciences, and soules deepe a Spirituall Consumptio because they will not rceive this onely Restorati I hold it best to subscrib to thy Directions for Purg Potion, or diet, my Rcovery is not to be doubte if I follow thy Aduise, Houely Remedies all shakin Agues of wavering Consciences. Burning Feavers
nfull Lust. All Consump∣ions of Faith, and zeale, and All the swellings and rising f the Lights to Pride, or aine Ambition (Oh good amaritan) dwell in the ttle House of my soule, I shall be purg'd, Cured, nd Comforted at all times, All diseases. MEDITATION. 50. Vpon a Soldier. See in these Professors a dangerous Mixture, some march in the same Army whose Hearts are with their rethrens Enemies, And as
Opportunity serues, Runne way, mutineere, or absolute Cowards upon of Pike, or any great seruice Yet some there are, deserue Commendations their qualification of Obdience, Courage, Patience, watfulnes, and Constancy. It hath beene alwayes (Oh Lord) in the Spiritall Army, some Israeli have their Hearts with Lords of the Philistines, ayly Runne away fro Gods Garrison, the Churc They goe out from us, bcause they were not of us. Others turne Rebels to Ies Christ his Kingdome, with Nolumus Hunc Regnare, an
housands are faint-harted, nd white liverd, though the ause be good, and God hath promis'd to defend it. They are thy Faithfull, and Elect (O God) that un∣dergoe the Heat of the day. I beseech Thee qualifie me with parts Requisite, and then I feare not the faces, nor forces of those Goliahlike, Enemies. I am sure I shall have some trew Comrades to goe with me, and some to fol∣low me. The Lord Generall is march'd before with a strong Regiment, He hath, and will for ever Triumph. I doubt not to have a share of Comfort with him, as well as of Bowes for him.
MEDITATION. 40. Vpon seing a Man looking upon the Sunne with his Eyes Immediately. THis mans Iudgment is Erroneous, because his Perspectiue deceives him, he Concludes the Sunne to be noe greater then it doth Appeare to his Eye. He may as well conclude that it doth not move, because he perceives It not. The Height of it from the Earth, the weaknes of his Sence, and the Greatnes of It's Light makes this confu∣sion in his Iudgment. It's no otherwie in the
spirituall Vision, the Natu∣rall Man perceives not the Greatnes, and Glory of that Sunne of Righteousnes, The state of Glory is not to be seene with the Eye of Sence, or Reason. Spirituall Obiects must bee Spiritually discer∣ned. He that will Rightly, and Effectually behold Thee (Oh Saviour) must have the Prospective of Faith. The Mystery of thy Conception, Incarnation, Resurrection, and Ascension are so high above Nature, That Flesh, and Blood cannot attaine unto them. Such Knowledge is too deepe for the meere Naturalist, In beholding these deepe
Points, Let me put out the Eye of Reason, and open the Eye of faith. Oh Lord give me such an Instrument, so I shall neither faile in my Ex∣pectation, nor bee falsified about the Obiect. For Faith drawes firme Conclusions. MEDITATION. 52. Vpon seeing a Tent Pitcht up, and suddenly Re∣moved. HOw fit this Instrument is for motion, when as great Howses are Burthenous, and are of that nature they they cannot bee our Com∣panions
in any sodaine extre∣mities. This I see is of that ease, and yet convenient e∣nough for a Covering, That a man may carry it all day at his backe, like a Snayle. In cases of sodaine necessity the Tent is the better house. I had rather have a Tent, and escape the danger of a Pur∣suing Enemy, then a faire great House, and my life ta∣ken away in it. (Believe it) Riches, and this worldly Pompe have the greater Inconveniences. He that hath least of this worldly Goods, hath the fewer feares. Feriunt Sum∣mos fulmina Montes, Give me a poore Life with safety,
rather then Riches with such hazards. Let me never looke for a long stay of certainty here, but alwaies so live, as expecting every moment a removeall from hence. Militia est vita hominis super terram. MEDITATION. 53. Vpon the covetous Rich Mn, Luk. 12. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. HOw full of care was this Earth-worme? yet how secure? how foolish? What a base sinne is that
which makes men so greedy, and so restles in getting wealth, and being gotten, debars the Master of the Right, or of any good Vse of it: while he will not part with his , hee must part with his . And when hee thinkes to gaine the World, he must  it. While hee is making his Resolutions, hee is forc't to his Dissolution: before hee can Build, or Enlarge his Barnes, he must passe to his Grave. He basely seekes to hoard p that, which hee should have distributed, what faire Opportunities doth a rich Covetous man loose.
Many may, and shall smart for having so lent to them, and they no lending any, to any. The possession gives not the master happines, so much as the distribution. The oney way to gaine Eternal, is to passe away Temls. The certainty of death, and the uncertainty of the time, is, and ought to bee a great Motive to weane us all from covetousnesse.
MEDITATION. 54. Vpon the sight of a Pismire. I See greater Creatures that may learne of this, to get their owne living, some reasonable Ones scarce get it so diligently, and honest∣ly, as this contemptible Worme. It labours while a faire opportunity is offered, Her worke is not to preju∣dice others by Oppression, or Extortion, meerely for susten∣tation against harder times, and for the well being of her selfe, and her necessary Fa∣mily.
A necessary direction for all Sluggards, and Spend thrifts, who may goe to her, and heare Lectures of Diligence, and Providence wisely discoursd of. The first, shee teaches to get his owne Bread, and not to live by unlawfull meanes. The second, she tutors to provide for his Wife, and Children, and to have something re∣seru'd for a rainy Day of Sicknes, of Adversity, or both. As I see providence in this Creature, so I observe a society with Order. There are no Private or Do∣mestique quarrels practised amongst them. Nature hath
setled peace, and concord in their Cofines. Privat Con∣tentions are a continuall dropping to a Family, which may prove an unhappy o∣verflowing tempest to the Republique. Abrahams ad∣vice is worth Imitation. Let there bee no contention be∣tweene thee, and mee, or thy Shepheards, and mine, For we are Brethren: Vnity crownes Fraternity. Divisions are the bane of the strongest Societies: civill wars made potent Rome a Cripple, an house divided against it selfe is, as when the Head wounds the Heart, or the Hand, both. It was de∣plored, when Ephraim was
against Manasseh, and Ma∣nasseh against him, yet both against Iudah. Peace not onely makes a State flourish, but also establishes, and confirmes it. The goodnes of the Crea∣ture lies not in the great∣nes. Wisedome goes not al∣waies by strength. Many o∣ther Creatures read Morality to man, this little great Stu∣dent reads Morality, and Di∣vinity. I would be loath this litle Harvest-man should condemne me. Let me ga∣ther food for my soule while I have the Sun of the Gospell. So in the daies of scarcenes, I shall haue enough.
MEDITATION. 55. Of HEAVEN. IT's Beautifull, Large, High, and Firme, God made it a Court for Him∣selfe, Angels, and good men. There have beene many in it, who shall never come into it againe. They cast out them∣selves Eiectione firma, It is full of beauty, Majesty, yet the poorest Peasant may be a priviledged Cour∣tier. It's large, to give spaci∣ous liberty to the Inhabi∣tants. It's High, yet made for the Lowly, and Humble,
firme to consummate the blisse of the godly. The beauty of thy Cou makesmee thinke what an infinit Majesty the Maker of it is of. Secondly, it puts me in mind of the necessity of my sanctification, for no uncleane thing shall come in there. Thirdly, the glo∣rious happines of thy Elect vessels, that shall dwell in it for ever. The largnes of it showes that this Earth, and my Body, are the Prisons of my soule, so that I desire to enjoy that spacious liberty. The Height, and distance of it from the Earth, warnes me to begin my journey
ither betimes. The firmnes it keepes mee from des∣ire. I may the surer finde because the Court never moves. Thy Court (O God) full of Favorites. Let me, entreat thee bee enrolled a∣ong the rest, for One. The ay is narrow, yet to bee . If I seeke it, as I may, I ought, or as thousands done before mee. (Oh ord) whom have I in Hea∣en but Thee? and who doe desire on Earth, in compa∣son of Thee? Glorious things are spoken Thee, thou City of God.
MEDITATION. 56. Vpon the Fish in the Sea. HOw long have these creatures spaciated themselves in this watry World yet come forth not infecte with the saltnes of the plac their Bodies are capab of it, they lodge, and in it, feed in it, and in it. Behold an Admirab Patterne for vs from the Sea-faring Inhabitants. godly man will keepe his Itegrity at all times, and all places. Though it bee
great Blessing to have our Lotte, and Habitation in Zion, yet if it be in Sodome, goodnes is not there to be left. I shall never approve of his Actions, who changes his minde with the places hee passes through: to be for the Coule in Rome, and Rhemes, in Geneva a Praecisian, A Lu∣theran in Dantzick, A Pro∣testant in London, and an Hea∣then in Barbary. He is not a good man who followes this Mutability, These Creatures shall Con∣demne those then that will Conforme themselues to all sinnes, of all places. Drun∣kennes with the Dutch, Lust
with French, Infidelity wit the Italian, Ambition, an cruelty with the Spaniard Treachery with the Moore Witch-craft with the Laplander, Covetousnes with the Iew, Malice with the Turke and Hypocrisie at home. A Wise Man keepes him∣selfe free from the sinne of the Times, persons, and places. It is not the plac that makes Good, or Bad. A Man may bee Good in the Campe, and bad in the Church. I beseich thee (Oh Lord) to give mee Circumspection over my Waies, so in all places I may retaine goodnes, and keepe Piety.
MEDITATION. 57. Vpon Saul sparing Agag, and the rich, and best of the Booty 1 Sam. 15. HEaven would punish Amaleck with the sword, But Earth will pity him with Covetousnes: God in∣tends Iustice, Saul aimes at Profit. Hee lookes not so much upon his Commission to obey it, as he seeks Eua∣sions to transgresse it. The greatest Princes may faile in their designes, when such Generalls are put upon the Execution. Actions of the greatest
Consequence layd upon the performance of vniust stew∣ards come short of the first ntendments. Couetousnes is as Bad a fault in a Commaunder as Cowardize. The one dare not fulfill his Iniunction, the other will not. That Pity is Execra∣ble that hinders Heavens Iustice. The Sword is some∣times to be vsed rather then the Scepter. There may be time when the Generall in the Feild must be as a Iudge, not regarding the beauty, wealth, or quality of the per∣son, but must proceed with Iustice. If God commands the Rule to be Generall, t's
no safe practise to put in Exceptions. Gods Edicts need not humane helpes to per∣fect them. The fitest Glosse upon them is Obedience to them. This conclusion is firme. Heaven commands this, or that, therefore it's good. beeing good, It is to be performed. Sauls proceeding in this kind is much like to a Par∣tiall Minister. God Com∣mands him to destroy all those spirituall Amalekites, sinnes. But he onely beates downe the sinnes of poore Men, but spares, and con∣nives at great Mens faults, holding them Prisoners in his heart, not willing to
Incurre perhaps their Dis∣favour. And all those Men which onely roote out small Cor∣ruptions, and lesser sinnes from Their soules, but let great Ones raigne still, either for Profit, or Pleasure, or both, doe falsifie with God, as Saul did here. Lord I pray thee give me grace to performe what thou Commandest. For O∣bedience is at all times, in all things pleasing to Thee. Obedientia praestantior Hea∣tombis.
MEDITATION. 45. Vpon his owne Thoughts by way of conclusion. IT's harder I thinke than to be well Imployed, not to be imployed at all. It is as Toylsome to bee ill Oc∣cupied, as it is to be Idle. I cannot conceive that such an Operative Organ as the soule can want worke. It may as well be thought to cease to Bee, as not to be labou∣ring. Shee is mistresse in such a foule House, shee had need alwayes be cleansing, she lodges so many guests, that it is a continuall worke to place all
in Conuenient Roomes. Many Thoughts are such Quicke Guests they will bee gone, and steale away some good from her, unles shee bee wary. They are all like Curreirs carrying out, and bringing in newes from her, to the World, and from the World, to her. They are alwayes in Tra∣vaile, the soule abounds with them, as the Sunne with Moates. Wee are borne to Labour, and we must per∣forme our Taske. As the Thoughts of Man are Many, so they are diffe∣rent, All are not good, nor all bad.
There is not any thing is blest with such a Library, as the soule of Man is, Every Obiect within, and without reades to her obseruations of Morality, and Piety. Shee cannot complaine for want of Variety, for the whole Vniverse is her study. Her thoughts are but her Servants, which shee Entertaines, or discharges as they please, or dislike her. I could wish that my thoughts would be tied up∣on the Quatuor Novissima. So they would never be ill Imployed. I pray thee (O God) to set a watch ouer all my thoughts, That they may be
such onely as may Glorifie Thee, Benefit my selfe, and Better others, and this is my Thought. Come Lord Iesus, come Quickly. MEDITATION. 59. Vpon his reading the Oc∣casionall Meditations of the Reverend Doc∣tor Hals Com∣position. IT's good to have a pat∣terne, then it's a great bles∣sing to stirre up others to good Indeauours. I must confesse
I had not laboured but by His aduice: his Fire made my Coale burne. It is as ne∣cessary a way for a Christi∣an, as I know any, and as Be∣neficiall, and pleasant to the soule. It's Lawfull to Imitate any good Action in any One, we might else casheire Exam∣ples, and onely entertaine Precepts, but that Magis ducimur Exemplis quam Prae∣ceptis, the virtues of our Predecessors had died before this time, had they not beene maintained by wor∣thy Imitators. It is Blockish stupiditie then to be senseles of embracing such offered benefits.
It is the easier for the soule to collect something out of euery thing. We are all be∣holding to the Pens that hath writ before us. I cannot see how a wise Christian, can let any thing passe him, without some benefit by it. For a good Scholler in Christs Church will re∣duce most things to Appli∣cation. FINIS.
