19196 24357088 14359
An extracte of Examples, Apo∣thegmes, and Histories. Collected out of Lycosthenes, Brusonius and others. Translated into Englishe, and reduced into an Alpha∣beticall order of com∣mon places, by. A. P. Imprinted at London by Henry Bynneman, for Humfrey Toie.
¶ To the ryghte worshipfull, and his sin∣gular good master, Doctor HVMFRIE, Vice Chaunceler of Oxforde, Deane of Glocester, and President of Magdalen Colledge. Iohn Parrincheffe his humble seruant wisheth long and prospe∣rous health. WHē Iphigenia (righte vvorshipfull) shoulde be killed and offered in sacrifice vn∣to Diana, to appease hir long conceiued ire to Agamemnon, and all Grece for his sake: Timanes the payn∣ter vvas sent for to describe this heauie and turbulent tragedie, done as it vvas. But comming vnto the discription of Agamemnon his face, he founde it so sad, sorovvfull and mourning-like, that vvith all the cunning he had, he coulde not in paynting represente the same. VVhere∣fore
couering his face vvith a veyle, he lefte the sorovvfulnesse thereof vnto the imagination of men. Lykevvyse I, vvho in descrybing of persons am nothing so cunning as vvas this Timanes in portraying of Pictu∣res, bycause I can not condignely ex∣presse the godly vertues, and vertuous godlynesse, vvith other good gyftes and qualities, that GOD, nature and for∣tune hath indued you vvithall: I vvill co∣uer them vvith the veyle of scilence, and leaue them to the iudgement of them that knovve, and canne better expresse them. And so leauing to hang a garlande of greene Iuie at the tauern dore, vvhere the vvyne is so good, famouse, and ven∣dible, I meane to spare penne, paper, and paines, and returne to my purpose. VVhilest God gaue life to D. Spenser, of moste wortshipfull memorie, I (for the loue he bare to good letters) founde hys worship, not in words, but in deedes, not in one or two things, but in many moste beneficiall, a father rather than a master vnto me. I was glad then, and do reioyce yet, that it was my fortune to dvvell with
so vvorshipfull and vertuous a master. VVhose singular vertues, If I shulde goe aboute to expresse or number, as I myghte lightly finde to my oration a beginning: so shoulde I hardely make thereof any conuenient ending. VVher∣fore I meane not at thys tyme (though I shal seeme scantly to performe my dutie) to blase or aduaunce his vertues at all, onlesse it be in affyrming, that he vvas a manne, not vnvvorthy to be the succes∣sor of Doctor Tailer, vvhose offyce and cure he supplied. VVhat commendation is comprised heerein, iudge they that knovve, or haue read of the goodly and godly qualities, the authoritie and wise∣dome that this Tailer vvas indued vvith. Nam sua cūct is nota est agricolis pietas, & candida metis simplicitas. VVel this good doctor Spenser, as in al things he vvas my very friend, so chefly (as in a thing of che∣fest price) he had a singular and earnest care to instruct me vvith lerning and ver∣tue. It hapned about this time twelue mo∣neth, that vvayting and vvalking abroade in the fields vvith him, at his cōmaunde∣ment, I began to reade in the beginning
of the Christian Poet Pallingene, vntill I came vnto this inuocation of the Poet: Et vos Castalides nimphae. &c. Tradite me famae ne prorsus inutilis olim, Ʋixisse hie videar: peream{que} in funere totus: At vvhiche vvordes he caused mee to stay, and beganne to declare vnto me the frailtie of our life, and that vve knevv not vvhen death should call vs. And therfore exhorted me, and vvished all others in their vocatiō to leaue some fruite of their studie. And bicause he sayd that he knevv the disposition of yong men to be fanta∣sticall, inconstante and full of conceipts, to the intent that I should not vvander, and go about I vvot not vvhat, he vvould tell me, vvherin fruitfully to my selfe, and profitably to others I should imploy my studie. VVilling me to take my shorte notes (vvhich I had for my ovvne vse col∣lected out of master Fox) and orderly to reduce them into an Epitome. A grateful vvorke, as he supposed, for the common people, vvhich can not, and vvoulde fayne haue some sight of that vvorthy vvorke. Moreouer, bicause that there in Essex and
Suffolke, vvere many vvelspoken Mini∣sters, vvhich by the exercise of Prophe∣sying, and the knovvledge of the Frenche tong, were able well to iudge, and sound∣ly to preache the Gospell: and only their defecte was, that (for vvant of the Latin tongue) they could not induce any mo∣rall example or hystorie, which beeing rightly applied, giueth a goodly illustrati∣on and grace vnto a sermon, or any other exercise: he thought I should please them and profit my selfe, if I vvould take Bru∣sonius and Licosthenes, and translate some of their examples into Englishe. Hys motion, bothe for authoritie and good vvill, was a sufficient commaundement vnto me to satisfie his pleasure in accom∣plishing his aduise and behest. And albe∣it he be gone, yet was not I so obliuious to forget, or so vncurteous to neglecte his wordes. VVherfore I haue vvith such diligence as in me lay, and vvith the smal learning that God hath lent me, patched it vp as I could, and as you see, I haue re∣duced it into an Alphabet of common places, conferring as the reader may see, Lycosthenes and Brusonius togither, cho∣sing
out such examples and Apothegmes as I thought moste necessarie, and omit∣ting (as neere as I coulde) all vnnecessa∣rie superfluitie. And thus hauing longer here continued my laborious style, than reason requireth (for auoyding of tedi∣ousnesse) vvith so vnperfecte an ende I vvill surceasse, moste humbly beseeching your vvorship to take in good parte this my simple trauayle. And then shal I little esteeme of the fonde surmisinges of the scornefull company: nor the rashe re∣porte of so fonde a felovvship. VVishing them rather to proue the lyke labour, than haughtily to reproue my vvell mea∣ning minde. God long preserue your vvorship in prosperous estate and felicitie. Datum Bracklei. Anno salutis humanae. 1572. Your worshippes humble and faythfull seruaunt, 10. FARINCHEF.
Of Abstinencie, Con∣tinencie, and Temperancie. WHEN Caesar broughte two hundred Talentes vnto Demetrius the Cy∣nicke,Brusonius. li. 1. cap. 9. he smiling, caste it vnto him againe, and saide: if he meaned to try me, he should haue done it with all his Empire. Certain Legates bringing vnto Pho∣tion a great summe of golde, which was sent him from Alexander the great, he demaunded of ye bringers why? bicause (quod they) he demeth thée of al others to be an honest & good man: then (quod he) let me be in déede, and continually be ac∣counted, as he now iudgeth of me, and so contemned and refused the golde. The same Photion likewise refused giftes which were sent him from Philip king of the Macedonians, and whē the Ambassadors persuaded him to take it, thoughe not for his owne vse; yet for his
children: he answered, the same fielde which hath brought me vnto this digni∣tie, shall likewise nourishe them. But if they proue not like me, I will not haue mine expēces to be an occasion to main∣taine their riot. Harpalus fléeing from king Alexander,Brusonius. li. 1 cap. 9. came vnto Athens with great plentie of golde, where, when he had intised many vnto him through his great gifts: be sent also 70. talentes vnto Photion. Who turning him about vnto the brin∣gers, away (quoth he) you naughtie-packes with this geare, and tell Harpa∣lus in my name, yt it shall be to his great gréefe and paine, onlesse he abstaine his handes from corrupting the citie. Diomedon Cizecenus, promised Ar∣taxerxes the great king of Persia, that he woulde corrupte Epaminundas with money, and so béeing well furnished therewith, he repaired to Thebes, where when he hadde corrupted Michitus a yong man, he thoughte likewise to haue dealte with Epaminundas. But he an∣sweared Diomedon, it was néedelesse for thée to bring me this money. For if
the kings pleasure tende to the weale publike, I promisse thée, I will doe it francke and fréely, if not, no worldlye wealthe shall cause me to accorde there∣to. And as for thée Diomedon, bicause not knowing me, thou déemedst me like thy selfe, I forgiue thée, but I charge thée gette thée hence, leaste that when thou canste not preuaile with me, thou cor∣ruptest others. Héereat, when Diome∣don gan to feare that he shuld not escape, Epaminundas willed him not to feare: For I will (quoth he) dismisse thée safe, not only for thy sake, but also for my owne honestie, least some suppose, that whereas I would not take the mony of thée, I should now take it from thée. When Aetolis sawe earthen vessels on Q. Tuberius table, at his retourning home, he sente him plate of siluer, but Tuberius neglecting suche pompe, sente them vnto him againe. The Ambassadors of king Alexander bringing vnto Xenocrites. 50. talentes, (which in those days, & specially amōgst the Atheniens, was coumpted a greate summe of money) Xenocrites broughte
them to supper into the colledge, inter∣taining them homely, and with his ordi∣narie fare. On the morowe, they asked him who shuld receiue the mony?Lib. 1. cap. 9 Bruson. wher∣to he answeared, why, did you not per∣ceiue by yesterdays supper, that we lack no money? At which woordes, when he sawe them sory, he tooke of them thirtie poundes, to the intent they shoulde not thinke that he despised the kings libera∣litie, and so dismissed them. When Alexander hadde taken king Darius wife captiue, albeit shée wer the fairest Quene liuing, yet he neuer med∣led with hir. But shutting hir and hir daughters in the Temples, he suffered them to liue vnséene of any, and woulde say in iest, that the Persian damsels were eyesores. Xenocrates, Plato his scholler, was a man of wonderous continencie: In so∣muche that whereas Phryne a passing faire strumpet, had laide a wager with certain yongmen, that shée would allure him vnto hir pleasure, shée coulde by no whorishe trickes prouoke him there∣to. But when the yongmen required
the wager: shée answered, that hir wa∣ger was laide of a man, and not of an i∣mage. Valentinus the Emperor, at the houre of his death, sayd: that one conquest only reioyced him, and being asked what that was? He answered, that nowe I haue subdued my fleshe, the wickedst & grea∣test enimie that euer I had. S. Ierome telleth of a certaine yong∣man, which by the commaundement of Decius Valerianus, was laide in a plea∣sant garden,Lib. 1. cap. 9 and there brought vnto him a faire faced harlot, who with hir daly∣ing indeuored to prouoke him to sinne: but such was his continencie, that when shée went aboute to kisse him, he bitte of his tong, and spit it in hir face. As Alexander trauailed by the way, and thereby had gotten a great thirst, it happened that one presented vnto him a helmet full of water: who receiuing the helmet in his hande, and beholding his horsemen aboute him, he bowed downe his head, beheld the drinke, and restored the drinke, not tasting thereof, but sayde vnto his chéefe men, if I alone shoulde
drinke, all these would be a thirst. Re∣membring well the Ouidian verse: Est virtus placitis abstinuisse bonis, Great vertue t'is from present pray, mans fansie to refrayne. When Pompei was sicke, and therby had no appetite vnto his meat, his Phi∣sitian commaunded them to dresse him a thrushe: but such either was the time of the yere, or else the scarcitie of things that for money none could be had, only they tolde him that Lucullus had one in his cage, but he would none of him, say∣ing: and can I not liue onlesse I haue Lucullus his wanton toyes? Of accusing and spea∣king euill of others. A Certayne Sophist called Zoilus, in∣dyted many rayling commentaries,Li. 1. cap. 16. which he presented to Ptolomie king of Egypt, hoping to haue had some greate rewarde of the king for his paynes, but when the kyng gaue him nothing, he was so néedie, that he procured some to demaunde the kinges liberalitye,
whereat the king had greate wonder, that Homer so many yeares after his death could féed so many thousand men, and Zoilus, who professed him selfe bet∣ter learned than Homer, shoulde stande in so great néede. And on that occasion caused him to be punyshed for hys la∣bour. Memnon a capitayne of Darius, figh∣ting agaynst Alexander, and hearing one of his souldiers rayling agaynst the king his enimie, stroke him with his speare, and sayde: I kéepe thée to fight agaynst Alexander, and not to rayle on him. When Antigonus his souldiers reui∣led hym, not thynking that he was present, he opening his tente with hys rodde, sayde: go further to rayle on vs, or else it shall be to your payne. But Se∣neca in his third booke of Ire, sayth that he sayde, Stande further sirs, least the king heare you. Also the same king Antigonus hea∣ring his souldiers curse him, bicause that in a darke nighte he had broughte them into suche a mierie place, that they could hardly go out: he came him selfe
(they not knowing him) and holps them euery one out. And now (quoth he) curse Antigonus, which broughte you into the mire, but pray for him which pulled you out. When a certaine drunken gest, had railed on the crueltie of Pesistratus, king of Athens,Cap. 16. and his frends willed ye king to punishe him therefore, he answered that he was no more offended with him therefore, than he woulde be, if a blinde∣folde man shoulde vnawares runne a∣gainst him. Pirrhus the king, hearing that some wt∣oute cause had railed on him,Bruson. he caused the parties accused, to be sent for, de∣maunding them whether they had saide of him, as the reporte wente they did? Wherto one of them answeared, yea O king, and should haue said muche more, had we had more wine to haue prouo∣ked vs thereto. Whereat king Pirrhus laughing, suffred thē to depart in peace. It was tolde Augustus, that Aemilius spake euill of him, who turning him a∣boute vnto the accusers, as thoughe he were in a great chafe, sayd, I would you
could proue it on him, Aemilius shoulde then knowe, that I haue a tong too. For I would say as muche of him. Philip king of Macedome, being rai∣led on by one Nicander, beganne to be∣stowe many giftes on him: after this, Nicander changing his note, began now as faste to praise him. Wherefore Phi∣lip turning him vnto his fréendes, sayde: Loe it lieth in vs to be spoken well, or euill of. Whereas M. Crassus for a light cause woulde chaunge loue into hatred, and wold be both defender and accuser of one man, and in a short time, would dissuade the selfe same lawes, whiche lately he persuaded, he caused many to be trou∣bled thereby. Wherefore Sicimius, who accustomed to cast many things in mens téethe, being asked, why amongst others he only spared Crassus? bicause (quoth he) that Crassus, though he be a shrewde cowe, yet he hath short hornes. Socrates in Plato sayth, that we offend God as often as we dispraise a good mā,Lib. 1. cap. 9 or praise an euill man.
Of Adultrie, Fornica∣tion, and VVhoredome. WHen Vrias was slaine,Brusonius. Lib. 1. cap. 4 and Dauid had taken Bersabe his wife, the thing sorely displeased God, wherfore he sent Nathan the Prophet, to warne him to putte hir away. But Nathan daring not openly to tell the matter to him be∣ing a king,2. Reg. 12 and taken in loue: vsed this insinuation. There were (quoth he) two men in one Citie, the one very riche, ha∣uing of his owne two heards of beastes, and as many flockes of shéepe, the other poore, and had but one only Lamb, which he broughte vp with his children, and it vsed to eate with them. And when a straunger came to this riche manne, he would not slay any of his own flocke for his guestes supper, but tooke this poore mannes Lambe, to entertaine him with∣all. This thing when Dauid greatly misliked, and sayde, that suche a fellowe coulde not be too muche punished, which hauing so many of his owne, woulde so vniustly take the poore mannes Lambe:
Nathan pronounced euen that onely he had committed the like facte. Vrbinia a virgin vestall, being taken in adultrie, was whipped aboute the Ci∣tie with roddes, and afterwardes accor∣ding to the manner, was buryed aliue. And of the Adulterers whiche medled with hir, the one slew him selfe, the other the ouerséers of the Temple, caused to be executed openly in the markette place. But this is not to be forgotten, throughe hir default, in offering sacrifice after shée was thus polluted: Rome was generally plagued, so that wemen with childe, to∣gither wyth their birthe, dyed in tra∣uell. When Tereus had rauished Philome∣la, his wife Prognes sister, and cutte of hir tongue, bicause shée shoulde not dis∣close him, bothe his wife caused hym to eate his owne sonne Itis, and also he was turned into the birde called a Lapwing. Brus. Lib. 1. cap. 4. Lais a famous strumpet of Corinth, for the comlinesse of hir person,Lib. 1. cap. 4 and elegan∣cie of hir beautie, earned muche money, so that richmen resorted vnto hir oute of
all Grece, but shée required great hire, so that this Prouerbe rose on hir. Non cuiuis homini contingit adire Cor∣rinthum. Euery mannes purse can not reache to goe to Corinth. Vnto this harlot came Demosthenes secretely, desiring to be receiued into hir grace, but when shée required ten thou∣sand groates for hir reward: Demosthe∣nes as one astonied with the wanton∣nesse of the womā, and the great summe which shée required, turned from hir, and said, I wil neuer buy repentāce so deare. Cyanippus of Syracuse, for that he did sacrifice to all the gods but Bacchus, was by him stricken with suche a drunken∣nesse, that méeting his owne daughter Cyane in the darke, he defiled hir. But shée, to the intent shée might after know who it was with whome shée had to doe, tooke a ring off his finger, thereby percei∣uing that it was hir owne father. And afterwardes, when the whole Citie was plagued for this so horrible an acte, and the Oracle willed the author héereof to be taken, and sacrificed: whereas none
knewe the author, nor what was the oc∣casion thereof,Lib. 1. cap. 4 Cyane with afflicted con∣science well remembring it, slew hir fa∣ther, and afterwards also slaying hir self cast hir vpon him. Of Auarice or Co∣uetousnesse. A Certaine man dreaming on a time, that he had founde an egge,Bruso. lib. 1. cap. 1. knitte in a corner of his shéete, declared it vnto a Southsayer, who interpreted, that there∣by was meante some hidden treasure, counselling him to digge in the place where he had this dreame. Which being accordingly accomplished, he founde in the same place, golde couered ouer with siluer, of the siluer he sent a little, but of the golde, he sent nor saide any thing. Wherfore the interpreter receiuing it, and alluding vnto the egge, demaunded if it had no yolke? It happened that M. Crassus making expedition to make warre into Parthia, by the way espied Diatarus building a
newe Citie, to whome, bicause he was an Olde manne, he began to say: What meanest thou O King, in the twelfthe houre of the day to beginne thy bulding? Naye (quoth Diatarus,) what meanest thou being an Emperoure, and not ve∣rye younge (mée thincketh) wyth suche expedition to goe vnto Parthia? Héere∣of Tullie in his booke de senectute saythe, I can not deuise, what Couetousnesse in an olde man shoulde meane? For canne there be any thing more foolishe, than the lesse waye a man hathe to goe, the more to care for vittaile, wherewith to passe the way. Semiramis the Assirian Quéene, cau∣sed in hir life time a Sepulcher to bée made, and therein engraued, that what King so euer shoulde want mony, might open the graue stone, and take inoughe. Which inscription Darius king of Persia reading, opened it, but money there he founde none, onlye there was a scrolle wherein it was wrytten: Onlesse thou were a naughtie manne, and vnreasona∣ble Couetous of money, thou wouldest
neuer haue opened the sepulchres of the dead, to haue sought it.Lib. 1. cap. 1 Oraetes a Persian, imagining howe to destroye Polychrates a Persian Lorde,Bruso. lib. 1. cap. 1. with whome he was at strife, remem∣bring him to be very gréedie of money, sent a Legate, to persuade him to take his parte againste Cambises, promising him for his rewarde, great aboundance of golde, and that he shoulde not thincke this promisse vaine, or of none effecte, he willed him, to sende some fréende of hys, to sée the Treasure, whereof he shoulde be partaker. Héerevppon Polychrates sente Maeander his scribe, vnto whome Oraetes shewed eighte chestes filled with stones, and couered ouer wyth golde. With the which golden baite, Polychra∣tes moued, came vnto Oraetes, and so was taken, and crucified to death. Cesellius Bassus borne in Carthage, came vnto Nero, and tolde him that in a fielde of his, he hadde founde a wonde∣rous déepe caue, and therin great store of hidden treasure, whiche he supposed to be of Didoes hiding: Nero straighte-wayes
giuing credite vnto thys tale∣with all expedition sent a many to fetche this treasure. The orators in the meane season greatly commended Nero, saying that he was a Prince moste fortunate, and moste intirely beloued of the Gods, in whose time treasure so long hidden, should nowe be reuealed, wherefore he in hope of this new found treasure, frāk∣ly spent and consumed his substance at home. But in fine, when they wer come vnto the field where this treasure should be, Cesellius brought them frō this place to that place, to séeke the caue, and so when a great companie of moiners wer come togither in vaine, he fained himself to be frēsie, and said that his dreame had neuer deceiued him, vntil nowe. Wher∣fore to auoide the present feare & shame which he was like to sustain,Lib. 1. cap. 1. he willing∣ly slue him selfe, and lefte Nero gaping in vaine for his pray. M. Cato the yonger, at the request of Q Hortentius his frende, gaue him Mar∣cia his wife, but after Hortensius was deade, he tooke hir home to him selfe a∣gaine. Wherefore afterwardes Caesar
and he falling at debate: Caesar by those wordes accused him to be a couetous person. If (quoth he) he had no néede of hir, why did he take hir? if he had, why did he let hir go? but that he was dis∣posed to make marchaundise of hir, let∣ting hir go in hir youth, that he mighte receiue hir agayne when she was riche? At the siege of Prenest, a citie in Jtalie, it hapned that in a great famine a soul∣dier caught a mouse, which he chose ra∣ther to sell for two hundreth pence, than therewith to assuage his hunger. But he was worthily punyshed for his coue∣tousnesse. For he whiche boughte the mouse liued, whereas the couetous sel∣ler dyed of famine. Vaspatian the Emperour was so vn∣reasonable couetous, that he caused ves∣sels to be set in the way, to receyue the vrine of such as passed by, and so selling it to the Dyers, gotte thereby great tri∣bute. Hereof when Titus his sonne re∣proued him, he sayde nothing, vntyll that the rente hereof was brought vnto him, then putting the money vnto hys nose, asked him howe he lyked the smel
therof, wherto when he answered that he liked it well, why (quoth Vaspatian) it commeth of pisse. Also when this Vas∣patian had gotten his empire, a cowherd of his, who had serued him al his youth, now desired him to make him frée, but could not obteyne his suite, wherfore he exclamed this prouerbiall sentence: The Foxe may change his cote,Bruso. li. 1. ca. 1. but neuer will leaue his crafte. Herevpon Seneca in his Prouerbs sayth, that the couetous man doth nothing well, but when he dyeth. Wherefore Marcial in his Epigram of Sceuola, who after his wealth became more couetous, wryteth thus: Si dederint superi decies mihi millia cen∣tum. &c. In Englishe thus: If millions many Gods vvould giue of goodly glittering golde, Should not then Sceuola be estemde, and highly be extolde? Oh then, hovv vvould I liue (quoth he) vvhereat the Gods dyd smile And gaue him his request: but then his ioyes he gan exile.
Then ragged govvne as pelting patche, our Sceuola could vse, VVith patche on patche as loutish lobbe he cobled ofte his shoes. His table then he did neglecte, and course fare pleasde him beste: VVith vvorldly cares he vvas so toste that scarse he toke his reste. Then must I lyue he often sayde, or else the Gods me take: And so vvith vvelth gan cares increase, and him more carefull make. The sayd Vaspatian demanding what the funerall pompe of a certayne noble man stoode in, and being told. 300. poūds, he cryed out, giue me so muche, and cast me into Tiber. Midas king of Phrigia was so desirous of golde,Lib. 1. ca. eo∣dem. yt he made his petition vnto the gods, ye whatsoeuer he touched might be turned into gold: wherin obteyning his request, all things which were ordeined for him to eate, béeing turned into gold, he miserably dyed for hunger. Iosephus in hys sixte Booke of the warre of the Iewes, sheweth that there were some of the Iewes founde,
who had deuoured golde. Wherefore as many of them as came into the handes of the Assirians, had their bellies ripped. So that in one night there were. 20000. opened, in hope to finde golde in their bellies, and had all so bene destroyed, had not Titus set foorth a sharpe edicte to the contrarie. At the destruction of Salomons tem∣ple at Ierusalem, when the Romanes were ascended on the temple, the Iewes setting it on fire, destroyed many of thē, amongest whom there was one Agori∣us, who with a loude voyce cryed vnto Lucius his fellow souldier and chamber fellow, that if be woulde helpe him out, he woulde make him inheritour of hys patrimonie. Wherefore Lucius in hope of the promysed rewarde, ranne vnto him, and taking him on his backe, with the weight of him was throwen down, and with the falling downe of stones, was presently destroyed. Oclius the sonne of Artaxerses, king of Persia, was so vnsaciable couetous, that whereas the Persian Princes were ac∣customed as often as they went, to giue
to euery womā a pece of gold: bicause he woulde giue none he neuer came there. Yea for couetousnesse of a small thing, he banished him selfe his countrey. Alexander the great hearing Anaxar∣chus disputing of infinite worlds,Lib. 1. ca. 1. began bitterly to wéepe, and béeing demaun∣ded the cause thereof: he answered, haue I not good cause to wéep, when as there be many worldes, and I haue yet scarse conquered one? Of Audacitie and boldnesse. A Gesilaus béeing warned of his soul∣diers,Bruso. li. 1. cap. 6. not to fight agaynst the The∣banes, bicause that their power was greater than his: answered them, that he which will rule and reigne ouer ma∣ny, muste not be afrayde to fighte with many. Fabius Max. telling Scipio (who made all expedition to wage warre into Afri∣ca) that nature teacheth all men first to defende his owne realme, before he goe to conquere others, and that he shoulde
first be sure of peace in Italie, before he made warre into Afrike. Scipio answe∣red, that it was a greater token of cou∣rage to make warre, than to defende it. At Hannibals comming to Capua,Lib. 1. cap. 6. Pe∣rolla, Calanius his sonne, coulde neither by the cōmaundement of his father, nor at the instance of Hanniball be induced to come to the banquet where Hanniball was: but watching his father as he came frō supper, & was going into a garden, he folowed him, & said: I can tell you father a deuise, which shal not only get me par∣don of my offence towards you, but also bring me vnto great dignitie & fauour a∣mongst the Romans for euer. Whē his father demanded what deuise ye was, he cast of his goune, and shewed his sword, which was girt to his side, saying, now I wil cōfirme ye Roman leage wt Hanibals bloud, & so his father could hardly kéepe him from running Haniball through. Cneus Piso accused Manlius Crispus,Idem. who although he were giltie in the thing wherof he was accused: yet for Pōpei his sake, who fauored hī, he was deliuered. Wherfore Piso laid al ye fault on Pōpei.
Wherefore Pōpei asked why he did not accuse him thē? Assure me (quod Piso) that thou wilt not make ciuil war if yu be pro∣voked therto, & then I will aske counsell whether thou or Piso shuld lose his head. When Alexander Phereus, (who tooke part wt the Atheniās, against ye Thebans) promised the Athenians that he woulde bring to passe, yt they should haue asmuche flesh for a farthing, as they were wont to pay a pound for. Epaminundas hearing it, said, but we Thebans wil be more liberal than so, for we will giue you wood inough to séeth your flesh for nothing: for we wil destroy your woods franke and fréely. Of Banquetting. PHilippe king of Macedonie, béeing on a time inuited to supper, brought many gests wt him, wherat seeing his host trou∣bled, fearing belike that there woulde not be meat inough, he deuised this mery iest: He sente one to euery of his friends, wil∣ling them to kéepe a place for the iunkets which should come after. And so they ga∣ping for after dishes, left the meat on the table vntouched.
When Socrates had bydden many rich men to supper,Lib. eodem. and his wife Zantip∣pa was ashamed, for that they had no better prouision to intertayne thē with∣all: he bad hir be of good comfort: For (sayth he) if they be modest, they wyll nothing be offended with a sparing ta∣ble, but if they be giuen to riot and ex∣cesse, I care not for them. Xenophon in his booke de repub. she∣weth,Bruso. vt supra. that at feastes yong men oughte not muche to talke, but onely to answer to suche questions as are demaunded them. Licurgus made a law amongst the Lacedemonians, that at banquets should be recited al the noble affayres that any man had done in the citie. And Plato sayth, that guestes ought not to talke of any weightie matters: but as their talke ought to be honest and chaste, so should it likewise be mery and pleasaunt. Heliogobalus sometime Emperour of Rome, was so excessiue in banquet∣ting, that he was neuer two dayes ser∣ued with one kinde of meate, sometyme his company was serued at meale with the braynes of Ostriges and straunge
soule called Phenocapterie, an other day with the tōg of popiniays, & other swete singing birds. Being nigh ye sea, he neuer vsed fishe in places far distante from the sea, al his houshold were serued wt most delicate fish, at one supper he was serued with 7000. fishes, & 5000. foules. Who being foretolde of his sorcerers that he should dye a violent death, he prouided ropes of silke to hang him selfe, swordes of golde to kill him selfe, and straunge poyson in Iacinas & Emeraudes to poy∣son him self, if néedes he must be forced.Libro & ca∣eodem Moreouer he made an high toure, hauing ye floore of bords couered with gold plate, & bordred with precious stones, frō the which toure he would throwe himself, if he should be pursued of his enimies: but for al this he was slaine of his souldiers, and caste into Tiber. Ex Eutropio. Of bestowing and thāk∣full receiuing of benefites. THoas in his youth brought vp a yong Dragon, which waring great,Bruson. he sea∣ring his serpentine nature, brought him
into the wood, & there left him. It hapned afterwards, that in the same wood Thoas was beset with théeues, whose voyce the dragon remembring, came and rescued him from them. Philarchus telleth of a man of Egipt, who brought vp an adder, which after∣wards bringing forth yōg, one of thē slue the son of him who had fostred thē. But when the old adder perceiued it, she slue hir yong one, and afterwards woulde neuer more come there. Also it is reported, that at Sestos a city in the sea coast of Thracia, there was a mayd which brought vp an Egle, who to requite hir gentlenesse, would first kill hir birdes, & afterwards flie abrode, and bring home great pray vnto hir: moreo∣uer when the maiden died, the egle also cast hir self into ye fire, wherin according to the maner, the maiden was burned, & so in hir life requited hir, at hir death died with hir. Simonides finding a dead mā, whō he knew not,Lib. ca. 27. lying vnburied on the groūd, tooke the paines to take him vp, & burie him Wherfore when as he minded the
nexte day to take shipping, he was war∣ned as he thought, by ye dead man in hys sléepe not to do so, for yt the ship wherein he would sayle, should make shipwrack, & so it came to passe. And Simonides by this means tarying at home, was saued, wheras ye rest, with whō he should haue taken his iourney were drowned. Aristomenes after ye Lacedemomās wer cōquered,Lib. eodem. brought frō thence. xv. virgins captiue, whō when his cōpaniōs would haue defiled by the way, he defended thē, and in their defence slue some of the cō∣pany. Wherfore afterwards when the virgins were raunsomed of their kins∣folks, Aristomenes was accused of mur∣ther, but ye virgins would neuer returne vnto their cūtry, vntil ye by knéeling and weping at the iudges fete, they had deli∣uered Aristomenes their defender. When L. Cinna had conspired against Augustus Caesar, and Caesar had therfore determined to be reuenged on him, the empresse Liuia desired him to absteine from taking vengeaunce: persuading hym rather by gentlenesse to bynde him vnto him. Wherefore Caesar
called Cynna vnto him, vnto whom de∣claring the trespasse committed, he desi∣red, that like as he would forget and for∣giue it: so Cynna woulde from thence∣foorth leaue off suche conspiring deuises, and ioyne with him in peace and vni∣fie, and besides that (which Cynna lyt∣tle looked for) he bestowed on hym the Consulshippe, and after that founde hym moste faythfull and friendly in all things. Diogines béeing demaunded why he was called Cynicus,Cap. eodem. that is a dogge, bycause (quoth he) I vse to fawne on suche as giue me any thing, barke at suche as giue me nothing, and bite them which are nought. Of brethren, and sisters. ARthemenes and Xerxes, two of king Darius his sons,Bruson. li. 2. cap. 39. after their fathers death contended for their fathers king∣dome, Arthemenes alleaging for himself his birthright, bicause he was eldest, and Xerxes stucke to the felicitie of the time, wherein he was borne (for Darius was
a king at his birth, wheras he was but a priuat person at the birth of his brother. The determination hereof was cōmit∣ted to Anafernes their vnele, who vnder∣standing both their cases, gaue sentence with Xerxes. But neither was Xerxes hereof glad, nor Arthemenes any whyt gréeued, but euē in the very time of their contention, they gratifled ech other with presents, and oftentinies kept banquet∣ting and good chéere togither. Lucius Lucullus did beare his brother such good wil, ye albeit he were the elder, yet he wold beare no office vntil his bro∣ther came to age: wherby he so pleased the people, that euen in his absence, his brother and he were made Odiles. When Cato had founde his brother Caepio dead, he made wonderful lamen∣tatiō & mourning for him. And after that he had with wonderful great charges fi∣nished his burial, he erected him a sepul∣chre of nutte or mazer. Further at his returning to Jtalie, he determined to car∣rie his brothers ashes with him, & when his friends persuaded him to put these reliques in some other shippe, and not to
beare them with him, for feare of drow∣ning both his ship & himselfe.Lib. 2. ca. 36. He answe∣red, that he would rather depart frō his life, than from it. And so he sayled, not without great daunger of lesing his life, wheras the residue arriued safe. When Itafernes we al his family were takē captiue of Darius, and cast into pri∣son, his wife came euery day to his gate, making so pitiful cōplaintes, that in fine the moued him to mercy. Insomuch that he sent one vnto hir, who willed hir in the kings name, to chose the deliuerie of one captiue whom she would, wherfore she amōgst the rest desired that hir bro∣ther might be deliuered. The king won∣dering that she did thus prefer hir bro∣ther before hir husband and children: she answered him, an other husband, & other children if it please God I may haue, but an other brother (now my parents be dead) I shall neuer haue. Of Children. SEruilius Geminus supping with Luci∣us Manlius (who was counted the best paynter in Rome) séeing his childrenBruson. li. 2. capi. 34.
harde fauoured, he saide vnto him, I sée Manlius thou canst not make a childe so wel as thou canst paint him. No (quoth Manlius manerly answering) for I paint them in the lighte, but I make them in the darke. Cyriades the first of the. 30. Roman ti∣rāts, for yt Cyriades his father was iust∣ly displeased we him, toke a great pece of money, and fled vnto Persia, where ioy∣ning with Sapores, he made war against Rome, and killed his owne father, but after wardes was by his owne crafte slaine him selfe. Absalon king Dauids sonne,Lib. & cap. vt supra. desiring his fathers kingdome, and therfore ma∣king war agaynst him, was, as he fled, hanged by the haire on a bushe, and so flayne; whose death his moste godly fa∣ther bewayled with many teares. Ariaster Triganis sonne, hearing that Pompe was inuading his fathers king∣dom, fled to aid hym agaynst his father: wherof Triganis hearing came & hūbly submitted himself at Pompeis féete, who curteously receyued him, and placed him on the right hand, and his sonne Ariaster
on his left hand, deuiding the kingdome betwéene them. But Ariaster béeing of∣fended herewith, when as Pōpei sent for him to to supper, he wold not come, sen∣ding him this manacing answer, ye he had no néed of him, but wold ioine with some other Roman, who shold better estéeme him. With which words he so offended Pompei, that he caste him in prison, and kept him for a spectacle at the triumph. Herodes father to Parcorus, hearing of of the death of Parcorus his sonne, & the discōfiture of his host, was so greued that he fel mad for sorrowe, but after he had bene a great while in this care, at laste comming to himselfe, he was so greatly trobled, whō of his 30. sons which he had begottē of his cōcubines, he might make king: for euery of these cōcubines desired ye regimēt of ye kingdome for their sonne: but in fine he determined to prefer Phra¦hates therto, who immediatly killed his father, destroied his brethren, & whē his owne son came to age, put him to death. It was by an oracle declared vnto Al∣tamenes,Lib. 2. ca. 34. ye he should be the death of his father Cartareus, king of Crete, nowe
called Candie, which destinie he desirous to eschue, departed and dwelt at Camiros in Rhodes. But after a season, his father desirous to sée him, departed from Can∣die, and by night ariued at Camiros. But his men, and the inhabitantes falling at debate, Altamenes comming amongste them vnawares, siue his father. Which thing when he vnderstoode, being asha∣med to looke any man in the face, he de∣parted into the wildernesse, and there di∣ed for sorowe. Spartianus wryting of the life of Seue∣rus, saythe, that there was almoste no good, or noble man, which left any sonne good or profitable for the cōmon wealth, but either they died withoute issue, or lefte suche, as it had bene good if they ne∣uer had bene borne. And to begin with Romulus, he lefte no childe, Numa Pom∣pilius none to doe the common wealthe good. What did Camillus? lefte he any childe like himselfe? What did Scipio, or the Catoes, who were noble men? And what should I speake of Homer, Demo∣sthenes, Virgill, Crispus, Terence, Plautus or the rest? Or what of Caesar or Cicero?
Who aboue all others had bene happie, if he had died without issue. And finally, who had bene more happie than Marcus Aurelius, if he hadde not lefte his sonne Comodus, to succéede him in the Em∣pire?Libro & ca. supradicto. or who more fortunate than Seue∣rus Septimius, if Bassianus had neuer bene begotten? Reade more in the title of edu∣cation. Of Concord and vnitie. VVHen Pisistratus, king of the Athe∣niens, giuing his children good coū∣sell,Bruson. Lib. 2. cap. 4. coulde not be heard of them, he was iustly displeased with them for it. Which thing his enimies perceiuing, were very glad, hoping that by this discorde in his house, some alteration woulde followe. Wherof, when the king had intelligēce, he assembled the Citie before him, tel∣ling them, that bicause his sonnes would not obey his fatherly pleasure, he was of∣fended with them, but yet now it séemed good to his fatherly pitie, that remitting their disobedience, to forgiue them, and
consent vnto them. Wherefore willed it to be published in the Citie, that the king and his sonnes were nowe at one. Demetrius, a very louing and obedi∣ent sonne to Antigonus his father, chaun∣cing to come from hunting, whilest cer∣taine Embassadoures were doing theyr legacie vnto him, in theyr presence en∣tred all armed as he was, and kissed his Father. Wherefore, when the Embas∣sadoures shoulde departe, Antigonus sayde vnto them: Remember sirs to de∣clare the loue and hartie affection which you haue séene betwéene my sonne and me. Héereby declaring, that agréement betwéene the father and the sonne, is the greatest token of a Princes power that may be. Licurgus, vnto the Citizens, whiche wrote to knowe howe they mighte best resist theyr ennimies force: Answered, if you shalbe content to liue poore as you are, and abstaine from mutuall dissenti∣on and discorde. That Concorde, is a thing very plea∣sante before God,Lib. 2. Ca. 4 Homer in his Fades declareth. Where hee felleth, howe
Mars the God of warre, came vnto Iupi∣ter to complaine of Diomedes, who had wounded him, but Iupiter with sterne countenaunce, answered, I woulde thou knewest that of all ye celestiall cōpanie, yu art one that I worst can away withal, whose only delite is in brauling, figh∣ting, and making of warre. In Salust, Mycippa at his death, war∣ned his sonnes to agrée amongste them∣selues, saying: by Concorde and vnitie, smal things are increased & made great, but by discorde, the greatest things that euer were, will be decayed and brought to naughte. Of the Court and Courtyers life. CAlisthenes the Philosopher,Bruson. Liber. 1.5. going to dwel with king Alexander, was war∣ned of Aristotle, either seldome to speake vnto him, or else to frame his speache pleasant and merie. But he reprouing the king, for taking pleasure to be salu∣ted of the Persians, and indeuoring to in∣duce him in the Macedonian customes:
was cast in prison, & there as some say, he died of the gout, others say he was cru∣cified, which Trogus denyeth, saying, he had his handes and his eares cut off, also his nose, and his lippes deformed, and so was made a spectacle for men to behold. Praexaspes,Liber & ca. infradict. one of Cambyses his se∣crete counsell, being asked what the peo∣ple saide of him, he answered, that all men praised him greatly, but that they saye he was toomuche giuen to Wine. Wherewith Cambyses being angrie, sayde, thou shalte perceiue whether the Persian people be deceiued, or no. For if I strike not thy sonne, which standeth in thy entrie, in the middest of the hearte, with this my shafte, then is the reporte true, whiche the Persians speake of me, but if I strike him, then doe the Persians belie my sobrietie: and at this woorde he drew his bowe, and strooke the childe full in the heart, and thereat laughing, he sayd, nowe maist thou sée Praexaspes, that not I, but the Persian people are beside themselues, and I pray thee tell me, if e∣uer thou sawest any aime righter: wher∣at Praexaspes searing leaste he shoulde
haue bene slaine himselfe, said: Nay sure∣ly, I thincke euen God himselfe coulde not haue shotten righter. When Agrippa the king, had bestow∣ed a Bishopricke vpon Mathias Ionas his brother, one Sylas his chéefe ruler, which neuer had failed him in his affaires, en∣uying the preferment of Mathias, began continually to cast his good seruice in the kings téethe, requiring that he also might be rewarded for his diligence, but there∣by he so displeased the king, that he tooke from him his former dignitie, and caste him into prison. Alexander Seuerus the Emperoure,Idem libro, & cap. eod. hearing that Veronius Turinus made the people beléeue, that he was in greate au∣thoritie with the Emperoure, and there∣by gotte greate bribes: He caused one to sue to himself openly, for a certaine sute, but willed him to go secretly to Turinus, to request his fauoure, which being ac∣cordingly accomplished, Turinus promi∣sed his furtherance héerein, and shortly after, tolde him that he had greatly la∣boured vnto the king in his case, where∣as in déede he had sayde neuer a woorde.
The matter thus suspending, he was a∣gaine called for, where his Aduocate Tu∣rinus likewise appeared, who hearing the case, begā to becken, but said nothing, yet in fine he obtaining his sute, Turinus re∣quired a great rewarde for his laboure, which he receiuing, & being accused here∣of vnto the Emperoure, was bounde to a stake, in the markette place, and stifeled with smoke. The crier standing by, and cried: smoke he solde, and with smoke he is punished. Lampridius in ye lyfe of Seuerus, which he wrote vnto Constantine, saythe, your godlinesse knoweth what you redde in Marius Maximus, howe that the common wealthe is in better case, and more in safetie, where the Prince is euill, and his frendes be good, than that common wealthe, where the Prince is good, and hathe euill fréendes. For one, be he ne∣uer so hadde, may be amended by many good, wheras a multitude euil, can neuer be amēded by one, though he be neuer so good. And he saith further, that Courtiers oughte to be holy, worshipfull, agréeing
they were séeking, and he couering this theft, bitte, and tore his side pitifully. All which pain he constantly abode, vntil the séekers were gone, whereof when one of his companions mocked him, saying, that he had bene better to haue deliuered the Fore, than so to be bitten to death: he an∣swered, no, but it is better to die wt pain, than to be apprehended with theft. Aristides hauing married one of his daughters to Dionisius the yonger,Lib. 2. cap. 1. and after repenting that he had so done, said: that he hadde rather wishe his daughter shortly to die, than long to continue with suche a husbande: wherof Dionisius hea∣ring, commaunded that he should imme∣diatly he put to death, but first he demaū∣ded of him, whether nowe he thought his daughter any better bestowed, thā of late he professed: No (quoth Aristides) I repēt me greatly of that I haue done, but no∣thing at all of that I sayde. When Decius Brutus making warre into Spaine, had subdued all Luscitania, only one Citie, called Cynania excepted, which stoutly tooke armor againste him: he sent Embassadors vnto them, to trie
whether they wold giue any money to be at peare. But they answered the Ambas∣sadors, that their ancestors had left them swordes to defend their country, but nei∣ther siluer nor golde to redéeme it of so couetous a captaine. Agis a man of Sparta, being by Leoni∣da cast into a prison called Dechas, wher the prisonners were strangled to death: séeing the hangman wéepe, and stagger in doing on the rope, fréende (quoth he) wéepe not for me. For I dying thus vn∣justly, and contrary to the lawe, am in better case, than they which condemned me héereto. And at this woorde, he helde downe his head, whilest the executor tied the knot to strangle him. Pomponius a Romane captaine,Capite vt supra. after many woundes, was taken captiue of Methridates, who asked him, whether he woulde héereafter become his fréende, if he caused him to be healed: to whome he answered, if thou wilte be a fréende unto the Romanes, I will be thy fréende,  not, I will surely be thy ennimie. When Socrates was appointed to die,
he séemed as thoughe he cared not for his life,Brusonius. Lib. 2. cap. 1. wherefore Hermogenes his familiar fréende, sayde vnto him, O Socrates, it were good, that you had some respect vn∣to your owne safegarde: why doe not I séeke my safegarde fréende Hermogenes (quoth he) whilest I bethincke me of my life passed? An other called Appollodo∣rus, who also loued him intirely, sayde, D fréende Socrates, I am very sory to sée thée thus vniustly condemned. Why Ap∣polodorus (quoth he) haddest thou rather sée me iustly condemned, than vniustly? and so fell a laughing. After that Pompei was conquered by Caesar, Cato the yonger, fearing least he shoulde come into the handes of Caesar, first reading Plato his booke de anima, of the immortalitie of the soule, caste him selfe on his swearde, but when his hou∣sholde ranne aboute him, and his sonne with a Phisitian, came and bound vp his woundes, he inwardly blamed him selfe, for not making the wound déepe inough, then thancking the Phisitian for sauing his life, he sayde that he woulde a while take his rest, and so the companie suppo∣sing
that he woulde haue slept, departed, when as he renting the wounde wider, tore out his guttes, and died. This Cato, in his childhood comming to Sylla his house, and séeing many noble mennes heades broughte thither: asked Sarpedon his maister, why no man slue Sylla? Who answered, bicause they feare him more than they hate him. Why thē (quoth Cato) diddest not thou giue me a sweard, that I might haue deliuered my country of so cruel a tirant? When the sayde Sylla had fully obtai∣ned the regiment of the commō wealth, and none durste gainesay him in oughte he tooke in hande: he desired the Senate to giue sentence, and pronounce Marius an ennimie to the common wealthe. Whereto only Sceuola would in no wise consent. But when Sylla began cruelly to threaten him, Scenola answered: albeit thou wouldest straightwayes shewe me thy hande of souldiers where with thou didst assault this court, yet couldest thou neuer, for shedding this little olde bloude of mine, cause me to call him an enimie, who so manfully hathe saued this Citie,
and all Italie by his prowesse. When Aristides, who for his vertue, of the Atheniens was surnamed Iustus,Lib. 2. cap. 2. was leading towards execution: all that met him, call downe their eyes, and la∣mented, that not only an vpright and iust man, but euen Iustice hir self (as it wer) should so be dealt with all: Only one spit in his face as he came by. Wherewith Aristides nothing moued, in smiling sorte desired the magistrate to take him away, that he might no more so frowardly trou∣ble them. Of Crafte or subteltie. ALexander king of Macedonie, mea∣ning to destroy Lapsacus,Brusonius. Lib. 2. cap. 3. the Citie wherein Anaximenes his maister dwel∣led, prepared with all his mighte to ac∣complishe his pretended purpose. But it happened, as he came nighe the Citie, he espied Anaximenes his master within the walles, wherefore, knowing yt he would dissuade him from his purpose, thincking to preuent him, he made an othe, that he
woulde not graunte Anaximenes hys fuse. Héereof Anaximenes (as it shoulde seeme) hauing some priuie intelligence, came vnto him, and desired that he wold destroye Lapsacus. And so Alexander, who hadde sworne to denie his request, to saue his othe, was forced to spare the Citie, which he so faine woulde haue de∣stroyed. On a time two straungers deliuered a certaine summe of money to a woman to kéepe, on that condition that shée should deliuer to neither of them their portion, vntill they bothe came together to fetche it. But shortly after, one of them faining that his fellowe was dead, came and had bothe theyr portions deliuered him. It happened not long after, that the other whome the woman supposed to haue ben dead, came and required his part. Wher∣fore the woman not hauing wherewith to paye him, and not knowing howe to doe, meante to hang hir selfe oute of the way. But Demosthenes deliuered hir of hir greate sorrowe and care, wil∣ling hir, that when he came againe, she shoulde bidde him bring hys fellowe,
according to his former promisse, and he should haue his money. Semiramis Quéene of the Assirians, making warre into India, that shée might make them afeard with the sight of Ele∣phantes, whiche they supposed to be no where but in Jndia, caused Oxehides to be sowen in the likenesse of Elephants, and to be stuffed with hay, hauing eche of them within it, a Camell & an armed Knighte sitting on his backe. Trimellius a citizen of Rome, remouing and abiding with his whole familie in ye countrey, one of his seruauntes finding a sowe of his neighbors abrode, killed hir, and broughte hir home. Whose carkesse being dressed, Trimellius layd vnder the blākets, wherin his wife lay. And when his neighboure made inquisition & search for the sow, he swore that he had but one, and shée laye vnder his blankettes. And therwith bringing them into the chāber, he shewed the bed where this wife laye. And so with this iest, deceiued his neigh∣bor, and caused his wife for euer after∣wardes, to be called Trimellius sowe. When Photion coulde by no meanes
kéepe the Atheniens from making an vnprofitable warre wyth the Boetians, he commaunded that all men from the age of seuentéene to seuentie, shoulds within fiue days after come before hym in complet harnis. Whereat they sto∣making the mater, that aged men shuld be brought to that poynt: he aunswered them, what wrong shall I do you when I my selfe which am fourescore yeares olde shall be present with you? And by that meanes quited them from prosecu∣ting their pretended war. After that the Magarenses, and the A∣theniens, had a long while made war for the Ile of Salamis, almoste vnto the vt∣ter decay of them bothe: it was in fine concluded by the Atheniens, that who so made any law of rechalenging the sayd Iland, should loose his life for it. Wher∣fore Solon being verie carefull in thys case what to doe, knowing that by hol∣ding his peace he should do the common wealth no good, and on the other syde by counselling them thereto, he shoulde be in danger of his life: he sayned him∣selfe to be madde, and like a madde man
ranne about the stréetes, and so causing a great assembly of people to come about him, he persuaded them with such verses as he neuer before vsed, and so preuailed therein, that with all expedition, they prepared them selues to renue the war agaynst the Megarenses. In the tyme of the war betwene the Lacedemonians and the Athenians,Cap. 3. the Lacedemonians hauing the better, to the intente to bring Pericles the Athe∣nian Capitayne in suspition: lefte all his landes vntouched, which thing he foretolde the Athenians, and to auoyde the enuic which they thoughte hereby to cause him incurre: he gaue all those his landes to the vse of the common wealth. When Medea would be reuenged of Pelias,Vtinfra. she promised to make him yong agayne, and the better to persuade hym therto, in his presence she transformed hir selfe from an olde woman, vnto youthly yeres agayne. Wherefore he commaunded his daughters to do what soeuer shée shoulde commaunde them. Wherevppon when he was a sléepe,
she commaunded them to take him and teare hym in péeces, and afterwardes to put him in a cauldron, that she might by that meanes restore hym to hys youth. And so was she reuenged, and he stayne by his owne daughters, and through his owne commaundement. Of Crueltie and Immanitie. TVllius Cicero wyth his owne han∣des wrote a Decrée agaynst An∣thonius,Bruso. li. 1. ca. 9. the which he lykewyse pro∣nounced agaynst hym in the common place. But Anthonius reuenged hym, causing hys heade and his handes to bée cutte off, and fastened in the same place. And (as Dion wryteth) Ful∣uia Anthonies wyfe, holding hys heade in hir lappe, wyth moste opprobrious wordes rayled and cursed it, spitting on it, and opening his mouthe, pulled out his tongue, whiche she all bepricked with pinnes. When Vitellius vnderstoode that Otho his enimie was slaine in the fielde
Bebryacus, and comming thither, sawe the dead carkasse lying on the grounde, whereas others abhorred the stenche of it,Bruso. li. 1. ca. 9. he with a detestable voyce cryed out, that the dead corpse of his enimie, espe∣cially béeing a citizen, had a swéete sa∣uour in his nose. But afterwardes he him selfe hauing his handes bounde be∣hinde him, a halter aboute his necke, and his haire cutte of like a condemned person, was for a mocking stocke so dra∣wen alongst all the way to the temple. And finally, béeing set vpon the Gemo∣niā ladders, had his head hacked of with little strokes, and thence was tumbled downe into Tyber. After that the Tribunes had slayne Apuleius, the Senate and the people of Rome consented that Metellus shoulde be reuoked from banyshement: where∣to Publius Furius then béeing Tribune, woulde in no wyse consente, no not though his sonne with teares desired it on hys knées. Which sonne of Metellus was surnamed for thys Pius Pityfull. The nexte yere Caius Cornelius succe∣ding Furius in the Tribuneshippe, for
this caused him to be called to accounte, but so had his harde and cruell harte in∣censed the people agaynst him, that they not abiding his answer, rēt him in peces. Suche was the wretched crueltie of Domitius Nero, that he commaunded Ruffinus his sonne in lawe to be caste in the sea, also he put to death his owne si∣ster, béeing great with childe, and hys master Seneca, Lucane, and diuers o∣thers, aswell learned men, as also his tutors and friends, he rewarded wyth like curtesie. Finallie, when he had at∣tempted diuers diuelishe deuises to de∣stroy his mother, and yet she was by Gods prouidence preserued, in fine pre∣tending great amitie, he sent for hir to a banquet, where with great ioy he re∣ceyued and interteined hir, & at parting kissed ye brests, which he more vnnatu∣ral than any Tigre had sucked, secretly cōmaunding the shipmaster, that béeing on the sea, he shuld make as though per∣force he were driuen against hir ship, & so bursting the ship, to drowne hir: which being as wickedly accomplished, she ne∣uerthelesse swam out & escaped. Wherof
(as ioyfull tidings) when one Ligarinus brought him word, he cōmanded him to be put to death, and with him his owne mother. This Nero cōmanded Rome to be set on fire in twelue places,Fox. & so conti∣nued it sixe dayes, and seuen nightes in burning, while that he, to sée the exam∣ple howe Troy burned, sitting in his towre Mecaenas, song Homers verses. But in the ende he was fayne to kil him self for fear, cōplayning ye he had neither friend nor foe left ye would do it for him. Also C. Caesar Caligula was so cru∣ell, that in dedicating a bridge which he had made, conteyning in lengthe thrée myles, and sixe hundred passes: he cal∣ling a number of people vnto him, cau∣sed them all to be throwen downe, and drowned in the sea, he wyshed that all the people of Rome had but one necke, to the intent he mighte destroy suche a multitude. But God sent so shrewde a cowe short hornes. For he was cut of by Cheraea, Sabinus, & others, which conspi∣red against him. After whose death there was soūd in his closet two libels, wherin was cōteined ye names of those senators
and noble men, that he meant to put to death, ther was also foūd a coffer,Fox. wher∣in diuers kinds of poyson were kepte to destroy a multitude of people, which poysons afterwards being throwen into the sea, destroied a great number of fish. When Herode had put to death al his sons, & at length falling into a gret & gre∣uous disease, insomuch ye worms did eat him aliue, dispayring ye he should neuer recouer, he caused all the noble men of Iewry to be imprisoned, thē calling his sister Salome & Alexander hir husbande vnto him, he said vnto them: I know the Iewes wil be right ioyful, & make great feasts at my death, wherfore take these whom I haue in holde, and put them to death, that once in my life I may cause all Iewry to lament and mourne. Whē king Darius made war agaynst the Scithians, & had taken the sonnes of Orobertus a noble man: he desired the king to leaue him one of his thrée sonnes to comfort him in his age. Which thing Darius promised to do, and more than that to. And so cruelly killing them, he bad him take them all thrée.
Cneius Piso made an Edict, that if a∣ny of his souldiours returned out of the field wtout his cōpanie, he should dye for it aswel as if he had slaine him, him self. It hapned that one so returning desired his leaue to goe séeke his mate,Lib. 2. cap. 9. whiche thing Piso would not graunt, but com∣maunded a Captain to sée him executed, which when he prepared to accomplish, he sawe the man whiche was missing comming towards them, wherefore he commaunded the hanchman to stay the sworde, and so brought them both vnto Piso: but he in a furie commaunded thē all thrée to be put to deathe, the one by∣cause he was alreadie condemned, the other bycause he was the cause of his condemnation, and the Captain for not executing his precept. Of deceyte and guile. ROsimund the wife of Alboinis king of Longobardia,Bruso. li. 2. through ye persuasiō of one Helmelchides, who promised hir mariage, made awaye Albonis hir hus∣bande. After whose death the adulterer
and she béeing chased from Longobardia, fled to Rauenna, where she was honou∣rably interteyned of Longinus the king, who also béeing taken with hir beautie, desired that she would make away Hel∣melchides, and marry him, promising hir by this meanes to restore hir to the kingdome of Longobardia. Wherevpon as Helmechides on a tyme came out of the bathe, she making him beléeue that she had made him a drinke to recouer his strengthe, caused hym to drinke poyson, whiche thing when he percey∣ued, he compelled hir to drinke the rest, and so in one day, and wyth one kinde of death, the worlde was deliuered of two adulterers. Datames was a man of singular craft,Capi. 19. and very subtyll and circumspecte in all his dealinges, so that when it was tolde him, that there were some which lay in wayse to kyll him, he caused one to doo on hys attire, and to goe to the place where the ambushement was, who béeyng supposed to haue béene Datames him selfe, was beset, but Da∣tames with greater power rescued him,
and subdued his foes. After this one Mi∣thridates pretending friendship, desired to speake with him in a secrete place, where he before had hidde his weapon. When the tyme was come that they should méete, Datemes caused him, and he Datemes to be searched, and when no weapon coulde be founde aboute them, they came togither to talke, and after long debating, they departed eche man his way:Capi. 19. but Mithridates comming to the place where his weapon lay, ma∣king as thoughe he paused, tooke vp his weapon, and hid it vnder his clothes, thē calling againe after Datemes, as though he had somewhat more to say vnto him, came to him and flue him. Whē Xerxes for his feblenesse began to be contēned of his subiects,Bruson. Artabanus his chief ruler hoping to aspire vnto the kingdome, came with his. vij. sturdy sons vnto the palace, where first he secretly made away his lord Xerxes, then ye soner to attaine his hoped pray, he set discorde betwéene the two yong princes, persua∣ding Artaxerses that Darius his brother had killed his father Xerxes. Where∣vppon
Artaxerses caused Darius to be kylled in his bedde. But as GOD woulde haue it, Artabanus not kée∣ping his owne counsayle, opened hys trayterous stomacke to Bacabassus hys companion, who disclosing it to Artax∣erses the Prince, he faygning as though he woulde sée a viewe of his men, com∣maunded them all agaynst the next day to be before him in complete armoure. Wherein they accomplished his com∣maundement, & he according to promise came to take a view of them, and espy∣ing Artabanus amongst the rest, making as thogh his cote of maile were to short, he willed Artabanus to chaunge wyth him. And so Artabanus vnarming him, Artaxerses thrust him through, verefy∣ing the Psalm, Foueam féecit, ac incidit in eam, he pretended the destruction of an other, and was him selfe destroyed. After that Ptolome king of Ceraunia had subdued Antigonus,Lib. 2. ca. 9. made war with Antiochus & Pirrhus, and had now gotten ye regimēt of al Macedonia into his own hands: he assaied also to deceiue his own sister, & to bereue frō hir hir two sonnes,
and hir citie Cassandra.Bruso. And that he might the better accomplish his malici∣ous intēt, he desired to mary hir. Herein albeit she suspected his wicked purpose, yet fearing his cruel nature to take ven∣geāce on hir, she denied him not, but sent one Dion to reasō with him in hir cause. To whō he sware & made many solemne protestations & vowes, that he sincerely sought the mariage of Arsinoe his sister. Herevpon she hoping that his meaning had bene as simple as his speaking, con∣sented to marry him. Vnto the solem∣nization whereof he assembled his no∣bilitie, charging them to call and take hir for Quéene. Which fayre wordes making hir fayne, she nowe of hir own accord desired him to go sée hir citie Cassandra, and agaynst his comming she caused the citie to be adorned & gar∣nished, and further she commanded that hir two sonnes, Lycimachus and Philip, with their crounes on their heads, shuld come and meete him by the way, which thing they accordingly did, and Ptolome with fayned countenance imbraced and kissed them. But assoone as he came vnto
the citie, he commaunded the Towre to be taken, and the two children to be slayne. Wherefore the poore babes were compelled to flée vnto their mother for reskewe, who imbracing them in hyr armes, assayed wyth hyr owne bodie to kéepe them from wounding but all in vayne. For in fine they were slayne, and she most cruelly and dispitefully ex∣pelled the citie: whence she went to Sa∣mothracia greatly lamēting that she was not slayne with hir children. But Pto∣lome for his wyckednesse escaped not vnpunished: For shortely after, léesing his kingdome to the Frenchemen, and him selfe taken captiue, with the sworde (as he deserued) finished his life. Whose head was fastned on a speare, & carried about for a terrour to their enimies. Caius Cannius a Romane knight, ly∣ing at Syracuse to refresh him selfe, was very desirous to buy a garden there: Whiche thing Pithius vnderstanding, came vnto him, & told him that he had a garden which Cannius might vse as his owne, but he would not sell it. The next day he had Cannius to diner, & had proui∣ded
that at that time all the fishermen should fish before his garden. At the time appoynted Cannius came, where he saw great store of botes, & much fish takē and cast vp, euen at Pithius féete. Whereat Cannius wōdring, what meneth it frend Pythius (quoth he) is here suche store of fish? Yea (quoth Pythius) it is no maruel, for al the fish in Syracuse is in this place. Herewith Cannius was greatly in loue with it, & earnestly desired Pythius to sel it. Which thing Pythins made straunge to do at the first, but in the end yéelded to his request. And so Cannius being a very welthy man, & desirous to haue it, gaue him as much money for it as he woulde aske. A day or two after Cannius inuited certain of his friends thither to supper, & he him selfe came thither betimes, but could sée neuer a bote there. Wherefore he demaunded of the nexte neighbour, whether the fishermē kept holyday that day, bicause none of them came thither? No (quoth the neighbour) but they vse not to fish here.Ex Ci. off. lib. 3. Wherefore I marueled yesterday to sée so many of thē here: and thus was Cannius deceiued.
Of death and buriall. DIogines the Cinicke béeing persuaded that after a mās death he shuld haue no sense nor féeling,Bruson. li. 4. cap. 10. was asked of hys frends what should be done wt him after he was dead: why take me (quoth he) & cast me in the fields. To whō his frends replying, that beast & birds would then deuour him, he bad them lay his staffe by him. But what shal that staffe do (quoth they) when you can not handle it? And what tell you me (quoth he) that beasts will eate me, if I féele them not. Wher∣fore Seneca sayth very well, that buri∣all was not inuēted for the deades sake, but for vs that liue, that we mighte not be offended with the noysome sauor and sight of the dead corpse. When Alexander had taken certayne Philosophers of India called Gymnoso∣phistae, which prouoked Saba to rebelliō, he proposed them hard questions, which onlesse they could absolue, they were put to death, & one of them which was eldest was made iudge in the mater. The first of them was demaunded whether there
were more liuing or dead? he answered there were more alyue, bycause the dead haue no more béeing. The seconde béeing inquired whether the lande or sea ingendred greater creatures? answer∣red, the lande, bicause the sea is but a portion of it. The thirde béeing asked what beast was moste subtill? the beast (quoth he) that man can not discerne. The fourth was demaunded what in∣duced him to persuade the Sabians to re∣belliō? who answered, bicause I thought it better to dye manfully, than to lyue miserably. The fifthe inquired, which was first made, the day or else the night? who sayd that the day was a day before the night. The sixte béeing demaunded howe one raygning mighte get the good∣will of the people? aunswered, if he be not terrible. Of the other thrée, one was asked howe a mortall man might be ac∣counted in the number of the Gods? if he do greater thinges (quoth he) than mans power can attayne to. The other was demaunded whether he thoughte life or death to be the stronger? answe∣red, that life was strongest, bicause in it
man suffereth so many calamities. The last was inquired, how long a mā should liue? vntill (sayd he) that he thincketh life to be better than death. The Galathians do so cōtemne death, that they fighte naked, and are persuaded as Pythagoras thincketh, that they shall put on new bodies. And therefore many put letters into the fire, wherein theyr fréends bodies are burned, thinking that their fréendes shall read them after their death. Aulus Posthumius in an oratiō which he made vnto his souldiers, sayd: It is gi∣uen to all men bothe good and bad to die, but to die godly and gloriously is only gi∣uen to good men. Hector in Homer,Diodorus, lib. 6. spea∣king vnto Andromache his wife, said: be not gréeued for my death, for both the va∣liante, and the miser, muste needes take that way. When Socrates was condempned of the Athoniens. for bringing in of newe Gods, with a stedfast countenaunce he tooke the poyson out of the hangmannes handes, and putte it too his mouthe. And when Xantippe his wife complained that
should die giltlesse. Why (quoth he) and haddest thou rather to sée me die giltie, than giltlesse? The Thratians wéepe at the birthe of man, and are merrie at his deathe. The Licians at the death of their fréedes, put on womans attire, that being moued wt the deformitie therof, they might the soo∣ner cease mourning. The Egiptians doe poulder the deade carcase, and kéepe it at home with them. The people in Carmania called Chelono∣phart, doe throwe them to fishes to be ea∣ten. The people in the East, called Na∣batholi, doe bury their kings in dunghils. The Persians doe lappe them in waxe, and salte them. The Magians vse not to bury the corpse, before it be rent with wilde beastes. The Hircanians kéepe dogs to deuoure them after they be dead. The buriall of the Parthians, (as Iustin recordeth) is first to haue the flesh deuou∣red of beastes and foules, and then to cast the bones into the earth. The Megaren∣ses when they interre the corpse, turne them to the East, and the Atheniens to the West, &c.
When any of the Egiptians domesti∣call fréendes departe, the women smeare their heade and their visages with durte: then leauing the deade carcase at home, they gadde aboute the streates with their garmentes rent, and theyr haire hanging aboute their eares, and pitifully yall and bewaile the deade. The like kinde of la∣mentation, the men likewise vse. When they returne to the corpse, they take a crooked iron, and therwith pul the braine oute of the nostrelles of the deade, and stuffe it with herbes. Afterwardes, they take a sharpe Ethiopian stone, and there∣with cutte his belly, and take oute his paunch, which when they haue emptied & made cleaue,Lib. 4. ca. 10 they stuffe it with swéete o∣dors & sow it vp againe, suffring the haire on their heads to growe, but vse to shaue their beardes. Diognit' Emperor of Erithraea, taking Policrita of Naxus captiue, delt not wt hir as mē vse to do wt captiues, but retained & kept hir as his wife. It hapned whilest shée abode wt him, yt the Erithreans, other∣wise called ye Milesians, kéeping solemne feast, were all ouercomen with wine.
Which thing shée perceiuing, desired Di∣ogtus to giue hir leaue to sende some of the festiuall cakes vnto hir brethren at Naxus, and being permitted, shée folded a shéete of lead, and couered it ouer with dowe, wherin shée declared the drunken case of the Milesians, and exhorted them with spéede to come thether. Which they accordingly accomplishing, came and set on them, and returned with great spoile, and no lesse victorie, bringing home Po∣lycreta their sister with them: who being commended, saluted, and iuyfully recey∣ued of all men, euen in the middest of this their ioy, gaue vp the Ghost. It is wrytten that Philarchus in the middest of a battaile, died with straining his voice. Or as some wryte, after he had attained a great victorie, crying oute, O ioyful and happie day: he was taken with a sodaine feuer which brake his vaines, and killed him. The signes of death in a sick man are these: If he haue the rauing sicknesse to laughe. Otherwise, if he be carefull for mending his apparell, or delight to folde his bedde clothes. If after sléepe he moue
not himselfe, or continually vse to lie vp∣right. If he vse to stretch out his handes, and answer to them which inquire of his discease. Celsius saythe, that it is a token of death, to rise vp in the very pange, im∣moderate sléepe or ouer watching, to fetche breth thicke, to voide sneuill, hard∣ly to spit, to wéepe when he hath no wil, to haue slime slicke on his tongue. Of Discorde and Variance. WHen the fathers conscript, and the Romane people were at variance betwene themselues,Bruson. Lib. 2. ca. 20 the fathers thought good to send one Menenius Agrippa, an e∣loquent Orator, and well be loued of the people, to make them if it mighte be, at one again, who being admitted into their tentes, made his Oration in this wise. On a time (quoth he) when the partes of men did not consent as nowe they doe, but euery part folowed their owne coun∣sell, saying & doing as they thought good: the residue of the members complained and saide, that by the care, laboure, and
seruice of the other parts was pampered and nourished, and so the rest tooke the paines, and the belly enioyed all the plea∣sure. Wherfore they concluded amongst themselues, that neither the hands shuld reache the meat vnto the mouth, neither the mouthe receiue it, nor yet the téethe deuide it. But héereby whilest they thou∣ghte to tame the belly, they broughte not only it, but also them selues to extreme penurie. This tale of Agrippa so preuai∣led wyth the people, that he caused them to reconcile them selues wyth the Se∣nate. Likewise Plutarch wryting of the life of Agis, by a like tale declareth what mischéefe commeth by discorde. It happe∣ned (saythe he) that the taile of the Ser∣pent raised sedition against the head, de∣siring that he might another while haue the guiding of the body, and not alwayes to be guided by the head. Wherin obtai∣ning his request, and hauing no eyes to guide him, and going he wotte not whe∣ther,vt supra. Brusomus. not onely hurte him selfe: but also bicause the heade contrary to the lawe of nature, was content to obey and folowe
so blinde a guide: he was made partaker of the same mischéefe. Leontius Bishop of Antioche, in that great Sinode which was kept there con∣cerning the establishing of Christian faithe, séeing their controuersie to be like to growe vnto a sedition, & fearing plain∣ly to expresse his minde: he stroked his head being full of white haires, and said: After this snowe is thawed, we are like to haue muche durte, by which woordes as it wer in a riddle, he foretold that that discorde woulde growe to dissention, and that the authors of that brabbling should neuer consente with the residue of the multitude. Lycosthenes, pag. 252. Amongste the Lacedominians, when two brethren fell at discorde, the officers mersed their father, bicause he dissembled the matter, thincking good to beare with the yong men, and to impute the faulte, which through theyr hote age, they com∣mitted vnto the negligence of the father, in whose power it stoode to forsée that no suche controuersie should arise betwéene his children.
Of Desire of knowledge Discipline, and the duetie of Schol∣lers to their Masters. LVcius comming to Rome, chaunced to méete with Anthonius the Emperor, of whom demaunding whether he went, and what businesse he had that way? An∣thonius answeared him, I knowe it is no dishonestie for an olde manne to learne, whiche causeth me to goe to Xextus the Philosopher, that of him I maye learne the things which yet I knowe not. At which wordes of his, Lucius wondering, helde vp his handes, and sayde: Good Lorde this olde man like a childe goeth to schole vvith a table in his handes,Lycosthe∣nes, pa. 284. ex Philo∣strato. vvhereas oure king Alexander, beeing but thirtie yeres olde, is already dead. Héerein muste I néedes more commend this Emperors studie and modestie, than Lucius his li∣cence and libertie. Salinus Iulianus the Emperor, being famous as well for his studie in the ciuill lawe, as also for the greate fréendshippe which was betwéen him and diuers other
Princes: was woont to say that he would be glad to learne, albeit one of his féete were in the graue. Which saying of his, was commended as it well deserued of all good men. But in these dayes we haue an other sentence common in most mens mouthes, I am nowe too olde to learne. Wheras in dede it is a shame, yt being so olde, thou haste not already learned all such things as are worthy to be learned. Lycost. pa. 248. Solon of Athens, hearing Sapphus his brothers sonne singing a song as he was tippling amongst his pottes: desired the yongmā to teach him that song. Who be∣ing demaunded why he so desired it: an∣swered, that I may die by yt time I haue learned it. Shewing héereby howe desi∣rous to learne he was, when euen nowe being as it were at deathes dore, he was not ashamed to learn. Yea he wold say, ye by learning euery day a little, he became an olde man. Lycost. pa 246. ex Aeliano. Alphonsus king of Arragon, being in talke of the losse of iewels, sadly affirmed yt he had rather lese his gemmes, Marga∣rites and precious stones, wherof he had
great store, than any of his bookes. Pa∣normita. li. 4. Metrocles sayd,Bruso. li. 2. cap. 23. that other thinges, as house, landes, garmentes, and such like, mighte be giuen & solde for money, but onely learning & discipline require long studie & indefatigable labour. La. l. 6. c 6. Marcus Antonius the Philosopher and Emperour so intirely loued his techers, that he set vp ye picture of Fronte his ma∣ster, & exalted Proculus to the dignitie of a consul. He would imbrace & kisse Iu∣nius Rusticus in the presence of ye senate, and in the ende made him also consull: & after his death erected his Image.Lico. ex An∣tonio in Me∣lissa: par. 2. serm. 11. And shortly to say, he so honored them al, that he adorned their images with golde, and would himselfe often resort vnto them, and offer floures & incense vpon them. Alexander being demanded whom he loued better of Philip his father, or Ari∣stotle his master, said, that he was more beholding to his maister. For Philip had made him a mā, but Aristotle had made him a learned and wise man. When Dionisius tolde Plato that some body shoulde cutte off hys heade,
Xenocrates Plato his scholer standing by, sayde, Nay I will firste haue this head of mine cut off. Lycost. ex Laert. lib. 4. cap. 2. Zeno not hauing money to giue a ma∣ster to teache him,Ex Laer. l. 7. cap. 1. woulde creepe in by a backe doore to heare Polemon reade his Logicke Lecture: whom Polemon espying, sayd: I sée well Zeno thou wilt steale that frō me, which others are like to buy of thée. Lycost. pa. 251. Of Dronkennesse and Drinking. AStiages in Xenophons Pedia deman∣ded of Cirus why he quaffed wine no better?Brus. lib. 1. cap. 16. bicause (quod he) I feare there be some poyson mixed in ye goblet amōg the wine. For I perceiued wel, yt at the last feast you supped vp poyson apace. Howe knowest thou that my sonne (quoth he) bicause (quoth Cirus) I saw that there∣by you loste the right vse bothe of body and minde. Alexander of Macedonie, béeing a gret drinker of wine, whether ouercome with wine, or enuying his fathers cōmēdatiō,
at a banket killed Clytus his very frend. But after his fury, he greatly repented ye acte, and therwith falling into a rage, he wold haue slaine himselfe, had he not ben let by his fréendes. Afterwardes falling on the dead corpse, he imbraced and kis∣sed the wounds, and could scarce be gotte thence to eate his meate. Wheras Antigonus loued, and great∣ly reuerenced Xeno the Philosopher, it hapned on a time, that being ouercome wt wine, he met his master Xeno, where∣fore like a drunken man he went to em∣brace and kisse him, desiring the Philo∣sopher to commaūd him do somwhat for him. Mary, I pray thée then (quoth Xeno) get thée hence and vomite. And so by this graue & wise reprehension, he both taun∣ted his drunkennesse, and warned him to beware, least by such surfetting he should hurte him selfe, and shorten his dayes. Lycost pa. 297. ex Acliano li. 9. de var. hist. Agesilaus the great king of the Lace∣demonians, at a certaine dricking, was by casting of lottes, as the maner was, made ruler of the feast. whose office it was to appoynte howe muche euery one
should drincke. Wherefore when the ta∣uerner demaunded him how much wine he shold fill to euery one of them: If thou hast prepared muche wine (quoth he) let euery man haue as much as he shall call for. But if thou haste but little, let euery one haue like muche. By which his wise dealing, he prouided that if there were wine inoughe, he mighte please the lustie quaffers, and yet not compell the sober drinckers. And on the other side, if there wāted wine, deuiding to eche like much, he shoulde not cause them to murmure. For when one had as muche as an other, they which woulde drincke moderately, had so to do, and they which would quaffe fréely, though they had not enoughe to sa∣tisfie their appetite, yet hauing inoughe to satisfie nature, could not complaine since they hadde as muche as theyr fellowes.Lycost. pa. 298. Wherfore they which otherwise would haue druncke fréely, for this cause only vsed it moderatly. Ex Plutarch. in Lycost. Apoth. Aristippus the Philosopher, who was Socrates scholler, hearing one commende him selfe that he coulde drincke muche,
and not be druncken: Marry a goodly matter (quoth he) and so can a mule to.ix Laer. li. 2. ap 8. Lycost. pa. 298. Philochrates and Aeschines béeing sent with other Athenians in legacie vnto king Phillip, at their cōming home com∣mēded him to be a lusty quaffer. Wher∣to ye orator Demosthenes answered, that vertue hath the spunge likewise: mea∣ning that to be asmal vertue in a king to emptie pottes apase. Licost. pa. supradict. Anacharsus a Scythian, being demaun∣ded howe a man might eschue drunken∣nesse? If (quoth he) he alwayes set before his face ye vncomly gesture of drūkards. For nothing more resēbleth madnesse, than the vndecent behauioure of drun∣kards, where he him selfe thinketh that all things become him maruelous wel.Brus. li 4. cap. 19. Lycost. ex Laer. li. 1. cap. 9. The Lacedemonians cause their chil∣dren to beholde their bondsiaues when they be drunke, to the intente that they may sée howe fowle and frantikelike a sighte it is to sée a man ouercome wyth wyne. Yea they woulde compell their slaues to drincke to muche, to daunce
foolishe daunces, and to sing madde ver∣ses. And so whereas others with many wordes could scarse persuade sobrietie to be a thing most honest, and drunken∣nesse to be a detestable vyce: they as it were in a briefe, set it before their chil∣drens eyes by the exāple of these bond∣slaues, vnto whose conditions for a child to degenerate,Lycost. was a foule and dishonest thing Ex Plut. in Lacon. Of educatiō of children. SOcrates sayd, that welborne children,Lico. Erasm. Apo. 3. and specially good natures, ought to be well instructed and brought vp in their youth. For it commeth to passe wyth them, as it doth with horses, which thou∣ghe they be fierce, and of a hautie sto∣macke, yet if they be well and gently broken they become coragious and good for any thing. But béeing euill delte withall, they become vntractable and good for nothing. And hereby it commeth often to passe, that the best and readiest wits are throgh ye folly of their teachers, marred, whilst they straightways turne horses into asses for wāt of skil to vse thē
He being demaunded why he did not rule the common wealth since be knewe so well the trade therof? Answered, that he dothe more good to a Citie, which ma∣keth many apte to beare rule therein, than he whiche gouerneth it him selfe. Lycost. pa. 305. He exhorted yongmen oftentimes to behold themselues in a glasse, and if they sawe them selues beautifull and faire,Lycost. pa 305 to take héede they commit nothing vnwor∣thy so faire a face. If they séemed defor∣med, to recompence that with dexteritie of wit, which wanted in feature of body. Ex Eras. lib. 3. Apoth. A certaine childe being broughte vp with Plato,Lycost. su∣pradict. after a seasō returning home vnto his father, and séeing him immode∣ratly laughing, wondered, and sayde, he neuer sawe any suche thing all the whi∣lest he dwelled with Plato: of so greate a force it is euen from ones infancie to be acquainted with vertue. When one was in hand with Aristip∣pus, to teache his childe: and he requested for hys paines. 500. groates, the other béeing (as it were) astonnyed, wyth
the greatnesse of the summe: saide that he would buie a slaue better cheape than so. Yea (quoth Aristippus) but for thys money thou shalte haue two, meaning that he shuld haue his sonne a good Phi∣losopher,Ex Lac. li. 2. cap. 8. and an obedient childe: Preti∣ly taunting the nigardisenesse of the common sorte, which are more couetous in nothing than about the education of their children. And will bestowe more coste on one to kéepe their horse, than on him that shall take paynes to teach and instructe their childe.Lico. pa. 306 ex Lac. li. 4. cap. 9. Lico. pa. 306. Carneades was wont to say, that rich men and kings sonnes learne nothing aright, but the arte of riding. Bicause all other féede their humor, and flatter them, whereas the horse, not knowing nor caring whom he hath on his backe, onlesse he sitte well, will cast him off. When Diogenes was taken captiue, and should be solde at Crete nowe called Candie, the cryer asked him by what title he should commende him vnto the byer. Say (quoth he) thou haste one to sell, who can rule children. A certayne man of Corinth marueling at the strāge∣nesse
of the cryer, came to Diogenes, to know whether he coulde do as the cryer professed: where perceyuing by hys talke that he was a wyse and a learned man, boughte him, and broughte hym home, committing hys children vnto him to sée them instructed, and brought vp in the liberall Sciences. Who recey∣uing them, dyd liberally instructe and bring them vp. And first he set foorthe for them the seuen sciences. Afterwards he taught them to ryde, to bende a bow, and caste a sling, with diuers other dée∣des of actiuitie. Besides this, he proui∣ded that they shoulde learne all the best sentences out of Poets and other good authors. He taught them to serue their father at his table, to be contente with course meate, and to drinke water. And whereas other dyd weare their heire long for a pride, he caused them to be sha∣uen, and when they went abrode, to goe with their heire vnkempt, no coates on their backe, nor shoes on their féete, and so taught them, that he was reuerenced of them, and highly cōmended of Xenia∣des their parent. Lic. pa 306. Ex Laer. li. 6.
Lycurgus,Bruson. li. 2. cap. 38. which made ye Lacedemonian lawes, indeuoring to bring the citizens frō their riot & excesse, vnto a more tem∣perat & better trade of life, & to make thē desirous of honesty & vertue: brought vp two whelps, which he tooke of one bitch, & wer litred at one time. Whereof ye one he brought vp at home we delicat fare, the other he daily exercised in hūting abrod. After he had thus broughte them vp, he brought thē both foorth with him before the people, then setting by them meat to féede on, whilest ech of thē fell therto, he sodenly put forth a hare, wherfore when the dog which had bene exercised in that trade, saw hir, he began with swift spéed to make after, but the other, according to his educatiō, fel stil to his meat. Lo (quod Lycurgus) sée you not these whelps, who although they are bothe of one kinde, yet what diuersitie there is in them by reason of their education? and that exercise dothe more preuayle vnto the attainement of honesty, than education. Some say that these two whelpes were not both of one kind, but that ye one came of a mastife, the other of a grayhounde,
and that he exercised the mastife to hūt, and suffred the grayhounde to tarry at home and fill his belly, and so it came to passe that the mastife proued the bet∣ter, and that he sayde: Wherfore O ci∣tizens, our noble of spring, whiche the common sorte commende and wonder at, saying that we came of the stocke of that noble Hercules, shal nothing auaile vs, onlesse we learne and exercise suche honest, vertuous, and noble déedes as that notable and famous man did. This wise man founde a way, that whereas the multitude are not fitte for Philoso∣phicall reasons, he might by a familiar example, as it were, sette the image of vertue before their eyes. For common∣ly the thinges which we sée with our eyes, doo more moue vs, than that wée heare spoken of others. But that which he did in this citie, that may euery hous-holder doo in his owne familie, and eue∣ry ruler in his owne companie. Nature is of greate force, but education is of greater force.Eras. li. 1. Plut. in Lacon. For that can amende a naughtie nature, and make it. And the faultes that come by birthe, we can not
doo withall, but to instructe and amende them by education, that may we do. Alexander béeing but yet a stripling, saw Philip his father about to cast away a horse, bicause he was so fierce that he wuld suffer no body to take his back. Sée (quod he) what a horse these cast away, for wante of knowledge howe to vse him. And when he had so saide, he came to the horse, and with great skil by faire meanes he so dealt with him, that in the ende he got on his backe, and softly with strayning the bit, he ran a course, and re∣tyred backe againe. Wherfore at the re∣turning, as he was aboute to alight, his father imbraced and kissed him, saying: It were good reason my sonne, to get thée an other kingdome, for Macedonia shall not be able to contayne thée. The wyse man forsawe, that the fathers kingdoms would not suffize so wise and valiaunt a childe. But the horse warneth vs of ma∣ny good wits, which for want of skil are cast away: by reason that suche as haue charge of them, not knowyng howe to deale with couragious horsses, maks them tame asses. Ex Eras. li. 1. Apotheg.Lico. pa. 311,
A certen man béeing accused for hea∣ting his father,Lico. pa. 312. defended his impious act in this sort. When he was a yong mā he beat his father (quod he) & this my sonne when he commeth to age will beat me, for it cōmeth so to vs by kind. And we sée it commonly come to passe, that like as we behaue our selues to our parents, so do our children behaue themselues to vs when we are parents. Eras. li. 8. Apoth. Leonidas Anaxandridas his son, going to warre against the Persians, when hys wife Gorgon asked him what cōmaun∣demēt he would giue hir at his parting: I commaunde thée nothing else (quoth he) but that thou marrie and bring vp thy children well. By which saying it is euident, that the wise man foresaw that he should dye in warre, and warned his wyfe to take a newe husbande, and to do hir indeuour, that hir children might be wel brought vp. Plut. in Lacon. Of Exercise and vse. WHen Octauius had conquered An∣tonius at Actium, as he returned
home, amōgst others which gratified his victorious successe, there came one, hol∣ding a crowe in his hande, which he had taught to say: God saue thy grace Ceasar, victorious Emperour. Caesar maruelling at the curteous salutation of the birde, gaue a great summe of money for him. But his companion, who had taken like paynes in bringing vp of the birde, and could get no part of ye sayd reward, came to the Emperour, and tolde him that he had an other crowe, which he requested Caesar to cōpel him to fetch. Which being taughte a contrary lesson, began to say: God saue Antonius the Emperor. Wher∣with Caesar was nothing offended, but bad the money to be deuided betwéene them both. It hayned that a cobler seing this, folowing their exāple, indeuored to bring a crow to the like salutation. But whē he had with gret pains & some char∣ges kept this crow a long while, & could by no meanes cause him to answere, he would say vnto the bird: I sée my labor & cost are cast away. But in the end ye bird began to speake, & as the Emperor came by, saluted him, to whom the Emperor
sayde, I haue now inough such felowes to salute me at home, the birde remem∣bring the sentēce which his master was wont so often to repete vnto hym, sayd: I see my labour and coste is caste away, whereat the Emperour laughing,Bruso. li. 2. ca. 30. bou∣ghte hir also for the lyke summe of mo∣ney. When Demonax hearde one stum∣bling in his declamation, he exhorted him to exercise him selfe often therein. Why so I doo (quoth the other) for I of∣tentimes vse to declaime when I am alone by my selfe. Mary it is no mar∣uell then (quoth Demonax) that thou diddest it so foolishly nowe, since hither∣to thou haste bene accustomed to so foo∣lish an audience. Eras li. 8. Apotheg. When Cicero had praysed M. Cras∣sus, in the common place, and his Ora∣tion was greatly commended of the peo∣ple, and afterwardes in the same place vehemently inuaied against him. Why (quod Crassus) dyddest not thou lately prayse me in the same place. I confesse (quoth Cicero) I praysed thée in deede, but for exercise sake I tooke in hande a
slaunderous argument. For the Retho∣ritians sometymes take in hande ar∣gumentes of contrarie matters, as when they prayse Bulyris, the quartan feuer, or ingratitude. Licost. ex libro. 4. Apotheg. Erasmi. Socrates was wont to say, that suche as exercised their body with dauncing, had néde of wyde houses, but suche as exercised them selues in singing, or ma∣king orations, might stande stil, and ne∣uer moue out of their places.Eras. lib. 3. Apotheg. By which saying of his, he allowed mode rate exer∣cise, & disalowed the immoderate, especi∣ally after meat. Licost. pa 324. Plato was wonte to admonishe men, that neither they shoulde exercise their body without some exercise of the mind, neither their minde without the body, wherof the one is proper to champions,Laerti. li 3. the other to fluggards. The Lacedemonians had a kinde of black potage, which they so greatly este∣med, that the elder & better sort woulde onely eate thereof, and leaue the meate for their yongers. Wherfore Dionisius king of Sicil bought a Lacedemoniā cooke
commaunding him to make that kinds of potage,Ma. Tu. Ci. Tusc. quest. libro. 5. and to spare no coste therein. But when the king tasted of it, he lyked it not, but spit it out agayne. To whom the cooke sayde, you muste vse this after you haue exercised your selfe as the La∣cedemonians doo. Lycost. Of fatall Destinie. WHen Dioclesianus was abiding at Turin in Fraunce,Bruso. li. 2. as he stayed at a certayne Iune, and a woman named Drutas & he commoned of his liuing, she saide vnto him: Dioclesian thou art ouer couetous a nigarde. To whom he in iest answered: thou shalt sée what a liberall fellowe I will be, when I am Empe∣rour. Well (quoth she) iest not, for thou shalte be an Emperoure in déede when thou haste killed Aper, (meaning Aper, Numerianus father in law, whom after∣wards Dioclesian killed for the death of Numerianus, whō Aper slue.) But Dio∣clesian construing Aper to be spoken ac∣cording to the sense of the Latin worde, for a wylde hore, dayly vsed to hunte
wild bores: But when he had killed ma∣ny, and sawe Arelianus, Probus, Tacitus, & Charus possesse the Empire, he would say: I kill the bores, but others eate the brawne. In the ende, hauing killed this Aper, and béeing now made Emperour, he sayde, nowe I haue killed my fatall Bore. Procas succéeding in the kingdome of Albanie, conceiued two sons, Aemulius and Numitor, whereof Numitor béeing the elder succeded in the kingdome. But Aemulius perforce expelled his brother, and vsurped the kingdome. And bicause none of his posteritie should afterwards enioy it, he killed Numitors sonne, and made his daughter Rhea a virgin vestral. But she, whether it were by a souldier, or else by the god Mars, as the Romanes thinke, was conceyued, and bare two sonnes. Whereof Numitor hauing in∣telligence, caused hir to be bounde, and put in prison, and commaunded one to take the children, and cast them into Ti∣bris, but at yt time it hapned that the wa∣ter was so ouerflowē, that he which was charged to droun thē, could not come to ye
riuer side, but thinking that the ouer∣flowing of the water should be sufficient to drowne them, he lefte them there, and went his wayes. Shortely after the water decreasing, one Fastulus the kin∣ges shephearde, came and founde them vnder a tree, which afterwards was cal∣led Ruminalis, and caried thē home, com∣mitting them to Laurentia his wife to be brought vp. Who bicause she was euill reported of for hir honestie, ye shepherds called hir Lupa and hereof it came that some write they were fed of a she wolf. For Lupa in Latin so signifieth in En∣glish. When they came to age, they be∣came great hunters, and vsed to rescue the pray which théeues came to fteale. So that they were accounted amongst the shepheards to be very valtaunt fel∣lowes. But in processe of time it hapned that ye shepherds of Numitor & Aemilius falling out, in a fray Remus was taken and brought bound vnto Numitor, where he so valiauntly behaued him self in his answere, that he caused Numitor to wonder at hys singuler audacitie, and remembring the tyme of the exposition
of his Nephues, by the circumstraunce of the time and the liniamēt of the person, he suspected that it was his nephue. And whylest Remus was thus occupyed with Numitor, Faustulus which knew al the matter, opened it vnto Romulus. Whervpon leuying an armie of young men, and hauing aide also frō Numitor their graundfather, they set on Aemulius their vnlce, and in the end restored Nu∣mitor their graundfather vnto his king∣dome. And leauing Albane they builded Rome in the place where they were cast foorth. Brus. li 2. cap. 38. Mandana,Bruso. li. 2. cap. 38. Astiages his daughter, drea∣med that she made so muche water, that the whole citie was filled, and all Asia ouerflowen therewith. With whiche dreame Astiages was so terrified, that he married his daughter vnto Camby∣ses, a manne of a good witte, but of a meane birth. But the same yere he him selfe also dreamed,Iust. li 2. that he sawe a vyne grow out of the priuitie of his daughter, whose branches ouershadowed al Asia. Wherfore he sent for his daughter, who was then nere hir trauell, setting some
to watch the birth, that assoone as it was brought foorth, it might be slaine. Which beeing performed, assoone as the childe was borne, it was broght vnto the king. Who tooke it vnto Harpagus his very friende, desiring & straitly charging him to carie it home, and kil it. But when he came home, he determined with him self to abstayne his handes from killing the babe: wherfore he sent for Methridatis the kings shephearde, and charged him in the kings name to take the infant, and cast it away on the mountaynes. When he had the childe, he carried it home, and shewed it vnto his wyfe, who desired him of all loues not to caste away the childe. But if he must néedes cast away one, she desired him to caste away hir owne, which she brought foorth that pre∣sent day: wherin he accomplished hir re∣quest, and caste away his owne childe, retayning the other in hys stede. Who growing in yeares, was made king of his playfellowe boyes: Wherefore playing Rex amongest them, when one Artembaris, a riche mannes sonne had disobeyed him, he caused him to be
apprehended, and beate him. Whereof his father complayned vnto the king, and caused him to be sente for. When he came, the kyng beholding hym, sayde: Arte thou the shepheardes sonne, which vseth to beate the chéefe mennes sonnes of Media? Yea O king (quoth he) and that not without a cause. For the boyes made me king aboue others, bi∣cause they thoughte me fitter therefore than the rest were. Nowe whereas the reste reuerenced and obeyed me: thys one woulde not doo so, wherefore ac∣cording to his desertes I punyshed him. At whiche wordes he caused the king to wonder, and remembring the time of the childes exposition, with the age and comelynesse of the person, he fea∣red that it was his nephue. Wherefore calling Methridatis vnto him, he strait∣ly charged hym to tell the very truthe of the matter, who daring doo none other wyse, declared the truthe of it. Héerevppon the king sente foorthwyth for Harpagus, demaunding him what he hadde doone wyth the chylde? who declaring all that he hadde doone, the
king made as though he were nothing offended herewith, but shortly after bid∣ding him to a banquet, he slue his sonne, and caused him vnwares to eate therof, asking him after supper how he liked the meat? And when he sayde very well, he cōmanded his cokes to bring in the head & other appurtenances of the childe, and sent Cyrus his new-founde nephue vnto his parentes at Persia. Who afterwar∣des by the ayde of Harpagus, subdu∣ed hys Graundfather, verified their Dreames, and enioyed the kingdome. Herodot. li. 1. Laius king of Thebes was tolde by an oracle,Brus li. 2. cap. 38. that it were good for him neuer to haue childe. For the childe whom he should conceyue, should be an occasion of great murther in their owne house. Wherefore as soone as the childe was borne, it was drawen out by the héeles, and therof was called Oedipus and cast away. But a woman chauncing to finde him, brought him vp. Afterwards it hap∣pened that Laius his father and he mée∣ting, bicause Laius proudly commaun∣ded him to gyue way, he slue him, not
knowing that it was his father. Aboute that time, there came to Thebes, one Sphinx, who kéeping a certaine bridge, there put forth a riddle to them that pas∣sed by, throwing thē into the water that could not reade it. But this Oedipus ab∣solued it, and had for his reward Iocasta, and the kingdome of Thebes▪ The ridle was thus. What Craeture is it, that first hath foure féete, then two fete, and at last thrée féete? Which Oedipus interpreted to be a man, who at his birth crauleth on all foure, afterwardes goeth on his two féete, cōming to age leaneth on his staffe, and so hath thrée féete. Wherfore Sphinx was cast into the riuer, and Oedipus vn∣awares maried Iocasta his own mother. Of Felicitie or happinesse. CRoesus king of Lidia, the richest man that euer was, sent for Solon, and as∣ked him whether any man were more happie than he? Yea (quoth Solon) that is Telus, who had very honest men to his sonnes, and he him selfe manly died in
defending his countrey. Then Craesus asked him agayne, whether nexte vnto Telus he were not most fortunate?Eras. lib. 8. Apoth. No (quoth he) Cleober and Brito are more happie, both for the singular friendship which is betwéene them, and also for the great obedience & reuerence which they shewed vnto their mother. But Craesus was here with offended, and asked whe∣ther he had no place amōgst ye fortunate? No (quod Solon) we can not yet cal thée blessed, but assoone as thou art dead, and out of the danger of fortune & affection, then we shall sée how happie thou shalt be. Wherfore Craesus was sorely disple∣sed with him, and let him go without do∣ing him any honor. But this saying of Solon was shortely after verified. And Craesus béeing ouercome and taken cap∣tiue of king Cyrus, and a fyre made to burne him, when he shuld enter into the flame, began oftesones to say, O Solon, Solō▪ Wherfore Cyrus asked him what he ment by those wordes? Then Crae∣sus telling him the sum of the matter: Cyrus séeing thereby the varietie of for∣tune, and the alteration of the worlde,
caused the fire to be quenched, and made Craesus one of his chief counsellers. Ouid 4. de Ponto. Of this felicitie Martiall in a certaine Epigram sayth thus: Ʋitam quae faciunt beatiorem. &c. In Englishe thus: The things vvhich cause mās life, methin∣keth, most full of blisse to be, Are these: vvhē goods frō friends do fal, and vve from labour free. VVhen fertile field growes fast abroade, and minde is voyde of strife, And merie Iohn by toasting fire may sitte vvith Ione his vvife. VVhen corpse is sound and strōg withal, and vvisedome rules the minde, And friends in friendships faithfull knot, a faythfull heart doth binde: VVhen fare is good, though not of cost, and night vvith pleasure prest, Not drousie head, but merry minde, doth cause a quiet rest. To be as heart could vvishe or craue. thy state content vvithall: Not feare nor vvishe for fatall day, But come vvhen come it shall.
Demetrius was wont to say, that he thought nothing more vnfortunate than him,Eras. lib. 8. Apoth. who in al his life had no misfortune chauncing him. For that suche a one ei∣ther knoweth not himselfe, for lacke of experience, or else is contemned and ouer scaped of the Goddes, as one good for no∣thing. Sylla, who for his felicitie was surna∣med Felix, among other his happie haps, saide, that two things chéefely reioyced him. The one, for that he had Pius Metel∣lus to his fréende, the other, bicause he had not destroyed Athens. Ex Plutarch. in Rom. Apoth. When one demaunded of Socrates, whether he thought not Archilaus moste happie? I can not tell quoth he, for I ne∣uer spake with him. Bruso. lib. 2 cap. 36. Antigonus seeing one of his souldiers, (who otherwise was a valiant man) to haue some secreate disease, asked him what the matter was that he looked so pale? To whome the souldier confessing the truthe of his anguishe, Antigonus bad his Phisitians, if it were possible to cure him. But being now cured of his disease,
he began to be more slacke to fighte, and not so hardie in his affaires as he was woont to be. Whereat the king wonde∣ring, asked him how it came to passe that his minde was so fodenly altered? Why thou thy selfe (quoth he) arte the cause thereof. For as long as I liued in paine and miserie, I was nothing afeard to lose so miserable a life. But nowe when by your goodnesse I liue in better case, I am loth to lose my life. Lycost. Ex Eras. lib. 8. Apoth. Of Fortune. POlycrates king of Samia, was a prince so fortunate, that he neuer desired any thing, but he had it. And coulde no sooner wishe but haue. Wherefore fearing the mutabilitie of Fortune, who when shée striketh, striketh home: he tooke a ring of inestimable price, and cast it into the sea. But fortune was so fauorable vnto him, that a fish eat his ring, which afterwards was taken and giuē vnto him, in whose belly the Cooke finding the ring, restored it vnto him againe. But in the ende, ma∣king
warre with Darius, he was taken captiue of Crontes the chiefe Captayne, hanged on the high mount Michasus, & there lefte a praye for foules to deuour. Dionisius the yonger being asked how it chanced that his father was preferred from the state of a priuat mā,Brusonius. Lib. 2. ca. 37. to become a king, and he from royall scepter, to be throwen downe to so base an estate, an∣swered: bycause my father lefte me his kingdome, but not fortune. Cressus consulting the oracle, whe∣ther he should wage warre against To∣miris the Quéene (of whome he was in fine killed) was aunswered: If thou dée∣mest thy self immortal: then néedest thou not my counsell héerein, but if thou ac∣knowledge thy self to be a man, let this be thy firste lesson, that the state of hu∣maine affaires is rounde, and that for∣tune neuer leaueth man in one estate. When Aucaeus the sonne of Neptune and Astipalcas planting a vineyard,Bruso. Lib. 2. ca. 37. was earnest with his seruants to apply their worke: one of them sayd to his felowes, what paines my Maister taketh aboute this vine, and yet he shall neuer taste the
fruit of the grape. When Ancaeus heard hereof, he said nothing vntill the grapes were ripe, and euen nowe pressed them, sending for his seruant, and caused a cup of the wine to be filled, he put it towards his mouthe mocking and taunting hys seruant for this vaine prophecie. But as he was thus preaching ouer the cup, an other of his seruants came in with spéed, and sayde, that there was a wilde Bore in the vineyarde. Wherfore Ancaeus cast downe the cuppe, and running to chase away ye wild bore, was destroied of him: and héerof sprang the prouerbial verse. Multa cadūt inter calicē suprena{que} labra. Though to thy mouth thou lift the pot, Whether thou shalt drink yet wotest thou not.Brusonius. Li. 2. cap. 37. When one Damacles a Parasite of Dionisius began to praise ye abundance of welth, maiestie & dominion, wherwt Dio∣nisius was indued, & sayd, ye he neuer saw any so fortunat as he was: Dionisius as∣ked him whether he wold be content to assay his estate and fortune awhile? Yea (quoth Damacles) with all my heart. Wherfore the king commaunded that this Parasite should be layd in his bed.
The next day he caused a gorgious din∣ner to be prepared, and setting him in his chaire of estate, he charged thē that with all possible honoure and pleasure they should serue him. But in the middest of this chéere, he caused a glistering sweard to be hanged with a horsse haire, and let downe ouer his head. Which when Da∣macles sawe, neither could he behold the comelinesse of his seruitures, nor yet the delicacie of his meat, but only fastening his eyes on the sworde, he desired Dio∣nisius to giue him leaue to departe, and saide that he would no lenger be blessed. Bruso. Lib. 3. cap. 13. On a time when the papacie of Rome had bene vacante two yeares and more, the Cardinals concluded to electe Petrus Moroneus a godly man, and consecrated him by the name of Celestine the fifthe. Who bicause he began to refourme the clergie, Boniface the eighte, (then called Benedictus) so handled the matter, that what by his iuggling & speaking through his chamber walles, nightly admonished him to giue vp his papacie, and other his diuellishe illusions, he persuaded him in
in some solitarie deserte. And ere long was by this Boniface apprehended, im∣prisoned, and put to death. For whiche impietie of his, when Iacobus and Pe∣trus Cardinalles of Columna, séemed to be offended, this Boniface tooke suche displeasure agaynst them, that he cau∣sed Preneste, Zagorolum and Columna to be made leuell with the grounde. Yea for their sakes he was so displea∣sed with the Gibilenes, and the inhabi∣tauntes of Columna, that on ashewed∣nesday, when Porchetus an Archebi∣shoppe, came and knéeled downe be∣fore hym to receyue his ashes, he loo∣king on him, and perceyuing that he was one of the Gibilines, caste his hand∣full of ashes in his eyes, and sayde: Memento homo. &c. That is, remem∣ber man that thou arte a Gibiline, and to ashes thou shalte goe. But in the ende, partely from the Cardinalles of Columna,Ex domino Foxo. and partely from Phillip the Frenche king (whome he had greatly molested) were sente an arnne of men, whiche came to Augonum, and there in hys owne fathers house, and in the
very chaumber where he was borne, they spoyled his substaunce, and led him captiue to Rome. And there within. 24. dayes after he dyed for sorrowe. Whereas the inhabitants of Paphus were wonte to haue their king chosen of the familie of the Sinarasians, and nowe that house was cleane spente, A∣lexander being very desirous to get them a king of that stocke, vnderstoode that there was yet a poore mā called Halimo∣mus, which came of that linage, where∣fore with al spéede he repaired thither to create him king. And finding him in hys garden drawing of water, with al triūph had him thence, & incontinent made him a king, and companion of his owne per∣son. Bru. li. 2. cap. 37. It is reported that Marius Septimus the tyrant was made emperor one day, reigned ye next, & the third day was slayn of his souldiers. Brus. li. 2. cap. 37. After the death of Antiochus, king of Syria, his sonne Seleucus killed Bernice his stepmother, with the yong childe his brother. Whereof when Ptolome king of Egypt, and brother to this Bernice,
had intelligence, he came to Syria with a mayne Hoste, to reuenge the death of his sister: and so good successe he hadde herein, that all the kings of Syria yéel∣ded them vnto him. But whylest he was thus occupied in Syria, his owne subiectes rebelled in Aegypt. Wher∣fore he was fayne to rayse his siege and departe home. Then Seleucus thin∣king to be reuenged on the Syrian ci∣ties, which tooke parte agaynst him, pre∣pared an armie to inuade them. But so it fell out, that the greatest parte of his nauie were drowned on the sea, and he with a small power ariued at the citie, and there when the citizens submitted them selues vnto hym, he receyued them to mercie. And gathering a new armie, he renued the warre agaynst Ptolome, of whome he was subdu∣ed, and compelled to flée to Antio∣che, as one with whome fortune was disposed to make a playgame. Bruso. lib. 2. cap. 37. When Timotheus, Conous sonne had subdued many cities vnto the Athenian kingdome, certayne persons enuying
him, and ascribing all his prowesse vn∣to fortune, paynted him a sleepe, and for∣tune subduing cities for him. But he offended so to loese the glorie of his va∣lyaunt attemptes, the nexte tyme that he had obteyned a conqueste, he sayde vnto the Athenians, that in all the victo∣ries that euer he gotte, fortune coulde rightely chalenge none of hys glorie. Wherevppon fortune was so offended with him, that after that tyme he neuer atchéeued any notable acte, but had euill successe in all the affayres he wente a∣bout, and in the ende loste the fauour of the people, and was banished his coun∣trey. Brus. lib. 2. cap. 37. When tidings was brought to king Phillip, of sundrie good fortunes which happened vnto him at one instaunte, as that Tetrippo his sonne had wonne the pryce at Olimpus, Dardenio had got a greate conqueste on the sea, and Olim∣pia hys wife had broughte him foorth a man childe: he helde vp his handes to heauen, and sayde. And O fortune I be∣séeche thée for so many and so greate benefites of thyne, suffer but some
small myschiefe to lyghten vppon mée.Lico. Plut. in Apo reg. Fulgo. lib. 7. cap. 2. Knowing hir manner to be suche, that on whome shée meaneth to worke some greate myschiefe, on them shée firste she weth a fauourable and fauning face, as playnely appeareth in the storie of Polycrates. Simonides the Philosopher was in∣uited to a banquet of Paulanias the king. Who in the banquet desired him to tell them something out of his Philosophie, that mighte be a lesson for them why∣lest they lyued. Well then (quoth hee) remember Pausanias, that thou arte a man. For séeing Pausanias by reason of hys happie estate, to thinke well of him selfe: he thought good by those wor∣des to putte hym in mynde of his due∣tie. But albeit Pausanias contemned thys sage saying of the Philosopher, yet afterwardes (béeing taken cap∣tiue, and lyke to bée famyshed) he was forced to allowe and commende hys wordes, and to appostrophate vnto hymselfe in thys sorte: O guest, guest, I sée nowe there was greate weighte in thy wordes:Lycost. Ae∣lian. li. 0 but I reposed suche
confidence in myne owne fickle for∣tune, that I thoughte them of no force. Wherefore now I muste dye a misera∣ble death. Of Fortitude and Manhoode. IF Antisthenes sawe any woman goe gayly apparelled, he woulde straight∣wayes goe vnto hir husbandes house, and byd him shewe his horse, and his harnesse, and if he thoughte them suf∣ficient, he woulde suffer his wife to goe at hir pleasure, bicause she had one at home to defende hir. But if he lyked not of it, he woulde persuade hir to leaue of hir gay clothes, least some bo∣dye woulde come and steale hir away. Ex Laer. li. 6. cap. 1.Licost. Archilomida Brasidas mother, hea∣ring that Brasidas hir sonne was slayne in warre, the firste question shée de∣maunded, was whether he dyed man∣fully of no? Yea (quoth the Thrasi∣sians:) For amongest all the Lacede∣monians
there was none in prowesse and vertuous qualityes comparable vnto hym. You knowe not sirs (quoth shée) what felowes the Lacedemonians are, I thinke in déede Brasidas my sonne was a good honest yong manne, but yet not so good, but that there be many better amongest the Lacedemo∣nians. Whiche aunswere of hirs is greatly to be commended, aswell for hir wisedome and fortitude, in so reioy∣cing at the honest deathe of hir sonne: as also for hir modestie and naturall affection vnto hir countrey, which could not abyde that hir sonne shoulde be so highely praysed, that his prayse shoulde any thing derogate from the true com∣mendation of hir natiue soyle. Plutar. in Lacon. Apoth.Lycost. When a certayne Athenian made a funerall Oration in the prayse of them whome the Lacedemonians hadde slayne in the warre: a Lacedemonian standing by, sayde: If these were suche iollie felowes which were slayne, what thinke you of our men which slue them.
Alexander the sonne of Mammea, hea∣ring that Artaxerses king of Persia, was comming with an huge armie to inuade the Romane Empire, saide vnto his souldiers, that strong and valiaunt men oughte to wishe the beste in all thinges, but yet to be content and to suffer, if any thing happen contrary to their expectati∣on. And neither to waxe proude in pros∣peritie, nor to dispayre in aduersitie.Licost. Herodian. lib. 6. When Publius Crassus sonne had a long time manfully fought agaynst his enemies, and was in fine slaine of them, they fastned his head vpon a speare, and therewith approched nye vnto the Ro∣mane armie, and greatly triumphing that they had him, they asked the Ro∣manes of what stocke that yong man came? saying that it was impossible that so valiaunt a sonne shoulde come of so cowardly a father. But Crassus was no∣thing troubled with this heauy sight, but ranne among the Roman souldiers, and sayde: this losse is mine ye Romanes, this calamitie is mine, and I onely haue cause to be sorie for this, but in your
health and prowesse, consisteth the pub∣like welth and glorie of the whole citie. Plut. in N. Crass. When Xerxes made warre agaynste Greece, the Athenians sent a spie to view Agiselaus Themistocles brother. Who comming into the host slue one Mardo∣nius Xerxes Courtier, thynking to haue slayne the king him selfe. Wherefore he was apprehended and sacrificed on the aulter of Sol, and there stoutly endu∣red all the torment, not once sighing for all the payne. And when he was losed, he told them that al the Atheniens were such fellowes, and if you beléeue me not burne my left hand also. Of Friendes and Friendship. SOcrates was wont to say, that no pos∣session is so good as a true and a fayth∣full friende, and that nothing is so plea∣sant and profitable as is suche a friende. Wherefore they go a contrarie waye to worke, which are more sorie for the losse of their money than for their friend, and
thinke that they haue lost much, if they bestowe a benefit on any man without some present profite, whereas in déede they gayne thereby a friende, whyche maye by the fruitfullest gayne possible. Erasm. Lib. 3. Apo. When it was tolde Dion (whiche af∣terwardes expelled Dionisius out of his kingdome) that Calixtus his friend, whō aboue all others he trusted moste, wente about to séeke his life: he couloe by no meanes be persuaded to condemne hym to death. But saide: I had rather be dead, than not only to stande in feare of my ennimies, but also to mistruste my friendes. Ex Plutarcho in regum A∣potheg. Antigonus dreamed that he was wal∣king in a faire fielde,Bruso. Lib. 1. cap. 3. and there sowed golden crummes, whereof incontinente sprang vp golden Corne. The interpre∣tation whereof, was applyed to Methri∣dates king of Pontus, whome they sayde at Ponthus to haue great store of Golde. Wherevpon Antigonus fully purposing to destroy Methridates, opened his minde
to Demetrius hys son, binding him with an othe to tell it to no man, but Deme∣trius béeing Methridates verie friende, bycause for his othe he coulde not open it in woordes, watched a tyme vntyll Methridates and he were alone, and then he toke hys Speare, and wyth the poynte thereof wrote, Flee Methridates, and so delyuered hys friende from presente perill. Luc us béeing Brutus verie friende,Bruso, li. 1. cap 3. and séeing the Souldiours verie desirous to take Brutus: he made as thoughe he hadde béene Brutus, and so was taken, and with all spéede brought before An∣tonius the Emperour, in whose presence he sayde: O Anthonie, no man hath ta∣ken Brutus, and God forbid that he shoulde euer come into his ennimies handes. At which wordes of his, when Anthonie sawe his Souldioures great∣ly abashed, he sayde thus vnto them: I beléeue (syrs) that you are greatly grieued, and verie sorie to sée that you are thus deceyued, and also thinke that you were verie muche mocked herein.
But know of a troth that you haue brou¦ght me a better pray than you are aware of, for I knowe not (I protest) what to haue done with Brutus if I hadde him a liue. But such a friende as this is, I had rather haue than all my foes. And so lo∣uingly entertayned, embraced and kys∣sed Lucius. Plutarchus. Orestes and Pilades so entirely loued eache other,Bruso. li. 1. cap 3. that whereas Orestes fell madde for slaying his mother Clitimne∣stra: Pilades tooke him and brought hym to Tauritia to the temple of Diana wher Iphigenia his Sister was abyding. And there afterwards when Orestes and his Sister went about to steale the Image of Diana, he was therefore apprehended and brought before the king. And when he was adiudged to die, Pilades made as though he had bene Orestes▪ and Orestes as the truth was, offred himselfe as the partie guiltie. And so contended whe∣ther of them should die. Ex Plutarcho. Suche friendship likewise there was betwixt Damon and Pythias,Bruso Lib. 1. cap. 3. that wher∣as Dionisius the tirante had condemned one of them to die, and he desired leaue
to goe to bid his friendes their vltimum val, and to set his goodes in a staye: the other became his suertie, promising that if he came not at his daye, he would dye in his steade. But when he was so faith∣full that he came at the time prefixed: Dionisius maruelling at their fidelitie forgaue the partie guiltie, & desired them to make him the thirde in this saythfull and friendly fellowship. Cicero off li. 3. But bycause this friendshippe is a blacke Swanne in these oure dayes,Bruson. li. 1. cap. 3. E∣sope in his fables warneth vs, that the things whiche we nowe doe our selues, we neuer loke for our friendes to do for vs. The Fable whereof is thys: On a tyme the Larke hauing yongones in a corne fielde which began to waxe ripe, when she shoulde flee abreade to séeke meat, she warned them to herken what news they could hear, and at hir cōming home to certifie hir thereof. It happend in the meane season that the owner of the fielde came thether with hys sonne to see his corne, saying this géere is ripe, and it is tyme that it were nowe cutte downe: wherefore to morrow morning
betimes goe vnto my friendes, and de∣sire them that I maye haue their helpe to dispatche this businesse: whyche thing the sonne accordingly dyd, and they no doubt promysed their ayde. Wherefore at nyghte when the Larke came home, all hir birdes beganne to flutter aboute hir, telling hir what they hadde hearde, and desiring that shée woulde inconti∣nent carrie them to some other place, but she willed them be contente, and bad them hearken the next day what newes they coulde heare. The nexte daye the goodman and hys Sonne came a fielde, wayting when his friendes woulde ap∣peare, but there came nobodie. Where∣fore he sayde agayne vnto hys Sonne, goe to my Cosens and Kinsfolke, and de∣sire them to morrowe morning to come and helpe me reaps my corne. The yong∣birdes hearing thys, were nowe more earnest wyth theyr damme to transporte them thence, but she was as earnest to persuade them not to be afraide. For no Cosens (quothe she) will be so seruicea∣ble, that they wyll strayghte-wayes
come and helpe their kinred. But to morrowe abyde, and hearken what o∣ther newes you can heare, and then if néede bée, I will prouide for you. The nexte daye the Cosens came not: wher∣fore the goodman sayde, farewell friends and kinsfolke, let vs truste to our selues, goe thou my Sonne and prouide two hookes, one for thy selfe, and an other for me, and we two to morrowe will reape it our selues. When the Larke hearde of this, nay now (quoth she) it is time to get vs packing, and so she immediately bare away hir youg ones. Ex Aesopo. Zopirus caused his nose and his eares to be cutte off, and making as though he were some other of the Persian princes: he wente vnto Babylon, and there com∣playned, that Darius hadde so cruelly delte wyth him, desiring them to take vengeāce on him. And so preuailed with them that they leuied a power, and made him chiefe ruler of their Armie, and so by this meanes betrayed Babylon vnto Darius his friende. But afterwardes Darius woulde often say, that he hadde
rather haue Zopirus whole agayne, than the cōquest of a hundred Babilons. Much vnlike such Princes whiche make more of a disarde, a horse, or a dogge, than of an honest faythfull and learned friende. Also Darius finding faulte with the cru∣eltie of Zopirus towards himself, would say that by a foule facte he hadde gotten himself a fair name. Ex Plutarcho & lu∣stino in Lib. 1. Scipio the yonger following the ad∣uise of Polibius, endeuored neuer to re∣turne out of the market before he hadde made some of them whom he met there, to become his verie friend. Plurarchus in Reg. Apoth. When Nicocles and Photion being perfite friendes, were condemned to die of poyson, Nicocles desired Photion to suffer him firste to taste of this deadely drinke, who answered. Albeit friende Nicocles this request of thyne is hard, yet must I néedes graunt it thée, to whō in all my life hetherto I neuer denyed ought. So great a griefe it is where true friendshippe is, to sée the deathe of his friend. Plutarch. in Grae. Apoth.
Of Gluttonie and Ryot. WHen it was tolde Augustus that Curotes his steward of Aegipt had boughte a tame Quayle, whiche was compted the passingst fighting birde in all the Countrie, and after he had bou∣ghte him, dyd roste and eate him. He sent for his Stewarde, and prouing this reporte to be true, he commaunded that he shoulde be fastned to the maste of a ship and there to dye. Accompting him vnworthie to liue, who for his glutto∣nous appetite woulde kyll a bird, whose life woulde haue shewed many menne much pastime and pleasure. When it was tolde Scipio that a cer∣tayne yong man bydding Guestes to a banquet, hadde made cakes lyke vnto the Cittie, and termed it Carthage: he tooke thys yong mans horse from hym, and when he demaunded hym what he mente thereby? whye quod Scipio, dyddest thou fyrste take awaye Car∣thage from me and eat it? And so with a prettie scoffe punished him for hys
gluttonie. Cyrus in Xenophon rebuked Astia∣ges his Grandfather for his excesse in de∣licate fare. But Astiages answered him, if thou dyddest once taste of thys, my Sonne, thou wouldest like it maruel∣lous well: and howe shoulde I like of it quoth Cyrus whereas thou doest so much abhorre it? For when thou takest breade thou neuer wipest thy fyngers after it: but when thou dippest of thys, thou kée∣pest a wyping as thoughe thou haddest touched some vncleane thing. Of Hatred and Enuie. WHen it was tolde Agis that there was one enuied him, no force (quothe he) the harme shall be hys, for then both his owne euill happe and my good fortune shall put him to payne: A∣luding to Horace who sayde. Inuidus alterius rebus macrescit opimis. The enuious man pineth awaye when he séeth his aduersarie prosper.
And Antisthenes sayde, that Enuie gnaweth & consumeth the enuious man no other wise than ruste dothe the yron. Likewise Chrisostome vppon one of the Psalmes saythe: that enuie is an vn∣quenchable fire whiche consumeth hym that hath it, like as the mothes do cloth. Whose vglie anctamie a certaine Poet describeth in this sort. Pallor in ore sedet macies in corpore toto. In English thus: His face is pale, his corpes is leane, his eyes are dimme of sight, His teeth do rust, his breath doth stinke his tong is poysoned quite: He neuer laughes, vnlesse it be vvhen other men do vveepe, He troubled is at others ioyes, that scarce he taketh his sleepe, And other men he blameth apase and they at him do chyde, And thus himselfe he doth torment, and payne doth still abyde. When Caius Furnius was made frée, albeit he hadde but a little grounde of hys owne: yet he so played the good
husbande therein, that he hadde more encrease of Corne than hys neighbours hadde, of better and farre larger fieldes. Wherefore some of them accused hym, that he had by witchcrafte gotten other mennes Corne into hys fielde. At the day therfore of his appearance, he brou∣ght all his husbandrie tooles with hym. He broughte his Daughter béeing a ioly huswife, and wel apparelled, hys plow∣chaynes strong and well made, his cul∣ter, share, and other instrumentes méete for a good husbande, and hys Oxen migh∣tie and full of fleshe, and sayde: loe here are my charming instrumentes whyche brought my field so good encrease, and so he was released. Ex Plin. Lib 18. cap. 16. Bruson. Lib. 3. cap. 7. Antiphiles enuying Apelles, accused hym to Ptolome, (who loued him verie well,) that he wente to Tyre, and there stirred the king to Rebellion, and saide that al the businesse which was betwene the irians and Aegipt, came by means of this Apelies. Ptolome beléeuing this tale, began to cal Apelles traitour and rebel. But afterwards when one of the
Tirian captiues swore, that Apelles was falsly accused, & that he neither made nor medled therein: Ptolome repented him that euer he had so said, and for amends, gaue Apelles a hundred Talentes, and this Antiphiles to be his bondman. A iust reward of a lying and enuious var∣let, and a notable example for Princes to be ware, so lightely to giue credite to pickthankes and tell tales. Brusonius Lib. 3. cap. 7. Marcus Anthonius commaunded hys Steward to deliuer two hundred poun∣des to a friende of his.Bruso. lib. 3. cap. 7. But the Stew∣ard maruelling, & enuying at the great∣nesse of the gifte, beganne to open the money, and asked what shoulde be done therewith? Why I tell thée (quoth the Emperour) I mean to bestow it on this my friend. And séeing the malicious sto∣macke of his Steward, he sayde: Is thys the whole summe? yea (quoth he:) now urely quoth Anthonius I thought two hundred poundes had contayned muche more mency than thys. Wherfore go and fetch as much more. O how many uch wicked and malicious stewards be
there nowe a dayes, which bicause they deserus nothing them selues, they can not abide that theyr Lordes shoulde be∣stowe it on suche, as well deserue it. Themistocles was so gréeued, to sée Milciades honoured for the greate con∣quest he wonne at Marathea, fighting a∣gainst the Barbarians: that he could not take his rest. And being demaūded what caused him to be so watchfull? He aun∣swered, that Milciades triumphs, would not suffer him to sleepe. The king of the Assirians, so loued Gobrias, one of his Noble men, that he meaned to ioyne his daughter in marri∣age with Gobrias sonne. Wherewith Gobrias being well content, sent his on∣ly sonne to the king, that they mighte further intreat of this marriage matter. But so it fell oute, that the kings sonne, and he going a hunting together, and chauncing to méete with a Beare, the kings sonne shotte at him, and missed, but this young Gobrias siewe him. And when the like chaunced, in chasing a Lyon: the kings sonne was so wrothe, and enuious against him, that he tooke a
speare out of his mannes hande, and slue him. Bruson. Lib, 3. cap. 7. Of Harlots. SAlomon who had himselfe. 300. concu∣bines, sayeth in his Prouerbes, that the lippes of an harlot, are as the drop∣ping of an hony combe, and her throte more swéete than oyle, but hir ende is as bitter as wormewoode. When Agrippus a yongman in Plau∣tus comedie, intituled Asinaria,Bruso. lib. 3. cap. 7. was like to be put from his lemman, bicause he had not twentie pounds to giue her, and Leonidas his man hadde so handled the matter, that he had gotte the money: the harlot came to him and saide, O Leonida mine eye, my Rose, my minde, my plea∣sure and hartes delight, let me haue the mony that we two louers be not put a∣sunder. Nay I pray thée quoth Leonidas call me thy sparow, thy hen, thy Lambe, thy kid or thy calfe, and so pretely taūted hir flattering tong. Straphones a soldier in Plautus comedie Truculentus, was in loue wt Phronesius a harlot, & whē he had ben frō hir a season
she sayde, that she was conceyued with chylde by him, and getting an other wo∣mans chylde, she mente to present it vn∣to hym, and make hym beleeue that it was his. When worde was broughte vnto him, that Phronesius was broughte a bedde with a chyld, and confessed that he was father therof, he made al spéed to returne home vnto hir. Afterwardes re∣sorting vnto hir house, and méeting with Astrophius the Harlottes handmayde, he talked with hir in this sorte: I praye thee is Phronesius brought a bedde? yea forsoothe syr (quoth she) wyth a goodly Boye. And is it like me quoth he? as like as maye be (quoth she.) For as soone as he was borne, he called for a sword and a buckler. Phryne desired a Caruer that was in loue wyth hir, to gyue hir one of the best Images he had, the whiche thing the lo∣uer promised to do, but the craftie Har∣lot thinking that he woulde not lette hir knowe whiche was the beste, suborned her man to set his shop on fire, wherfore when moste parte of his Images were brent, and yet some of the beste escaped,
the caruer cryed out, Alas if Cupide and my Satyres had bene brent, I had bene vtterly vndone. And so by this diuel she pollicie, she vnderstanding that the I∣mage of Cupide was more worth than the reste, required to haue it for hir re∣warde. Ex Eras. li. 6. Apoth. Theodora a passing strumpet,Lycost. talking with Socrates of hir great haunt, made hir beste that she could call away more of his schollers, than he coulde of hirs. No maruell (quoth Socrates:) for thy wayes séeme pleasaunt and easie: but the way to vertue séemeth full of bram∣bles and briers. Recitatur apud Xeno∣phon, & Telia. li. 13. de varia histo. Gnathena a queane,Licost. séeing two yong men fighting for hir, comforted him that had the worse in this wise: Be merie good felowe, for this game was not for glorie, but for spending of money. Mea∣ning that in other games he that had the beste, had some rewarde for his paynes. But héere he that had the best, must pay some money, or else should go wtcout hir. And so it was better for him to go with∣out ye cōquest, than haue it. Ex Er. l. 6. Ap.
Of Humanitie and Gentlenesse. DEmonax sayde, that we ought not he offended with men, when they of∣fende vs, but to correct and amend their faults: imitatin; herein good phisitians, which are not offended with mē, bicause they are infirmed, but indeuour to cure their disease. And as it is proper to man to offende: so is it the maner of God, and of suche men as desire to be like vnto God, to forgiue their offences. Ex Eras. li. 8. Apoth.Licost. Certen tospottes chaunced to fall in company with Pisistratus wise, who ha∣uing dronken more than they had bled, began to shewe their lasciuious maners abundantly towards hir. But on the mo∣row whē they came to them selues, and remēbred what they had don, they went to Pisistratus, and besoughte him wyth teares to forgiue their follie. To whome Pisistratus sayde: take héede hereafter that you behaue your selues more sober∣ly. But as for my wyfe, I can beare hir record, that she was not out of my gates
yesterday of all the day. Shewing great humanitie in forgiuing the sily soules,Lycost. and no lesse wisedome in defending his wiues honestie. Ex Plut in Grae, Apoth. When one told Agisipolis, that Philip king of Macedonie had in a shorte tyme destroyed the citie Olirthius, he answe∣red: but it would be a good while ere he woulde builde suche an other. Meaning that it were far better with gentlenesse to preserue suche a citie, than with suche austeritie to destroy it. Ex Plut. in La. Theodocius the younger was of suche and so wonderfull humanitie,Licost. that when his friends demaunded him why he dyd not behead suche as had conspired hys death? he aunswered: I had rather re∣store suche as are dead to lyfe, than to put to death suche as are alyue. Aboun∣dauntly herein declaring the ductie of a good Prince, who oughte to be gentle and ready to forgiue suche as offende priuately agaynst him selfe,Ex Eras. li. 8. Apoth. but yet to be austere and sharpe to punishe such as offende generally agaynst the com∣mon wealth.Brus. li. 3. cap. 4. When Ouileus Camillus a Romans
Senatour meaned to rebell, and pur∣chase vnto him selfe the Romane Em∣pire, Alexander Seuerus hearing therof, sent for him, and thanked him, that he was so willing to take so great a charge in hande. And in the Senate house cal∣led him sellowe Emperoure, curteously intertayned him into his palace, caused him to be apparelled with his imperiall robes, and when he went in progresse, tooke him as his companion to ryde with him. And when he him selfe wente on foote, he woulde cause him to ryde on horsebacke. And finally when by the lawe he was condemned to dye, he gaue him his life, and forgaue him his fault. Traianus the Emperour,Eiusdem. which succe∣ded Nerua, did so surmount his predeces∣sours in humanitie and gentlenesse, that when his friends blamed him, and saids he was too gentle vnto his subiectes: he answered, that he behaued him selfe to∣wardes them, as he woulde wishe that they should do towards him. Sigismunde the Emperour sayde,Licost. that those Princes of all others were moste happie and fortunate, which expel from
out of their courte the malicious and proude, and retayne suche as be mercy∣full and gentle. Aeneas Siluius de dictis Sigismun, Impe. Alexander hauing taken Porus king of Indio captiue,Licost. offered to giue him his request in any thing that he shoulde rea∣sonably demaunde. Wherefore king Porus desired him that he might be vsed lyke a king. At which words Alexander smiled, and sayde: I meaned so to doo, albeit thou haddest not desired it, though not for thy sake, yet for my owne honor and honestie. Ex Bruso. li 3. cap. 13. When one had solde gems of glasse vnto Galenes, Aurelius Ceasars wyfe,Lycost. making hir be léeue that they were right gemmes, she afterwardes perceyuing that she was so deluded, desired hir hus∣bande to haue him punished for his dis∣ceite. Whervppon the Emperour com∣manded that be should be taken, & made him beléeue that he should be deuoured of a lyon. Then béeing put into a caue, and all men looking when a ramping lion should come to deuoure him, on a sodayne he caste in a sily capon. And
when all men maruelled at so ridicu∣lous a thing, he caused the crier to cry, he offended in deceit, and with deceite lo he is punished.Lycost. Ex Trebellio pollio. This Aurelianus the Emperour com∣ming to besiege Tira, and finding the gates shut agaynst him, said in his chafe, that he would not leaue a dog aliue in al that citie. Which voyce of his greately encouraged his souldiers, hoping therby to get some great pray, and when they had nowe subdued the citie, they desi∣red the Emperor according to promise, to suffer them to ransacke the same. Go to (quoth he) I remember in déede that I sayde, that I woulde leaue neuer a dogge in all the citie. Wherfore go your ways, and kil them al. And so he accom∣plished his promise, and yet gētly intre∣ted his einmies. Ex Flauio Vopisc. At the siege of Caieta,Lycost. when the inha∣bitants had for want of vittaile expelled out of their citie all the yong frie, olde people, and all other that were not mete for warre: Alphonsus king of Arra∣gon, who came to subdue them, gently receyued them into his campe. Where∣of
of when certayne of his souldiers bla∣med him, and sayde, that if he had not receyued them, the Caietanes woulde haue yéelded vnto him ere long: he an∣swered, that he dyd more estéeme their lyues, than the conquest of a hundred suche cities. A notable acte, and wor∣thy perpetuall memorie. And afterwar∣des the citie, which with fortie thousand men of armes he coulde not subdue, by that kindenesse, without any effusion of bloud yéelded vnto him. Ex Panor. li. 1. de rebus geftis Alphonsi. Ex domino Foxo.Iohannes Scotus, a right godly deuine and learned Philosopher, comming to Fraunce out of his owne countrey of Scotland, by reason of the gret tumults of war, was worthily intertained, & had in great estimation of Carolus Caluus the Frenche king, whom he commonly and familiarly vsed to haue about him, both at bed & at borde. Vpon a time the king sitting at meate, and séeing (be∣like) in this Iohn Scotus. somewhat which séemed not very courtly: cast forth a mery word, asking him what differēce there was betwene a Scot and a Sot?
Whervnto the Scot sitting ouer against the king, somewhat lower, replyed a∣gayne sodenly, rather than aduisedly, (yet merily) saying: Mensa tantum, that is, the table onely: importing himselfe to be the Scot, and so by crafte calling the king a Sot. Which thing the king tooke in good parte, and laughed it out. Xerxes séeing Grecian spyes come to viewe his armie, dyd them no harme, but ledde them about, shewing them all his armie, and let them go vnhurt. Laurentius Palatine of Hungarie said, that Sigismunde the Emperoure dyd foolishly,Lycost. who not onely forgaue his eni∣mies their liues, but also intreated them as his friends, and bestowed much libe∣ralitie vpon them: to whom Sigismunde answered, thou thinkest it profitable to kill thy enimies, bicause they shal make warre agaynst thée no more. But I kill my enimie with sparing him, and with my liberalitie I make him my friende. Ex Aenea Siluio. l. 3. commentarij de re∣bus geis Alphon.
Of Innocencie, or a good conscience. WHen Anaxandridas sawe one hea∣uie,Licost. bicause he should be banished the citie, he said, be not afraid good felow to leaue the citie, but be afraid to forsake iustice & equitie. Meaning that they wer not miserable which were vnworthily punished, but them to be most miserable which of their owne accorde forsake iu∣stice,Ex Plut. in Lac. Apoth. and depart from honestie, albeit no punishment ensue therfore. Pirrhus leading an armie agaynst the Lacedemonians,Lycost. heard Cyrcilidas a La∣cedemonian Senatour manace the ar∣mie. But Pirrhus saide vnto them: Be of good comforte sirs, for if Cyrcilidas be a God, we haue done nothing wherewith he may be displeased. But if he be but a man, he shall well perceiue that we are men, to whome he thus threatneth, and not women. Whose meaning was, that the innocēt are always in hope of Gods fauour and assistaunce: Who although he be sometimes displeased, yet will he always he iust and righteous in visiting
the vniust,Ex Max. Ser. 5. and letting the innocent and guiltlesse escape. When Vespasian had a long time ben sicke of an ague,Licost. and was remoued in his bedde from the place where he lay, vnto some other chamber: he looked vp into heauen, and complayned that his life should without cause be taken from him. And sayde that he was sory for no déede that euer he did, but for one, what that was he tolde not him selfe, neither can any contecture what it should be. Ex Suetonio. Whē one blamed Anthonius Pius the Emperor,Lycost. saying: that he was ouer gen∣tle vnto his enimies, & suche as had con∣spired his death, asking him what should become of him, if they had preuayled a∣gaynst him? he answered: I doo not so serue God, neither is my life suche that I should be giuen into my enimies han∣des. Ex Brus. li. 5. cap. 26. Alphonsus King of Arragon, béeing de∣maunded why he went somtimes with∣out his gard? answered, that he went ac∣companied with innocēcie. Wherby the wise prince meaned that he was well
garded from sustayning any iniurie, that had a cleare conscience of his owne, and that they wer neuer in safetie, who bere about them a corrupt conscience,Panor. li. 2. de Alphon. rebus gestis. but as the Psalmist sayth, they are afrayde of daunger where no daunger is. Of Iudges and Iudgement. PHilip king of Macedonie, sitting in iudgemēt in a certen cause of one Ma∣cheta, slumbring, and not tending the cause, vnaduisedly condemned Macheta. But he cried out, and said, I appeale. Ap∣peale (quod the king) vnto whō dost thou appeale? Vnto thée O king (quod he) if thou wilt awake & heare me. Whervpō the king began to awake & be more attē∣tiue in his cause, & perceiuing that he had done him wrong, he did not reuoke hys former iudgement, but payed him selfe the summe, wherein Macheta was con∣demned. Bruso. li. 3. cap. 10. Alexander Seuerus did beare such sto∣macke agaynst corrupt iudges, that whē he chaunced to méete with any of thē, by cōmotion of his minde he would cast vp
choler, béeing so moued with them, that he could not speake, and was ready with his two fingers to putte out their eyes. Bruso. li. 3. cap. 10. When Cambises king of Persia vn∣derstoode that one of his iudges had pro∣nounced false iudgement, he cōmaunded that his skin should be flayne of, & set on the chaire where he sat in iudgemēt, and where his sonne after him should sit to giue sentence. Brus. li 3. cap. 10. Marcus Antonius the wyse Philoso∣pher, and mightie Emperour was wont to say, that priuate persons had many iudges, but Princes and Magistrates haue onely God to be their iudge. As by this example folowing may appeare. Ex domino Foxo.Anno domini. 1105. two famous Arche∣bishops of Mentz béeing right vertuous and wel disposed prelates, were cruelly and tirannously delt withal, & intreated by the bishoppe of Rome. Their names were Henrie and Christian. This Henry hauing intelligence that he was com∣playned of to the Pope, sent a learned man, (an especiall friend of his) named Arnolde, to excuse him. But this honest
man Arnolde, in steade of an excuser became an accuser, brybing the chiefe Cardinalles with good golde: by which meanes he obtayned of the Pope those two Cardinalles to be sente as inquisi∣tours, and onely doers in that present case. The which (comming to Germa∣nie) summoned the sayde Henry, and deposed him of his Archbishopricke (for all that he could doo) either by iustice, or lawe, substituting in his place the sayde Arnolde▪ vppon hope (no doubte) of the Ecclesiasticall golde. Wherevpon that vertuous and honorable Henry spake vnto those peruerse iudges on this wise: If I shoulde appeale vnto the Aposto∣like see for your vniust processe had a∣gaynst me: perhappes the Pope would attempte nothing more herein than you haue, neither shoulde I winne any thing by it, but onely toyle of body, losse of good, affliction of minde, care of heart, and missing of his fauor. Wherfore I do appeale vnto the Lord Iesu Christ, as to the most highest and iust iudge, and cite you before his iudgement, there to an∣swere before the high iudge. For neither
iustly nor godly (but by corruption as it pleased you, ye haue iudged me. Wher∣to they scoffingly answered: go you first, & we wil folow you. Not lōg after (as the storie is) the said Henry died. Whereof the two Cardinals hauing intelligence, sayd one to the other, iestingly: beholde he is gone before, and we must folow, ac∣cording to our promise. And verily they said truer than they were aware of, for within a while they died in one day. For the one sitting on a iakes to ease himself voided out al his intrels into ye draught, & miserably died. The other gnawing of the fingers of his hands, & spitting them out of his mouth (all deformed in deuou∣ring himself) died. And likewise not lōg after the ende of these men, the foresayd Arnolde (moste horribly) in a sedition, was slayne: and certayne dayes, lying stinking aboue the grounde vnburied, was open to the spoyle of euery rascall and harlot. Ex domino Fox. As Ptolome was on a time playing at tables,Licost. one came to him, reading the names of such as were cōdemned, with the crimes that they had committed, to
knowe what kinde of execution eche of them (according to their deserts) should sustayne. But Bernice, Ptolomes wife tooke the scroule of his hand, and would not suffer him make an ende of reading. And sayde that he ought not go so vnad∣uisedly to worke, when they intreate of life and death, but leauing of their game, should go to it in earnest. Knowing that the lyfe of man is of greater impor∣taunce, than a caste at tables. Which wise words of hirs greatly pleased the wise Prince, and after that he woulde neuer determine of so weightie a mat∣ter, before he had rightly & duly conside∣red the same. Ex Aeliano. li. 14. de Va. hi. When Zeuxis an excellēt painter had portrayed the picture of Helena,Lycost. Nico∣stratus an other painter cōming by, gazed a long time on ye artificiall workmāship thereof. An other of his neighbours cō∣ming that way, went to Nicostratus, and asked him why he wondred so muche at so common a thing? O (quoth he) if thou hadst mine eyes, thou woldest not think it common. Alluding to our prouerbe:Eras. li. 6. Apoth. A blinde man can not iudge of colours.
When Apelles had portrayed his py∣ctures, he vsed to set them foorth in the stréete, and sitting him selfe behinde a clothe, he woulde hearken what euery one sayde of his workemanship. It hap∣ned therefore on a tyme, that hauing with all diligence portrayed a passing péece: a shoemaker came by, and founde faulte with the shoe, saying, that there wanted a hemme in the héele, which re∣profe of hys, Apelles (authorizing hys science) tooke in good parte. But the next day comming by agayne, he sayde that the legge was not well formed. Wher∣fore Apelles séeing his blinde boldnesse: stepped foorth, and sayde: Ne sutor vltro crepidam. Nay let not shoemaker med∣dle further than the shoe. Ex Bruson. lib. 1. cap. 10. Negabisus an affectionate fellowe sometimes would greatly commend the rude workemanshippe of the Paynter,Licost. and at an other tyme woulde disprayse very artificiall workemanship. Wher∣fore Xeuxes sonnes holding a payn∣ting sticke in their handes, would laugh and mocke him to scorne. Wherewith
when he séemed to be offended, Xeuxes sayde vnto him: as long as thou holdest thy peace, the children thinke thou arte a fine fellow, bycause of thy gay clothes, but as sone as thou thinkest to speake of some weightie matter, they contemne thée, Wherfore rule thy tong, and praise nothing wherein thou hast no skill, and knowest not whether it be well or euil. Ex Aeliano. Lib. 2. de vari. Brusonius li. 3. cap. 16. Erasmus Lib. 6. Apoth. Plin. pro Negaby. ponit. Alexan. Magnum. Of Iustice and Equitie. WHen Bias was about to condemne one to deathe, he began bitterly to wéepe, and to lamente the lamentable case of the man. But when one sayd vn∣to hym, why doste thou wéepe? since it standeth in thy choyce whether thou wilt condemne him or saue him: he an∣swered as nature chargeth me to bewail his death: so dothe she bynde me for no∣thing to depart from iustice and equitie. Ex Eras. ser. 44.
Antisthenes the wisest of the Atheni∣an Philosophers, sayde: that a wise man is not bounde to humane lawes. Mea∣ning that a wise man is only bounde to vertue, and in all things ordereth his life according to equitie and iustice. Laer. li. 6 When Cyrus was a boy, his maister gaue him this argumēt to teach him the rule of perfect iustice. There wer (quoth he) two boyes, the one great, and he had a little coate, the other little, and he had a great crate, nowe this little boye put of his owne great coate, and did putte on his fellowes little coate. Was this good iustice quoth ye master, or no? Yea (quoth Cyrus) for by this meanes eche of them had a fitte coate. Nay quoth his master thy iudgement is false. For iustice com∣maundeth to giue euery one his owne. And so tooke him vp and beate him. On a time as Carolus Caluus the French king was sitting at dinner, and was serued with a certain dishe of fishe, wherin were two great ones and a litle one, after he had therof sufficiently takē his repast, he set downe the saide fishe to Iohannes Scotus, to distribute with the
two clarkes that were sitting with him, which were two tall mightie persons, he himself being but a little man. Iohannes taketh the fishe, of the which the two great ones he carued to himselfe: the lit∣tle fishe he reached to the other two: whose vniuste deuision the king behol∣ding, reprehended him therfore. But he answered and saide that he would proue this deuision to be bothe iust and equall. For heere (sayth he) be two great and a little, poynting to the two great fishes, and him selfe: and likewise héere a∣gaine is a little one, and two great, poin∣ting to the little fish, & the two great per∣sons. I pray you (quoth he) what oddes is this? or what distribution can be more e∣quall? Ex domino Fox. Glaucus in all his dealings was a ve∣ry iust and vprighte manne, only in one thing a little departing from iustice, he was greatly plagued therefore. On a time one Milesius tooke a greate summe of money to kéepe, leauing a certen to∣ken whereby he mighte knowe howe, and to whome to restore it againe. But after long continuaunce of tyme,
when the sonnes of the man that deliue∣red it came to require it, he woulde not deliuer the money before he had therein consulted the oracle. Wherefore he died without issue, and the name of hys house was cleane extinct and decayed. Bruson. Lib. 3. cap. 8. Iohannes the Emperoure, and Hen∣ricus Duke of Corinthe,Lycosthe. being a long tyme at variance for the kingdome of Boheme: there came one vnto this Io∣hannes, who promised that if he shoulde haue any thing for his laboure, he wold poyson the Duke his ennimie. But this godly Emperoure so embraced iustice: that he gaue him this sharpe aunswere. If thou haddest killed Duke Henrie, I not knowing thereof, and haddest come to me for a rewarde: I promise thée I woulde haue rewarded thée with a hal∣ter, for imbruing thy hands with his re∣gal bloud. And wouldest thou, thou var∣let haue ben author of so horrible an acte? Aneas Siluiu, lib 3. commentario∣rum de rebus gestis Alpho. Ex domino Fox.On a tyme when the Abbot of a cer∣taine Monasterie was dead, there came
vnto the Courte of VVilliam Rufus then king of Englande two Monkes of the same house: who before hadde gathe∣red muche money and made their frien∣des to the king, and offred large of∣fred large offers, eyther of them to be promoted vnto that dignitie. Ther was also the third Monk, who of méekenesse and humilitie followed the other two: to the intente that on him whome the King shoulde admitte Abbot, he shoulde attende and wayte. The King called be∣fore him the two Monkes seuerally, & eyther of them out-profered the other, but as he caste his eye aside, he espyed the thyrde Monke standing by, suppo∣sing that his comming had also bene for the like cause, wherfore calling him vn∣to him, he asked him what he would do, whether he woulde giue more than his brethren hadde offred to be Abbot? who aunswered the king and sayde: that he neyther hadde (nor woulde if he myght) offer any penny for it, nor by any suche vnlawefull meanes come by it. When the King had wel pondered his answere he sayde, that he was beste worthy to be
Abbot, and to haue the rule of so holy a charge: and so gaue it him without ta∣king any pennie for it. Of Laboure and paine taking. DEmocritus being demaunded what difference was betwixt the painefull and the idle? answered, the same diffe∣rence that is betwéene the wicked and the godly.Lycost. For the labourer hopeth for his rewarde, whereas the idle persone, respecting his present estate, is content to take his ease, and to liue a miserable and beggerly life. Ex Maxi. ser. 32. The wise man in his Prouerbes, re∣proueth the sluggardes in thys wise. Go to the Pismire, O thou sluggard: beholde her wayes, and be wise. For shée hauing no guide, gouernoure, nor ruler, prepa∣reth hir meat in sommer, and gathereth hir foode in haruest. How long wilt thou sleepe O thou sluggarde? when wilt thou awake out of thy sléepe? Yet a litle sléepe,
a little slumber, a little folding of thy handes together: Therefore thy pouer∣tie commeth on as a trauailer by the way, and thy necessitie as an armed man. The Corinthians hearing that Phillip king of Macedonie, was comming to inuade theyr kingdome: began euery man to doe his endeuoure to resist his force. One in making fitte his armoure, an other in gathering of stones togither. Be made the wals hygher, and the other made the fortresses stronger, and to be shorte, euery one did somewhat which might tende to the defence and sauegard of the Citie. Which thing when Diogi∣nes saw (bicause he had no other thing to do) he began to roll and tumble his tun. Whereat when one of his fréends won∣dered, and asked what he meaned there∣by? He answeared, bicause I alone will not be idle, when all these are so busily occupied. Guido Bitur. tit. de Disidia. When one tolde Socrates that hée woulde very faine goe to Olympia,Lycost. but that he feared least he shoulde not be able to endure the laboure and paynes:
Socrates answered him, I know thou v∣sest to walk betwene thy meales, which walke if thou vse onwardes thy way to Olympus, within fiue or sixe dayes thou shalte come there. Whereby the wyse man declared that it is rather a slouthful imagination, than oughte else, whiche maketh men afrayde to attempte any goodnesse. For if we should sustayne any labour, daunger, or coste, for some ho∣nest matter: Lorde howe we excuse our selues, detracte the time, and cast daun∣gers? Whereas commonly in a thing of no value, yea sometimes in vnhonest affayres, we nothing sticke to sustayne the like or greater paynes. As for exam∣ple, exhorte a slouthfull truande to the studie of learning and vertue, and he wil straiwaies haue an excuse, that for want of wealth he can not sitte vp, and take paynes at his booke, that he is not able to buy bookes and other necessaries to his studie: and yet the selfe same fel∣lowe for all his weaknesse can indure to sit vp whole nightes at cardes, dise, and tossing the pot, and so bothe spende his money, léese his credite, and gette the
Ague, Goute, or Dropsie or some suche disease. When one Matheus Siculus blamed Alphonsus for labouring wyth his owne handes: Alphonsus smyled and sayde, what hath God and nature giuen Kings their handes to do nothing with? The Lacedemonians vsed this pro∣uerbe, put to thy hande and then call on fortune and she will helpe thée: Where∣by they meant that we shoulde so call to God for helpe that we in the meane sea∣son be not idle our selues, for then our prayer shall nothing helpe vs. And as we know ye he will prosper our workes that we attempte in his feare:Lycost. so oughte we to persuade oure selues that he dete∣steth idle and slouthful persons, and that his pleasure is that we shoulde take paynes for his blessings, not thincking him to be so folish that he wil bestow his blessings on them that eare not for thē. Ex Plut. in Lacon. Amis king of Egipt, amongste other his statutes, made an especiall law, that the Pretor should once a weeke aske an accoumpte howe euery one in the Citie
liued: to the intent that if any were founde irle, or occupyed in any vnhenest science, he should be taken and punished as one greatly offending against the cō∣mon wealth. Aristotle woulde often saye that the roote of learning was sowre and bitter,Lycost. but the frute thereof to be most pleasant and swéete▪ Meaning thereby that with∣out laboure and diligence a man can at∣taine nothing▪ But after laboure and di∣ligēce so applied, that there ensueth per∣petuall rest and tranquilitie of mind. Ex Laert. lib. 5. cap. 5. Of Lawes, Statutes, and Decrees. PAusanias being demaunded why the Spartanians might alter none of their olde lawes?Bruso. lib. 3. cap. 34 bicause (said he) that lawes ought to rule mē, & not to be ruled by thé. Anacharsis, no lesse pleasantly than truely,Ibidem, called lawes spider webs, bicause they take the silly flées, but let the great birds through them. Meaning yt the pore only are punished for their offences, but the riche and mighty by bribing, and o∣ther
shiftes, escape vnpunished. When one inquired of Demarchus,Lycost. Ex Plut. in Lacō. Apot. why he was exiled his Countrey, being himselfe Prince therof? He answeared, bicause that oure Spartantan lawes are mightier than oure Princes. Meaning that albeit he were Prince of the Citie: yet he ought to be ruled, & guided by the law. Herein shewing a Princely mode∣stie, in so quietly taking his exile, and so nobly authorizing his countrey lawes: Who did not repine, but spake well of the rigoure of his countrymen. Antiochus the thirde wrote vnto his citizens, willing them, that if he chanced to wryte any thing vnto thē,Lycost. which were cōtrary to ye order of their law: thei shuld not accept it, but accoūt it wrytten weout his consent, or knowledge. For Princes sometimes for pleasing of parties wryte suche things as they would be lothe to haue accomplised. Wherefore, what so euer is contrary to the law,Eras li. 5. A∣po Ex Plut. ought to be accompted as a thing forged, and not cō∣sented vnto by the Prince: who oughte to defend, and not to infringe his lawes and customes.
The Lacedaemonians had a lawe that in warring with their ennimies,Lycost. who so fled out of the fielde, shoulde be appre∣hended and put to deathe. But it hapned that fighting agaynste the Remaynes at a fielde called Leuctria, the greatest part of the Armie tooke their héeles: where∣fore the Captains being destitute of ayde on the one syde, were loth to put so great a multitude of theyr souldiers to death: & on the other side were as lothe to haue their lawes infringed. So yt they desired Agesilaus a valiāt captain & a wise ceū∣seller to take so me order herein, where∣vpon going vp into the pulpet, he began in thys sorte to insinuate the people. My purpose is not at this time eyther to make any newe lawe herein, or to adde or diminishe any thing from your olde and commendable decrées, or in any sorte to alter or chaunge the same. But only thys I counsell and thinke good, that the Statute in thys case enacted, shall from to morrowe forewardes take date for euer hereafter to be executed. And so by thys shift he defended the citie from present danger, and prouided a re∣medie
for the dangerous mutation of lawes, and all this by abrogating the lawe for one daye. Ex Plutarc. in Laco. Apotheg. Augustus made a Lawe for adulte∣rers,Lycost. howe they shoulde be iudged which were accused thereof, and howe they shoulde be punished which were founde guiltie therein. But afterwardes hea∣ring that a yong man hadde to doe with Iulia his daughter, he was so incensed with ire: that he fell on hym and beate hym wyth his owne handes. Where∣fore the yong man cryed out O Caesar thou madest a Lawe herein, but dost thy selfe contrarie to it:Ex Plut. in Rom. Apot. with which words Caesar comming to himselfe, and re∣membring howe he hadde violated his Lawe, was so sorie therefore, that that daye he woulde eate no meate. Ethelstane sometymes king of Eng∣lande, prescribed a Lawe,Ex domino Fox. that euerie man shoulde paye Tythes of hys in∣crease: whose wordes are these. Ego Ethelstanus. &c. I Ethelstane King, charge and commaunde all my officere through my whole Realme, to paye the
Tithes of my proper goods, as wel in li∣uing and cattel, as in the corne and frute of the grounde, and that my Bishoppes likewise of theyr proper goodes, and my Aldermen and officers and heade men shall do the same. Remembring what Iacob sayd vnto the Lord: Of all things that thou hast giuen me I will paye the tenthe, and howe terribly God threat∣neth vs, that if we will not paye oure tithe, from vs nine partes shall be taken away, and the tenth only shal be lest vs. King Alfrede his father deuised and set forthe many godly & holsome lawes:Ex domino Fox. wherein especially by him was proui∣ded for the extirping and abolishing of al theft, and theues out of this realm. So yt the realme throughe his viligante care was broughte to suche tranquilitie, or rather perfection at that euery crosse or turning way he made be set vp a golden brooche, at least of siluer gilded through out his realme: and none to be so hardie by day, or night to take it downe. Vitoldus duke of Lituania,Ex domino Fox. desirous to differ from his subiectes, made a Lawe that all men shoulde be shauen, and no
man to haue a bearde but he. But na∣ture so impugned his vaine deuise, ye he had no hair growing on his face. Wher∣fore still coueting to haue a knacke by himselfe, he shaued his head and his eye∣browes, forbidding his subiectes to doe the like. And he would say that the peo∣ple should obey the lawe, and the lawe be subiecte vnto the Prince. The words and workes of a right impious tirante. Who when he oughte to giue his sub∣iectes example of obeying the law, wold himselfe be vnruely, and lawlesse, and deny that in life and conuersation, which he ratified in words and constitution. Of Lasciuious loue, lust, and lecherie. OVid in his booke de arte amandi, saith loue is I wotte not what, that com∣meth I wotte not whence,Ouid de Arte aman. who sent it I wotte not, it ingendreth I wotte not howe, it is contented I wotte not wher∣with, it is felte I wotte not howe ofte, nor I wotte not wherefore.
And finally it taketh roote without brea∣king of the fleshe outwarde, or pearsing the intrals inwarde. Diogines saith that loue is a businesse to set idle persones a woorke,Lycost. alluding to the verse of Ouid, in his boke de remedio amoris. Laert. lib. 6. Quasi tollas periere Cupidinis arcus, Contemptique iacent & sine luce faces. VVhere idle minde is not in place, There Cupids craft hath lost his grace. Estrasco a yong Romane that was dumb, and Verone a Latin Ladie yt was dumbe also, sawe eche other at the mount Celi∣ote at a feast, and there fell in loue eche with other. And theyr heartes were as sore fixed in loue, as theyr tungs were tied with woordes. The yong Ladie came from Salon to Rome: and he went from Rome to Salon, by the space of thir∣tie yeares together without the witting of any persone. And at last died the hus∣bande of the Lady Verone, and the wife of icrasco, and thē they discouered their loue, and concluded a mariage, of whom discended the noble linage of ye Scipions:
which were more liberall in feates of armes, than their father & mother were of their tongues. Ex M. Aurelio. Masina king of Numidia, and Sa∣pharise a Ladie of Carthage, all only by one sighte, as they sawe eche other on a ladder, he declared his desire vnto hir: and she knowing his luste, breaking the ore of feare, and lifting vp the Ankers of shame, incontinently raysed the say∣les of their hearts, and with the shippes of their persons ioyned eche to other. And so the knowledge of their heartes, the mariage of their bodies, the perditiō of their estate, and the infamie of their name, in one day, in one houre, in one moment, and in one steppe of a ladder was agréed. Ex M. Aurelio. Paris a Troian, and Helena a Greke, of two straunge Nations, and of farre countroys, with one onely sighte in the temple, their willes were so vnited, that he tooke hir as his captiue, and she abode his prisoner. In Paris appeared but small force, and in hir as little resi∣staunce. So that in maner these two yong persons, the one in procuring to
vanquish, the other suffering to be van∣quished, Paris was cause of his fathers death, and Helene of the infamie of hir husbande, and they bothe of their owne death, losse of men, destruction of Troy & slaunder to all the worlde. Virg. li. 2. Aenidos. When Alexander would haue gyuen battayle vnto the Amazones, the quéene captayne of them, no lesse fayre than strong and vertuous, came to a riuers side, and the space of an houre eche of them beheld other with their eyes, with∣out speaking of any worde, & when they returned to their tentes, their fierce∣nesse was turned into swéete wanton words. Ex Marco Aurelio. Cleopatra in the Prouince of Bithinia, in the wood Sehin, made a goodly bāket and solemne feast to Marcus Anthonius hir louer. And though she were not very honest hir self, yet had she with hir right chast women. And thus the banket en∣dured a great part of the night, and the wood béeing thicke, the yong damselles were not so wilie to hide them, but the yong men Romanes found them, so that
of sixtie daughters of the Senators. 55. were gotten with childe. Which thing made great slaūder to the people, sorow to the Senatours, infamie to Cleopatra, and dishonestie to Anthonius. Ex eodem. When Pirrhus, the faythfull defen∣dour of the Tarentines, and renowmed king of Epyrotes, was in Italie, hée came to Naples, and hadde not bene there but a day, the same season there was a Lady in that same citie named Gamalice, of a highe linage, and great∣ly estéemed in beautie, the very same day she was gotten with childe, shamed throughout all Jtalie thrust out of the citie, and slayne by hir owne brother. Ex Marco Aurelio. Nero Domicius was a monster of so horrible vncleannesse, that he absteined not from his owne mother, his naturall sister, nor any degrée of kinred. And that (more horrible is to speake) he vsed hys filthy buggerie with Porus a boy, whom by magike and sorcerie he endeuoured to traduce vnto the nature of a woman. Bruso. li. 3. cap. 9. Letus declareth howe that Maxentius
béeing at a time farre in loue with a no∣ble and chaste gentlewoman of Rome: sente vnto hir suche courtiers of his as were most fitte for that purpose, whom also he had in greater estimation than any others, and with suche was wonte to consulte about matters for the com∣mon wealth. These first fell vpon hir husbande, and murthered him in hys owne house: then when they by no meanes, neither with feare of the ty∣raunt, nor threatning hir death, pull hir from him: at length she desired leaue of them to goe into hir chamber, and af∣ter hir prayers she woulde accomplishe their request. And when she was gone into hir chamber, vnder this pretence she slue hir selfe. But the rakehelles, when they sawe the woman farrie so long, béeing therewith displeased, brake vp the doore, and founde hir lying dead: wherefore they returned, and declared this heauie happe vnto their vnhappie maister. Who was so farre past shame, that in steade of repentaunce, he was the more set on fire to attempt the like. Ex domino Fox.
Also Tarquine the proude, béeing a right goodly man in gesture, right va∣liaunt in armes, and of a noble bloud, as an vnhappie Prince, defiled all his vertues with vicious liuing, in suche wise that he conuerted his heautie into lecherie, and his power into tyrannie, for dooing the lyke villanie vnto Lucre∣cia, the chast Lady of Rome. Whereby he loste not onely his realme, but also caused the name of Tarquine to be bani∣shed out of Rome for euer after. Li∣uius li. 1. &. 2. Of Liberalitie. MYcippa in Salust said vnto Iugurtha, that neither an armie of men, nor yet abundance of treasure were so firme to retayne a kingdome, as a sure and trustie friende, whom neither golde can winne, nor sworde compell to forsake his friende. And suche friends (saide he) by beneficence & liberalitie thou mayest easily finde. At the siege of newe Carthage, there was a proper yong woman (who was
the wife of one Lucius prince of the Cel∣tibrians) taken captiue, and brought vnto Scipio as a bootie worthy of so valiant a captaine. But he no lesse curteous & libe∣rall, than he was valiaunt and martial, did in most honest maner restore hir a∣gayne. Wherfore hir father & hir frien∣des gaue him righte condigne thankes, and offred him a great summe of money for hir raunsome. Which summe Scipio willed them to deliuer vnto him, and fa∣king it in his hands, he deliuered it vnto hir husbande, and said: besides the dourie which hir father had bestowed with hir, he woulde giue that to hir mariage. A∣bundantly declaring his liberal & gentle disposition, both in restoring the damsell and refusing the raunsome. Who on another time hauing taken Hasdruball king Masinisa his cosin cap∣tiue,Brus li 3. cap. 23. gently intertayned him, and sente him home, with other greate presentes vnto the king his cosin. Shewing here∣by that a valiaunt captayne oughte as∣well to excell in liberalitie and other domesticall vertues,Bru. li. & ca. adem. as in warlyke af∣fayres and prowesse.
Cymon was so gentle and liberall,Brus. li. 3. cap. 28. that whereas he had farmes, orchardes, and gardeynes in many places: he ne∣uer set any man to kéepe them, but suf∣fered who so woulde to enioy the fruits thereof: Accustoming alwayes, wher∣soeuer he wente, to haue one followe him with a purse of money, that if any one asked his almes, he might straight∣wayes bestowe his liberalitie vppon him. And if he sawe any one want clo∣thing, he would do off his own apparell, and bestow it vpō him. And though this kinde of liberalitie be in these our dayes very rare, yet by reporte good master Foxe dothe to his power resemble this good Cymon. When a certayne Macedonian was driuing a Mule,Brus. vt in∣fra. laden wyth the kinges coyne: it happened that wyth the weight of the money the Mule was tyred. Wherefore the man tooke it on his owne shoulders, and beganne with greate payne to carrye it. But the weighte thereof was so heauie, that the poore man was forced to fall vnder it. Whiche when Alexander the kyng
espied, he sayde: bicause thou shalte not be wearie to carrie so tedious a burthen, I giue it thée, take it, and carrie it to thy owne house. When Ptolome had subdued Deme∣trius, he not onely spared his lyfe, but al∣so lefte his tente vntouched, and gaue him. 8000. of his captiue souldiers with∣out any raunsome, saying: that valiant men striue not for the death of men, but for honour and glory. Whose regall be∣neficence Demetrius wondering at, desi∣red God to giue him occasion to requite him with the like. And so it came to passe. For Demetrius tooke Cilla a nota∣ble aptayne of Ptolomeis, captiue, and with lyke humanitie restored hym a∣gayne.Brus. li. 2. cap. 28. Amongest infinite foreine examples which I might here insert: I thoughte good not to forget a domesticall example of an English captayne in beneficence and liberalitie inferiour to none. In the reigne of king Edwarde the thirde, the yere of grace. 1 3 4 5. the king of England waging warre into Fraunce, sente thi∣ther Henry Earle of Lancaster, as ge∣nerall
captayne of his armie, who albe∣it he were a man famous and notable for his prowes in marciall affayres: yet in curtesie and liberalitie he surmoūted all others, and almoste passed himselfe. In so muche that at the siege of Briers, wheras he had graunted euery man for his bootie the house with the implemēts therein, which he by victorie should ob∣tayne: amongest other his souldiers, to one named Reth, fell a certayne house, wherein was conteyned the minte and money coyned for that countrey, to the value of a great substaunce. Whiche when the souldier had founde, in brea∣king vp a house where the first grosse metall was not yet perfitly wroughte, he came to the Earle, declaring vnto him the treasure, to knowe what was his pleasure therein. To whome the valiaunt captayne answered, that the house was his, & what so euer he founde therein. Afterwardes, the souldier fin∣ding a whole minte of pure siluer ready coined, signifying the same to the Earle, thinking so great treasure to be to much for his portion. To whome the sayde
Earle answered and sayde, that he had once giuen him the whole house for his portion, and that he hadde once giuen, he would not call backe, as children vse to play, and if the money were thrise as muche, it should be his owne. Domi∣nus Fox. Ex Chro. Albanea. Dionisius the elder comming to his sonnes house, and séeing there greate store of plate, bethe of siluer and golde, cryed oute and sayde: O my sonne, thou haste no princely stomacke, which canst kéepe all this plate to thy selfe, and make friends with none of it. Mea∣ning, that without the good will of the citizens, he shoulde neuer aspire to be prince, and hardely kéepe his kingdome, if he had it. But the vnskilfull yong man thoughte it better to haue a house well garnished, than to haue faythfull friendes abroade in the citie. Brus. lib. 3. cap. 28. Iohn Patricke béeing sometimes a hardeand a sparing man, as he was at his prayers on a time, there appeared vnto him a comely virgin, hauing on hir head a garlande of Oliue leaues,
which named hir selfe Mercie, saying to him, and promising, that if he would take hir to wyfe, he shoulde prosper maruellously well. Wherefore after that day he became so bountifull and beneficiall to the poore and néedie, that he counted them as his Masters, and hym selfe as a seruaunt and stewards vnto them. He vsed twyce a weeke to sitte at hys doore all the day long, to take vppe matters, and to sette v∣nitie where there was any variaunce. One day it happened, as he was sit∣ting all day before hys gate, and sawe no man come vnto him, he lamented bi∣cause that that day he had done no good. But his Deacon standing by, sayde, that he had more cause to reioyce, set∣ing that he had brought the citie to suche perfection, that there néeded no recon∣cylement amongest them. An other tyme, as he was reading the Gospell, the people (as their manner is) wente foorthe to talke and iangle: he per∣ceyuing that, wente foorthe ae, and sae amongst them, and sayd: where the flock is, there ought the shepheard to be.
Wherfore either come you in, that I al∣so may come in with you, or else if ye tarie out, I wil likewise tarie with you. Dominus Fox.Anno. 651. ex Polly chro. li. 5. cap. 10. Osevvie sometimes king of Deira in Englande, was a prince of wonderous liberalitie towardes his people, and no lesse deuoute and religious towardes God. Who on a tyme had giuen to A∣dianus a Scottishe Bishop, a princely horse with trappers, and all that per∣teyned thereto. This Adianus as he was riding vpon his kingly horse, there méeteth him a begger crauing his al∣mes. Adianus hauing nothing else to giue hym, lighted downe, and giueth to him his horse trapped and garnished as he was. The king vnderstanding this, and not contented therewith, as he was entring at diner with the sayde A∣dianus: what mente you father byshop (sayde he) to giue away my horse I gaue you, vnto the begger, had not I o¦ther horses in my stable that might haue serued him? but you muste giue away that which of purpose was picked out for you? To whome the Byshopp
aunswered and sayde: what be these wordes O king that you speake? Why sette you more price by a horse, which is but the foale of a horse, than you did by him which is the sonne of Marie, yea the sonne of God? He sayd but this, and the king fell downe at the Bishops féete, destring him to forgiue him that, and he woulde neuer after speake any worde for giuing away any treasure of his. Dominus Fox Pa. 164. Ex Hunting. de hist. Angli. Of Mariage, wyues and vvomen. WHen the realme of Carthage was flourishing in riches, and happy in armes, they ruled the common wealth by wise Philosophers, and sustayned it by discrete armies on the sea. At which tyme Arminius the Philosopher was as∣well estéemed amongest them, as De∣mosthenes amongest the Gréekes, or Cicero amongest the Latines. Foure∣score yeres he liued quietly, as a baron
moste peacible of minde. And was as strange to women, as familiar with his bookes. Then the Senate séeing he was much broken with the common wealth, & withdrawen from al naturall recrea∣tion, they desired him with gret instance to be maried, that mentorie mighte be had of so wise a man in time to come. But she more importunate they were, the more he resisted, and sayde: I will not be marryed. For if she be foule, I shall abhorre hir: If shee be riche I muste suffer hir: if she be poore, I muste mayntayne hir: if she be faire, I muste take heede of hir: if she be a shrewe, I canne not suffer hir. And the least pestilence of all these is inough to slea a thousande menue. Ex Marco Aurelio. When one asked Socrates whether it were better to marrie, or to liue single? He answered: whether of bothe thou doest, it shall repente thée. For if thou marrie not, thou shalte liue solitarily, thou shalte dye withoute issue, and a straunge▪ shall inherite thy lande: on the other side, if thou take a wise, thou
shalte haue perpetual vexation and con∣tinuall complayning. Hir dourie shall be caste in thy dishe, hir kinsefolkes shall bend the browes at thée, and hir mother shall speake hir pleasure by thée. And besides this, little knoweth the father what shall be the ende of his children. Brus. li. 7. ca. 22. Laer. li. 2. ca. 5. When Cneius Pompeius passed the Orient, on the mountaynes Rifees he founde a manner of people called Ma∣sagetes, whiche hadde a lawe, that eue∣ry inhabitaunte shoulde haue two tun∣nes or fattes (bicause they had no hou∣ses to dwell in.) In one of them was conteyned the husbande, their sonnes, and their menne seruauntes, and in the other the wyfe, the daughters, and their mayd seruaunts. On the holidayes they did eate togither, and once a wéeke lay togither. Hereat when Pompei won∣dred, & demaunded the cause therof, they answered: because the Gods haue giuen vs but a shorte life (for none of vs may lius aboue lx. yeres at the moste) those yeares we indeuour to liue in peace and tranquilitie. And in hauing our wyues
still with vs, wée shoulde liue euer dy∣ing. For wée shoulde passe the nygh∣tes in hearing their complayntes, and the day in abyding their chidinges and braulges, but in kéeping them this wyse a parse from vs, they nourishe their children more peaceable, and es∣chews the noyse which slayeth their fa∣thers. Ex Marco Aurelio. But hereof Palingenius passingly in∣treateth in this sorte. Sed for san multi dubitant, an caelibe vita Coniugiū melius: nam{que} vxor sepe superb' est Litigiosa, ferox, demeus et adultera saepe. &c. Englished thus: But some perchaunce vvill doute The mariage or the single life, vvhich best of them: for stoute And proude the vviues are often seene, and ofte to chide and brall, And catche their husbands by the pates, and often nought vvithall: Besides, the cares of children vexe, vvhom greeues the sicknesse rage, Or else vntimely death doth take: the daughter comes to age, VVith monied bagges a mate requires,
or else dame Lais schoole, Doth practise there, & staines the house: the sonne proues oft a foole, Limefingred oft, and harlots kepes, a bravvling marchant stoute, A svvearing goose, a ruffian vvilde, a vile vnshamefast lout. He seemth not to be free beside, vvho so euer hath a vvife, Must alter needes conditions all, and leaue his youthfull life. Forsaking frayes must bide at home, nor ride from tovvne to tovvne, Nor in the night time vvalk in the stretes in beating dores a dovvne, And keping Ione. Its nedefull then to liue aduisedly, And see thy goodes then not decreace, but may augmented be. Least in thy age the vvallet come. Although these things be so Yet thincke I sure vvith maried bed and nature for to go, More better farre, as shee to vs of birdes and beastes vntame, Example shevves, hovv both the kindes them selues togither frame.
And ioyne in one of duetie must, and alwayes so remaine, Encrease to get, and nourish vp their yong with equall paine, VVherby the kinde may still endure, and neuer more decay: For vve as euery kinde of beast, are moude to Venus play, By natures will: a worser thing shall hap to thee be sure, If thou thy selfe wilt neuer seeke, this thing for to procure. And voide of issue shalt thou die, and yeelde thy corpse againe, A straunger then shall haue thy goods, for which thou tokest paine. And when that aged haires shall hap, and sicknesse shall thee hent, VVho shall thy wearied age relieue? vvho shall thy hurtes lament? Thy brother or thy kinsman neare, or will do this thy freend? No sure, for to be heire to thee, they rather wishe thine end. On thee aliue they wait and fawne, thy goodes at graue to take: And eche man loues, and feares thy good
on thee no force they make. But novve thy vvife hir father leaues, and mother deare besides, VVith all hir house and houshold frends: vvith thee alone shee bides For euermore both night and day, and of thy seede shee beares A svveete and goodly golde polde boy of yong and tender yeares. And kindred eke to thee shee brings, and doth thy house enlarge, And helpes thee eke in euery thing, and takes vvith thee thy charge. Betvveene you, all things common are, both good and euill things, VVhatsoeuer harmeth one, hurtes both, and that vvhich profit brings Vnto the one, that profits both. If sicknesse make thee weake. Or greater age, then doth shee straight exhort thee vvell, and speake. Shee comforteth thee, & helps thee then, shee neuer leaues thee there, Shee vvatcheth thee, and watching serues: likevvise thy children deare, VVith all the meanes they can they kepe, for both theyr blouds are one,
And image like: and vvhen the day vvherin thou must be gone Is come, thou art not cleane extinct, but shalt aliue remaine In them, who then shall represent theyr fathers face againe. But some there be that rather had in common harlots bed, Vncertaine children get, therfore they list not vviues to vved. Suche kinde of men I can not praise, nor wise I haue them thought, For vvife with dourie helpes thee well, where harlots bring thee nought. A vvife doth bring thee store of frendes, where harlots bring thee foes, A wife thou maist in safetie keepe a whore vvith greefe and woes. The one will trustie still remaine, the other false alway, And fearing to be cast at large, shee stealeth all shee may, And for hir selfe shee heapes vp all, hir state for to repaire, VVhen thou hast pluckt hir bels away, and cast hir vp to aire. More, if thou kepest a whore, thy goods
are but in queasie case, Of wiues are children lavvfull got, of harlots bastardes base. To wed therfore it needefull is. On a time when Socrates had inuited Euthidemus to supper, in the middest of the banket Xantippa Socrates his wife was so offended with hir husbande, that shee railed at him, and rising, ouerthrew the Table with all that stoode thereon.Lycost. Héereat when Socrates saw Euthidemus sore vexed, he sayde vnto him, why arte thou so offended with this? Cansts not thou suffer my wife, as well as I laste day suffered thy hen to flée on thy takle, & ouerthrow the pottes, and other things that stoode theron? Ex Laer. lib 2. cap. 5. An other time, when Alcibiades as∣ked him how he could suffer his wise so to chide and seeld with him? He replied, and how chaunceth it then that yu canste suffer thy hennes at home to cackle? I abide them quoth Alcibiades, bicause they bring me egges and chickens.Idem. And so (quoth Socrates) I beare with my wife bicause she bringeth me children. Ex La∣ertio
li. & ca. supradict. Also when one saide that he wondred howe Socrates coulde abide to suffer two suche shrewde wiues in hys house:Idem. He saide, that of them he learned paci∣ence at home, to putte in practise when he went abrode. Ex A. Gellio, lib. pri∣mo. cap. 17. When Anymus had bad one to sup∣per, and sawe him displeased to heare his wife chide and scolde with hir maidens: he turned to his gest, and sayde: Good Lord howe impacient arte thou? I haue suffred hir this twentie yéeres, and canst not thou abide it two hours. And so quie∣ted his gest,Lycost. and caused his wife to leaue chiding and fall a laughing. Ex Adriano Barlando. But as there are and hath bene ma∣ny wiues, proude, malicious, deceitfull, and shrewde vnto theyr husbandes, so hathe there bene, and are many of that sexe, temperate in woordes, faithfull and louing vnto theyr husbandes, well orde∣red in theyr personnes, peaceable wyth theyr neighboures, honest in theyr fami∣lie,
and shame faced amongste straun∣gers, whereby they haue attained great renowne in theyr life, and left eternall memory after theyr death: Of whiche sorte as I could alleage many examples both Ecclesiasticall, forren and ciuill: so to delight the good I meane to insert two or thrée, as héere immediatly you shall sée folowing. On a time when Camillus a Romane captaine hadde made a solempne vowe to offer a present vnto Cybilla, if he con∣quered his ennimies: when he had at∣tayned the victorie, Rome was so poore that it hadde neyther golde nor siluer to make this promisse good. Wherfore the Matrones of Rome séeing their husbands had offred theyr liues in the said warre, went altogither into the highe capitoll, and there in the presence of euerye manne, presented theyr Owches han∣ging on theyr eares, the rings of theyr fingers, the Bracelets of theyr armes, the Pearles from theyr heades, the collers from theyr necks, theyr brooches from theyr brests, the girdles from their
middles, and borders of theyr gownes. Whereby there was enough,Ex M. Au∣relio. not only to performe the said vow, but also to pro∣secute the warre against theyr enimies. Fuluius Torquatus being consul in the warre against the Volseos, the Knightes of Mauritane brought a wilde man to Rome, that had but one eye, whome they had taken in hunting in the desertes of Egipt. And the matrones of Rome were at that time as sadde and sober, as theyr husbandes were valiant and vertuous. Amongst others was the wife of yt saide Torquate, who was great with child, and neare the time of hir deliuerance. A wo∣man so honest for the sober solitarinesse that shée kept in Rome, that shée had no lesse glory in the citie, than hir husbande had abrode in the warres. For in ye four∣téene yeare that hir husbande was in warfare in Asia, frō the first time ye he went thether, shée was neuer séene at ye windowes gasing out, nor suffred man childe aboue the age of eight yeares, to come within hir gates, Yea where shée had left with hir thrée sonnes (the eldest of whom was not aboue the age of three
yeares) assone as they came to the age of eight yeares, shée sent them away vnto theyr graunde father, to the intent that vnder the coloure of hir owne children, no others should enter into hir house. Those yeares passed, after the good olde Torquate was returned home, the saide Wilde man with one eye went by the doore of the sayde Torquate, and one of hir maidens tolde hir that it was a mar∣uell to sée him. Wherefore shée hadde great desire to sée him, and bicause there was no body to shewe him hir, shée lost hir lust, and dyed for sorow, choosing ra∣ther so to doe, than eyther to goe abrode, or to gaze oute of the windowes to sée him, wherfore shée had this glorious E∣pitaphe. Heere lieth the vvife of Torquate, the chaste Matrone: That did aduenture hir life, to assure hir Fame. Ex M. Aurelio. Almaricke king of Ierusalem, (who de∣stroyed Babylon,) hadde a sonne named Baldewine, and a daughter called Sibil∣la. Baldewine from the beginning of his
raigne was a leapre, and therefore not able of bodye (all be it valiant in harte) to rule that function. Sybilla his sister was marryed to one VVilermus of the mounte Ferat, by whome shée hadde a sonne called also Baldevvinus. After him shée was married to an other hus∣bande, named Guido de Lizimacho, Earle of Joppa and Ascalon. Vppon thys it befell that the sayde Baldevvine the Leapre sonne of Amaricke, béeing thus féeble and infirme (as is saide) cal∣led his nobles togither, with his mother and the Patriarche, declaring vnto them his inhabilitie, and by theyr consentes committed the vnder gouernment of the Citie to Guido the husbande of Sybilla his sister. But he being founde vnsuffi∣ente, or not luckie in the gouerning thereof, the office was translated to a nother named Raimundus Earle of Tri∣polis. In the which time, the Souldans with the Sarazens mightely preuailed againste the Christians, and ouer-ranne the countrey of Palestina. In the meane time Baldevvine the leaprous king de∣parted,
whereby the kingdome fell next to Baldevvinus the sonne of Sybilla by hir first husbande. But hée also dying in hys minoritie, the succession there∣of by discente fell to Sybilla, the wife of Guido aboue mentioned. To whome the Péeres and Nobles of the Realme iayning togither in Counsell, offred vn∣to the sayde Sybilla, as to the lawfull heyre vnto the Crowne, to bée theyr Qúeene: wyth thys condition that shée should sequester from hir by lawfull di∣uorcement the foresayde Guido hir hus∣bande. But shée refused the kingdome offred vnto hir on that condition: till at the laste the Nobles with the Magi∣strates in generall graunted vnto hir, and by theyr othe confirmed the same, that whome so euer shée woulde choose to be hir husbande, all they woulde take and obey as theyr king. Also hir hus∣bande Guido amongste the rest wyth like petition humbly requested hir, that the kingdome not for his sake, or for his priuate losse, mighte be destitute of go∣uernement.
At length, shée with teares consenting to theyr intreatie, was contented, and so∣lemnly was crowned for theyr Quéene: who after the manner, againe receyued theyr fidelitie by theyr othe. Wherupon Guido without all hope of kingdom and wife, departed home quietly to his owne house. This done, the Quéene assem∣bling hir states and Prelates together, entred talke with them about the choo∣sing of the king, according vnto that they had promised and sworne vnto hir: and to obey him as theyr king, whome shée shoulde nominate: the Quéene wyth a loude voice sayde vnto Guido that stoode amongst them: Guido my Lord, I choose thée for my husbande, and yéelding my selfe and my kingdome vnto you, openly I protest you to be the king, And woor∣thy (no doubte) was shée to be commen∣ded and extolled bothe for hir singular vertue of chastitie and high prudence: so tempering the matter, that both shée ob∣tained to hir husband the kingdome, and retained to hir selfe hir husband. Domi∣nus Fox. Ex bibliothaeca Cariensi. Licurgus made a lawe amongste the
Lacedemonians, that the father that died, shoulde giue nothing to hys Doughter. And that neither liuing nor dying, he should giue any thing to marie hir with: to the intent that none should marry hir for hir riches, but for hir goodnesse and vertue. And whereas nowe some be vn∣married bicause they are poore: so then they abode vnmaried, bicause they were shamefull and vicious. Ex M. Aurelio. Of Magistrates and Officers. CLeobulus sayde that that common wealth was most fortunate and best ordered,Lycost. Ex Stobeo, ser. 41. wher the Magistrate was more afearde to be euill spoken of, than to suf∣fer the penaltie of the lawe. Bias sayde, that that common wealth was happiest where men stoode more in feare of the law, than of the Magistrate. And Pitticus counted that realme in best case where the wicked do beare no sway nor authoritie.
Antisthenes being demaunded howe they oughte to order them selues that come to be Magistrates in the common wealth:Lycost. answeared, they muste doe as men that doe come to the fire, that is, they must take héede least they stand to neare for burning theyr shinnes, nor yet stand to farre of, least they be a cold still. Ex Stob. serm 43. Agasicles being asked howe a manne mighte rule wythoute a garde to defend him? Answeared, if he do so rule his sub∣iectes as a father dothe his sonnes.Lycost. Mea∣ning that if he were gentle and amiable vnto his Citizens, there can be no surer defence than they will be vnto him. Ex Plutarcho in Lacon. When Cleon shoulde take in hande to administer the common wealthe, he called all his fréendes vnto him, and dis∣solued his olde knot of amitie and frend∣shippe,Lycost. as a great stay to kéepe him from equitie and iustice. Therefore also when Themistocles shoulde be made Magi∣strat, he denyed it, saying: he woulde ne∣uer sitte in that seate where he mighte
doe no more for his fréendes than for his foes. Ex Plutarcho in Lacon. Chrysippus being demaunded whye he woulde beare no office in the com∣mon wealth: Answeared, bicause that if I rule not well, I shall displease God, but if I rule as I shoulde doe, the peo∣ple will be offended. Brusonius Lib. 3. cap. 5. Socrates was wonte to saye that it was a shame to sée that wher as in han∣dy craftes, no manne taketh anye thing in hande,Lycost. wherein he hathe not benetra∣ded: yet in administration of the com∣mon wealth oftentimes many are made officers, whiche wotte but very little, what belongeth thereto. Ex Eras. lib. 3. Apoth. Antisthenes willed his Citizens to set Asses to ploughe, and when they aun∣sweared that Asses were not apt to that laboure: what matter is that quoth he? For you make many Officers in the common wealth: which neuer learned the manner thereof, and yet when you haue made them, they serue the turne
wel inough. Meaning that it was a thing muche more absurde,Lycost. to make an vnskil∣full man a magistrate, than to sette an Asse to ploughe. Brusonius Lib. 6. cap. 5. Ex Laertio Lib 4. Cap. 1. When the regall Diademe shoulde be sette on Antigonus his head,Lycost. before it was put on, he sayde these woordes: O noble (though vnhappie) crowne, if a mā knewe howe full of trouble and misery thou arte, he would not take thée vp, al∣beit he founde thee lying in the streate. Max. Valerius lib. 7. cap. 2. Ex Stobaeo serm. 46. Alphonsus the mightie king of Arra∣gon vsed to say that Magistrates oughte as muche to excell priuate personnes in life and conuersation,Lycost. as they dee in dig∣nitie and vocation. Meaning that the life of the subiects shal best be reformed, when Princes and others giue others example of theyr godly and vertuous li∣uing. As by this story folowing may ap∣peare. Ex Panorm. lib. 6. Cato being Censor in Rome, was so seuere a punisher of transgressoures, and so feared for his good and vertuous
liuing, that like as children in the schole hearing their master comming, runne vnto their bookes: so when he wente through the citie, euery one ranne vnto his businesse. Who when he tooke any euill doer, he strayghtewayes impriso∣ned him, and in steade of examination, the first thing he tooke hold of, was their hands: which if they had bene labori∣ous and full of harde knots, though his crime were very gréeuous, yet his cha∣stisemēt was mitigated and made more easie, but if the vnhappie prisoner chan∣ced to haue idle hands, that is, softe and smoothe, he shoulde for a small faulte haue greeuous punishment. For the Ro∣manes had this prouerbe: he that hath good hands, muste néedes haue good con∣ditions. Ex Marco Aurelio.Lycost. The sayde Alphonsus also called effi∣tes and dignities, touchstones to try the natures and dispositions of men, which can in nothing be so well perceiued, as in promotion and dignitie. Ex Panor∣mita, de rebus gestis Alphonsi. li. 6.
Of Misfortune and miserie of man. CRates sayde, that what state soeuer man follow, he shall be sure to finde bitternesse therin. In the field labour: at home cares: in a strange countrey feare, if he haue ought: in youth, folly: in age, weaknesse: in mariage, vnquietnesse: in lacking a wife sollitarinesse. If a man haue children, he shall haue cares: if he haue none, he is halfe maymed: so that one of these two (sayth he) is to be wi∣shed, either not to be borne,Lycost. or quickly to dye. Xerxes séeing Helespontus swimming with his ships, and all the playnes ther∣about mustring with his mē, said that he was a right happie man, & therwith be∣gan bitterly to wepe. Which soden alte∣ratiō Artabanus his vncle espying, won∣dred, and demanded the cause therof. Oh (quod Xerxes) now I remember howe short & transitorie mans life is. For sée, of so great a multitude as here is, within this hundred yeres there shal not be one man aliue, Ex Plut. in Rom. Apoth.
When Philip king of Macedonie had subdued Cheronea, a citie of Athens,Licost. and thereby hadde purchased innumerable wealth, he began to be hautie and high minded, saying, that fortune hadde no power to doo him harme. But after∣wardes béeing aduertised that his pride woulde haue a fall, and howe vayne a thing man was, he kepte a boy euery day to come to hys chamber doore,Ex Caelio. Rhodi. li. 9. cap. 33. and with a loude voyce to cry: Remember Philip thou art a man. Also his sonne Alexander, as he was at the siege of a certayne citie, viewing in what place the walles thereof were moste weakest, was wounded in the legge with an arrowe. But at the first, not séeling the smarte thereof, procée∣ded in the siege, vntill in fine his legge waxed so sore, that he was compelled to take his horse, and leaue the fielde. And then he sayde: Euery one telleth me that I am immortall, and sonne to Iupiter, but thys wounde playne∣ly sheweth, that I am a myserable mortall manne. Ex Plutarch.Lycost. in vita Alexand.
When flatterers came about Canu∣tes (sometimes king of Englande) and began to exalte him with highe wordes, calling him a king of all kinges (moste mightie) who had vnder his subiection bothe the people, the lande, and the sea. Canutus reuoluing this matter in hys minde (whether for pride of his heart exalted, or whether to trie and refell their flattering wordes) commaunded his chaire to be broughte to the sea side, at what time it should begin to flowe, and therein sitting downe charged and commaunded the floudes rising to goe backe, and not to touche him. But the water kéeping his ordinarie course, gro∣wing higher and higher, began to wash him welfauouredly: Wherfore the king starte backe, and sayde: Lo, ye call me a mightie king, and yet I can not com∣maunde this little water to stay, but it is like to droune me. Dominus Fox. Ex Polli. li. 7. Hunting. li. 6. A scholer of Zenons comming honie to his father, was of him demaunded, what profite he had attained by his long studie in Philosophie? who answered
that he would tell him, and saying no more, his father was offended, and thin∣king his coste caste away, he began to beate him. Which thing his sonne pa∣ciently suffred. Then his father demaū∣ded him agayne to she we some experi∣ence of his learning, to whom his sonne answered: Lo this fruite haue I gotten by my Philosophie, thus paciently to en∣dure my fathers displeasure. Ex Era. l. 8.Lycost. A poth. When one stroke Socrates with hys héeles, and his friends sayde that they wondred howe he could put vp so great an iniurie, he aunswered them: what and if an asse should kicke you, woulde you go to laws with him for it. Another tyme when one gaue him a blowe, he was nothing offended, but sayde it was great pitie that menne coulde not tell when to doo on their helmets. Ex Eras.Lycost. Pericles béeing rayled on and braw∣led with, of a brabling marchaunt,Licost. saide nothing, but went his wayes home, and when the other folowed him, incessant∣ly scolding with him (béeing late in the nighte) he caused his man to light a can∣dle,
and brought him home. Augustus lying at a certayne village in the countrey, coulde not take his rest, for an Owle which euery nighte awa∣ked him. Wherefore he willed some body to take the Owle. Whiche thing a souldier, béeing skilfull in byrde-ta∣king, accordingly accomplyshed, and hoping to haue some greate rewarde for his labour, brought him to Augu∣stus. Who commended hym for his diligence, and bidde one gyue hym a thousande pounde for his paynes. But the mallaperte souldioure sayde, that he had rather let hir go, than take so lit∣tle for hir, and so let hir goe in déeds. Wherwith Augustus was nothing mo∣ued or offended.Li. 5. cap. 4. Crates after he had by shipwracke, loste all that he had, was nothing grée∣ued, but with a meric chere sayde this: Go too fortune, I knowe what thou meanest, I am sure thou intendest no∣thing else, but to cal me to Philosophie, and I am well content to come thither as thou callest me.Lycost. Ex Laer.
Of Fathers and their loue tovvards their children. SEleucus had a sonne named Antio∣chus,Bruso. of comely gesture, and valiant in armes, who comming to youthly yeres, fel in loue with Stratonice, his mother in lawe, & his fathers wife. But fearing and shaming to disclose it, it so payned him, that he was sicke and like to dye thereof. Wherfore his father caused ma∣ny Phisitians to be sent for, to knowe, & to cure (if it were possible) his sonnes sickenesse. Amongest the reste one na∣med Eristratus perceiued the effecte and cause thereof. For when Stratonice hys mother in lawe came in to visite him, strayghtwayes his colour began to rise, and his pulses to beat, and when she de∣parted, his colour vaded, & his sickenesse increased. Wherefore calling Seleucus vnto him (who was wonderous pensius for his son) he tolde him that Antiochus his sonne was sicke with loue. Then the carefull father earnestly desired him, to disclose the partie that caused hys sonne so to fare: to whome Eristratus
answered: O king it is my wife that thy sonne so loueth. Immediately Seleucus with many teares desired him to accord vnto his sonnes wil, and to saue his life. O king (quoth the Phisition) this is soone spoken, but if it were your wife that he were so in loue with (as wel as you loue him) I beléeue you would tell me an other tale. Oh no (quoth the king) there is nothing so harde, but to saue his lyfe I coulde well finde in my harte to doo it. Why then (quoth Eri∣stratus) you muste be your owne Phisi∣tion, for it is your wife Stratonice that causeth him to féele this payne. And so the louing father was content to forsake his owne pleasure, to redresse the payne of his sonne, and maried him vnto Stra∣tonice his wife.Li. 5. cap. 4. Agesilaus so intirely loued his chil∣dren, that he would play and ryde on a sticke with them. And when one of hys friends came in, and sawe him so play∣ing with them, Agesilaus desired him that he woulde tell no body thereof, vn∣till that he had children of his owne. Meaning that then he shoulde him selfe
proue and féele the great loue & affection which nature causeth parentes to beare vnto their children.Licost. Ex Acliano li. 12. The like saying is of Socrates, whom whē Alcibiades saw playing with Lam∣procus his sonne, he beganne greatly to laugh, and mocke Socrates therfore. But Socrates answered: why mā is it so gret a matter of laughter to sée the father play with his children? Holde thy peace, when thou hast children of thine owne, thou shalt do the like, and perhaps more foolishly than this.Licost. Ex Acliano. Albeit Pericles hadde loste all hys kinredde, and his owne sister, yet he was nothing gréeued therewith: but when he had loste Paralus his sonne, he could not choose,Brus. lib. 5. cap. 4. but fell a wéeping and crying, and saide: Good Lorde kéepe Ca∣millus, that I lose not him too. When Absolon was hanged by the haire, albeit he had defiled his father Da∣uids bed, and had sought by all meanes possible to put him besides his cushion, yet when his father heard thereof, he coulde not contayne his fatherly affec∣tion, but bitterly wept and saide: O my
sonne Absolon, my sonne, my sonne Ab∣solon, would God I had dyed for thée, O Absolon my sonne,2. Reg. 18. my sonne. Of Pride. WHen Aristotle sawe a yong man proud, which was indued neither with learning nor vertue, nor any other good gift, he sayd vnto him, I would my selfe no better than thou thinkest thou art, nor my foes to be no worse than thou art in déede. Another time séeing a yong man proude of a gay cloke, he saide: wilt thou not leaue to be so brag of a shéepes skinne. Anthon. in Melissa, parte. 2. serm. 74.Licost. Socrates séeing Alcibiades proude of his riches, and of a ferme or two that he hadde: brought him vnto a Mappe, wherein the whole worlde was descry∣bed. Thē he had Alcibiades looke where he could finde Athens therin, which whē he had with muche a do accomplished nowe (quoth Socrates) shewe me your ferme héere: why (quoth Alcibiades) it is not here. And why then arte thou so
proude (quoth Socrates) of that which is counted no part of the world?Licost. Ex Stobaeo: ser. 20. Chilon enquiring of Esope what Iu∣piter did, was answered that he was occupied in putting downe the mightie, and exalting the humble. Wherefore when Artabanus woulde dissuade Xer∣xes from leading his armie into Grece, he sayde: thou séest that the great beasts are killed with lightning,Brus. lib. 6. cap. 5. but the little ones escape: high houses & trées are blo∣wen downe, wheras the little cotages stand stil. For God deliteth to put down the mightie from their supernall seates. When a certayne Phisitian named Menacres had good successe in his profes∣sion, & had cured many desperat diseases, the people flatring him, said that he was a God, & called him Iupiter. The proude vainglorious foole thinking highly of him self, & wel liking this surname, when he shoulde write to Agesilaus, he prefixed this salutatiō: Menacres Iupiter to Agesi∣latis sendeth gréeting. But ye king offēded with his presumption, replied with this salutation, Agesilaus the king sendeth to thée Menacres helth. Wherby he meante
that the Phisition him selfe was sicke,2 and neded some pils to purge his proude stomacke, who beeing a man subiecte to mortalitie, would think so highly of him selfe, as to terme him selfe by the name of an immortall God.Licost. Ex Achano. li. 12. When one Pambo sawe a woman proude, and very gorgiously attired, he wept & sobde. And béeing demaunded the cause thereof, he aunswered, that there were two thinges that caused him so to do. The one is (quod he) to sée the womā thus cast away, the other is, for that I, who beare the name of a Christian, do not so indeuer with innocencie of life to please my God, as this womā doth with hir gay attire to plese wicked & naughtie persons.Licost. Ex Pet. de nata. Eccle. hist. l. 8. c. 1. Iulia, Augustus Caesars daughter bee∣ing nicely apparelled, came so vnto hir father, who abhorring all pride, re∣buked hir for hir ouer nicenesse. Wher∣fore the nexte day shee attyred hir selfe more soberly, and came and saluted hir father. Who sayde vnto hir: is not this attyre better than yesterdays? yea quoth shee. For to day I indeuoure to
satisfie my fathers, by yesterday my husbande his eyes.Licost. Ex Macrobio Satur. lib. 2. cap. 3. An other tyme when one tolde hir, that she was a great deale more proude than hir father Caesar. She answered: my father forgetteth that he is Empe∣rour, but I remember wel that I am an Emperours daughter.Licost. Ibidem. When one demaunded Phitons wife, why she was not attired in gold as other princes wiues were? she answered: bi∣cause my husbands vertue is a sufficient ornament for me.Licost. Ex Stobeo. ser 72. Tharsius Amphius béeing exalted from the state of a gardener, vnto great honor and dignitie, beganne to forget his olde friends. Wherfore one of them saide vn∣to him: if ye remēber sir, we also sprang vp of the same séede that you did.Brus. li. 6. Of Princes and principalitie. PYthagoras sayde that a Prince ought so to rule, yt he may be more beloued than feared of his subiects. For loue cau∣seth
reuerence, but feare causeth hatred and treason.Licost. Ex Stobaeo ser. 46. Edwarde surnamed the Confessour somtimes king of Englande, describeth the office of a prince in this sort: A king (saith he) ought aboue al things to feare God, to loue & obserue his commaunde¦ments, & to cause thē be obserued throgh his whole kingdome. He ought also to kéepe, cherish, maintayne, & gouerne the church within his kingdome, according to the institution of his auncientes and predecessors, & to defend ye same agaynst al his enimies, so ye god aboue al thinges be honoured, & euer be before his eyes. He ought also to set vp good lawes, and customes, suche as be holsome, & appro∣ued, & such as be otherwise to repel and put out of his kingdome. Item he ought to do iudgement and iustice in his king∣dome, by the counsel of the nobles of the Realme. Also thrée seruauntes a king ought to haue vnder him as vassals, flesh∣ly lust, auarice, and gréedy desire. Whō if he kéepe vnder him as slaues, he shall reigne well and honorably in his king∣dome. Al things are to be done with good
aduisement and premeditation, & that properly belongeth vnto a king. For te∣meritie and rashnesse wil bring a king∣dome soone to desolation and decay. Dominus Fox. Ex libro regum antiq. in praeto. Londinensi. Agesilaus would oftē say that a prince ought to excell his subiectes, not in nice∣nesse and wantonnesse, but in fortitude and temperaunce. Also he sayde, that a prince oughte to learne this lesson, to be stoute and cruell agaynst traytours and rebels, and to be gentle and louing vnto his citizens and subiectes. And he was wont muche to reioyce in this, that where as he was Prince and ruler of his people, yet he coulde aswell indure to take paynes as any of them. Yea when vs woulde haue his souldiers at∣tempte any enterprise, he hym selfe would be the first that should set on it, and so for shame they woulde followe him in dooing the like.Licost. Ex Plutarch. in Lacon. When one sayde vnto Theopompus king of the Lacedemonians, that then it should be well with the Lacedemoni∣ans,
when the Prince knewe howe to rule the subiectes as he ought to doo: he replied, that that shoulde rather come to passe, when the subiectes knewe howe to obey their Princes. Meaning that the citie shall be beste gouerned, where the citizens will be obedient and ruled by their gouernour. For as the Gospell sayth, euery citie deuided within it selfe shall be broughte to desolation.Licost. Ex Ful∣gocio. li. 7 ca. 2. Cyrus king of Persia, sayde, that no man shoulde be a Prince, which were not better than the people whom he ru∣led, and did not excell them in valiaunt∣nesse and prowesse, aswel as in wisdome and knowledge. Brus. li. 3. ca. 33. Fredericke the Emperour béeing de∣maunded whom he loued best of his sub∣iects, he answered, that he loued thē best which would so please him, that in no case they would displease God. A chri∣stian prince, and spoken right christian∣like. Ex Aenea Siluio.Licost. Alphonsus king of Arragon sayde, that those princes ought especially to be beloued & feared, which were louers and
imbracers of iustice and equitie. Which Princely vertues who so euer is indued withall, theyr behest all men loue, reue∣rence and feare. As we reade of Cyrus, who not only in iustice, but also in all o∣ther princely vertues, was him selfe an example vnto his subiectes, and whose woorde was of as great a force as the oth of any priuate person. Ex Panormi. lib. 1. de rebus gestis Alphonsi. When one tolde him that the king of Spaine should say, that it was not come∣ly for a Prince to be learned: he said that those were woords of an Oxe, and not of a man.Lycost. ex eodem. For quoth he a Prince wythout learning, is nothing else but as it were an Asse with a crowne. Also, whē it was tolde him that he was not apparelled like a Prince: he answeared that he had rather be princelike in manners and au∣thoritie, rather than in his scepter and crowne. Boso the last king of Araletensis com∣maunded the Bishop that he shoulde not goe to Euening prayer on Christmasse euen, before that he came thether. But when the Bishop with the rest of hys
companie had taryed somewhat longer than his accustomed time, and sawe that the king came not, he went to seruice. Wherfore whē the king came in, he be∣gan to chide with the Bishop, and was so moued that before all the people he gaue him a blowe.Lycost. Ex Munster. li 2 Cosmogra. Whereof the Bishop thincking to be reuenged, complained to Otho the Emperoure, who immediatly commanded that the Bishop should be beheaded. And when the Archbishop in∣treated for him, he woulde not forgiue him, but sayde that no woorde that came from the mouthe of a Prince, shoulde be spoken in vaine. When one sayd vnto Antigonus, that all things were honest and iust, what so euer the Prince did,Bruso. li. 3. cap. 13. he answeared, yea, amongst the Barbarike Princes it is so, but we account nothing honest, which is not honest in déede, nor any thing iuste which is not iust in déede. Alexander Seuerus the adopted sonne of Heliogabalus, was a wise, valiant and vertuous Prince, who bare suche affecti∣on to learning and learned men, that he would do nothing without their cousel
and assistence. From his Courte he dis∣missed all superfluous and vnnéedefull seruantes, and sayd that he was no good pupill, which fedde idle seruauntes with the bowels of his common wealth. And amongste his other good vertues (which was a rare thing in those dayes) he was fréendly and fauourable vnto the Chri∣stians. In so muche that when the Chri∣stians hadde occupied a certaine publike place to some good vse, belike for the as∣sembling and conuenting togither of the congregation, the companie of the cookes or tiplers made chalenge thereto. The matter being brought before the Empe∣roure, he iudged it more honest the place to serue to the woorshippe of God (howe so euer it were) than to the durtie slub∣bring of cookes and scullians. Ex domino Fox. King Alfrede alias Alurede, Anno 899 king of Englande, in his youthe percey∣uing him selfe somewhat disposed to the vice of the fleshe, and therby letted from diuers vertuous and good purposes, did not as many yong Princes and Kings sonnes in the worlde be nowe wonte
to doe: that is, to resolue them selues so all kinde of carnall licence and sensuali∣tie, running and folowing without bri∣dle, whether so euer theyr licence giuen doth giue them leaue (as therefore not without cause the cōmon prouerbe doth reporte of them) that kings sonnes learn nothing else well but only to ride. Mea∣ning thereby that Princes and Kings sonnes hauing aboute them flatterers, which boast them in theyr faultes: only theyr horsses giue them no more than to any other, but if they fit not fast, they will cast them. But this yong king see∣ing in him selfe the inclination of the fleshe, minding not to giue him selfe so muche as he might take, but rather by resistance to auoid the temptation ther∣of, besought God that he would send to him some continuall sicknesse in quen∣ching of that vice, whereby he mighte be more profitable to the businesse of the common wealth, and more apte to serue God in his calling. Then at Gods ordi∣naunce he had the euill called Bicus, till he came to the age of twentie yeres. Af∣ter this sicknesse being cured, he fel to a∣nother,
which continued with him from twentie yeares of his age to. 45. (accor∣ding to his owne petition and request made vnto God) whereby he was more reclaimed and attempred from other more greate inconueniences, and lesse disposed from that which he did most ab∣horre. Also he deuided his goods into two equall partes, the one appertaining to v∣ses seculare, the other to vses spirituall or ecclesiastical. Of the which two prin∣cipall partes, the firste he deuided into thrée portions: the first to the behoose of his house and familie: the secōd vpon his workemenne and builders of his newe woorkes, whereof he had right great de∣lighte and cunning: the thirde vppon straungers. Likewise the other seconde halfe vppon spirituall vses, he did thus deuide in foure portions, one to the re∣léeuing of the poore, an other to monaste∣ries, the third to the schollers of Oxford, for maintināce of good letters, the fourth he sent to forren churches wythoute the realme. Also so sparing he was of time, that he deuided the day and the night in∣to three partes, if he were not lette by
warres and other great businesse, ye viij. houres he spent in study and learning, & other. viij houres he spent in prayer and almes déedes, and other. viij. houres he spent his naturall rest, sustinance of his body, and the néedes of the realme. The which order he kept duely by ye burning of waxen tapers, kept in his closette by certaine persones for the same purpose. Nowe besides these other qualities and gifts of Gods grace in him, aboue mēti∣oned: remaineth another part of his no little praise & cōmendation, which is his learning and knowledge of good letters, whereof not only he was excellent expert himself, but also a worthy maintainer of the same throughout all his dominions. He translated into English Orossius, pa∣storale Gregorij the historie of Bede, Bo∣etius de consolatione Philosophie, also a Booke of his owne making in his owne tong, which in the Englishe spéeche is called a handbooke, in Gréeke called In∣chiridion, in Latin a manuell. Suffring no man to aspire vnto any dignity in the court, onlesse he were learned. Do. Fox. Next vnto this vertuous and learned
prince Alfrede, of all others that I could reade, Maximi ian moste resembled hym in godly learning and in learned godlinesse: Who was so excellente ex∣pert in the toungues, but specially in the Latine stile, that imitating the example of Julius Caesar, he did wryte and com∣prehend in Latin histories, his own acts and feates of chiualrie, and that in suche sorte, that when he had giuen a certaine taste therof to one Pycharmerus a lear∣ned man, asking his iudgement how his warrelike stile in Latin did like him, the said Pycharmerus did affirme and report of him to Iohn Charum (the witnesse & wryter of this historie) that he did neuer sée nor read in any  story a thing so exactly done, as this was of Maximili∣an. Moreouer, as he was himselfe right learned, so was he a singuler patrone, and aduauncer of learning and learned men. And for the maintenaunce thereof erected the excellent vniuersitie of Wit∣tenberge. Dominus Fox ex Iohanne Cari∣one.
Of Pleasure. KIng Lysimachus by chaunce of warre taken captiue of the Scithians, in hys captiuity was so sore oppressed wt thirst, that he was glad for a draught of drinke to sell his kingdome. But afterwardes remembring for howe shorte a pleasure he hadde solde a thing most precious, he cried out and wept,Lycost. saying: Alasse howe madde was I to sell a noble empire for the satisfying of my affection and gréedie belly? The same day that Socrate, shoulde drincke his deadly drench, when his sha∣kles were taken off his feete, he felt him∣selfe maruellous light and pleasant, and sayde: behold how wonderously nature hath ordeyned,Lycosthe. that sorowe and pleasure goe alwayes togither, and that there is neuer any perfite pleasure, where there hath not bene paine and sorowe before. Ex Laertio, lib. 2. As Homer like a learned Poete dothe faine, that Circes by pleasant enchaunt∣ments, did turne men into beastes, some
into Swine, some into Asses, some into Foxes, some into Wolues: euen so Pla∣to like a wise Philosopher dothe plainly declare that pleasure by licentious vani∣tie, that swéete and pleasant poyson doth ingender in all those that yéelde them selues vnto hir, foure notorious proper∣ties. The first, forgetfulnesse of all good things learned before. The seconde dul∣nesse to receiue either learning or hone∣sty afterwards. The third, a minde im∣bracing (lightly) the worst opinion, and barren of discretion to make true diffe∣rence betwixt good & bad, betwixt trouth and vanity. The fourth, a proud disdain∣fulnesse of other good men, in all honest maters. Plato and Home. haue both one meaning. For if a man inglut himself wt vanitie, or walter in filthinesse like a swine, then quickly he shal become a dul asse, to vnderstād either learning or ho∣nestie, & yet he shalbe as subtil as a foxe, in bréeding of mischeefe, in bringing mis∣order, with a busie hed, a discoursing tōg, and a factious heart, alwayes glad to cō∣mend the worser partie, & euer ready so defend the falser opinion. And why? for
where the will is giuē from goodnesse to vanitie, there the minde is caryed from right iudgement to any fonde opinion in religion, in Philosophie, or any kinde of learning. The fourth frute of vain plea∣sure, by Homer and Platoes iudgement is pride of them selues, and contempt of all others, which is the very badge of all those that serue in Circes Courte, who transformeth the voluptuous man (as hath bene described) into a maruellous monster, which caryeth at once in one body, the belly of a swine, the head of an asse, the heart of a horsse, the braine of a fore, and the wombe of a wolfe. Ex lu∣dimagistro domini Aschami Platonis E∣pistola. 3. ad Dionysium. Of Seruauntes. DIogines had a seruant named Naues, who running away from his master his fréendes willed him to make inquisi∣tion for him. No (quoth Diogines) that were a sport alone, if Naues can liue we∣oute
Diogines, that Diogines shoulde not be able to liue withoute Naues.Lycost. For he is the best Philosopher that néedeth fewest things, wherefore he woulde not séeme to be worse than his seruaunt, and to séeke suche a seruaunte that cared not for his master. Ex Erasmo. When Xeniades had boughte Diogi∣nes, Diogenes (as thoughe he had béene maister) sayde, sée that thou doe what so euer I bidde thée. Marie quoth Xenia∣des, that were a merrie world, when the seruaunte shoulde commaunde the Ma∣ster. No? quoth Diogines, what if you shoulde hire a Phisitian, woulde you not doe what soeuer he prescribed vnto you? Muche more then ought you being sicke in minde, to obey your seruaunt, who is a cunning Philosopher,Laerti. lib. 6. and cannecure your disease. And as much as the minde excelleth the body: so much the disease of the minde is more daungerous than the infirmitie of the body. He also was wonte to say, that there was no difference betwéene the Master and the seruaunt, but onely theyr name.
And that wheras the seruauntes serued theyr maisters, the maisters serued and obeyed theyr own affections. Wherfore he concluded yt good and faithful seruants were better than their maisters,Laertius. li. 6 if they were voluptuous and wicked liuers. Callicratides being demaunded what kinde of people the Jonians were? answe∣red that they were euill frée menne, but good bondmen. Meaning that they knew not howe to rule,Lycost. but coulde well indure to be ruled and gouerned by others. Ex Plutarcho in Lacon. A woman of the Lacedemonians being taken captiue, and brought to be solde, was demaunded whether shée woulde proue an honest woman if shée should be bought,Lycost. Ex Plut. in Lacenar. Apot. yea that I will quoth shée, albeit I be not bought. And when he asked hir what shée coulde doe, shée answeared, all things that a frée woman should do. But when shée was putte to doe some seruile businesse: shée said, thou shalt repent thée, that thou haste bestowed thy money no better, and immediatly slue hir self, say∣ing: that albeit shée were a captiue, yet a caitine or a bondslaue, shée coulde not,
nor would not be. A certaine seruaunt in Rome accused his master, that contrary vnto the Ro∣mane edict, he had hidden gold. And com∣ming before the Tribune, he broughte the golde with him. Wherupon his ma∣ster was broughte before the iudge. But his mother purposing by accusing hirself to excuse hir sonne, came and offred hir selfe as the partie guiltie, and sayde, that the treasure was of hir hiding: On the other side, the seruaunt refelled hir say∣ing, and earnestly indeuoured to proue that it was his master that had hiddē it. His master all the while stoode still and saide nothing. Wherefore albeit Brutus (being iudge) perceiued by his scilence this accusation to be true, yet hauing cō∣passion on the yong man and his mother, dismissed them, and badde them take the gold with them. But séeing the vntrusti∣nesse of the malapert seruaunte, who so greatly desired his masters death, he cō∣maunded that he should be hāged, accor∣ding to the law of Seuerus the Emperor, who made a lawe that if any seruaunte complained on his master, his complaint
shoulde stande of no force,Lycost. but that he should be punished therfore. Ex Plutarch. in Rom Apoth. When the Scythians hadde béene se∣uen yeares together in Asia in warre-fare, theyr wiues being weary, and grée∣ned any longer to tarry for them, thin∣king that by this time they were cleane destroyed: determined to marrie wyth theyr seruauntes whiche were lefte at home to kéepe theyr cattell. Wherefore when the warre was finished, and the Scythians as conqueroures would haue returned home: theyr seruauntes in ar∣mure forbadde them theyr coastes. So that they wer compelled to wage warre with theyr owne seruauntes, who so stoutly resisted them, that they were as like to be conquered of them, as to con∣quer, or subdue theyr ennimies. Where∣vppon one more wise than the rest, wil∣led them to chaunge theyr weapon, re∣membring that it were not theyr enni∣mies, but theyr seruauntes and bonde∣slaues, with whome they had to do. And therefore not by force of armes, but by
the authoritie of theyr maistership, they shoulde represse them. And so chaunging theyr sweardes into roddes and whips, on a sodaine they sette on them, and with shaking the whippes so terrified them, that where as by dinte of sweard they coulde nothing abate them, wyth feare of stripes they chased and put them to flight, not as conquered ennemies but as fugitiue seruaunts. Iustin. lib. 2. When M. Antonius was subdued of Octaunus, he commaunded Erotes his seruaunt to thrust him through with his swearde:Bruso. lib. 6. cap. 4. but the faithfull seruaunte so entierly loued his maister, that making as thoughe he would haue stricken him, he turned the sweard, & thrust it through his owne body. When Caepio was condempned for conspiring againste Augustus, hys ser∣uaunte putte him in a chest,Idem cap. eodem. and so con∣ueyed him secretely in the nighte ouer Tibris vnto Napies, and there hid him and retourned home. And being taken and examined héereof, he coulde by no violence be induced to confesse where his maister was.
On a time as Appion lay a sléepe in a stable, a companie of armed men, which bare him a secrete grudge, came to kill him: but his seruaunt knowing of theyr comming, attired himself in his masters apparell, and lay him down in his place: And so the mē rushing in, killed the ser∣uaunt,Ibidem. supposing that it had bene Appi∣on, and Appion by this meanes, being apparelled in his seruauntes attire, esca∣ped with his life. Seneca in his sixth Epistle, giueth this lesson to masters. Liue so (sayth he) with your inferiours,Bruso. as you would that your superiours shuld do with you And when ye remēbre what power you haue ouer your seruaunts, remember also that the same power your Lord hathe ouer you. Ex Senecae epist, 6. Of Sobrietie. DEmades the Orator dining wyth Photion, and séeing his slender pro∣uision, sayde vnto him, I wonder Photi∣on how thou canst gouerne the common welth, & fare no better than this? wherin he shewed a double error, thinking his
office to tend to his own vtilitie, & com∣mending excesse vnto him, who aboue all others liked and vsed sobrietie. But Demades mused, as he vsed, and iudged other men by him selfe, for he was won∣derous couetous of money, and altogi∣ther giuen to riot and excesse.Licost. Ex Eras. lib. 6. Apoth. When one asked why the inhabitan∣tes of Sparta did not loue to tipple wine? Leonchidas answered, that we may be able to giue other men counsell, and not be compelled to goe and aske it of o∣thers. Wisely shewing, that great typ∣lers of wine are nothing apte to giue good counsayle, but that sobrietie is the mother of good and wholsome counsels. Ex Plutarch.Lycost. Romulus the first founder of Rome, is reported to be wonderous abstenous in drinking of wine. Wherefore on a time béeing inuited to supper (for that he had some businesse to do the next day) at that meale he woulde drinke little or no wyne at all. And when his friends saide that wine woulde be good cheape, if no man drunke more than he did: he saide,
nay then it would be déere, if euery man did as he did, for he (he sayd) did drinke as much as he listed. Eras. li. 6. Fredericke the Emperour so imbraced temperaunce and sobrietie, that where as his wife Leonora neuer drunk wine, and it was told him for a medicine, that if she would vse to drinke wine (by rea∣son that Germanie was so colde a coun∣trey) she should with great ease be deli∣uered of hir children: he answered, that he had rather haue his wife be barrein, than muche accustomed to drinke wine.Licost, Ex Aenea Siluio. li. 2. Alphonsus king of Arragon neuer drunk wine, vnlesse it were mixed with much water, and being demaunded why he did so, he answered, bicause I wil not be drunke. For I know wel inough how muche the immoderate drinking therof hath obscured the glory of Alexander the great.Licost. Ex Panor. li. 1. Anacharsis sayd, that the vine brin∣geth foorth thrée grapes, the first of plea∣sure, the nexte of dronkennesse, the third of sorrowe and griefe. Meaning that to drinke wine moderatly is holsome and
good, but to drinke too much maketh mē drunken, and to continue in excesse, cau∣seth chiding, fighting, and daungerous diseases. Bruso. li. 1. cap. 16. Of Superfluitie and su∣perfluous expenses. DIogenes taūted the madnesse of men in this wise, they will (quoth he) for vile things giue much, and for things of importance giue little or nothing. As for an image they wil be glad to giue a hun∣dred pounds, and for a bushell of wheate they wil grudge to giue twentie pence, and yet of the one we haue no nede, and without the other we can not liue, and therefore if men hadde reason, wheate shoulde be dearer, and images better cheape.Lycost. Ex Laer. li. 6. Lykewyse Crates deridyng the fol∣ly of the worlde, which are harde and nigardely to bestowe coste in thinges moste necessarie and honest, and moste liberall and prodigal in things vnhonest and shameful, saith thus: giue a cooke ten pounds, and to a Phisitian foure pence:
giue to a flatterer ten talentes, and to a counsayler giue smoke: and giue to a baude a talente, and to a Philosopher thrée halfepence. Ex Laer. li. 6. ca. 5. Of worldly wealth, ry∣ches, and prosperitie. WE reade of many prophane Phi∣losophers (as Socrates, Diogenes, Bion, Crates, Anaxagoras, Pythagoras, and innumerable others) who conside∣ring that worldly wealth could nothing lesse doo, than cause a quiet minde, as a thing of no worthinesse, neglected it, and as a thyng of no pryce, sette it at nought. Whose consideration Plutarche by this similitude approueth as not vntrue. Likewise (sayth he) as a man going to the sea, and firste carried towardes the great shippe in a little bote, there begin∣ning to vomit, desireth greatly to be at the bigger vessell, supposing to finde ease therein, where he is worse trou∣bled with the same griefe than he was before: euen so a man béeing in a vyle
state, and poore case, and not well con∣tent therewith, coueteth aduauncement to higher condition, and to haue his goods and substaunce increased. To the which things if he chaunce to attayne, he shall be more vnquieted than he was before in his former dignitie. As for examples, Alexander the great king of Macedonie, possessing in a ma∣ner all the worlde, for all that was so little quiet, that when he heard Demo∣critus disputing of many worldes,Brus. lib. 1. cap. 1. he wept bitterly, that he had not yet con∣quered one of them. Of the other parte, poore Diogenes, glad to vse in steade of a house, a tunne to lye in,Era. Apoth. lib. 3. and compelled with pouertie to liue with colde hearbes and water (his mynde instructe with learning and vertues) was neuer vn∣quiet, neuer carefull, no, he thought him selfe richer than Alexander, to whome he was bolde to say (at which tyme he offred to giue him what he wold desire) that he was in better case, and néeded fewer things than he. For as for hym he was well contented with his state, but as for Alexander, he coulde not be
contented with the kingdome of Mace∣donie, no not with the kingdome of the whole earth. At whose securitie Alexan∣der maruelled, and saide: And if I were not Alexander him selfe, I would wishe to be none other, but euen Diogenes. Laertes, which to the sight of ye world liued welthy, and wonderous quiet, yet was not quiet in déede, as witnesseth Plutarch. On the other side Metrocles vile & beggerly, in winter couering his body with a tub,Era. Apoth. lib. 6. for lack of houseromth, & in sommer taking vp his innes in the porches of the temples, faring no better than did the dogs of the citie: yet was he of so quiet a mynde (vertue béeing the author thereof) that hys quietnesse amongst writers shall be had in perpe∣tuall memorie. In Aristotles problemes it is deman∣ded of riches, why he vsed to dwell with the worst, and so to disdayne the compa∣ny of the beste?Ex Hugo∣ne. who answered, that his minde was once to haue dwelled wyth them that were good, but Iupiter enuy∣ing this his purpose, put out his eies, and since he loste his sight, it was euer hys
chaunce lightly to happen on the worst. It was also asked of pouertie, why she did stil visite the good men, and passed by them that were wicked and naught: she answered, that good men could tell how to intreate hir. And so shal ye read that such murthe∣rers as Tantalus, ambicious as Croesus, couetous as Crassus, and sicophantes as Cylition, had of wealth great abūdance. And on the other part such iust and good men, as Aristides, Cato, Vticensis, Fabius Maximus. Anaxagoras, & Plato were euer in great trouble, indigencie, & affliction. Manius Curius, was once a man of muche nobilitie, riches, and renowme amongest the Romanes. Howebeit af∣terwards as it fortuned, he became a ve∣ry poore man, insomuche that his meate for the moste parte was onely rootes, colde hearbs, and wortes.Era. Apoth lib. 5. It chaunced that the Embassadoures of the Samnites thē being at Rome, & hearing of his po∣uertie, whō they had knowen once to be famous and wealthy, came to his house to visite him, where they founde him in a poore chamber, very poorely arayed,
and dressing his simple dinner, they af∣ter much cōmunication about to depart, gently offered to giue him money, the which he refused, and sayde: kéepe your money to your selues, for he that can be content with such apparel and fare, hath no néede of your money. Horace cōsidering ye whorish charmes of the worlde, calleth hir riches & orna∣ments matters of the great euill, and coūselleth them that be lothe to be wic∣ked, to hurle them into the sea. Let vs therfore not passe for the lacke or losse of riches or other worldly thin∣ges, that be so perillous: but rather pre∣pare our selues to follow the counsell of Horace, though he were an Ethnicke: not in casting away our goods, if we haue them, but liuing as though we had them not. Imitating the godly riche Abra∣ham, Iob, Tobie, in giuing and distribu∣ting them vnto the poore and néedie. And  so shall we lay vp treasure in heauen, where neither rust nor mothes do corrupt, nor théeues breake through and steale. FINIS.
The Table. A. Abstinence, Continencie and Tempe∣raunce. Pag. 1. Accusing aad speaking euil of others. Pag. 6 Adulterie, Fornicatiō, and whordome. Pag. 10 Auarice or Couetousnesse. Pag. 13 Audacitie and boldnesse. Pag. 21 B. Banketting. Pag. 23 Bestowing and thankefull receyuing of benefites. Pag. 25 Brethren and sisters. Pag. 28 C. Children. Pag. 30 Concorde and vnitie. Pag. 34 Court and Courtiers. Pag. 36 Constancie. Pag. 41 Crafte or subtiltie. Pag. 46 Crueltie and Immanitie. Pag 51 D. Deceyte and guile. Pag. 56 Death and Buriall. Pag. 63 Discorde and variaunce. Pag. 66
Desire of knowledge, Discipline, and the Duetie of scholers to their masters. Pag. 72 Dronkennesse and drinking. Pag. 75 E. Education of children, Pag. 79 Exercise and vse. Pag. 86 F. Fatall destinie. Pag. 90 Felicitie or Happinesse. Pag. 97 Fortune. Pag. 101 Fortitude and Manhoode. Pag. 110 Friends and friendship Pag. 113 G. Gluttonie and Riot. Pag. 121 H. Hatred and enuie. Pag. 122 Harlots. Pag. 127 Humanitie and Gentlenesse. Pag. 130 I. Innocencie or a good conscience. Pag. 137 Iudges and Iudgement. Pag. 139 Iustice and Equitie. Pag. 145
L. Labour and payne taking. Pag. 150 Lawes, Statutes, and Decrees Pag. 154 Lasciuious loue, lust, and lecherie. Pag. 159 Liberalitie. Pag. 165 M. Mariage, wyues, and women. Pag. 173 Magistrates and Offycers. Pag. 189 Misfortune and miserie of man. Pag. 194 P. Pryde. Pag. 202 Princes and Principalitie. Pag. 205 Pleasure. Pag. 216 S. Seruauntes. Pag. 218 Sobrietie. Pag. 224 Superfluitie, and superfluous expences. Pag. 227 W. VVorldly wealth, ryches, and prospe∣ritie. Pag. 228 FINIS.
