19807.3 33143166 28270
AN HONOVRABLE PRESIDENT FOR GREAT MEN. BY AN ELEGIECALL MONVMENT to the Memory of that worthy Gentleman Mr. IOHN BANCKS, Citizen and Mercer of LONDON, aged about 60. yeares, and Dyed the 9th day of September. ANNO. DOM. 1630. FAME come and wayte vpon the Fu∣nerall Herse Of Noble worth; and let this wee∣ping Verse Charme all those Eyes which spent a brinie Teare: Let none weepe more; but read what's written here. Fame dry their Eyes, and bid them all reioyce For Rich and Poore all with a generall voyce Spend their best breath, to tell the World that hee (Whose death deserues this sad solemnity) Was One, a Tunne of Dyamonds could not buy The Iewels which he wore: Humility, Religion, Iudgement, Wisedome; Poore Mens Prayers Which halfe the way to Heauen, made him Stayres Should any weepe for such a man that's dead? Inter'd with Fame, his Soule to Heauen fled? Not a Teare more: But bid the great Ones learne To doe like good, that they in BANCKS discerne Bid them peruse the Index of his deeds, And euery one discreetly as he reeds Obserue and quote i'th Margent of his hart The best of them; that when their soules must part From their dead bodies; They may so worke in them The World may say; they liu'd and dy'd good Men But aboue all his Merit, My Pen is bound To laud his worth (whom Fame hath so renowu'd) Much more then any: For the Legacies Bequeath'd to Rich and Poore at Obsequies Of dead Testators, are but customary But the bequest I treat, is full of glory. As long as Time hath being shall not dye This first borne famous Guift and Legacy. Let the World know, he hath remenbred those The greate Ones doe forget; and to disclose His Goodnesse in it, Censure You that read This Eligie; Although IOHN BANCKES be dead He shall for euer liue. Th' Artillerie Shall fame his Guift to all Posteritie. Nine times Ten Ponnds this Gentleman did giue LONDONS Arttillerie, that such may liue And florish in that noble Schole of Armes (Where's taught the Gaurd of Princes frō all harmes) Twenty Pounds to Feast, and other Twenty more To purchase Armes; and Fifty to the Store, The Stock, the Treasury, or to the Banck BANCK fits it well; if there were more to ranck. Hee was a Souldier, though that honored age Deny'd him with his Iuniors equipage; Therefore his loue we honor: Behold and see The Glory of this sad Solemnitie. The Warlike Musick, Drum and Fife are clad In blacke, there beating Dub a Dub all sad: Muskets (Retrorsum) and their rests doe weepe, The heads of Pikes doe the like Clangor keepe Captaine, Leiftenant, Ensigne, and the rest All with deiected Countenances prest To direfull Mourning: Thus are Souldiers friends Like royall Princes brought vnto their Ends. FINIS Mariscallus PETOVVB composuit.
