22463 99852529 17854
THE YOVNG ADMIRALL. AS IT WAS PRESENTED By her Majesties Servants, at the private house in Drury Lane. Written by James Shirly. LONDON, Printed by Tho. Cotes, for Andrew Crooke, and William Cooke. 1637.
Names of the Persons. THe King of Naples. The King of Sicily. The Prince of Naples. Vittori the Young Admirall. Alphonso his Father. Noblemen of Naples. Julio. Alberto. Fabio. Noblemen of Sicily. Horatio Trivulsi Captaines. Fabrichio Mauritio. Didimo a Page to Rosinda. Pazzorello a servant to Rosinda. Soldiers. Rosinda the daughter of Sicily. Cassandra Vittories mistresse. Flavia, Lady attendant on Rosinda.
TO THE RIGHT HONO∣RABLE GEORGE LORD BARKLEY, of Barkely Castle. My Lord, THe many testimonies of your excel∣lent nature, with so much furni∣ture, and ornament of learning; have in the hearts of the knowing world erected monuments to your living fame, and long since prepard my particular ambition to be knowne to you, that , among other, whose more happy wits have gind by be∣ing onely read under so noble a Patron, might by some timely application derive upon me your Lordships influence. Be pleas'd my most honourable Lord to ac∣cept this Poeme, till something of more high endeavour
may present my service, yet let me not barre it the truth of this Character, it hath beene grateful to the stage, and graciously entertain'd at Court by their Majesties, Now if your Lordship smile upon it in this addresse, and bid it welcome, it shall dwell with ho∣nour and security under your name, and the author glory to professe himselfe My Lord Your most humble Honourer, IAMES SHIRLY.
THE YOVNG ADMIRALL. The first Act. Enter Prince, and Alberto. ALberto. My Lord y're sad. Pr. I am thinking, Alberto, Of many things, have I not cause? Al. You may Thinke on em with lesse trouble. Pr. But of all What dost imagine most afflicts me? ile Prevent thy answere, I am not troubled With the present threatnings of the Enemy, With all his preparations to invade us. Al. You have more confidence in Vittori, sent To meete the insulting King, he has heene fortunate In many warres. Pr. The warres consume Vittori, He has beene too fortunate. Al. Your wishes ere Against the common peace, if he prove not A happie Admirall we are lost. Pr. Be thou
And all thy name lost, and may no age Find it agen: how dare you interrupt us? When we do want your Councell, wel'e call for you. Al. I am gone sir. Enter Iulio. Pr. My Iulio welcome, What speakes Cassandra yet? Iu. Nothing to encourage you, the same obstinate thing Victory has her heart, she much condemnes The roughnesse which you mix'd with your last courtship, She saies your Father may command her life, But you must be a stranger to her bosome. Pr. I was too rude at my last visit. Iu. Rather sir too tame. Pr. Have I for this drawne warre vpon my countrey, Neglected Sicilies Daughter, left a staine Vpon his Court, and paid his Entertainment With wounding one he lou'd? Iu. His favourite You had beene lesse sir, then your selfe to have suffered His insolence, nor was't an act becomming His Master, to send hither to negotiate A marriage for his Daughter, and when you So farre engag'd your selfe upon a visite, To permit any of his gaudy upstarts Affront your person. Pr. I acquit the King, Twas no state quarrell, high with wine he did Throw some disgrace on our Italian Ladies, Whilst he would magnifie some beauties there, This he did second with a pride, and rudenesse, My patience was not tame enough to suffer, And carelesse of all danger I did punish him. Iu. Twas home and hansome. Pr. I must owe to fortune. Iu. For your returne, she did but do her duty, To make it swift and happy. Pr. I confesse the princesse usd me nobly, though my fancy
Was not surpris'd, for here I kept the image Of faire Cassandra, whose divine beauty Doth scorne all competition. Iu. Did you love Cassandra before you went to Sicily? Pr. Yes but with too much silence, and that love Did make me apprehend more fiercely the Occasion to breake off all forraine treaty, Horatio's fall, and my quitting the Country, Vpon't the king interprets a disgrace To his daughter and himselfe, and in revenge Hath added this new tempest to the Sea, Mean't to our ruine Iulio. Iu. All their fury May soone be interrupted, if Vittory Mannage his businesse well. Pr. That's all my trouble. Iu. What? Pr. Vittory ther's the devill on't, he may Be fortunate and overcome. Iu. Can there Be ill in that? Pr. Ill? thou art shallow, I Made him not Admirall, but to engage His youth and spirit, apt to fly on dangers, To perish in his hot pursuit of honour, If he come home with victory, my Father And his wise state must give him thankes, the people Giddily runne, to meete the Conquerour, And owe their lives, and safety to his triumph. But where am I? what peace brings it to me? What blessing i'st to heare the generall voyce Shoot their wild joyes to heaven, and I in torment Certaine to lose my hopes in faire Cassandra? Iu. There may be waies at home to remove him, And plant you in your wishes. Pr. It would be Most happinesse to heare his death. Ju. That may Ruine a Kingdome.
Pr. Ruine twenty more, So I enioy her first, nothing can be Too precious to forfeit, I am mad, And my desires by opposition grow More violent. Iu. I thought your masculine soule Lesse capable of vexation, shall a subject Whom with your breath you may blow out o'th'world Raise su h a storme within you? Pr. No he sha'not, I ha found my selfe againe, come ile be merry, But I will have Cassandra spight of fate? Iu. Resolve and have her. Pr. Stay, it were convenient We did know how to doe this Iulio. Iu. Y'are in the right sir, it were first indeed Convenient to know how. Pr. Thou knowst his Father. Iu. Sighnior Alphonso. Pr. A bold and daring Gentleman, all flame When he is mov'd, and carelesse of a danger To vindicate his honour. Iu. What of this? Pr. He shall beare the foundation of a plot, To make me Lord of my desires. Iu. Heele rather Meet torture then consent, his arme is not Yet withered, and while he can lift a sword, He will employ it to revenge Vittori. Pr. Thou art no Polititian Iulio.Enter Fabio. How now? what newes with you? Fa. And please your grace An humble creature of yours, proud of the least Occasion to expresse how faithfully My heart is fixt to serve you. Pr. Whats your businesse? In. I have businesse of some consequence,
I had not beene so bold else to disturbe Your Princely conference, for I durst never Assume that impudent garbe, that other courtiers Are knowne by, my devotion has beene still To appeare in modest services. Pr. To'th point. Fa. It were a point of deepe neglect to keepe Your  in expectation, yet delaies Make ioyes the sweeter, arrowes that fly compasse, Arrive with as much happinesse to the marke, As those are shot pointblanke? Pr. This Courtier loves To heare himselfe talke, be not so impertinent, We know your care. Fa. And cost my Lord sometimes, For they that hold intelligence abroad To benefit their countrey, must not make Idolls of their estates, and tis a happinesse To sell their fortunes for their Princes smile, Which I am confident you will vouchsafe, When you have heard my newes. Pr. Woud you would vouchsafe To let us heare? Fa. Vouchsafe my Lord, alas! You may command my tongue, my hands, my feete, My head, I should account that limbe superfluous That would not be cut off to do you service. Pr. I do command thee silence, dost heare, silence, Fa. It is a verture my good Lord I know, But where the tongue has something to deliver, That may delight a Princes care, and so forth. Iu. Now theres some hope, he's come to his, and so forth. Fa. The newes concernes the Admirall Vittori. Pr. What of him, is he slaine? Fa. The starres forbid, he is return'd my Lord, Triumphant, brave, and glorious— Pr. Be dumbe. Another syllable, le ha thy tongue out,
And leave no roote, lest there grow out another, Was all your circumstance for this? u. My Lord! You are too open brested, let this fellow See into your heart, wisemen disguise their counsels Till things are ripe. Pr. Begon, pox o'your legges And the curse ha'not beene before, yet stay, Give order that no man goe forth to meete him Vntill our pleasure further knowne, command The Governour oth City place a guard About the gates, let no mans face appeare Without the walls, the King our father meanes To salute him first in person, dee stand. Fa. Give order that no man goe forth to meete him, I shall my Lord. Pr. He shall be entertain'd, I feele new armies in my brest, His father Enter Alphonso. Thine care Iulio. Iu. I shall attend you straight My honorable Lord. Al. Your servant Iulio Where is the Prince? I beg your graces pardon. Pr. Oh my good Lord, your sonne I heare's return'd With honour, has defeated the Sicilian Bravely. Al. He has and please your highnesse, heaven Has smild upon his undertaking, it renewes my youth to heare it. Pr. He had good souldiers, But all their valour still conspires to make The generall a garland, he must weare The conquering bayes, whose blood soever pay's for't. Al. My Lord. Pr. Nay, nay I envie not his victory. Al. You envie him, it was your cause he fought, And for his Country.
Pr. Right, and tis the cause That often prospers, that without his valour Would ha defen'd it selfe. Al. If all vertue Were left to her owne protection, my Lord, Vnarm'd with strength and policie, best states Would finde shrew'd innovations. Pr. You had best Tell me I lie. Al. I dare not thinke so foulely. Pr. Y'are a traitor, Enter Iulio with a Guard. Lay hands on him. Al. He that shall dare to say Alphonso is A traytor, let his veines partake no blood Of yours, and he shall curse he had a tongue. Pr. Disarme the rebell, and to prison with him. Al. Ingratefull Prince. Exit. Pr. Ile tame your ruffian spirit. So, so, ile now acquaint my father Iulio, Who must allow my act, diseases that Are desperate require a rugged handling, This is for thee Cassandra! Exit. Enter Vittori, Mauricion, Captaine and Souldiers. Vi. Stand. 1. Stand. 2 Stand. 3 Stand. Vi. The King received intelligence! Ma. Our ships Must needes report that loud enough. Vi. Tis strange, Is it not possible we have mistooke The shore, transported with our navall victory, Speake gentlemen! or doe we dreame? Ma. Those walls Are certainely the same, and that the City Peopled when we launch'd forth, and full of prayers For our successe. Ca. It may be they reserve Their welcome till we march into the City.
Ma. They may have some conceit. Vi. A generall silence Like night dwels round about us, and no signe That men inhabite, have we wonne at Sea To lose our selves upon the Land? or in Our absence hath some monster landed here And made it desolate, devour'd the Natives, And made em creepe into the earth agen? Ma. They might salute us with one peece of ordnance. Vi. They cannot take us for their enemies, Captaine enquire the cause, let none else move; Yet stay, unlesse it be some strange mortality, And yet that cannot be, have we brought home Their safety purchas'd through so many horrours, And is this all the payment for our conquest? To shut the gates upon us. Cap. Force them open With the Canon, shake their walls about their eares, They are asleepe. Vi. For such another rashnesse Thy head shall be the bullet of that Canon, And shot into the towne; go to! be temperate, As I grudge none the merit of their valour, I must heare none so bold. Cap. I ha done sir. Vi. Subjects are bound to fight for princes, they Not bound to the reward of every service, I looke upon thee now fighting at sea, And have forgot this error, give no breath To such a thought hereafter▪ Honour payes Double where Kings neglect, and he is valiant Truely that dares forget to be rewarded. 1. So. This is but cold comfort for a knapsacke man. Vi. And yet tis strange the King should thus neglect us, This is cheape entertainement for a conquerour Ist not Mauritio? misery of Souldiers When they have sweat blood for their Countries honour, They stand at others mercy.
Ma. They have slept since And dream't not of our sufferings. Vi. Is the Prince Alive, to whom we owe our Countries quarrell The difference of both Kingdomes? Our warre and fortunes justifie his act Can he be guilty of this shame? no more, There's something would faine mutinie within me, Strangle the snakes betime Vittori—so This was a way to forfeit all our fames; Fold up your Ensignes throw off all the pride That may expresse a triumph, well march on As we had over bought our victory. Ma. The gates are opend now, and we discover A woman by her veile, in mourning habit, Comming this way Vi. Alone? more strange and fatall, It may be tis my genius come to give A melancholy warning of my death, As Brutus had from his, Ile stand my destiny, Yet bearing the resemblance of a woman It will lesse terrifie, who should this be?Enter Cassandra veild in mourning. Lady your garment speakes you a sad woman, Greefes should salute no neerer, if it were In poore Vittories power to dispossesse you Of any sorrow. Cass. Oh my deare Vittori My wishes ayme at none beside. Vi. Cassandra? We are rewarded, had Vittori taken Into his body a thousand wounds, this kisse Had made me well againe, or but one droppe Of this rich balsome, for I know thy teares Are joy to see Vittori safe, the King With all the glories of his Province cannot Doe halfe this honour to his Admirall, I have a place above all happinesse,
And meete a greater empire in thy love Then fame or victorie hath ever boasted, My owne my best Cassandra! Cas. Call agen That temper, which hath made Vittori honour'd And if my teares which carry something more Then joy to welcome home, my best lov'd Lord Affect you with no sadnesse, which I wish not, Yet looke upon this mourning not put on To counterfeit a griefe, and that will tell you There is necessity for you to know Somewhat to checke the current of your triumph. Ma. What prodigies are these? Vi. I was too carelesse Of this sad habit, joy to see thy face Made me distinguish nothing else, proceed And punish my too prodigall embraces, It is not fit I be in one thought blest And thou in such a Livery. Ca. When you say You have strength enough to entertaine the knowledge Of such an injury. Vi. If it onely point At me, speake it at once, I am collected, Shat see I will be conqueror at home, If it concerne thy selfe, let it not flow Too fast, but rather let my eare receive it By such degrees as may not kill too soone, But leave me some life onely to revenge it. Ca. The Prince whose cause engag'd your warre abroad, Hath ill rewarded you at home. Vi. He cannot! Ca. Sir in your absence I have suffered for you, Hourely sollicited to my dishonour. Vi. Ha! Ca. For though he cald it love; I might suspect it, His personall visits, messengers, rich presents Left me not quiet to enjoy my selfe.
I told him I had given my faith already, Contracted yours, impatient of my answers, He urg'd his greatnesse, sweare he would enjoy me, Or be no Prince in Naples, I am yet Preserv'd, and welcome home my deerest safety. Vi. The Prince doe this! Ca. This is but halfe the story, By his command none dare salute your victory, Or powre their glad hearts forth at your returne, To these he hath newly added the dishonour of Your father, whom he hath commanded close Prisoner ith Castle, upon some pretence Of treason, in my eyes you may behold How people shed their sorrow, as the guard Led him to prison, none so bold to aske The cause that made him suffer in his miserie. Vi. Will the King suffer this? Ca. Alas his age Hath made him tame, a too indulgent father To such a sonne, whose will is all the law, Controlling what he pleases in this fall Of justice; which way will Vittori take? Vi. Mauricio didst heare this? we must aske Forgivenesse that we have beene valiant, Repent our duties, and that victory We bought so deere, we shud have dyed at sea, And then perhaps beene talk'd on in the croud Of honest men, for giving up our lives, Which for our service they may now take from us, We are not yet i▪th snare, and we have power To stise their designes, and prevent our Dishonourable fall. Ma. The souldiers hearts Are yours. Vi. No Mauricio let em be the Kings, If such as they forget their office, we Must keepe our thoughts unstain'd, ile to the King, But without any traine.
Ma. In this you do not Consult your safety. Vi. Safety is a lecture To be read to Children, I doe alwayes carry My owne security within, Mauricio, Yet doe not thinke I am desperate, ile take No knowledge of the Princes action But give account of my engagement, thats Not much amisse, the King I know is gracious And the Prince too, how ever passion play This rebell in our soule. Ma. You shannot neede sir, The King is comming hither, Vi. And the Prince, Lets all looke smooth, the King is come himselfe To gratulate our successe. Enter King of Naples, Prince, Iulio, Fabio, Alberto. You too much honour The poore Vittori, who at your feete layes His heart and victory, and that which gave Him power to doe you service. King. We receive it, And here discharge your souldiers, who shall tast Of our particular bounty. Omnes Sol. Heaven preserve the King. Exit. Sol. Pr. Sirra did not I give strict charge That none should passe the gates, how came she hither? Fab. No man and like your grace, I did remember And durst not prevaricate in one syllable Of my Commission, she is a Lady sir. Pr. You wood be an officious hangman I perceive, Ile finde you understanding. Vi. Let me prostrate My duty to your highnesse, and be honour'd To kisse your hand. Pr. Vittori ile not flatter I have no grace for him, whose father durst
Attempt an insolence upon my person, Which the sonne may be guilty of in his blood. Vi. My father insolent, and I guilty sir, Because I share his blood? oh that I knew In what part of my veines to finde those drops, That I might sacrifice to your anger▪ And expiate my Fathers sinne! Pr. I came not to expostulate. Vi. Is this all my reward? Pr. Your valour has Beene payd in the successe, what you have done Was duty, if you have not mixed our cause With private and particular revenge. Vi. You speake not this to me sir. Pr. Yes to you, We doe not feare the bugbeares in your forehead, You will heare more. Exeunt Prince, Iulio. Vi. Sir you have mercy in you. Kin. You have displeas'd our sonne Vittori. Vi. I? witnesse the Angels. Ki. I must tell you too, Your father has transgrest beyond example. Vi. Good heaven forgive him, is this all, All my reward? Ki. What would you aske. Vi. Aske—why—I aske my father. Ki. Your father? Exit King, Alb. Fab. Vi. Goodnesse leave me not the wonder Of all mankind; gentlemen all gone. Ca. Alas Vittori. Vi. I that commanded thousands This morning am not owner of one servant. Dost thou stay with me? Ca. My prophetick soule Knew this before. Enter King, Alberto, Fabio. Vi. The King returnes, Cassandra. Ki. We ha thought upon't Vittori, and without The Councell of our sonne, will condiscend
To your Fathers liberty, he is yours upon Condition, you and he, and this your Mistresse Go into present banishment. Vi. How  banishment? Ki. I runne my sonnes distast There is no time for study, he affects That Lady, if you stay something may follow, To ▪th generall repentance, troth I pitty thee, Here take our signet, time and absence may Correct all. Exit King cum caeteris suis. Ca. Oh embrace it deere Vittori, We shall meete safely every where but here, Enlarge your Father, and we cannot misse A happier fate. Vi. Can my Cassandra thinke so? That word shall▪make me live a little longer, But these are strange turnes Madam, Naples hath No dwellings for us, when we are quit of these, Wee'le with our griefe make tame some wildernesse. Exit. The second Act. Enter King, Prince, Alberto, Fabio. King. Whats to be done? Pr. Done, y'are undone all, Betraid the Crowne you weare, I see it tremble Vpon your head, give such a licence to A Rebell, trust him abroad to gather Strength to the Kingdomes ruine. King. What can such A naked man attempt to make us feare? Pr. He carries with him a whole army sir The peoples love, who want no giddinesse Had they but opportunity, and such A master Rebell as Vittori, to Make spoyle of all, who counceld him to this. Al. Not I and please your grace, I wish it heartily
Vndone. Pr. You wish it sir, are wishes now The remedy for such a mischiefe, you When the state bleeds, will wish it well agen; Y'are fine court Surgeons, had you staide his Father It might have check'd his treason, or Cassandra. Al. That's his torment. Pr. We had beene secure, Exasperated now with his affront, As never traitor wanted impudence To blanch ore his rebellion, he may inflame The Neighbour Princes, to conspire some warre For his revenge. Fa. his grace sayes right, there may Be a consequence of much danger, and Vittori Has fame abroad. Ki. I did it for the best, By his absence thinking to remo his anger, I could have beene content, to have honoured him, For to say truth, his services did challenge More friendly paiment. Fa. To say truth, he was A noble valiant gentleman, and deseru'd Pr. What deseru'd he? Fa. A halter, and shall please Your Highnesse, I did wonder at your patience He was not put to death. Pr. I must acknowledge, Vittori has deseru'd for many services, The love and honour of his country, fought Their battels, and brought conquest home, made tame The Seas that threatned us, secur'd the Land, And Rome allowd some Consuls for lesse Victories, Triumphs, and Statues. Fa. Most excellent Prince How just he is. Pr. But when opinion. Of their owne merit swels em into pride,
Which sets a price of that, which modesty Should count an act of their obedience, They forfeit the reward of thankes and honour, And betray poore and most vaine-glorious soules, Scipio, and Antony, and other Romanes, Deseru'd well of the Senate, and were honoured, But when they ran to faction, and pursued Ambitious endes to undo their Countries peace, They were no longer Patriots, but declared Romes poyson, and like gangrenes on the state To bee cut off, lest they corrupt the body. Fa. Was ever Prince so wise! Ki. But sonne, sonne, how Can these staines reach Vittori? he hath given No argument to suspect his fall from Loyalty. Pr. I do not sir accuse him, nor did I More then became the spirit of a Prince, Show I was sensible of his Fathers impudence, If you remember, when I urg'd what trespasse His Father had committed, he urg'd aloude, Was this all his reward, as if his service Were obligation to make us suffer, And justifie their affronts, but I waste breath Since you are so well pleas'd, my duty sir Shall speake me still your Sonne, but let me take Boldnesse to prophesie their insolence Strucke at my person first, but you will find Their pride reach higher, I am but a branch Superfluous, and may be prund away, You have you say no argument to suspect His fall from Loyalty, if whats done to me Be dead within you, yet remember now You have disingag'd by exile his relation And tie of subject, he owes now no faith to you, What that, and his disgrace and opportunity Abroad may frame him to, I leave, to imagine. Ki. Nay prethee come backe, thou hast awak'd me, I finde my rashnesse, I did never thinke
There had beene so much danger, we will study Timely prevention, let em be cald backe, Fly after em, and in our name command. Pr. You shanot need. Ki. How shanot need? Pr. Your pardon, In hope your wisedome would allow it, after I have made that my act, Iulio is gone With strict commission for that purpose. Ki Iulio? I thanke thy care. Fa. I was most divinely thought on, most maturely. Now all your jealousies are laid. Pr. I shall Compose my selfe at his returne, to weare What countenance you will direct. Ki. Cassandra Y'ave sent for too. Pr. By any meanes, she is So precious to Vittori, had she sinn'd Alone to merit banishment, hee would follow her Through all the world. Ki. Women are strangly attractive, Fame speaks her vertuous too. Fr. Some vertue she has— Enter Julio, Alphonso, guarded. Julio has prospered, Tha'st done good service, Alphonso though your late affront to us Be foule in its owne nature, and may encourage Others by your impunitie, yet we have With the remembrance of your former actions Lost your offence, Vittori too shall find The honour he deserves. Al. How's this? Pr. Where is he? He does not scorne our mercy; Iulio, Where is Cassandra? Iulio. Shipt with Vittori, thanke Alphonso fort
Whom you have pardoned, they are both at Sea. Pr. Whirle, winds pursue em. Ki. Where's your sonne Alphonso? Al. Embark'd with his faire Mistresse, I observe My Lord which way your anger moves, in vaine You vex your soule for them, the Sea's no part Of your command, the winds are masters there, Which cannot raise a storme so blacke and ominons, As their owne countrey. Pr. By what meanes escaped they? Alp. Take it from me, and after cut my head off, I charg'd him as his heart wish'd to enjoy A Fathers blessing, as he lov'd the honour Of his Cassandra, fearing some new plot To hire a Barke, and quickly put to Sea, Whilst I made some stay to dispose affaires, That might befriend us in another countrey, He did obey and had my prayers, the winds Convey'd him swiftly from the shore, and had Your creature Iulio not made such haste, I had dispatch'd, and in another vessell Followed his ship, but heaven determined I Should be agen your prisoner, use your power But looke to give account for every haire Of this old head, now withered in your service. Pr. To the Castle with him. Al. I, there's the King, Let me use one word more Royall sir, to you. Pr. You'le heare him. Al. Feare not Prince, my soule's not falne So low to beg compassion. Ki. Speake Alphonso? Al. My duty still preserv'd, I would advise Your age to quit the trouble of your Kingdome, And aske the Princes leave to turne a Capuchin, Why should you stoups with burthen of such a state, And have a sonne so active, turne Fryer, my Lord, And make the youngman King.
Pr. I must endure. Ki. Away with him. Fab. Ile see him safe my Lord. Enter a Messenger. Pr. What hasty newes with you. Mess. To Armes great sir for your defence, there are New dangers from the Sea. Kin. Another Fleet? Mes. And sailing this way, we suspect they are Sicilians. Ki. Vittori gave ablow to their defigne. Pr. Dee but suspect it vilaine? Iu. It may bee Some scattered ships. Pr. Has not Vittori mock'd us, And plaide the vilaine with your trust. Ki. They could not be reinforcd so soone, what number? Mes. They cover sir the seas. Pr. Gather up forces to Prevent the landing. Mes Tis impossible? They touch our shore by this time. Ki. Then make safe The City. Al. It may be another leet, meant to releeve The first, and came not forth so soone. Ki. Now we want Vittori. Exit. Pr. All the diseases Naples ever gron'd with Ore take Vittori, but Alphonso shall Pay deeely for this mischiefe. Iu. Be not sir Dejected, tis more easie to defend At home, then thrive in forraine warre, these men Will find as proud resistance. Pr. Canst thou thinke I do looke pale for this ▪ no Iulio, Although the suddaine newes might move me somewhat I have a heart above all feare, and can Know no distraction but Cassandra's absence,
That makes me looke so wild, and teares my braine With the imagination. Iu. But the state We are in requires you should be active sir. Pr. Ah Iulio, the armies which I feare Are not abroad, they have made entrenchment here. Exit▪ A shout within, Enter the King of Sicily, Horatio, Trivulsi, Fabrichio. Hor. Though Naples do not bid you welcome sir A shore, the joyes and duties of your subjects▪ Cannot be silent. Ki. We do thanke you all, The seas were kinde, and the winds kissd our sailes. All things conspir'd to our revenge. Tr. Your Iustice Our very enemies acknowledge it, And conscious of their injurie, are afraid To looke upon us. Ki. Marshall of the field Give present order for entrenchments. Weele quarter here, you shall make good that part With your horse troupes, and plant Canons on that hill, To play upon the towne, Naples shall find We did not venter all upon one stake, That petty losse at sea which made them triumph, And perhaps carelesse of more opposition Shall dearely be accounted for, beside Dishonouring our Daughter, and our Court By such a rude departure. Hor. As they had Scorn'd your alliance. Ki. Thy particular▪ Suffrings Horatio, and wounds are put Into the scale. Hor. They are not worthy sir, Had his sword reach'd my heart, my death had been No sinne compar'd to that affront he threw, Vpon your selfe and Daughter, I was bound
To engage that blood was given me to serve you, And I doe love those drops that in a cause So just made haste to shew their duty to you Better than those that dwell within my heart. Ki. We are confident of thy loyalty. Tr. The Princesse. Enter Rosinda and Flavia. Ki. Alas Rosinda thou wert not bred to these Tumults and noyse of warre, has not the sea Impair'd thy health, I was too rash to allow Thy travaile, and expose thy tendernesse To this rude voyage. Ro. It appeares to me A pleasant change of ayre, I have heard men talke Of many horrours that attend the seas Of tempests, and of dangers, I have seene Nothing to fright me, if the waves put on No other shape, I could exchange me thinkes My dwelling on the land. Ho. We owe this happinesse To you faire Princesse, for whose safer passagê The breath of heaven did gently swell our sailes, The waves were proud to beare so rich a lading, And danc'd toth' musicke of the windes. Ro. You shew Your complement my Lord, call you this Naples? Ki. The kingdome of our enemy which shall groane for the inhabitants. Are all our forces. Landed? Tr. Safe to your wishes, and expect What they shall be commanded. King. We must first Secure the ground we have, being defenc'd With workes, we may prevent their sallies, and Assault to our best advantage, still preserve Thy courage my Rosinda, tis for thee We have adventurd hither. Ros. And you have Beene kinde to the petition of your daughter,
Who can in duty waite upon your fortune At home, I should have withered in your absence, I shall grow valiant here. Ki. My deerest child, Whose very eyes doe kindle flames of courage In every souldier, be still safe, and promise Thy selfe a brave revenge. Fla. What will become of us Madam? Ro. We must take our fortunes, I am sorry For thee▪ Fla. You have some reason for your selfe, if any danger fol∣low I know where to place the cause, but I dare suffer with your grace, Enter Paz. and Page. Passerello Madam, and the Page Ro. Hee's come in good time to releeve our thoughts. Paz. Madam. Pag. Come plucke up a good heart. Paz. Tis comming out as fast as it can, sweete Didimo hold my head. Pag. Come, tis but a little sea sicknesse. Paz. Seasicke quotha—a vengeance of all drunken voyages, I can doe nothing but— Ros. How now Pazzorello? Paz. Oh Madam, never did man cast up so much, and had so little skill in Arithmeticke, nothing grieves me, but I have not drunke for't. I have a perpetuall motion in my belly, the foure winds are together by the eares in my small guts, would I had never knowne the Sea, little did I thinke—oh— Fla. Thou art a fresh water souldier. Paz. Fresh water? I know not, be judge by the whole ship, If I was not in a sweete pickle. Ro. The worst is past; this is but physicke. Paz. If I had thought the sea would have given me so many vomits, I would have seene it burn'd, ere I would ha ventu∣red so farre, I ha purg'd both wayes, and the enemie had met us before we landed, I should have scour'd some on em. Pa. How doe you now? Paz. The fit is not so violent altogether, a shipboard I runne
a tilt, howsoever I beseech your grace, that I may goe home agen. Ro. There is no way by land. Pag. And a little more jogging at sea— Paz. The very word Sea, boyles in my stomacke, and will make my mouth runne over presently—ho it comes, it comes. Exit▪ Pag. Madam I have a great desire to attend him, I have cast a plot to make your, highnesse merry. Ros. Youle play the wag with him, wee'le trust you to pursue it Pa. I humbly thanke your grace. Exit. Ros. Flavia does not the day looke blacke o'th suddaine, Fla. It has not the same complexion, I heare A noyse too. Ro. From the sea it growes loud. Fla. Tis well we are a shore, oh me I tremble To thinke what would be come on's, and we had Not beene afore this tempest, I thanke providence I was upon the Sea once in a storme, But they use to clap the women under hatches, I never prayd so in my life; the King! Enter King Horatio, Trivulsi, Fabrichio. Ki. I know not what to thinke, no sooner Landed, But such a storme pursue us, does not this Affright Rosinda into palenesse? dost Not feele an ague? Ro. I have rather cause Sir to rejoyce, it overtooke us not Vpon the sea, the furie of it there Might have beene fatall. Hor. Be not troubled sir, My soule doth from this omen prophesie The victorie you wish upon this kingdome, Nor is it superstition to beleeve▪ That heaven doth point us out the scourge to Naples, By seconding our comming with a tempest; The waves were proud to entertaine our Navie: The fish in amorous courtship-dane'd about
Our ship, and no rude gale from any coast Was sent to hang upon our linnen wings, To interrupt our wishes, not a ▪starre Muffled his brightnesse in a sullen cloud, Till we arriv'd, and t en observe how heaven Threatens the fall of this proud enemie, By this prodigious tempest, which but gives Them warning of a greater. Ki. We are confident Thou hast happily expounded, what lightning Darts from those angry exhalations. Ho▪ It speakes the flame of our revenge. Ki. What thunder? Ho. The loudnesse of our canon, let their feares Apply it, and runne mad with apprehension. Tri. Our ships must needes fall foule on one another, Riding ith haven. Ho. Let em cracke their ribs, We have the more necessity to tug for't. Ki. Yet would thou wert at home. Ros. Feare not for me sir, Your absence would present my imagination With more affliction, I suffer lesse In knowledge▪ and shall rise by brave examples, Valiant above my sex, these horrors fright Not me. Ki. This fire will quicken the whole army. Souldiours pursued by Vittori, Cassandra halfe dead under his arme. What mutinie is here? Vi. Base vilaines, to take part With all the malice of the world against me. Ki. What are you? Vi. I am a Gentleman, and dare Rather than▪ suffer a rude hand divorce This burden from my armes, defie you all. Alas she will be gone, oh my Cassandra Thy oule shannot forsake thee thus, ile take it
In with a kisse. Tr. Some whom the wracke has cast Vpon the shore. Ro. Pitty the gentlewoman. Vi. Come not too neere, the man that first attempts This Lady, had better rip his mothers wombe. Ki. Whence are you? Vi. You are strangers I perceive, Then I presume to tell you, I have more justice, To tread upon this earth, then you, or any The proudest, it once gave us birth, and fate Vngentle fate, hath sent us backe to dye here, But I will not outlive my deere Cassandra. Ki. Doe you delight in wounds, resigne that Lady. Vi. Not while my hand can manage this, the blood You take, will make us walke on even pace To death, and when my soule can stay no longer, Ile leave a curse to blast you, but if you Beare hearts of flesh about you, and will promise A pitty to this poore departing Spirit I will not use a sword, but give my life To be commanded from me at your pleasure, Your care will come too late. Ki. I promise by The word and honour of a King, she shall Be carefully attended. Vi. Though that name Breed wonder in me, it secures all thoughts That may concerne her safety. Ki. See Rosinda With as much diligence to this Ladies health, As you'd preserve your owne. Hor. An excellent creature! Ki. My faith is past, Now if you please you may acquaint us with Your name and quality, Vi. Something on the sudden Weighes my hart lower, I ha not power to thanke him.
Ki. Already you have exprest your selfe this Country man, Be more particular. Vi. My name's Vittori. Ki. Hor. The Admirall of Naples? Vi. It was a title! I had too late, and lost it for my service; I cannot conjure up the dead to witnesse, There be some living that remember me, It was my chance to have the best at sea, Against the bold Sicilian. Ki. A chance sayst? Vi. Few victories can boast moe, all is but The dye of Warre, which valour must obey, My lot was to bring peace, and triumph home, And my reward was banishment, the sea Held me a sinfull burden to the waves, Or else the blood I shed to mixe with em, In anger and revenge conspir'd to throw Our Barke, with the distressed lading back Vpon this flinty bosome of your Country, You have at full my misery, be just To that poore Lady, whatsoe're I suffer. Ki. Your fame was with us earlier, entertaine him, They disarme Vittori. You are welcome man, there's cause we should Be kinde to you. Vi. Will a King staine his honour? Ki. Know miserable man, thy destinies Have made thee his, that will exact severe Account for many lives, most happy storme, Thy master too shall finde a punishment Great as his pride, how fortunate we are! Vi. I aske no mercy for my selfe, be kind To that poore Lady, as y'are a Prince, and I Will kisse my fate. Ki. We violate no promise made to her, Though torment make thee curse thy selfe, blest heavens? You shall pay deere for all.
Vi. Oh my Cassandra, When at the expence of all my blood, I have bought Thy precious life from these hard hearted men, Shed one teare on me; and I am pay'd agen. Exeunt▪ The third Act. Pag. You should have thought of this afore. Paz. I did thinke, and thinke on't agen, but there was nece∣sity of going with the princesse, or losing my place at court, when she came backe, prethee sweete Didimo councell me, I shall nere endure these bounsing of gunnes, happy are they that can destroy gunpowder, without offence in their muste∣rings, souldiers may talke, but there's neither wit nor honesty in making so many cripples, yet I would give one of my legs to have the tother secur'd, I care not which, cowards are com∣monly creatures of understanding, would I had purg'd away my soule at sea, there had beene peace among the Had∣docks. Pag. Come, I have a tricke to save thee harmelesse, thou shat entreate to be gentleman of a company. Paz. Shall I? whats that? Pag. A singular priviledge I can tell you, oh the right hand file, doe not you know't. Paz. A right handed file. Pag. There's no honour like it, Ile not give a rush to be an officer, your Gentleman of a company marches in the vanne. Paz. Vanne what's that? Pag. The bullets first salute him, he goes up to the mouth of a Canon, he lies perdue. Paz. Perdue? Pag. More glorie than to command an army, to lye two houres upon his belly in the field, and digge a hole for his chin, when the bullets whisper in both his eares, whize; to be trod upon by horses, and scorne to reveale himselfe, sometimes to be snatch'd up by a party of firelockes, or if he fight to bee cut into honourable collups, or his limbes strewed about the field,
which found by a subtlers wife, is sod for the knapsacke men, and goes currant for campe mutton, my father was a Captaine, and I have heard him tell brave stories of these gentlemen of companies. Paz. And thou wodst ha me one of these gentlemen. Pa. By any meanes. Paz. Have the bullets first salute me lye perdue as you call it, and be cut into honorable collups, or have my haunches sod by a subtlers wife, and passe for Campe mutton, this is the pre∣ferment you wish me to M. Didimo. Pag. You shall be in no danger, I have but told you what fortunes other men have met withall, you shall be secure and march in the vanne. Paz. and come up to the mouth of a Canon. Pag. Tis my meaning. Paz. Which if I doe, Ile give the Canon leave to eate me. Pag. Dost thou thinke I would advise thee any thing for thy hurt. Paz. Hurt, no no, these are but leabitings, to have my limbes strew'd about the field, or so. Pag. Come, I love thee, and will give thee proofe, thou hast got money in thy service, put thy body in equipage, and beg of the princesse to be one of these brave fellowes, I will put thee into a way, to get everlasting fame, and not a haire of thy head shall be the worse fort, thou shat come off. Paz. My head shall come off. Pag. Thy whole body triumphant, my Rosiecleere, and live to make Nations stand a tiptoe to heare thy brave adventures, thy head shall be inchanted and have a proofe beyond the mu∣sty murrian, didst never heare of men that have beene sicke and shot free, with bodies no bullets could peirce. az. Thats by witchcraft. Pag. Tha'st hit the naile boy, I will procure this feate done for thee, feare nothing, but be very secret, thy head shall be an anvile, and breake all the swords that light upon't▪ and for the shot, thy breath shall dampe a Cano, it shall fall off like one of thy buttons. Paz. If this could be compas'd, I should love witchs the
better while I live. Pag. Here's my hand, something shall be done, but put on a brave outside of resolution for the credit on't, that the world may beleeve tis thy valour puts thee upon desperate actions from which a charme shall bring thee off, or the devill shall nay to some body, here's the Princesse. Enter Rosinda, Cassandra, Flavia. Looke high and let me heare how youle deserve the benefit. Cas. Madam I know not in what language to Expresse those humble thankes my soule is full of, It shall be justice, you command this life You have preserv▪d. Ros. We should have forfeited Humanity, not to have releev▪d you In such distresse. Enter Horatio. Ho. Shall I not trespasse madam Beyond your mercy, by this bold Intrusion? Ro. My Lord y'are welcome. Ho. Your grace honours me, but to you lady I am directed. Cas. To me noble sir. Paz. We shall be rusty here for want of use, Oh for an action of battery, I long To fight pell mell with some body. Ro. Pazzorllo. Pag. He▪s growne most strangely valiant. Fla. How he lookes? Paz Madam I have an humble sute to your highnesse. Ro. To me? yare like to prosper in't. Paz. I beseech you I may not bee a Common Souldier, I would crosse the seas for something, let me be gentleman of a company, and let the bulets flye as fast as they can. Ros. I must confesse you aske a place of honour, but of danger. Paz. Danger's an Asse, oh that I were to fight With the Generall now for two crownes! Fla. A mighty wager! Pag. He meanes both th kingdomes.
Paz. I would desire no more then my finger against his mus∣ket. If we make no assault presently against the walles, I shall goe neere to mutinie, and kill two or three of our owne Cap∣taines. Ro. This he that was sea-sicke? Paz. Oh there is no honour, like to marching in the vanne! Ile not give a rush for a man that wonot ly Perdue halfe a yeere together, and come up to the teeth of a Canon. Pag. To the Canons mouth, I speake by a figure. Paz. Now you talke of the mouth;  will eate every day this leaguer foure and twenty Canon bullets butterd, and as many Spanish Pikes for sparagrasse: their steele points will fortifie my stomacke; I will kill my hundred men an houre for a twelve∣moneth together. Fla. Youle not have mn enough to conquer. Pag. When the men are all dead i'th towne, heele ly with all the women, and get as many more, rather then want ene∣mies. Paz. Oh how I could demolish man woman and child now! Ro. I see your spirit, and must cherish it; ile speake to my Lord; you may have your desire, but be not seene in't for your honour. Paz. Hee's here indeed, Didimo when shall I be bewitch'd, and the devill do not put me in good security? Pag. Trust me for that, lets leave em about it. Hor. an you be cruell Lady to that man, That offers you his heart? Cas. Alas my Lord You aske mine in exchange, and I have made it A gift already to Vittori, while He lives he must possesse it, as y'are noble Prosecute this no further. Hor. I have done, Vittori then must dy. Enter King of Sicily Trivulsi, Fabrichio Kin. Horatio, Command your prisoner be brought to us presently. Hor. I shall sir. Exit Cas. As you are a King, I beg your mercy
To poore Vittori. Ro. I petition too For her desires. Ki. Vnlesse he will be cruell to himselfe, His fate smiles on him, does he love you Lady. Cas. Great sir, we are one soule, life cannot be So precious as our loves. Ki. You shall preserve him, Rosinda. Ro. I obey. Exit. Ki. Leave, as thy health Is but a prologue to his blessing, that Paper speakes our intention, you shall Present it, if he be wise his judgement Will meet our purpose, what we lost at sea, We enable him to satisfie by a second Proofe of his courage, and propound not only Life, and his liberty, but so great an honour As next our title, there is left no glory To equall it. Cas. Y'are all bounty. Ki. There are some Conditions, if you find him coole, you may Apply what argument you find to warme His resolutions, here he is, I leave you. Enter Vittori. Horatio. Vi. I waite sir your command. Ki. She will instruct you Horatio. Exeunt. King and Hor. Vi. Enjoyes my best Cassandra perfect health, The King is just, and I have not enough With this poore life to satisfie. Ca. Vittori Wee now begin our happinesse, the King Has beene so gracious. Vi. All that's good reward him, To see thee safe and smile, I writ my ambition. Ca. When you peruse that paper, you will find How much we owe to providence, it was The Kings command I should deliver it, The words were of sch comfort that came with it,
I must be confident you'le thanke him for it. Vi What should this be?Reads. Noble Vittori, we know you are a Souldier, and present you not with naked pitty of your fortune, what some Prince would take away we have purpose to cherish, your life enjoy your selfe, and with it the Command of all our Forces. Naples ingratitude, if you have put no false shape upon your injuries, may bee argument enough to your revenge and justice. Be our Souldier, fight against your Coun∣try, so with one valour, you punish them, and make us satisfaction, we will have pledge for this trust in Cassandra, whose head shall be the price of your disobedience. Sure I have lost my understanding ha? Does it not bid me to fight against my Country? I prethee reade Cassandra, and repent, Thou hast thought him mercifull. Cas. Wee have pledge for this trust in Cassandra, whose head shall be the price of your disobedience. The language is too cleere. Vi. It carries more Darkenes then ever the night was guilty of, And I looke blacke already to have read it, Does he call treason justice, such a treason As heathens blush at, Nature, and Religion Tremble to heare, to fight against my country, Tis a lesse sinne to kill my Father, there, Or stab my owne heart, these are private mischeefes, And may in time be wept for, but the least Wouud I can fasten on my Country makes A Nation bleed, and my selfe too, blasts all The memory of former actions, And kils the name we live by, oh Cassanda Thou didst not well to praise the King for this. Cas. His words did sound more comfort. Vi. Prethee tell me? How canst thou hope I should preserve my faith Vnstain'd to thee, and breake to all the world? Cas. Naples has beene injurious, and we made No solemne vow to love what hath betrai'd us. Vi. Take heed, and do not greeve the Saints to heare thee,
If Naples have forgot Vittories service, I must not make a desperate shipwracke of My piety, what greater vow? It was Articled in the creation of my soule I should obey, and serve my Country with it Above my selfe, death is a brave excuse for't, No he shall see, I am a Souldier And dare be just, say he should torture me, Shall wickednesse be strong in punishment, And we not be as valiant in our suffering? Ca. Can then Vittori be content to leave his Cassandra to the misery of life Alone? for in the number of mankinde I nere shall finde, another in whose love I can place any comfort. Vi. Do not say so? Princes will court thee then, and at thy feete Humble their Crownes, and purchase smiles with Provinces, When I am dead the world shall dote on thee And pay thy beauty tribute, I am thy Affliction, and when thou art discharg'd From loving me, thy eyes shall be at peace, A Sunne more glorious shall draw up thy teares Which gracing heaven in some new forme, shall make The Constellations blush, and envy em; Or if thy love of me be so great, that when I am sacrific'd Thou wot thinke of me, let this comfort thee, I die my Countries Martyr, and ascend Rich in my scarlet robe of bloud, my name Shall staine no Chronicle, and my Tombe be blest With such a garland time shall never wither: Thou with a troupe of Wives as chaste as thee, Shall visite my cold Sepulcher, and glory To say, this doth enclose Vittories dust, That died true to his honour, and his country, Methinkes I am taking of my leave already, And kissing the wet sorrrowes from thy cheeke, Bid thee rejoyce, Vittori is a conqueror,
And death his way to triumph. Cas. This is all, A new disguise for griefe, to make it shew well. Vi. To make it shew indeed, I have talk'd idly, And miserably forgot my selfe, I am chck'd, This tels me another tale, if I refuse To obey the Kings directions, he is not So kinde to take the forfeit of my life, But he will make the price of my neglect, Cassandra's innocent bloud, if I obey not To do an act injurious to vertue, Thy soule must be divorc'd. Cas. Sir I have read it, And were not worthy of Vittories love To value this poore life above his honour, Keepe your high thoughts, peserve all peace within you, You shall not buy my breath with your owne shame, Ile die with that deotion, I ha praid for you, Which trust me was most heartily, and ile shed No teares for my owne funerall, if any Vnruly drop breake forth, when we are parting, Tis more to leave Vittori then the world, Yet if thou wot give me leave, Ile confesse to the Before my head fall from this other peece, I would deceive the hangman, for ere thou Go from me, with a sigh into thy bosome, I would convey my spirit, and leave him But a pale ghost, to mocke his execution. Vi. I cannot hold, this conflict is more fierce Then many thousand battells, canst thou dy? Cas. If you will have it so, you have taught me To be in love with noble thoughts, I shall Have some weepe ore my hearse, and when Im'e gone Seald by my bloud, a Martyr for thy love, The world shall praise me for it, and the Virgins And Wives, if I obtaine no other monument, Build me a toombe within their hearts, and pay Their yeerely songs and garlands, to my memory, That died, to save Vittories life and honour. Vi. How should Cassandra die to save Vittori?
Cas. Allow it So you be happie, and although my wishes Are rather for the punishment of Naples, More cruell then our enemies, yet if you Thinke it dishonour to oppose that country, I have a heart most willing to preserve By any death your fame, lose not a scruple Of your selfe for me, I carry thy love with me, And prophesie my story shall throw more Disgrace on Naples, then all thy revolt Can bring upon thy name. Vi. I am in a tempest And know not how to steere, destruction dwels On both sides. Ca. Come, resolve. Vi. I must—to let Thee live, I will take armes, forgive me then Great Genius of my Country, that to save Her life, I bring my honour to the grave. Exeunt▪ Enter Fabio and Mauritio at severall doores. Fa. I know not what to say to these garboiles, there▪s a hot Naples toward, and the Prince is so humerous a thother side, I dare not come neere him, Captaine Mauricio. Ma. Signior Fabio you dishonour your body, by straining so much Complement. Fa. Your humble servant Captaine. Ma. A court instrument, and so deepe a base, you forget your selfe, have the Warres made this alteration? keepe your garbe and be staunch Signior, a Captaine is a thing too course for your acquantance, you wonot know Souldiers in peace. Fa. Alas sir, the necessity of my affaires at Court, and place so devoures my attendance, that I cannot give that respect which is due to a Gentleman of your quality, no neglect I beseech you Sir. Ma. I am glad tis come about, what do you thinke now of a Musket bullet next your heart, tis very provocative, come b not sad, thou maist live a day or two longer. Fa. I hope Captaine the state of the City is not so desperate. Ma. We expect a battell every houre, & the wals to fly about
Our eares, if they should be patient, we ha not provision to en∣dure a siege, what will become of your pumps signior, your wrought shirts, and rich nightcaps, I say nothing of your wardrobe, jewells and other trinkets. Fa. I stand not upon them, my life is more precious to me then all these. Ma. What pitty it is so profound a gentleman should dye by gunpowder, what would you give to be sav'd now? Fa. How dee meane Captaine? Ma. For your soule let it hift, I thinke thou hast little care on't thy selfe, thee be many would give all their estate to out∣live these combustions. Fa. I would I were sure on't, condition I lost halfe my land. Ma. A match▪ my life against halfe your land to secure you, And make an indifferent bargaine presently. Fa. Your life? how are you sure to live? Ma. If I dye, you have halfe your land by't, if you live, tis worthy dividing transitory fortunes, I shall ha the worst match on't. Fa. But how will you assure me Captaine? Ma. Thou art not sencelesse, why your venter is but land a∣gainst my life, which is more precious I hope than thousand acres, is this to be considered▪ clap hands, and we will have ar∣ticles drawne for mutuall assurances, I doe not this to every man, but I hope to have good on thee hereafter; the King! Enter King of N. Prince, Julio, Alberto. Fab. And Prince. Ma. Lets withdraw then, and conclude tis a safe bargaine for you sir, if you faile, what would all your estate doe you good, and then I forfeit my life, if you scape, I have but halfe your land. Fab. I understand, and thanke you noble Captaine. Exit. Ki. Alphonso must be sent for out of prison, He's an experienc'd souldier. Pr. To betray us. Ki. Now we are punished for Vittories banishment. Pr. Your feare will make us cowards. Iul. Shall we make A sally forth? King. Alberto. Pr. Weele expect more Advantage first, they have inisht their redoubt,
Is our river guarded with a sconce? Iul. On that part No enemy can endanger us. Ki. What if you Tasted Alphonso, he has beene ever faithfull, And we too rash. Pr. Keepe prudent watches Iulio, Something ith evening may be attempted, Death is the worst, and better fall with honour Then owe our life to feares, I would Cassandra Were in their Campe, oh Iulio. Iu. Twere better She were at home in your possession. A Herald sir. Pr. Admit him. Ki. Alberto, Iulio. Exiunt. Enter againe, with Vittori like a Herald. Pr. Whats the complement now. Vi. Thus Naples is saluted from my Master, Provok't by injuries above the patience Of kings to suffer, without thirst of blood Or pride of conquest, he is come in armes To aske a satisfaction, if you would Not know the fury of a warre, which acts, Such horrid ruines gainst men and nature, that Repentance cannot easily absolve The guilt in them that caus'd it, meet conditions, And deserve timely my great masters friendship, With mercy on your selves. Pr. Mercy! Ki. Be temperate. Vi. Remember wounds are made more easily Then curd, and now arriv'd within your countrey, Revenge may spread a wild destruction, Let mothers still enjoy their sleepe, and dwell Within their husbands bosome, let their children Live to requite the parents grone, and prosper, Let old men pay their debt onely to nature, And virgins dedicate their yet chast wombe To Hymens holy use, or at their quires With freedome of their soules, sing holy prayers For the sweete peace you lend em, to serve heaven. Pr. This fellow's sent to mocke us in my heart I repent all the tye of armes and nations. That gives such saucy freedome to a Herald.
Vi. I claime my priviledge, and dare say more. Pr. What more? Vi. Vittori is our generall. Ki. Pr. Vittori? dares that traitour. Vi. When Kings leave Their justice, and throw shame upon deservers, Patience so wounded turnes a fury. Pr. How dares Scicily trust him? Vi. Yes he has good pledge; Too great a pawne. Pr. This, this vxation I did expect, but we must not be frighted, Tell your insulting master, he shall finde Men that both dare, and can resist this fury; Conditions we despise, nor let him magnifie His purchase in that rebell, every souldier With us hath equall courage to Vittori, But a soule far more honest. Vi. Honest? Pr. So sir, This, warre shall justifie upon his heart. Vi. I dare not stay to heare more; least my passions Betray me, what a fire this language has Shot through my blood, the poore old king sayes nothing, But fils a place like a state cipher. Pr. Herald. Returne this to that Giant of your warre, Vittori, in his absence, we shall find A punishment for his treason, and to coole His hot veines, say the first attempt he makes Against us, shall as valiantly be answer'd With his fathers head. Vi. Ha? Pr. By thy masters soule It shall, and this is all our answere, see Him safe without the walls. Exeunt. Vi. Thunder has strucke me, I feele new stigs about my heart, my father? Was ever man o miserably throwne Vpon despaire, if I refuse their warre I lose my wife Cassandra, if I fight My father bleeds, some divine arme sustain
My feeble soule, instruct it how I should Distinguish sorrow, and which blessing rathr I should now part with, a deere wife, or father. The fourth Act. Enter Rosinda Cassandra. Ros. But did the Prince affect thee so Cassandra? Cas. I have told you Madam every circumstance, I should but flatter my owne misery To speake it lesse, misfortune had not made me Your prisoner now, if he had beene more temperate. Ros. But did thy heart allow him no affection? Thou wert much unkind. Cas. He had my duty Madam, Which still I owe him, as my prince, but I Had but one faith, and that was given Vittori, I feare I have displeas'd you. Ro. No thou hast not, Dost thinke he loves thee still? as. I know not Madam, but I hope not. Ros. Would I could hope so too; Thou hast deserv'd my confidence, and although Thou canst not helpe me, I must tell thee all, I love that Prince, lov'd when I first saw him, And when he courted me, I thought twas necessary To shew I had a soft heart, but he flatter'd And tooke too soone occasion of his absence, The wounds he left upon Horatio Were not so deepe as mine, which howsoere I have disguis'd yet from my fathers eye, Can find no cure without his surgerie That left them in my bosome, to this end I urg'd my father to this warre, and beg'd With many prayers to witnesse his reveng. Cas. That was a desperate remedy, how if Your father be orecome, and you made prisoners. Ros. We shall find death or ransome, the first would
Conclude my sufferings, th'other not much harme us, Perhaps advance my ends, but if the victorie Should crowne our army, I should interpose To make conditions for the Prince, fate must Decide one of these wayes. Cas. Madam I pitty you, Sure if the Prince knew with what constancie Your love breathes after him, he would finde a passion To meete your Noble flame. Ros. I know not whether To pray for victorie, or to be conquer'd, For till the warres conclude, I must despaire To see whom my desires pursue. Cas. Tis possible That you may see him Madam. Ros. When? Cas. This night, And speake with him, without exposing your Person to any danger. Ros. Prethee doe not Mocke me sweete friend. Cas. You were compassionate Of me, and tis but duty I should answere it With my desires to serve you, not to hold Your thoughts in expectation, is there any Gentleman neere, whom you dare trust? Ros. With what? Cas. With carriage of a paper, I shall runne Some hazzard, but there's nothing can weigh downe That goodnesse you have shewed me, being a stranger, Ile frame a letter Madam in my name, And by some charme of love invite him to Your tent, if he retaine part of that flame Which did so command in him, be assur'd The Prince will come. Ros. Thou wert create to make Me blest, but with what safety can he reach Thus far and not be knowne. Cas. He to whose trust You give this secret, shall remove that feare. Ros. There is a Captaine.
Cas. Best of all. Ros. Fabrichio. Cas. Send for him straite, if you allow this device Ile presently dispatch the amorous summons. Ros. Ile call thee sister. Cas. Call me servant Madam, In that I am honour'd Exit. Enter Flavia disguis'd. Fla. Are you ready Madam? Ro. For what? Fla. To laugh, I am turn'd inchantresse, and now tis upon the minute, Pazzorella by the boyes directions comes for his magicall armour. Ros. I have something of more consequence to finish, But I may be at the end of your mirth. Exit. Ros. Fla. Prosper in all your wishes. Enter Page. Pag. Flavia That's excellent, Herald never Look'd so dreadfully, where's the Princesse? Fla. She commanded not to expect her, but shee le not be long absent, where's te gamestr? Pag. Almost within reach of your voyce, you'le remember the circumstance, that he may be capable of the charme, hee's mad to be inchanted. Fla. I warrant you, I have some furies to assist me too. Conduct him hither, if the foole after this conceiving himselfe bewitch'd, should grow valiant, and doe wonders, who can helpe it? if he have but the wit to keepe his owne counsell, let him take his course, but he approaches. Enter Pazzorello and Page. Pag. That is she. Paz. That old hag. Pag. Good words, she has come two hundred mile to day up∣on a distaffe, salute her, she expects it. Paz. Would you have me kisse the devill? Pag. Doe I say—This is the gentleman my loving Aunt, For whom I doe beseech your powerfull spells. Fla. To make him slicke, and shot free. Pag. Right deere Aunt, He is a precious friend of mine, and one That will be ready servant to your pleasures At midnight, or what houre you please to call him.
Paz. Thou wodst not ha me lye with the old witch, what a generation of hobgoblins should we have together. Pag. Nor for this benefit, shall you finde him onely Obedient to your selfe, ut very dutifull To any devill you have. Fla. He is welcome child. Paz. What a salt peeter breath she has. Fla. Where is Mephestophiles. Paz. No more devils if you love me. Fla. I must have some to search him. Paz. Search me? where? for what? Pag. How much was I overseene not to give you warning, Be not afraide what have you about you? Paz. About me where in my breeches, what doe you meane I shall be cut for the stone. Pag. Have you any money about you! Paz. Yes I have money of all complexions in my pocket. Pag. Away with it, as you love your selfe, not for your right hand, have one peece of gold or silver about you, no charmes can fasten on you then, her spells can have no power, if you doe not throw it away instantly—give mee▪t, ile keepe it from her knowledge, this were a tricke indeed—have you no goldfinches in your fob? Paz. I defie him that has any thing in the likenesse of coyne. Pag. This is all money in your pocket; and come to be made shot free. Paz. What must I doe now? Pag. Kneele downe, and expect with obedience and admi∣ration what will become on you—Great Aunt the gentleman is cleere and ready, you are sure you have no more impediment of this nature, if you dissemble, and be kild afterward, thanke your selfe. Fla. Where be my spirits? Pag. He humbly desires you would finish him as privately as might be, he does not know the constitution of every devill, and to make too many acquainted, if he could be finished other∣wise, your Art may dipence. Fla. He must cut off his little finger then. Paz. How cut off my finger! Pag. What did you meane? here's a ring, a diamond. az I had forgot it. Pag. No more, off wee't, if you love your hand, here▪s a jest to
foole away your life quickely, not for the world, present it to her, great Lady of the Laplanders, this gentleman implores his mercie to his joynts, and offering this trifle, humbly prayes, you would honour him to weare it for his sake. Fla. Comes it freely off. Paz. It came off very hard, but I beseech your learned bel∣damship, to accept it as a token of my duty. Fla. I doe and thus prepar'd, delay My charmes no longer, come away You spirits that attend upon, This powerfull incantation, Have you brought that sacred juyce, Which at such a time we use; Distill it gently I command, Holding his eares with other hand. Paz. Oh my eares. Pag. The more paine she puts you to now, the lesse youle feele hereafter sir. Fla. Now rub his temples, forehead eke, Give his nose a gentle tweake. Strike of palenesse, and bestow On either cheeke a lusty blow; Take him by the haire and pull it, Now his heads free from sword and bullet. Paz. What will they doe with the rest of my body? Fla. Grape his necke till he groane twice, Paz. Oh, oh. Fla. Enough, now let the young man rise; Thus on his shoulders I dispence My wand to keepe all bullets thence; And other weapons that would harme, Pinch him now on either arme, fairy-like. Paz. Oh, pox othe devill oh, Fla. On his breast give him a thumpe, And two kickes upon the rumpe. No circumstance must be forgot, To make him free from sticke and shot; And now my potent charmes are done, This man is free from sword and gunne. Pag. Bounce, Y'are made for ever. Fla. Farewell to both, for now must I
On my winged Gennet flye. Suckle and Hoppo fetch long strides, By your mistresse as she rides. Exit Flavia, &c. Paz. Whether is she gone now? Fla. Home to a witches upsitting, she's there By this time. Paz. Where? Pag. In Lapland, she will crosse the sea in an eggeshell, and upon land hath a thousand wayes to convey her selfe in a mi∣nute, I did but whistle and she came to me. Paz. She knowes your whistle belike, well art thou sure I am inchanted now? Pag. It concernes you to be sure on▪t, and I must tell you one thing, if you make the least doubt on't, youle endanger all, charmes in this kind are nothing without the imagination, be∣leeve it, and if any sword or bullet have power to hurt you, nere trust your granam agen. Paz Nay nay, I doe beleeve it, and will bee valiant accor∣dingly, they pinch'd and kick'd me devillishly for all that. Pag. Y▪are the better proofe fort, you cannot be pinch'd or kickd too much in such a cause, what to be made slicke and shot∣free? now doe I foresee youle be Captaine within these three dayes, you cannot avoyde it sir, who will not honour that man whom the bullets are afraid of? The Princesse. Enter Rosinda, Cassandra, Fabrichio. Fab. Repent your grace thought me a gentleman, If I faile in this duty. Ros. Not a syllable Of me. Fab. I am charm'd. Cas. Happy successe attend you. Fab. Your highnesse has much honourd me, and Lady I kisse your faire and. Paz▪ Captaine, Captaine, a word. Fab. I am in haste now. Exit. Paz. Sure the Captain's afraid of me, he knowes by instinct What I am. Pag. Your grace mist excellent mirth. Ros. Tis done then, bid him follow us. Exit. Pag. The Princesse desires to speak with you Paz. Desires to speake with me!—you have not told her? Pag. Dee thinke I would betray you. Paz. Would somebody would challenge mee to fight before her, if the Ladies knew I were sticke free they would
teare me in peeces for my company. Pag. You do not know, what you may get by your body that way, I attend you. Paz Knives, daggers, swords, pikes, gunnes both great & small Now Pazzarello doth defie you all. Exeunt. Enter Alphonso, Alberto. Alp. You tell me wonders, my sonne Generall Of all the enemies Forces, can Vittori Lay such a staine upon our family, Speake it my Lord no more, no private injury Can so corrupt his nature; come, I know He dares not fight their cause! Alb. I thinke so too; The Prince hath coold his resolution By this time. Alp. Ha? you are misticall. Alb. He has sent Him word, the first attempt he makes against The towne your head must answere it, and I cannot Beleeve how ere particular wrongs inflame him To a revenge, but he retaines that piety Which nature printed in him toward a Father. Alp. Is obligation to a parent more Then that we owe our Country, oh Vittori, My life were profitably spent to save Thy honour, which is great in the worlds eye, Time shall be grieved to have preserv'd thy name So long, and when this blot shall be observ'd Vpon the last leafe of thy Chronicle, It shall unsettle quite the readers faith To all the former story. Enter Iulio. Alb. Iulio. Alph. My Lord? Iulio. It was the Kings command I should deliver. Alp. What? Jul. What must displease you, You must prepare for death. Alp. Has my sonne put Rebellion into act already? that Will save my executioner a labour, He has, I read it, looke into the tombes
Of all our ancestours, and see their ashes Looke paler then before, the Marble sweates, The Eboine pillars that so many yeares Sustain'd our titles shake, and sinke beneath em, The Genius of our house grones at this treason, I will not live for any man to tell me I am Vittories Father. Enter Prince. Alb. Here the Prince! Alp. Forgive me sir my passions, I have guilt Enough without em to deserve your anger, He was my sonne, and that must needes condemne me; But I will loose him from my bloud, and cut His name from that faire list, that numbers up Our family, but I forget my selfe, I have no minutes at command, my life Is at the last sand, and I cannot stay, Be just, and purge Vittories sinne with his Old Fathers bloud, I do obey your doome. Pr. What doome? you talke as you were destin'd To some blacke execution, I have Beene too unkinde already, and must aske Your gentle pardon fort, by goodnesse selfe I mocke not, I bring life Alphonso to thee, And but prepar'd by Iulio, thy heart With sorrow, to meete honour with more tast. Alp. Good my Lord distract me not, let me dy In my right wits. Iul. Alphonso you may trust The Prince, my message was but counterfeit. Pr. Th'art a brave man, and can'st not be provok'd I see to wound thy honest fame, so just To vertue, that thou darst preferre her cause To thy owne life, and rather violate The lawes of nature to thy sonne, then leave Exit Iulio. The priviledge of honour undefenc'd, Thus we embrace thee, do not kneele Alphonso Vnlesse You'le bring us lower, thus as a friend We circle thee, and next as a Souldier
Able in spight of age, and active still We give these armes, this sword, the best in all, My Fathers armory, and us'd to conquest, Take from thy Prince, and fight, fight for thy Country, And purchase new wreathes to thy honoured browes, Before the old be wither'd, I do see thee Already mounted as a challenger, The proud steed taking fire and mettall from the rider, all bedewd with his white foame, Flying to meete thy sonne, whose (once faire) plume Is staind with bloud of his owne countrimen. Alp. I reach your sense in part my Lord, but cannot Gather your words into a summe, beside The honour is so great I dare not with The safety of my understanding, thinke One so unworthy as Alphonso. Pr. What? Dares fight against a Traitor, for his Country? Alp. Gainst all the world I dare. Pr. Be valiant; And breath defiance against one. Alp. A glory I My soule's ambitious of. Pri. Vittori Is That traitor whose offence, whom dost become More nobly to chastise then his owne Father, Which title if you should forget to encourage you, Thinke whose defence you undertake, for Whom You punish, and what consequence of fame Waites on this pious action. Enter Julio. Iul. My Lord A Captaine of the other side hath boldly offer'd Himselfe a prisoner, and desirees accesse To your highnesse, to whom only he must impart Something he sayes, that will be acceptable, We have search'd him, and find nothing but a letter Directed to your selfe. Pr. To me? admit him, Meane time you may consider, Is it with us, Captaine. Enter Fabrichio: Fab. Please you peruse this paper. Pr. Ha? from Cassandra? Alp. Oh Alberto I
Could wish Vittori dead, but two not satisfie Vnlesse we murder one another too, And I must challenge him, he is my sonne Although he be a Rebell. Pr. Iulio, Thy bosome is my owne? Captaine a word. Iu. I am astonishd, ha? I like not this—my Lord. Alb. The Prince is troubled, something like Excesse of joy transports him. Pr. Th▪art a foole. Iu. This may be a plot, how dare you trust yourselfe upon this invitation. Pr. Not on this, be coward then for ever. Iu. Are you sure, this is her character. Pr. Perfectly, beside she has confirm'd me by this Ring, Vittori gave it her, I know't and woed her Once to exchange. Iu. Yet thinke upon the danger. Pr. I would run through flames to meet her, use no argumets, I can be at the worst a prisoner, And shall be ransom'd, keepe you councell sir, Captaine—the word?—Enough, Kisse her white hand, and say, I come this night, waite on him to the gates, Let his returne be safe, Alphonso how Stands your resolve? dare you be Naples Champion Against the enemy proposd? Alp. My sonne— Will both the Kings trust to our swords their cause? Pr. I cannot promise that? Alp. What profit brings My valour then if I orecome. Pr. Addition To your owne fame, to have cut off a Rebell. Alp. So I must kill my sonne, or he must be A Parricide. Pr. Nay if you be so scrupulous, I look'd you have thank'd me, and have runne too▪t. Alp. Except Vittori sir, and I dare challenge The proudest in their Army.
Pri. You are afraid Of him belike, tis such a kill-cowe gentleman, But I court you to nothing, you may thinke on▪t, Yare, now no more a prisoner ulio. Exit. Alp. I am worse? I had some roome before, now l'me confin'd To such a straite, my heart must of necessity Contract it selfe, my owne thoughts stifle mee, Vittori is lost already, I must goe Another way to find out my owne ruine. Exit. Horatio, Cassandra. Hor. Lady you thinke not what I am, how neere The bosome of a King. Cas. You cannot be So neere as I am to Vittori sir, And you increase my wonder, that you can Nourish the least'hope, that I should forget My owne tie, by remenbring what relation You have to any other, if the King Did know this, he would chide you. Hor. Come I see You must be courted otherwise, with action. Cas. How sir? Hor. And if you will not be so civile. To change one kindnesse for another, I Have skill to prompt you thus. Cas. You are not noble. Hor. Tush this is nothing, I have beene too tame, And howsoere you wittily compose Your countenance, you cannot choose but laugh at me, That I have beene so modest all this while; Come, I have another inside, and do know You are a woman, and should know your selfe And to what end we love you, what are you The worse by private favours to a gentleman, That have at home beene sued too, with petitions And great ones of both sexes, to accept Wives, Daughters, any thing, and thinke themselves Honoured to take the first fruites, I could have The virgins of whole families entaild
Vpon me, and be brought as duly to My bed, as they growe ripe, and fit for coupling, As men whose'lands are morgag'd would observe Their covenants and the day. Cas. Ile heare no more. Hor. So peremptory Lady? take your course, The time may come you will repent this forcivenes. Exit. Enter Fabrichio. Whither in haste Fabrichio? Fa. My good Lord I have brought newes, where the Princesse sir? Hor. Thou art almost out of breath, what newes I prethee? Fa. Newes, that will please my Lord. Hor. You aske for the Princesse, will they please my Lady. Fab. Yes, and the tother Lady too, Cassandra. Hor. Will it spread joy no farther? Fab. Yes it will please you, And please the King, and the whole army. Hor. Strange, you may impart it then. Fab. My duety sir, did aime it first to you, I was engag'd To deliver a letter in Cassandra's name To the Prince of Naples, to invite his person Privately this night. Hor. Whither? Fab. To the Princesses tent. Hor. And hast thou don't? Fab. Don't, and bring backe his word to visite 'em. Hor. Art sure the Prince? Fab. As sure as I am your creature, This will bee welcome to the Ladies, what use You are to make of this, becomes not my Instruction, if it be of any consequence, To make his person sure, when he arrives. Hor. This service will be gratefull, Ile acquaint The King, returne the Ladies to expect him. Fa. I have directed him how he shall passe. Hor. And make it good, away, this makes thee happy, The King shall know it instantly, thei'r here, Ile give you scope. Exit. Enter Rosinda, Cassandra, Flavia, and Page.
os. He is return'd. Cas. What answer? Fa. To your desires. Fla. Where's Pazzorello now. Pag. He's quarrelling with some body, he is so confident And domineers, ha? tis he, He Bleeds too. Enter Pazzorello bloody. Paz. A pox a your inchantments, I had like to have my braines beaten out, what will become of me▪ Pag. Why this is nothing sir. Paz. Nothing sir, would thou hadst it. Pag. Let me aske you a question, what weapon did it? Paz. I gave but the lye to an old souldier, as we were drin∣king together, and he presently claps me ore the pate with the rest of his musket. Pag. That may be, but no sword or gunne shall endanger you, as for truncheon, batoone, and such woodden batteries you must fortifie your selfe as well as you can against em, beside sir, there is no breach of conditions in losing a little blood, you may have you head broken in twenty places, nay you may bee beaten, and bruis'd in every part of your body, but all this while you are slicke and shot free, your life is your owne, and then what need you care sir? Paz. This is some satisfaction. Pag. Should you challenge him at rapier, you should quick∣ly finde who will have the worst on't. Ros. This service shall be otherwise rewarded, Ile trust your secrecie, he will be a fit man to engage, beside ti His desire. Fa. You may command me. Ros. Waite upon This gentleman Pazzorello, he Will use you nobly for my sake. Paz. Must I Be a perdue now? Madam I humbly thanke you. Exit Fab. and Pazzorello. Cas. The night comes fast upon us. Ros. It cannot come Too swiftly, that brings so much happinesse.
But tis an argument of much love to thee, That can at such a time invite him hither. Cas. I hope you feed no jealonsie of me, I did all for your service, and shall then Thinke I am happy, when he knowes your love And values it. Ro. I have no feares of thee? Ca. Have none at all. Ro. Flavia? Fla. Madam. Ro. You must keepe watch to night. Fla. My duty Madam. Ros Come let us tell some stories, to passe over The tedious houres. Cas. I waite your pleasure. Fla. Come Didino, we shall have your tale too? Pag. Mines short and sweet, still at a Ladies service. Exit. Enter Sergeant, Pazzorello. Ser. Follow me close, I hope you have made your Will. Paz. My Will? why Sergeant I am not sicke. Ser. For all that you may be a dead man ere morning, whize. Paz. What's that? Ser. These bullets will keepe you waking, here lie downe close, within two houres you shall be releeved. Paz. Dost heare Sergeant, whize—do the enemies shoot any Sugar plummes? Ser. Be not too loude in your mirth, I see another give fire, farewell Signior Perdue. Paz. So, now I am a Perdue, this will bee newes when I come home agen, the poore fellowes will fall downe and wor∣shippe mee, I alwaies wonder'd, why wee had so many brave Souldiers, and quarrelling spirits, if they be shot free, I cannot blame em to rore so much in Tavernes—whize—agen, I woud faine have one of these bullets hit me, that I might know certainely the toughnesse of my new constitution, and yet I shall hardly bee sensible of it, ah my conscience if I were cramm'd into a Canon, and shot into the towne, like a Cat I should light upon my legges, and runne home agen.
Enter Prince. Pri. Love be propitious still, and guide my steps, Thou hast engag'd me thus farre. Paz. Coughes. Paz. Vh, uh. Pr. Whose that? Paz. There's somebody, now I begin for all this to be afraid, flesh will be flesh, and tremble in spight of the devill, what were I best to doe? Pr. Tis some perdue. Paz. Though I be sticke and shotfree, I may be beaten, and bruis'd as I remember, more, I may be taken prisoner by the enemy, and be hang'd afterward, and then what am I the bet∣ter for my inchantment, what a dull rogue was I not to except the gallowes in my conditions, but it may be there is but one, qui vala—the word. Pr. Rosinda. Paz. Oh are you there, tis my Lady the Princesses name. Pr. Thy Lady, prehee shew me the way to her tent. Paz. I had almost forgot, such a gentleman is expected, Pr. Heres gold prethee make haste. Paz. Now by your favour you shall first goe to my Captaine Pr. His Name. Paz. Fabrichio. Pr. The same, withall my heart, heres more gold. Paz. I will make the more haste. Exeunt. Enter King of Sicily, Horatio, and a Guard. King. Thy newes does take me infinitely, if he Keepe touch we may propound what Articles We please. Hor. Fabrichio is confident heele come. Ki. He will deserve our favour, keepe at distance, Sent for in Cassandras name? belike He loves that Lady, let him, tis a strange Adventure, sure my daughter is of counsell With her, she had some bend that way, till he Became ingratefull to us. Hor. When you have Him in possession, you may throw off Vittori, one whose honesty I feare,
Vnder your princely favour, you have built Too much, but heaven has sent the young Prince hither To disengage your trust, he that dares prove A rebell to his Country, dares be guilty Of any other treason. King What shall we Doe with Cassandra? Hor. Keepe her still to waite Vpon the Princesse, and expect the first Opportunity for your kingdome, Naples will Attend your leisure then, and court your mercie. Enter Prince, Cassandra, Rosinda, Flavia. Pazzorello aloofe. Ki. Be silent. Hor. Lose no time. Pr. For this embrace, I dare agen neglect my life—villaines Ro. We are betrayd, my father. Cas. Oh misfortune. Paz. What will become of me? Ki. Y'are welcome prince of Naples. Pr. Am I betrayd? false woman. Paz. And please your majesty I am innocent, I brought him hither I confesse. Ki. Reward him. Hor. ome hither sirra. Paz. Howe's this? are you in earnest? my Lord aword—but is this the Prince of Naples? Hor. The very same sir. Paz. Take your gold agen, I will have more for taking a Prince, I crave the law of armes, I will have his ransome. Ki. Away with the foole. Paz. Give me my prisoner agen then. Exit. Ros. Sir heare me. Ki. Another time Rosinda—by thy duty— Exit Ros. & Flavia. Cas. Heare me great sir. Ki. Weele heare and thanke thee at more leisure too, attend our daughter▪ Cas. Oh my Lord, be you But master of so much charity.
Pr. Away, Never was such a blacke and fatall houre, As that when I first saw thy cozening face. Enter Vittori. Vi. The Prince? I dare not trust my senses, ha? How came he hither? wonder circles me, Cassandra busie with him too? she courts him, The Basiliske is not more killing than This object. Pr. Strumpet hence. Vi. Ha? Cas. My Lord Vittori? Vi. What name was that the Prince bestow'd upon you, Yet doe not answere me, away, new tortures. Exit. Cs. Pr. Vittori, ha, ha, ha! Vi. Your grace is mighty merry, I could wish You had more cause. Pr. Vittori I see trouble in thy face, Perhaps tis wonder, upon what invitation I am a guest here. Vi. Are you not a prisoner? Pr. You are no stranger to the plot, it seem̄es, Base villaine to betray thy Prince. Vi. My Lord You are too rash in censure, I betray you? I am so farre from the conspiracy That yet I cannot reach it in my thought, Much lesse with guilty knowledge, I dare tell you The Devill shannot tempt me too't, nor more Wrongs then your hate can throw upon me. Pr. Iuggling! Can he that dares take armes against his Countrey, Make conscience to betray a part of it, His Prince, degenerate rebell! Vi. Heaven and this King Know upon what severe necessity I am engag'd to warre. Ki. As things fall out Your valour may be uselesse, we acknowledge
This happinesse, from Cassandra, though she meant Other successe. Vi. Cassandra? Pr. Yes that peece Of frailety, rather impudence, by the witchcraft Of her letter tempted me thus farre, a curse Vpon her lust. Vi. Indeed you cald her strumpet, She may deserve it by this story, tis Her character, my eyes, take in new horrour. (he reades) My Lord, if it be not too late, to be sensible of your princely affe∣ction to me, I implore your mercie, and will deserve it by my repen∣tance. I am by misfortune a captive to your enemy, but blest with the freedome to remember you, I have a designe for my enlarge∣ment, and if I durst cherish an ambition of your presence this night, dare confidently pronounce our mutuall happinesse, this ring be wit∣nesse of my true invitation, and doubt not her faith to your safety, who will sooner forfeit her owne life, than betray you to the least dishonour. This gentleman shall instruct you with more particulars, pardon great prince this infinite boldnesse of your servant, and if all the seedes of love be not dstroyd, visite and preserve your other∣wise miserable Cassandra. And all this while I live, and have my senses, O woma woman! sir if you remember Twas your conclusion, if I refus'd To be your Generall against my Country, Cassandras head should off, be constant King, I wonot. Ki. What? Vi. Not fight, nor for your Kingdome, She cannot bleed too much, as for you sir. Pr. What of me? Vi. Y'are still my Prince, thanke heaven for that, Did you else graspe an Empire, and your person Guarded with thunder, I would reach and kill you, By my just rage I would, stay I will fight. Hor. With whom? Vi. With you or all the world, that dare maintaine
There is a woman vertuous. Hor. Neglect him. Pr. How he breakes out at forehead, this is some Revenge yet. Ki. Come my Lord, you must with us, Here your command determines, we shall have No further use of your great valour sir. Vi. You may with as much ease, discharge me of A life too, your breath does it, for I dare Not kill my selfe, in that I am a Coward. Oh my hearts griefe, preserve my right wits heaven; The wickednesse of other women could But shame themselves, which like wild branches, being Cut off, the tree is beautifull agen, But this spreads an infection, and all The sexe is wounded in Cassandr'as fall: Exit. The fift Act. Enter Rosinda, Flavia, Page. Ros. Away, your mirth displeases. Fla. Madam I hope I have not offended. Ros. Let the boy begon. Pag. Good Madam laugh a little, tis my duty To drive away your sadnesse, tis all the Vse, Ladies have for Pages, now and then To purge their melancholy. Ros. Doe not tempt my anger. Pag. Then ile goe seeke out Pazzorello Hee's better company, and will make me laugh, If his fit of immortality hold, my duty Madam. Exit. Ros. Oh Flavia I am undone. Fla. Not so deere Madam. Ros. Though I be innocent, I want the courage To tell the Prince Cesario, I love, Were I allow'd accesse, he must imagine Me guilty of his dishonour, nor can I
Be happy while he thinkes himselfe so miserable, Art thou so wise to counsell me? Vittori. Enter Vittori. Vi. Madam I have an humble suite to you. Ro. To me Vittori, for Cassandra's sake I must deny you nothing. Vi. For her sake I begge it. Ro. Pray be plaine. Vi. That you would speake toth' King. Ros. For what? Vi. To cut my head off. Ros. How? Vi. With sword or axe, or by what other engine He please, I know youle easily obtaine it, Tis for Cassandra's sake, I would be faine Despatch'd, sheele thanke you too, and then the prince And she may revell. Ros. I doe finde his jealousie, Alas poore gentleman! but I hope You doe not meane so desperately. Vi. As you Love vertue doe this favour—if you make Scruple, there is a King a little further Will take my life away at the first word, For I am resolv'd to die. Ros. Shall I obtaine A small request from you. Vi. These are delayes. Ro. If you be weary of your life, you'le meet it, For there is danger in't. Vi. And thanke you too, Ile doo't by your faire selfe, now, now, you blesse me? Without exception, Ile obey you Madam. Ros. Tis this. whispers. Vi. Doe you not mocke me. Ros. No suspition. Vi. Instantly. Ros. This minute weele begin it, and Ile promise
Something beside that you will thanke me for, But things are not yet ripe, will you doe me This honour. Vi. Come I waite you, but tis strange Why you should thus engage your selfe? Ros. When you know, You will allow my reasons. Vi. I attend you, now farewell false Cassandra. Exeunt Enter Julio, and Mauritio. Ma. The Prince not to be found. Iul. I did suspect That letter might betray him, now Alberto, How is the King? Enter Alberto. Alb. Imagine how a father Can apprehend the absence of a sonne He lov'd so deerely, but hee's justly punish'd For his indulgence, though we dare not say so. Ma. Tis very strange. Iu. He was merry the last night. Al. What letter wast Iulio, the Captaine brought? I could distinguish it did strangely move him. Iu. Letter? Alb. Can you forget it. ul. Pox upon the witch That sent, now shall I be examin'd, and If he returne not, lose my head, that letter Was a discovery of some plot, the enemie Purpos'd that very night. Ma. Perhaps this mischiefe, Why was it not prevented? Iu. I shall make fine worke, I know not how to shadow it, would he had Laine with my sister, rather than ingag'd Himselfe so farre for Venison. Alb. Peace, the King. Enter King and Alphonso. Ma. And old Alphonso! I am glad to see His change of fortune. Alb. The King ever lov'd him.
Alp. Sir have comfort, Your sorrow will discourage all. King. Dost thinke He is not taken by the enemie, And put to death? Alp. They dare not, tis against The rules of warre. Ki. What dare not men that hate us, And yet conceale the murder? Enter Fabio. Fab. Where's the king. Ki. Here, what portends thy haste, and busie countenance? Fab. Oh great sir. Ki. Has thy intelligence brought us knowledge of Our sonne? Fa. The newes I bring my gracious Lord Concernes the Prince, and how my heart flowes over, That I am pointed out by heauen the first And happy messenger. Ki. Proceede, and weele reward thee. Fab. All my ambition aimes but at your favour, My soule was never mercenary, tis My duty to weare out my life in services For you, and the whole state, whereof although I am no able member, yet— Alp. Hee's mad. Fab. It is with joy then, my good Lord Alphonso, And by the way I must congratulate Your present favour with the king, I knew The noble faculties of your soule, at last Would finde their merit. Ki. Villaine  what dost racke My expectation? speake, what of my sonne? Answere me without circumstance, where is The Prince? be briefe or— Fab. I know not my good Lord. Ki. Traytor, didst not prepare me to expect Newes of my sonne, pronouncing thy selfe happy In being the messenger? is he in health?
Answere to that. Fa. I know not my good Lord. Ki. Cut off his head, I shall become the scorne Of my owne subject. Fa. Mercy Royall sir, And ile discharge my knowledge. Ki. Tell me then, And ile have patience for the rest, but be not Tedious, is my sonne alive or dead? Fab. Alas I know not my good Lord. Ki. Confusion! Fab. But with your Royall licence, I am able To produce those can satisfie you in every Particular. Ki. Where? whom? and quickly save thy life. Fab. They waite sir. Ma. This fellow was made for court dispatch, An Elephant will sooner be delivered Than his head when tis stuft with any businesse. Enter Fabio, Vittori dsguis'd, Rosinda. Ki. A Lady. Alp. And a faire one, what's the mystery. Iul. Shee's not of Naples sure. Alb. Fabio what is she? Ros. Sir, you may justly wonder that a woman, A stranger, and an enemie, although My sexe present you with no feares, should thus Adventure to your presence, had I doubted My selfe first, since suspition of anothers Defect, oth rise from our owne want of goodnesse, I had not us'd this boldnesse, but safe here And arm'd with innocence, I gave up my freedome, And dare not feede one jealousie, my honour Can suffer with a king. Ki. An excellent presence. Alp. Her bearing is above the common sprit. Ki. Faire Lady, make me more acquainted with Your purpose, nothing can proceede from you,
That will not charme us to attention. Ros. Your sonne great sir. Ki. Where? speake, you do not looke As you delighted to report a Tragedy, Lives my Cesario? Ros. He does live my Lord. Ki. Support me good Alphonso, I shall faint Vnder my joy. Ros. But lives a prisoner To his enemie, the King of Cicily, Who wish'd no greater triumph, then to boast His person Captive, how he meanes to deale with him, May admit some feare, Kings that prescribe to others In peace, have great prerogatives, but in warre Allow no Lawes, above what anger dictates To their revenge, which bloud doth often satisfie. Alp. He dares not be so cruell. Ros. I conclude not, But yet tis worth some feare, when he that was The roote of all this warre, stands at their mercy That could not wish his safety, and their owne Together, I have told you sir the worst. Ki. Alas, thou hast undone me. Alp. Sir, my Lord? Lady you were too-blame—my Lord. Ros. Your sonne Shall live, and blesse your age, to see him live, If you will be so kinde to allow your selfe But eyes to witnesse it. Kin. Flatter not my soule, That is already weary of her burden, And would begon to rest. Ros. Gather your spirits. Ki What hopes? Ros. Assurance sir, if you but please To entertaine it, I came hither on No empty motive, but to offer you A pledge for young Cesario.
Kin. Where? what pledge? Ros. A pledge of as full value to the owner, As your sonnes life to you. Alp. Such security were welcome. Ki. Make me blest. Ros. Receive me then your prisoner, and you make your bal∣lance even, Lose not your thought in wonder, when you know The price of what I have presented you; Your reason shanot thinke him undervalued, I am Rosinda, Daughter to that King, Whose Souldiers threaten Naples, equally As pretious to my Father, and a Kingdome And to your power, thus I expose my selfe, If young Cesario meet unkinde conditions, 'Ith same proportion let Rosinda suffer, Erect a Scaffold quickly ore the walles, And fright their jealous eyes, when they behold Who is prepard for death, to equall their Revenge upon Cesario, whom thei'le threaten To make you stoope, but lose no part of honour, As you are a King, their trembling hangman Shall thinke himselfe mock'd, and let fall his sword, Or both our heads take their farewell together. Ki. Alphonso ist a woman? Alp. And a brave one! Ma. I admire her noblenesse. Ros. You are slow to aske The cause that hath engag'd me to all this, And yet you cannot chuse but reade it plainely, In my guilty blushes, I do love the Prince Perhaps tis more then he imagines, and Since I first saw him in my Fathers court, Without dishonour, I dare justifie My heart was his, and to this love you owe The sorrow of his absence, for Cssaandra That noble Lady, to whose breast I gave My secret'st thought, for my sake by a letter In her owne name, by tie of former love
To her, ingag'd his meeting at my tent, Whither no sooner privately arriv'd, But by a vilaine that deceive our trust, My Father was brought in, and he made prisoner, You have the story, and my resolution To be companion of his fate. Vi. Agen. Those words deere Lady, that concern'd Cassandra. Ki. Alp. Vittori! Vi. All your pardon I must heare this first. Ros. Cassandra is innocent, and but fram'd that letter To bring us two acquainted, the earth has not A purer chastity. Vi. You have kept your word, & heaven reward your soule for't, My duty sir to you, and to my Father. Ros. He hath deserv'd his welcome for my sake. Ki. We thus confirme it. Alp. My poore sonne Vittori! Ki. But teares of joy salute thee, best of Ladies! Alphonso she is faire, well shap'd, my sonne Gave her deform'd, with what eyes could he looke Vpon this beauty, and not love it. Vi. This beauty is her least perfection, It speakes her woman, but her soule an Angell, But I forget Cassandra all this while. Ki. Welcome agen faire Princesse, my Cesario Is here supplied——Alphonso. Fab. This may bring the peace about. Ma. May it so? what thinke you of halfe your Land? Do not your acres melt apace? Ki. Away— Never did Lady such an act of Noblenesse, And what we cannot reach in honouring thee, Ages to come shall pay thy memory. Exeunt. Enter King of Sicily, and Cassandra. Ki. S. May I beleeve Rosinda loves the Prince, And yet so cunningly disguyse it from me? Cas. It was my plot I must confesse, but her
Affection bid me too't, I did expect Another consequence. Ki. Ile to my Daughter. Cas. The Prince now in your power, I hope great sir. You'le looke more gently on Vittori. Ki. We shall thinke on him. The Prince, excuse my absence. Enter Prince. Pr. Can those deceiving eyes looke still upon me? Is not thy soule asham'd, have I for thee Neglected my owne Fortune and my Father, All the delights that waite upon a Kingdome, For thy sake drawne this warre upon my Country, And done such things, I did forget I was A Prince i'th acting, and is all my love Rewarded thus, no devill to betray me But she to whom I durst have given my soule, Degenerate woman. Cas. Sir throw of your passion, And when you have heard me speake but a few minutes, You'le change opinion, and if you do not Accuse your selfe, you will at least acquit Me from the guilt of your dishonour. Pr. Did not The magicke of your letter bring me hither? Cas. I must not sir deny, I usd what motive▪ I could to gaine your presence, but no magicke. Pr. Twas worse, and shewes more blacke for thy intention▪ Hast thou a Conscience? and canst deny Thou didst not meane this treachery. Cas. May heaven Then shoot his anger at me, I sent for you, But as I have a life not to betray you. Pr. What could induce thee then? Cas. Love, love my Lord. Pr. Ha? pardon my rashnesse and my errour, Do I heare thee pronounce, twas love sent for me, What streames of joy runne through me, I am free, Have suffred nothing, nothing worthy of
So rich a satisfaction, I forget Naples with as much ease as I can kisse thee, Have you no more vexation? Oh my starres I Your influence is too mercifull. Cas. Mistake not, Twas love I must confesse, but not that love Your wild imagination prompts you too, And yet it was my love to wish you happie. Pr. You are in Paradoxes Lady, twas love, & it was not▪ Cas. Love with another Lady In birth; and all thats good above Cassandra, Had toward your person, did command my service In that rude letter, my ambition Reach'd at no greater honour, then to bring Her passions to your knowledge, thinke my Lord Ypon Rosinda. Pr. Ha? Cas. And prison all Your wanton thoughts, Rosinda was by heaven Design'd for you, as I was for Vittori. Enter King of Sicily. Kin. Tis treason to be ignorant, search every where, Ile hang yee all, unlesse you find my Daughter, Prince wheres Rosinda? I will have her, or Your head shall off. Pr. My head? Ki. I cannot take Too great revenge, no punishment can fall Severe enough upon his head was guilty Of all these tumults. Cas. Is the Princesse lost? Ki. Not without some conspiracy, ya're all Traytors, if I recover not my Child, I will sacrifice the lives of my whole army. Pr. How ill this violence sits upon a King—Alphonso. Enter Alphonso, Horatio, Trivulsi, Fabrichio, Pazzorela, Page. Kin. What are you sir? Hor. One from the King of Naples.
Ki. Ile heare nothing unles Rosinda be concernd ith message▪ Alp. She is. Ki. Ha, where? Alp. Safe in the City sir. Ki. A prisoner. Alp. Guarded with love and honour, which he hopes Is not here wanting to Cesario. Ki. How came she thither? Alp. With Vittori sir. Cas. Ha Vittori? Ki. That double renegade, where is Cassandra? Off with her head, and his.— Alp. My humblest duty.— Take councell to your action—Rosinda is in the same condition, my Lord Vouchsafe mee hearing. Hor. Sir, if I were worthy To advise you, let your passions coole, you but Provoke their furie to your Daughter, by threatning the prince. Tri. Y'are now on even termes, What if you met and parlied? Pr. Every praise Thou givst her makes me see my owne deformity, Madam you first awakd me. Fab. Please you sir, The King would have some further conference. Cas. Direct their councells heaven. Pr. Thy pardon deere Cassandra, When I have leave, Ile aske Vittori's too, And all the worlds. Ki. For further pledge on both sides, Horatio weele exchange to invite Naples To give us meeting. Alp Tis desired already. Ki. We follow, come my Lord old men have passions. Pr. They were not men else. Alp. My sonnes life Cassandra. Exit
Paz. But this is strange newes Didimo, is my Lady and mistresse a Prisoner? I tooke the Prince. Pag. Twas valiantly done. Paz. Why may not I with my armour of magicke bustle a∣mong the enemies, and get honour now? Pag. It were your onely time, get but a brave horse— Paz. That would carry double, and I might bring home the Princesse behind me to the Campe; Say no more; stay, thu art sure I am sufficiently inchanted. Pag. No infidelity, as sure as you had no money in your pockets. Paz. Well remembred, if it be so sure my little Didimo you shall now give me account of all that gold and silver. Pag. Such another word, and my Aunt shall take off her urse agen. Paz. There's it, this urchin has me oth hip, beside in my con∣science, my granam has given thee a spell too, so that wee might fight our earts out, afore we kill one another. Pag. You my be sure of that. Paz. Prethee let me try, for my owne satisfaction, whether my sword will runne thee through or no. Pag. It has beene attempted a hundred times, you may as soone pricke me with the pummell; but if thou hast any doubt thy owne body is not steele proofe, my rapier shall demon∣state. Paz. Wo't? now tha'rt honest. Pag. Tis to no purpose. Paz. For my satisfaction, if thou lov'st me. Pag. Come on your waye. he drawes. Paz. Stay, tis pointed—I have a great mind, but if—but if—I should—I am inchanted; doot, stay, I wonot see't: now— Pag. Never feare. He sheathes and with the scabberd thrusts him behind, and drawes it agen presently. Paz. Oh! He has runne me through body and soule, hum  I see no point, nor blood, nor paine, ha? Tis so, god a mercy Didimo, I am right, I see't.
I will dispatch these warres presently. Pa. Your charme will last no longer. Paz. Tell not me, I will then go seeke adventures, Wee'le wander to releeve distressed damzels, Through woods with monsters, and with Giants haunted, And kill the Devill like a knight enchanted. Exeunt. Enter King of Scicily, Prince, Alphonso, Trivulsi, Fabrichio, Cassandra; at one doore. King of Naples, Rosinda, Horatio, Vittori, Iulio, AlbertLoud Mu∣sicke. at the other. Alphonso, goes to the King of Naples, and Horatio returnes to the King of Sicily▪ they whisper. K. of Sci. Lets heare our daughter speake. Ros. First with an humblenesse Thus low, I beg your pardon, and beseech You would interpret no defect of dutie, That I forsooke my tent, and your protection There is another, stronger tie than natures Love, whose impulsion you have felt, or I Had never beene your daughter, mov'd my flight Love of that excellent prince, whom in your power I had no way to gaine but by this losse. And if you had beene cruell to Cesario, I should have gloried under these to suffer. Pr. No more, there's vertue in that excellent Princesse To stocke two Kingdomes, pardon faire Rosinda, Thou hast made me fit to know thee, taught by thy Obedience, I returne a sonne to Naples Thus, but desire no life without possession Of that religious treasure, as y'are kings— Both Kings. A chaine of hands and hearts. Vit. Oh my Cassandra. Nap. Ioy in all bosomes. Sicil. Thus our kingdomes knit. Pr. Horatio we are friends too. Hor. Owne me your servant sir, I begge your pardon.
Pr. I cannot aske forgivenesse oft enough For injuries to thee noble Vittori, Alphonso and Cassandra. Vit. Alp. Cas. All your creatures. Enter Mauritio, Fabio. Ma. Iustice my Lord. Fab. Mercy my Lord. Nap. Whats this? Ma. A deed of halfe his land, if he surviv'd These warre, which are now happily determin'd, My life was his security, which will Be merrier with the moity of his Acres. Na. How if he had dyed? Ma. His Land had gone to the ext heire, thats all His ghost would hardly call upon my forfeit; If I had dyed, his land had beene discharg'd, But we both living must part stakes, he has Enough for two on s. Fab. heated by a soldade. Pr. He must confirme his act. Fab. But in such cases sir    estates— Pr. Are too much sir,      impertinent, Goe to, yare well. Fab. But halfe well, and like your ▪ Ma. Tis very well. Nap. Our Citty spreads to entertaine such guests. Pr. Never was musicke of so many parts, As friends to Naples now, we all jovne hearts. Exeunt. FINIS.
