22918 99857061 22730
THE ANTIQUITIES OF CANTERBVRY. OR A SVRVEY OF THAT ANCIENT CITIE, WITH THE SVBVRBS, AND CATHEDRALL. Containing principally matters of Antiquity in them all. Collected chiefly from old Manuscripts, Lieger-bookes, and other like Records, for the most part, never as yet Printed. With an Appendix here annexed: Wherein (for better satisfaction to the learned) the Manuscripts, and Records of chiefest consequence, are faithfully exhibited. All (for the honour of that ancient Metropolis, and his good affection to Antiquities) Sought out and Published By the Industry, and Goodwill of WILLIAM SOMNER. Cic. in Oratore. Nescire quid antea quàm natus sis accider, est semper esse puerum. London, Printed by I. L. for Richard Thrale, and are to be sold at his Shop at Pauls-Gate at the signe of the Crosse-Keyes. 1640.
TO THE MOST REVE∣REND FATHER IN GOD, WILLIAM, BY THE DIVINE PROVIDENCE, LORD ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBVRY, PRIMATE OF ALL England and Metropolitan, one of the L L. of his Majesties most Honourable Privy Councell, and Chancell or of the Vniversity of OXFORD. May it please Your Grace. AS without the concurrence of divers good reasons to induce me, I had not pre∣sumed to present unto Your Grace the following Discourse: So I conceive it very fitting, and my bounden duty, to give Your Grace, and the world, an Accompt in
briefe, of the inducements whereby I have been animated to appeare in this kinde before Your Grace. The chiefe whereof hath been, and is, Your Graces interest both in the Author, and in the Worke. In the Author, as subsisting in his place and profession, under God, chiefly by your Graces favour and Goodnesse. In the Worke, in a double respect: the one, as it is a Discourse of Antiquities; Your Graces extraordinary care and cost for the Collection where∣of, of all sorts, from all parts, Crow∣ned by Your singular Piety and Noble∣nesse in disposing them to the good and service of the publike; as they are thankfully acknowledged and wor∣thily celebrated by all the Lovers of Antiquities; so doe they give Your Grace an especiall interest to all their Labours who are that way inclined. The other; as it handleth more espe∣cially the Antiquities of two such Parti∣culars as are of very neere relation to
Your Grace, the Church, and City of Can∣terbury. These reasons (may it please Your Grace) not to trouble You with more, in all Humility I hope, may prevaile with Your Grace for Your pa∣tience and pardon of this presumption: and though not procure Your Graces acceptance and protection of the Worke, yet Your excuse of the Authors bold∣nesse, who most humbly craves it at Your Gracious Hands: and with his hearty Prayers, both for the long con∣tinuance of Your Graces Health and Happinesse here, to Gods Glory and the good of His Church, and for Your endlesse blisse hereafter, prostrates both Himselfe and His Labours at Your Graces Feete with that reverence which becomes The meanest of Your Graces Servants, William Somner.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER. IT is the observation of some anci∣ent Philosophers (who also prove it by divers good arguments) that all men, for the most part, have a naturall desire to immortality. But this we all know by common approv'd experi∣ence, that Man that is borne of a Woman is of short continuance. He commethforth like a Flower and is cut downe, he flyeth also as a shadow and continueth not. Some therefore who knew not of any other world after this, in defence of natures wayes and providence, maintained, that she had in some manner satisfied the desire of man in making him generative. Nam quodammodo ipse putatur vivere, cujus progenies vivit, (For that man in some sort may be thought yet alive, whose progeny is living) as I may say in the words of Cassiodore with little al∣teration. But if there be any immortality in this,
it can be but an immortality of the body, not of the minde, the best and chiefest part of man. The immortality of the minde (all that it is capa∣ble of in this world, which though it be not im∣mortality properly, yet may certainely much conduce to allay the complaints of mortall men concerning their shortnesse of life) doth, as I conceive, especially depend from that Memoria praeteritorum, and Providentia futurorum, (Re∣membrance of things past, and Foresight of things to come) which the Latine Orator speakes of. As for the first, he certainly that knowes no more of the world (the time of a mans life be∣ing so short as it is) then what hath happened in his time, though he may be in yeares, and per∣chance very old in regard of his body, yet in re∣gard of his minde and knowledge, he can be accounted but a very child. Which is the very answer that an ancient Egyptian Priest and Anti∣quary gave to Solon concerning the Grecians of his time: that they were all, the best and ancien∣test of them, but very babes and children. And his reason was, because none of them could say any thing of the state of their owne countrey be∣yond their owne and their fathers memory: whereas the Egyptians, out of their ancient holy Records, could tell them many memorable things, both concerning Greece in generall, and the state of their then famous Athens in particular,
for many hundred, if not thousand, of yeares before. If therefore a man living in a place of note, can by his industry, out of undoubted Re∣cords and Monuments (if such be the happy con∣dition of the place, that it afford them) certainly finde, what have beene the severall both materi∣all alterations (as in respect of buildings, and the like) and historicall events, that have happened to it for divers ages before, and can derive the present times and places that he lives in, by a continuall series of chances and alterations from such or such a beginning, I doe not see (if know∣ledge be granted to be the life of the soule, as the soule is the life of the body) but he may reck on his yeares according to the proportion of his know∣ledge, accounting himselfe to have lived so many yeares, as he is able truely and historically to give an account of. Now for that other part of immortality, which is Providentia futurorum, even this hath such dependance of the former, as that he that is well vers'd in the knowledge of things past, may probably foresee what will happen in time to come. As for example; It was no difficult thing for one of the ancient Grecians (who lived in the dayes of Pythagoras, and was one of his Audi∣tors) having observed the course of the world, and what had already hapned to Greece it selfe, and to other places in that kinde, to foretell of
old Greece, then flourishing, that the time would come when it should be the seate of Ignorance and Barbarisme; as it is at this day. Vpon the same grounds of former ages experience, did ano∣ther of the ancients both foresee and foretel, above a thousand yeares before any such thing happen∣ed, the discovery of a new world, in these re∣markeable words of his: —Venient annis Seculaseris, quibus Oceanus Vincularerum laxet, & ingens Pateat tell us, Tiphysque novos Detegat orbes: nec sit terris Vltima Thule. As the knowledge of ancient things is pleasant, so is the ignorance as shamefull, and oftentimes exposes men to the scorne and contempt of stran∣gers. Tully relates of himselfe, that being sent with authority to Syracusa, a quondam renowned City of Sicilia, for his owne private satisfaction, he enquired of the chiefest of the City about the sepulcher and monument of their famous Archi∣medes; who (through shamefull ignorance of their City-Antiquities) denyed that he had any. But Tully knowing the contrary by what he had read, and by good luck remembring some cer∣taine verses that mentioned some particulars of his monument, whereby it might be knowne from others, taking along with him those vene∣rable
blocks (who, as ordinary worldly men, had no care but for their profit, no curiosity but for their belly) he repaired to the place, being neer the City-gates, where ancient sepulchers and monuments were most frequent, and so negle∣cted (whereby you may judge of the temper of the Inhabitants) that they were almost all over∣growne with thickets and bushes. But the place being cleered by men that were on purpose set on worke, he found at last by helpe of the fore said directions, the monument that he sought, with the very markes (a Sphaera, and a Cylindrus) and the inscription (though now halfe worne out, more through neglect then age) that he looked for. And so, to the great shame of that City, and the inhabitants thereof (noted abroad for their luxurious life and great excesse in all worldly things) concludes with these upbraiding insul∣ting words: Ita nobilissima Graeciae civitas, quondā verò etiam doctissima sui civis unius acutissimi monu∣mentum ignorasset, nisi ab homine Arpinate didi∣cisset. As if a man should scoffingly object to us here of Canterbury, that he was faine to come out of Wales or Scotland, of purpose to shew us the monument and place of buriall of some one of our famous Abbats, or renowned Archbishops, whose credit, and bounty, when living, had re∣dounded much to the honour and benefit of the City.
For these and the like reasons, my thoughts and affections having ever much inclined to the search and study of Antiquities, (to which also my particular calling did in some manner leade me) I have more particularly, as bound in duty and thankfulnesse, applyed my selfe to the Anti∣quities of Canterbury, the place of my birth and abode. And to me this was a sufficient motive why I should of all other places desire to know the antiquities and former estate thereof. But why any man else, that is an Englishman, should have the same desire, other reasons may be given, very considerable, if I be not much deceived; as first, the Antiquities thereof. Antiquities due and proper Epithete is, venerable. Now the in∣terest which our City hath in that venerable badge and cognisance is not unknowne: it being ac∣knowledged for one of the most ancient Cities in the Kingdome. Quiacivitas Cantuariae est una de antiquissimis urbibus Angliae, is no other language then is frequently found in the Charters, and such private Acts of Parliament, as (making that a maine motive to the grant) have conveyed any Favour, or Franchise to the City or Citizens. Se∣condly, the great fame and repute that it had a∣broad, for reasons that will appeare by this Trea∣tise: and thereupon the great resort of strangers from all nations under heaven, (which in proba∣bilitie gave occasion to the proverbe of Canter∣bury-tales)
to the number sometimes, as shall be shewed, of a hundred thousand at once. But the chiefe reason, in my judgement, ought to be, be∣cause from thence first the faith of Christ was pro∣pagated and derived unto other parts of the Realme of England, after the Saxons our fore∣fathers were become Lords and possessors of it. When the Romans had conquered Greece, they did not use them as they did other nations com∣monly by them subdued, but with all love and respect, Athens especially, which they had in ho∣nour (say ancient Geographers of those times;) and, in token of their respect, suffered them to enjoy their ancient lawes, liberties and forme of go∣vernment, as though they had not beene conque∣red. Tully gives the reason. Cum ei hominum generi praesimus non modo in quo ipsa sit, sed etiam à quo ad alios pervenisse putetur humanitas: certè iis eam po∣tissimùm tribuere debemus, à quibus accepimus. And doe not all piously-affected English owe so much honour and respect to the place, from whence the light of Christs glorious Gospell first shined unto their fore fathers, as to desire to be acquainted with the present and past estate of it? I have spoken of religion onely, but I might adde humanitatem, learning and good literature too. For with religion came learning: and in the dayes of Theodorus the seventh Archbishop of Canterbury, (if publike schooles wherein all good
Arts and Sciences, philosophy especially, are lear∣nedly taught and professed make an Vniversity) Canterbury was a famous Vniversity: yea, and was afterwards a patterne (as some have written and published) for the erection and foundation of a famous Vniversity in this land. This worke is chiefly collected from old Ma∣nuscripts, Leiger-bookes and other Records of cre∣dit, exhibited to me for the most part by the Treasury of our Cathedrall; which, as it exceeds most of the Realme, if not all, in beauty, state∣linesse, and magnificence of building; so in this particular kinde of unvaluable treasure, is, as I con∣ceive, inferior unto none. With the helpe of Spots History of Canterbury mentioned of Balaeus, and of Iohn Twine's collections of the Antiquities thereof spoken of by him in his Commentaries, de rebus Albionicis, &c. could I but have gotten them, I should perchance have brought the work to more perfection: but with the helpes I have had, I have done my best endeavour that nothing might be strange or unknowne that carries with it any shew of Antiquity, either in the Church, (as the most eminent place of all) or in the City and Suburbs thereof. If the Worke may not deserve thine acceptance (courteous Reader) for it selfe, let then the Authors love to Antiquities, his thankfull intentions to∣wards the place of his birth, education and present
abode, and the encouragement of worthy friends serve for his Apology. If otherwise it give thee some content, and mine endeavours prove accep∣table unto thee, I shall desire thou wouldest be thankfull to them, without whose helpe, as I had not beene able, so without whose encouragement I had neither beene willing, thus to have adven∣tured forth in publike, as namely Doctor Casau∣bon, one of the Prebendaries of this Church, and Thomas Denne Esquire: to whom, for their great and ready favour and furtherance herein, I were conscious of much ingratitude and want of ingenuity, if I should not acknowledge my selfe exceedingly beholden. Such as it is I commend it to thy favourable acceptance, (friendly Reader) and shall adde no more but the best wishes and respects of Thine to serve thee, William Somner.
A Table of the Chapters contained in this Booke. 1 THe Antiquity of Canterbury. Pag.1. 2 The Wall about the City, and Gates therein. Pag.6. 3 The Ditch encompassing the City-Wall. Pag.31. 4 The Castle. Pag.33. 5 The River serving the City, called Stoure. Pag.37. 6 The Suburbs. Pag.45. 7 The division of the City into Wards. Pag.96. 8 Westgate-ward. Pag.99. 9 Newingate-ward. Pag.127. 10 Northgate-ward. Pag.132. 11 Worthgate-ward. Pag.136. 12 Ridingate-ward. Pag.144. 13 Burgate-ward. Pag.146. 14 The Cathedral, and Parochial Churches. Pag.150. 15 The Ecclesiasticall Government of the City. Pag.349. 16 The Temporall Government thereof. Pag.363. 17 The Appendix. Pag.376. Ex Aedibus Lambethanis. Octob. 23. 1639. Imprimatur. Guil. Bray.
THE MAPP OF CANTERBURY map of Canterbury
THE ANTIQVITIE OF CANTERBVRIE. SO great and Universall is the respect that is worthily given to venerable Antiquity, that not any one orna∣ment sets off any place, whether City or other, with greater lustre, or more proclaimes and applauds their Judgment that first selected the place for Habitation, then the true and knowne Antiquity, and long duration of the place. Now no one thing almost of this nature that discourse shall offer to the consideration of an English man, especi∣ally a Kentish man, shall finde more vulgar beleefe, nor is better grounded in tradition, then (my maine motive to the ensuing treatise) the Antiquity of this our City. And then it, what more celebrated in (the living Monuments of their deceased Authors) our stories and other like workes of English Writers? For brevity sake (which I shall study throughout my whole discourse) the Testimo∣nies
only of two, Mr. Cambden Britannia. In Kent., our moderne Chorogra∣pher, and Henry of Huntington Hist. lib. 6. De An. Dom. 10 11. one of our elder Histori∣ans, as sufficient to justifie so knowne a verity, shall suffice for instance. Who, in the places here marginally quoted, have set and left the note and marke of Antiquity upon the place. And no marvell, when as in the English-Saxons time, and even in the beginning of their Heptarchy, it was the head or chiefe City of the Kentish Kingdome, and the Kings seate. Imperii Regis Ethelberti Metropolis, so Bede. Caput imperii, &c. so others call it. Florileg. ad An. Dom. 596. In civitate Eccles. Hist. lib. 1. cap. 25. famosa, quae antiquo vocabulo Dorovernia dicitur: is the close of a Charter of Kenulph King of Mercia, in the yeere 810. As for the further discovery of the yet greater Anti∣quity of the place, if any shall desire it; let him consider with me in the next place, the names that former times have knowne it by. As the Saxons of old Cambden in Kent. called Kent,  (i. the Countrey of the men of Kent:) So the name which they gave to this our City was  (i. the Kentish mens City, Court, or Borough:) A name well agreeing with that of Cair-Kent, or Caer-Kent (the City of Kent) as Nennius and the Britaines cal∣led it. What time the Romane Empire extended it selfe hither, it was of them called Durovernum; haply from the British, Durwhern, rendred by my Author Cambden ubi supra., a swift River, such as our Stoure is: or else (as one Twyne. De Reb. Abion. lib. 1. pag. 113. will) from Thorowbourne, because of the Rivers running through the City. With very little variation from which Romane name, you may finde that our elder Historians, Bede, and others called it Dorovernia, and Dorobernia: and that you see before, in the yeare 810. was called Antiquum voca∣bulum; and yet long afterwards in use, even untill that of Cantuaria, better answering to the English-Saxon, Cant∣warabyrig, and from about the Normane Conquest hither∣ward, more frequently then the other; and in time alto∣gether
taken up and used, made it give her place. But of our Citie names see more if you please in the Antiquit. Britan. pag. 34. Cleerely then Canterbury had an existence in the time Canterbury in being in the Romanes time. of the Romanes Empire here. Let me adde, and before, in the preceding Britaines time too, as to me seemes somewhat evident from hence, that the Romane Durover∣num, is seemingly no other then the Latine-rendring of the Britaine Durwhern; by which or neere a like name (most probably) the Romanes found it called by the Bri∣tains at their coming. However the mention of it in the Emperour Antonines Itinerary, more I take it, then foure∣teene hundred yeares old, and the many pieces of Ro∣mane Coyne, both of his, and also of preceding, and succeeding Emperours, found almost in all parts of the City; (some whereof are come to my hands) are evident tokens of the places great Antiquity. A thing not doub∣ted of a farre more learned, and judicious Surveyor of our City, Mr. Cambden Britannia. Of Canterbury, in Kent., in whose opinion it was famous in the Romanes time. One strong argument whereof amongst the rest, are the present remaines of a double Military way of theirs; the great Stone-causeys, I meane, directly leading from two of their famous havens, Dubris and Lemanis; unto this our City, the former by Barham-downe, the latter by Stone-streete. But (will some say:) what make I loytering here? It is neither in the Saxon, nor yet the Romane, neither the intervening Britain's time, that we are to expect the find∣ing of our Cities Originall. It's much elder: Rome it selfe Elder then Rome. not so old. Indeed I read that one Rud-hudibras or Lud∣rudibras a King of the Britains almost nine hundred years, before our Saviours Incarnation, was our Cities Founder. Of whom founded. So sayes the Author of the British story, a Writer, though by the best of our Antiquaries (Cambden especially) for
the generality of his History exploded, as fabulous; yet in this particular followed by divers men of Judgement, and good Antiquaries too Author Anti∣quit. Brit. Lam∣bert. Holinshad. Stow. Speed.: with what warrant, as I can∣not determine, so neither will I examine, but leave it as I finde it to the scanning of others. So much for our Cities Originall and Antiquity. Now what was the generall state and condition of it in either the Britains, Romans, Saxons, or Danes times: no man may exact or expect any accompt of me, in regard no History, or other Record enables me to show it. The Survey taken of it in the Conquerours time, and record∣ed in the booke of Doomesday, is the first and most Why so called see Sir H. Spil∣mans Glossary, and the inter∣preter, in hac voce. ancient description of it any where extant. A transcript or extract whereof, here presented; reade if you please. Cheuth. In civitate Cantuaria habuit Rex Edwardus l. & 1. bur∣genses reddentes gablum & alios cc. & xij. super quos habebat sacam & socam. & iij. molend. de xl. sol. Modo Burgens. ga∣blum reddend. sunt xix. De xxxijobus. aliis qui fuerunt, sunt vastati xj. in fossato civitatis, & Archiepiscopus habet ex eis vij. Et Abbas scil. Augustini alios xiiij. pro excambio castelli. & adhuc sunt cc. & xij burgens. super quos habet Rex sacam & socam & iij. molend. reddt c. & viij sol. & thelonium redd. lxviij sol. Ibi viij. acrae prati quae solebant esse legatorum Re∣gis mo. reddt de censu. xv. sol. & mille acrae silvae infructuosae de qua exeunt xxiiij sol. Inter totum Idest Tempore Regis Edwardi. T. R. E. valuit lj. lib. & tantundem quando Hamo vicecom. recept. & mo. l. lib. ap∣preciat. Tam' qui ten' reddit xxx lib. arsas & pensatas, & xxiiij lib. ad numerum super haec omnia habet Vicecom. c. & x sol. Duas domos duorum Burgensium unam foris aliam intra ci∣vitatem quidam Monachus ecclesiae Cantuar. abstulit. Hae erant positae in Regis calle.
Burgenses habuer. xlv mansur. extra civitatem de quibus ipsi habeb. gablum & consuetud. Rex autem habet sacam & so∣cam. Ipsi quoque Burgenses habebant de Rege xxxiij acr. ter∣rae in gildam suam. Has domus & hanc terram ten' Rannul∣fus de Columbeis. Habet etiam quater xx acr. terrae super haec quas tenebant Burgenses in alodia de Rege. Tenet quoque v acr. terrae quae justè pertinent uni ecclesiae. De his omnibus re∣vocat isdem Rannulfus ad protectorem episcopum Baiocensem. Radulfus de Curbespine habet iiij mansur. in civitate quas tenuit quaedam concubina Heraldi. de quibus est saca & soca Regis. sed usque nunc non habuit. Isdem Radulfus ten' alias xj. mansuras de episcopo Baioc. in ipsa civitate quae fuer. Sbern Biga. & reddt xj sol. & xi den. & i. obolum. Per totam civitatem Cantuariae habet Rex sacam & socam excepta terra ecclesiae S. Trin. & S. Augustini. Eddevae Re∣ginae. & Alnod's Cild. & Esber Biga. & Siret de Cilleham. Concordatum est de rectis callibus quae habent per civitatem introitum & exitum quicunque in illis forisfecerit Regi emen∣dabit. Similiter de callibus rectis extra civitatem usque ad u∣nam leugam, & iij perticas & iij pedes. Si quis ergò infra has publicas vias intus civitatem vel extra foderit, vel palum fixerit; sequitur illum Praepositus Regis ubicunque abierit & em'da' accipiet ad opus Regis. Archiepiscopus calumniatur, forisfacturam in viis extra civitatem ex utraque parte ubi terra sua est. Quidam praeposi∣tus Brumannus nomine T. R. E. cepit consuetud. de extraneis mercator. interra S. Trinit. & S. Augustini, Qui postea temp. R. W. ante Archiepiscopum Lanfranc. & Episcopum Baioc. recognovit se injustè accepisse. & sacramento facto juravit quòdipsae ecclesiae suas consuetud. quiet as habuer. R. E. tem∣pore. Et exinde utraeque ecclesiae in sua terra habuer. consuetud. suas judicio Baronum Regis qui placitum tenuer.
The Citie wall, and Gates therein. VVHen Canterbury was first enclosed with a wall, I think, is no where to be found in story, or other record, either private or publick. Tokens of the walls good antiquitie are the British bricks, to be seen at Riding∣gate, at the gate also now done up, sometime leading from the Castle-yard to Wencheape, and at Queningate, or rather (if you will) at the place in the wall, where once the gate so called stood, and is now also made up. But in greatest plenty, upon the bank on either side the River behinde S. Mildreds Church in the remaines of the wall there. And that the City was walled in before the Norman conquest, is evident by the testimonie of Roger Hoveden Annal. Par. prior., who rela∣ting the siege and surprisall of the Citie by the Danes, in the time of King Etheldred, Anno Christi 1011. tells us, that (amongst particulars of the Danish crueltie, wreaked on the poore English people of the Citie) many of them being by the Danes cast headlong from the wall of the Citie met with death in the precipice. This may be further proved by severall Records of our Cathedrall, making mention of this wall in the English-Saxons time In Archivis ecclesiae Christi. Cantuar.. But that I may not seem to loyter, I pur∣posely passe them by, and proceed to elder evidence. Now the first and most ancient mention of our City wall (I conceive) offers it self in King Ethelberts charter of the site of the Monastery called (from him, for whose sake it was founded of King Ethelbert) S. Augustines, da∣ted Anno Christi 605. The ground therein set out for that intent being described to lie, sub orientali muro Civitatis Dorobrniae. A plain argument of the Cities walling at that time, and (as I conjecture) Archbishop Parker's warrant for his Hanc muro cinctam Antiq. Brit. pag. 34., &c. where he reports the do∣nation of this City, with the Royaltie thereof by King
Ethelbert to Augustine. And that it was then walled, may hence be further argued, that as Edward the Confessour long after, is said to build S. Peters Church in Westminster without London-City-Wall, purposely for the place of his owne Sepulture Post aleos vide Cambd. in Middlesex.: so one maine end of the worke of that Augustinian Monastery, was (as both Ethelb. and Aug. in their severall Charters intimate) that it might be a Cimi∣tery or place of buriall for them and their successors; the Kings and Archbishops of the place for ever. And why? but even because of the then unlawfulnesse of buriall within Cities, and other walled Townes, a thing, by that Though the Saxons in likelyhood re∣garded not that Romane law, yet Au∣stine, being a Romane did. Law of the twelve Tables (Hominem mortuum infra ur∣bem ne sepelito, neve urito.) flatly forbidden. So have I briefly trac'd our City Wals to the furthest of their known Antiquity. But, by the way, I may not conceale from you, what suspicion there is of (these Heralds of our City Wals An∣tiquity:) the Ethelbertine Charters to be fictitious and counterfeit. Sr. Henry Spelman, that learned and worthi∣ly admired Antiquay hath that opinion of them. And indeed, there is a note to be found in the Records of our Cathedrall Vide Dom. Hen. Spelman. Tom. 1. Concil. pag. 125.: which confirmes the suspicion. It tels us, that untill Withred (King of Kent) about the yeere of grace 700. that Church did peaceably enjoy it lands & liberties, onely by custome, ex antiquo more, without any charters or other written muniments. Could it now be truly ad∣ded that Withreds is the first and most ancient muniment of that Church, judging of the one by the other, this would give great cause of suspicion of the truth of those Ethelbertine charters. But in regard, that severall mu∣niments of elder times then Withreds, as one of King Ed∣bald sonne and successour of Ethelb: and two of Cedwalla the west-Saxon, made to this very Cathedrall, are to this day extant, being registred at length in the Leigers of that Church (I speak ex proprio visis) and, if judgement
may be given by the agreement of the hands, even by the very pen of the authour of that note, there is more cause in my judgement to suspect that note, of falsitie, then those charters, which it may seem to question, of forgery. But the noble Knight sets before you (if you please to peruse them) other reasons for his opinion. I referre you to them, and them to your consideration: and so passe on to further discourse of our Citie wall. Which I conceive carries yet greater antiquitie, then hitherto hath been spo∣ken of. For (if as Huntington affirms it was) Canterbury were one of the 28 Cities infamousing this Iland in the Britains times, and of them called Kair-Chent, taking this note along with us, that Kair Caius de An∣tiquitate Can∣tabrig. lib. 16. 1 with them signified a wall∣defenced town or City, we need not doubt but it was walled in their times. And so much for the walls antiqui∣tie, now I passe to after-accidents that have betided it. The City (as I have given you a former touch) being by the Danes, in the dayes of King Etheldred, besieged, taken, and with the Cathedrall (as all our Chronologers agree) burnt and utterly wasted; the City wall (no doubt) being the Cities best securitie against a like surprisall, if it should still have stood, was not spared by that all-wasting enemy. I read that Archbishop Lanfranc, in the Conquerours time, was a great benefactour to the repaire of it. So saith Mr. Lambert Perambula∣tion of Kent. In Canterbury., and so Stow, followed by Speed. But no other story mentions it, no not that of his life and acts written by (his successour) Archbishop Parker. But so they say. Take it as I finde it. When or by whom soever it was re∣paired, it is plain by the Monk of Malmesbury, that in his time, which was about the yeare of grace 1142. in the reign of King Stephen, it was walled round. For he saith it was De gest. Pontif. lib. 1. in Prologo. then a City much renowned (amongst other things) for the walls whole and undecayed enclosing it round about. Which being so, and no violence offered them afterward
that we reade of, I marvell somewhat that there should be need of that fortification of the City with walls in Richard the first's time, as it seems there was: For the King being (it should appeare) taken prisoner in his return from the holy land, his Mother Q. Alianor, out of her care in her ab∣sent sonnes behalfe, of this amongst other (as it seems) weak parts of the kingdome, takes order for the fortifying of it: as by her letters In Archivis Ecclesiae Cant. of the following tenor may appeare, written (itseems) at the instance and for the securitie of the Cathedrall Monks, fearfull that this one act of their as∣sistance in the work of the Cities fortification, might in∣fringe their libertie of Burgbote, and being drawn in conse∣quentiam become a prejudiciall example, effectuall to compell them to the like in future time, as of the nature of a leading case. Carta Alianor. Reginae quòd homines nostri non tenen∣tur facere fossat. vel murum circa Civitatem Cantuariensem. A. Dei gratia humilis Angliae Regina, omnibus Christi fide∣libus ad quos literae praesentes pervenerint, salutem in ve∣ro salutari. Audito quòd karissimus filius noster Rex Angliae Richardus detentus est ab Imperatore Romano, vovimus ad memoriam beati & gloriosi martyris Thomae, ut liberationem Domini Regis filii nostri possemus ejus intervenientibus meritis & precibus obtinere. Cùm autem ob terrae turbationem Cau∣tuariae Civitas fossatis & muris & aliis propugnàculis munire∣tur, omnés{que} ad hoc compellerentur; quidam homines Prioris & Conventus ecclesiae Cant. non de jure, non de consuetudine, sed ad nostrarum precum instantiam ibidem operati sunt. Nos itaque diligentius attendentes libertates & immunitates ad praefatam ecclesiam & ejus homines ubicunque fuerint pertinentes, mona∣chis ejusdem ecclesiae concessimus & promisimus, quòd operatio illa quam urgens necessitas & nostra interventio inducebat, eis
vel hominibus eorun in posterum non noceret, eorumque cartis & libertatibus, quae illis à multis Regibus confirmatae sunt, prju∣dicium non afferret. In huus rei testimonium praesentes literas si∣gillo nostro fecimus communiri. Test. H. Archidiac' ejusdem ecclesiae, & magistro P. Bless. Bathon. Archid. apud London. With like caution I finde the same Monks, a while after help forward the Cities defence another way. For in King Iohns time, Rich. 1. immediate successour, the Citizens after much suit to the Monks, prevailed with them at length, to sell them of their wood to make hurdles or wat∣tles withall, for the defence of their City. They are in∣deed (as I am informed Vide Gloss. D. H. Spelman in verbo Hurdi∣tium. things of especiall good and known use for such a purpose, in divers respects, but chief∣ly serviceable, rightly used, for the securing of a wall against Rammes, and such like engines of assault and bat∣tery. Consider of this further, after you have read these letters In archivis ec∣clesiae Cant., which I may call the Monks acquitance, or pro∣tection. Omnibus ad quos praesens scriptum pervenerit, Hubertus de Burgo Iustitiarius Domini Regis, salutem in Domino. No∣veritis quòd ad magnam petitionem meam & civium Civitatis Cant.Monachi ecclesiae Christi Cant. vendiderunt civibus Cant. de bosco suo ad faciendum Cleias ad defensionem Civita∣tis Cant. Et quia constabat nobis plenè per cartas Domini  Jo∣annis Regis nostri, & antecessorum suorum quod praedicti Mo∣nachi ad munitionem praedict. Civitatis non tenentur, nè prae∣dicta venditio possit in posterum praedictis Monachis vel eccle∣siae Cant. praejudicare, literis praesentibus cum sigilli nostri appo∣sitione jus & libertates dictorum Monachorum &Cant. ecclesiae protestamur super praedict• venditione. Val•. The prototype is yet remaining in the Cathedrall, where I have seen it with the seale appendant. The like to that (of the Authors) represented in figure in the last edi∣tion of the Remaines pag. 209. and in the map of Kent. I reade nothing of our walls afterward till Rich. 2.
dayes, who (as Thorne reported by Mr. Lambert Peramb. of Kent in Canter∣bury. saith) gave 250. markes towards the ditching, and inclosing of the City, and in whose reigne, Regis ad exemplum, that re∣nowned Patriot Archb. Sudbury is said to have built the Westerne-gate of the City, together with the Wall, ly∣ing betweene that and the North-gate, commonly called the long Wall, and was purposed (some say) to have done likewise about all the City ver of an∣cient funerall Monuments. pag. 225., if he had lived. The rest of the Wall (it seemes) either tottering, or being quite decayed at that time. Insomuch as Simon Burley (Warden of the Cinque Ports) advised that the Jewels of Christ-Church and Saint Augustines, should for more safety be removed to Dover-Castle Lambert. Per∣amb. in Cant.. What cost in reparation it had afterward bestowed on it, was chiefely raised by the generall taxe of the City. For it appeares by the Book of Murage in the City-Cham∣ber, that the whole City in the time of Hen. 4. was taxed and assessed to the repaire thereof: towards the sustaining of which both for the present and future, and the Citizens incouragement to proceed in that worthy undertaking, that King, by his writ of Privy Seale, gives them both a licence of Mortmaine, for the purchasing of twenty pound land per annum to the City for ever; and also grants them all wast grounds, and places lying within the City to use and dispose of for their best advantage, likewise in perpe∣tuity. For your better satisfaction, take here a translated Copy of the Writ, as I have it from the Records of the Chamber. Henry by the Grace of God King of England, and of France, and Lord of Ireland, to all people to whom these present letters shall come, greeting. Know yee that where Motives. our welbeloved, the Citizens of our City of Canterbury, (as We heare) have begun to fortifie and strengthen the same City as well with one Wall of stone, as with a Ditch.
We considering the same City to be set neere unto the Sea, and to be as a Port or entry of all strangers into our Realme of England coming by the same parts; so that it hath need of the more strength. Of Our especiall Grace, and for the honour of God; and by the assent of Our Counsell have granted and given licence to the same Citi∣zens, that they may purchase Lands and Tenements to the value of twenty pound by the yeare within the said City. Grant. To have and to hold to them and their successors, Citi∣zens of the foresaid City, in helpe towards the building and making of the same Wall and Ditch for ever. The stat. made of Lands and Tenements not to be put to Mortmaine, or for that the said City is holden of Us in Burgage notwithstanding. Provided that by inquisitions thereof, in due forme to be made, and into the Chancery of Us or of Our Heires, duely to be returned, it be found that it may be done without hurt or prejudice to Us or to Our Heires aforesaid, or to any other. And moreover, in consideration of the premisses of Our more speciall Grace, We by the assent of Our said Counsell, have granted and given licence to the foresaid Citizens, that they all Lands and places voyde and waste within the foresaid City may dresse up, arrent and build up. And the same Lands and places so dressed up, arrented and builded, they may have and hold to them and to their Successors aforesaid, in helpe and reliefe of the same Citizens, and in mainte∣nance of the premisses and other charges to the same City hapning for ever: without let of Us or of Our Heires or Ministers whatsoever they be, the stat. aforesaid; or for that the said City is holden of Us, in Burgage as it is a∣bovesaid notwithstanding. Saved alwayes to Us and to Our Heires the Services thereof due and accustomed. In Witnesse whereof We have caused these Our Letters Pa∣tents to be made. Witnesse Our Selfe at Westminster the fifth day of May, in the fourth yeare of Our Reigne.
The better and more easily to estimate and judge of the charge of which worke, I finde that the yeare before (3. Hen. 4.) the compasse and circuit of the Wall was mea∣sured, and a note thereof taken and registred in the Re∣cords of the Chamber. Let me present you with the Co∣py of it, in the identity of words and language that I finde it. Mensuratio murorum circa Civitatem Cant' per Thomam Ickham honor ablem Civem Civitatis praedict' fact. Ann. Reg. Hen. tertio. Primo à parva porta de Quyningate usque ad Burgate xxxviij. perticat, & porta de Burgate continet unam. Item, à dicta porta de Burgate usque ad Newingate xxxvij. perticat, & porta de Newingate continet unam. Item, à dicta porta de Newingate'usque ad Ridingate xlviij. perticat, & porta de Ridingate continet unam. Item, à dicta porta de Ridingate usque ad Worgate lxxxiij. perticat, & porta de Worgate continet unam. Item, à porta de Worgate usque ad aquam quae est à retro S. Mildredae, lxj. perticat, & riparia ibidem continet, iiij. per∣ticat. Item, à riparia usque ad Westgate. cxviij. perticat, & di∣mid', & porta de Westgate continet unam. Item, à porta de Westgate usque ad finem muri qui vocatur Long-wall continent', lix. perticat, & quartam partem perticat. Item, aqua quae vocatur Stower ab illo muro usque ad murum qui vocatur Waterlocke continet, xviij. perticat, & dimid. Item, & murus ab illo loco usque ad Northgate continet, xl. perticat, & porta de Northgate continet unam. Item, à porta de Northgate usque ad Quyningate continet lxix. perticat, quae est versus Prior' ecclesiae Christi Cant. Summa otalis (but it is miscast) vclxix. perticat, & quarta pars perticat.
This Thomas Ickham, by the way, the Wall measurer, was Alderman of Burgate in the fourth yeare of Hen. 4. and dying the twenty sixe of May. 3. Hen. 5. was buried in Christ-Church. Liber Ms. in Archivis Eccle∣siae Cant. Others of his name and family, (I take it) lye buried in Saint Peters Church in Canterbury, as I shall show hereafter. By this Record you may perceive that the whole Wall betweene Westgate and Northgate was not then built, as now we see it is. For on either side the River, the Wall, by this Record, clearely breakes off, so that there is an in∣terjected distance of eighteene perches long betweene the one, and the other Wall. And indeed it will easily appeare to be but a slight observation; that so much of the Wall as stands and is made up in that then un-walled part, namely betweene the Posterne and the Waterlocke, next Northgate, through which in Arches, with a Portclose, the River now passeth from Abbots Mill, is in the stone∣worke much different from the rest of the Wall, and shewes not in any part the least wracke or decay, as the other doth. It seemes then that Archbishop Sudbury built not all the long Wall. But enough of the Wall, unlesse the City of latter time had more tendred her own credit and safety in keeping it better repaired. In pity and just reproofe whereof (whe∣ther in this City, or any other) I crave leave here a little to enlarge my selfe. A Cities aspect is much blemished by ruinous edifices: especially publicke, and in places most obvious to the eye. Now what more publicke and obvious then the City Wall? Against this deformity the Civill law very carefully provides, which sayes: Civitas ruinis non debet deformari. Fin. ne quid in loc. pub. lib. 43. ff. . 8. As likewise doe the lawes of this land: Statutes being made 27. 32. and 33. Hen. 8. to remedy such deformities in many of our Cities, and this in particular. If this move not, know then that our Eng∣lish Townes and Cities are taxed, and have a note set on
them published to the World in Print, for their notori∣ous defect of Walles and Bulwarkes. Expositae sunt nati∣ones (saith the French Thlosanus) De Repub. li. 1. cap. 3. nu. 5. praedae exterorum, quae non habent muratas aut munitas Civitates, ut de Anglia, & Scy∣thicis liqu nationibus: Cito enim expugnatis portubus, in∣gressu & aditu patefacto, omnia cedunt reliqua, &c. Thus he, and leaves it not so, but a while after hath it up a∣gaine. Eod. lib. cap. 5. num. 3. Estque res notissima, Angliam aliasque regiones toties mutasse Reges & Dominos, quòd null aut paucissimae sunt in eis urbes & arces munitae: ut sit axioma certissimum, in∣gressis in eas Regiones obtento, statim dominationem earum sequi. Thus he, much to the discredit of our Nation: but deservedly I doubt, and suspect our particular neglect and defect in this kinde, partly gave the occasion. As we tender then our owne, and our Countries credit; as we respect our particular commodity in point of security and beauty, both which it will at once bring unto our City, let us with our forefathers, as good Patriots, looke better to our Walles. But I feare I speake too late. Serò medicina paratur, &c. The malady is of that growth by the want of applying timely remedies, that, I thinke, it is now become incura∣ble. Such danger, such detriment attends, and is begot∣ten by delay. Yet let me not seeme tedious, whilest I re∣member what some yt living cannot have forgotten; that not long since the cure was in part worthily attempted by a noble Citizen, Mr. I. Easday by name, sometime one Ann. Domini. 1586. of our Aldermen, who in the time of his Maioralty, well hoping his Successors in the place, would likewise have succeeded him in this his exemplary piety and commen∣dable endeavour for the repaire of the City wall, to his great cost, being a man but of an indifferent estate, be∣gan the repaire thereof at Ridingate, and therein pro∣ceeded so farre, as where you may finde his name inscri∣bed on the Wall. A worke left for future ages to follow,
now having hitherto vouchsafed it their imitation. But I forbeare, because I list not to be satyricall. In this Wall are to the number of twenty one Turrets, or small watch Towers orderly placed, the most of them (thankes to God) of no use now adayes; but in many mens judgements, such, as with no great cost, if it might stand with the wisdome of the City, might make, what we much want, convenient Pest-houses, and Recepta∣cles for the poore visited people of the City, many times either indangering the publicke safety by their stay in their houses, or else hazarding their private well-fare abroad for want of such or like accomodation. I have done with the Walles. The Gates. The Gates of the City come next to be considered of. The Wall at this day admits of onely sixe (except the three Posternes) answering to the number of the Wards, Burgate, Newingate, Ridingate, Worthgate, Westgate, and Northgate. Anciently we had another, a seventh gate, which was called Queningate, whereof mention is made in the fore-going note of the measure∣ment of the City Wall. I will briefely speake of them all, beginning with that whereof I finde eldest mention, Burgate, or Burrough-gate. The first of King Ethelb. Charters dated in the yeare of our redemption 605. tels us of this Gate: bounding out Burgate. the intended site of Saint Augustines Monastery, South to Burgate-way. In meridie via de Burgate, saith the Char∣ter. It was afterwards, and still is otherwise called Saint Michaels-gate, from the Church so called sometime neighbouring to it. About the yeare of Grace 1475. This Gate was new builded, at whose charges is to be seene up∣on the Gate, without, where you may finde the principall
benefactors, worthy Citizens in their times, thus me∣morized. Per Iohannem Franingam, Iohannem Nethersole, & Edm. Minot. By this Gate lyes the Road betweene the City and Sand∣wich, A common foot-way som ime through St Augustines Church-yard. and the bordering parts, and that onely by Long∣port at this day: whereas in former time there was also a common foot-way lying through St Augustines Church∣yard, by the Gate at either end, the one yet standing a∣gainst St Pauls-street, called Church-street: at the one end, and the other directly oppositeto it, where a new Gate was lately made opening into St Martins-streete. Besides tradition which retaines the memory of this com∣mon way, the wills Penes Re∣gistrum Consistor' Cantuar. of some of our Townesmen buried in St Augustines said Church-yard, make mention of it, by appointing and laying out their burials in Cimiterio St Au∣gust' in alta via, and the like. And in, or about the begin∣ning of Hen. 6. reigne, I finde there arose a great debate, ending in a suite in law, betweene the City and the Abby concerning Limits; occasioned chiefely by the Citizens challenge, and the Monkes deniall of this way, to lye and be within the liberty and franchese of the City. The qua∣rell happened in the time of the Bailiffes, who in their passage to and from St Martins by that way, with their Maces, the ensignes of their Magistracy borne up before them, so distasted the Monkes, that on a time meeting them and their company upon the place, and not prevai∣ling with them verbis; or by force of argument to desert their, and the Cities claime in that behalfe: impatient of the affront, they attempted it vi, or by force of armes, endeavouring by strong hand to force them from the place, but being the weaker party, were put to the worst. To suit then they goe, but the issue what it was I cannot learne, onely I have seene (and have a Copy of) an argu∣ment drawne and framed on the Monkes part, and in de∣fence of their limits and liberties, to the doing whereof
the premised difference gave the occasion. However the way continued and lay common till our memory. And here, in all probability, lay the most ancient rode between Burgate and St Martins, it meets in so streight a line, the rodes at either end; whereas Long-port rode lyes wide of them both, more south from the Abby: the rode being so turned of purpose (as I conceive) to make more way, and give larger scope for St Augustines Church-yard. And (which moves me most) the first site of the Abbey is bounded South to Burgate way, and not to Long-port Vide Cr. 1. Ethelberti.. But leaving this Gate, come we now to the next. Newingate, otherwise from the Church so called stand∣ing Newingate. hard by it, St Georges-gate. This Gate was new built much about the time that Burgate was. For thus I read in the will of one William Bigg of Cant. In Archivis Registri Domini Archidiaconi Cantuar. a benefactor to the worke, 1470. Item, I give ten pounds to the making, and performing of St Georges Gate, to be payed as the worke goeth forward. But it took not the name of New∣ingate, that is Newgate, from this new building of it; but was much more anciently so called. For about the middle of the eleventh Century, in a Bull of Pope Alex. 3. to the Monkes of Christ-church, I read this; In civitate Cantuar. Ecclesiam scil. Georgii de Newingate: Yet by the name of it, it should not be of any great antiquity. And indeed I conceive it to be of a latter foundation then any of the other five, and that it was built (as Newgate in London was upon an occasion not much unlike Survey of Lon∣dn. pag. 35. ult. Editionis.) chiefely for a more direct passage into the heart of the City from Dover-rode. Whereas the more ancient rode and passage into the City from Dover lay by the next Gate, whither I am going. Ridingate, an ancient Gate, and mentioned in the Re∣cords of St Augustins Abby, in Ann. Dom. 1040. thus: Ridingate. Edsinus Archiepiscopus dedit Sancto Augustino quinque acr as terrae Rudingate & unum pratum pertinens ad terram praedict':
hac conditione interposita, ut monachi St August. haberent ejus memoriam in orationibus suis specialem Thorne in vi∣tis Abbat. St Augustini. Cant.. By this Gate (I say) anciently lay the Dover-rode, or rather the Roman port-way, or military way betweene Do∣ver and Canterb. the like whereof lay betweene Cambd. in Kent of Portas Lenanis, and Stone-street. Limen and the City. (As probably also betweene it and the rest of the Roman ports, to wit Reculoer, Richborow, and New∣enden, places all where the Romans planted their Castra Riparensia, as I may not unfitly call them, for the defence of the Saxon shore:) Of the which formed two, one up∣on Burham-downe, and the other upon the Downes by Horton and Stowting, is in ancient evidences called Dun∣strata. 1. The street way on the hill or downe. The Vesti∣gia of the latter, is that long continued hard-way, called Stone-street, and of the other the abrupt pieces of a faire causey upon Barham-downe, a way more streight and di∣rect then that now used, lying by Whitings-way, or rather White-way (for King Iohns Charter to St Rudegund's Abby by Dover cals it Alba via Liber. Ab. St Rudegundis.;) whither the rode was turned (as is probably conjectured) for the frequency of robberies and murders committed in Woolwich-wood, through which the former way lay and lead. But to our Gate againe, which I suppose tooke it name from this Port-way or Rode-way. Ridingate, being no other but the Rode-gate. Which conjecture is made much more probable, if not the matter put out of all doubt, partly by the tokens of Antiquity, the Roman or British-bricks as yet to be seene about it, and partly by the name of the streete leading from it into the City, called to this day Watling-street, one of the foure famous wayes or streets which crossed and quartered the Kingdome. Erming-street, Ikenildstreet and Fosse being the other three, which Mulmutius Dunwallo is by some storied to have made; I know not how many hundreds of yeeres before Christ. So Holinshead. But of Mr Cambden, who hath a
large discourse of them Britannia. Ro∣manes in Bri∣tain. pag. 63. 64, 65. En∣glish edition., much more probably attributed to the Romanes. I proceed. By this gate was sometime standing a Church, called the Church of S. Edmund S. Edmunds Church. the King and Martyr, otherwise from the Gate by which it stood, S. Edmunds of Ridingate, built by one Hamon the sonne of Vitalis, one of those who came in with the Conquerour Lib. Hsp. S. Laurentii prope Cant.. This Church was stand∣ing neare within the gate, for I have read an old deed bounding out an house one way to the street leading to S. Edmunds Church from Tierne-Crouch (that is the Iron crosse, which sometime stood at the East-end of Castle-street, at the meeting of the foure weuts) But the Church is now so cleane gone, that the least vestigium of it appears not. I read Lib. Eccles. Christi. Cant., that upon the declining of it, iu the yeare of our Lord 1349. it was united to S. Mary Bredne, by the then Commissary of Canterb', specially authorised there∣to by the Ordinary, who were then the Prior and Count of Christ-Church in the vacancy of the See by Archbishop Bradwardines death, with consent of the Nunnes of Sepul∣chres, who were Patrons of it, it being given them long before by the Abbot and his Covent of S. Aug. whereof their domestick Chronicler Thorne In itis Abbat. S. Augustini. hath these words. Anno Dom. 1184. Rogerus Abbas & Conventus hujus Monasterii concesserunt ecclesiam beati Edmundi de Redingate in puram & perpetuam elemosynam Monialibus S. Sep. Cant. Ita ta∣men quod Moniales praedictae in recognitionem Iuris quod S. Aug. habet in praedicta ecclesia de red. 12. denarios de ipsa ecclesia singulis annis reddent super Altare S. Aug. in die ipsius scil. ad organa reparanda, & super hoc tam Priorissa & Sup∣priorissa in Capitulo nostro fidelitatem juraverunt multis testi∣bus praesentibus. Thus he. Let me onely acquaint you that over this Ridingate, was sometimes, and that in the me∣morie of many yet living, a Bridge lying upon the under∣props or Buttresses yet standing on either side the Gate; Bridge over Ridingate. by which when it stood, a man might have continued his
walk from the lesser to the greater Dondgehill, and è con∣tra, but it is decayed and gone. And so I walk on to Worth∣gate. Of which I can say but little, and the rather because I am not as yet perswaded to be of their opinion who think that Winchep-gate, that now is, and so called, is the anci∣ent Worthgate. For my part, I rather conceive the gate now disgated sometime leading out of the Castle-yard in∣to Winchep to be Worthgate, because it is both the more ancient gate in all appearance, carrying a shew of greater Antiquitie then the castle it self in the perfect Arch of British brick which it hath, not sampled of any other a∣bout the City; and in its ruines retaines the vestigia of a gate, both for strength and beauty of good respect. Be∣sides, by it the road is continued, directly from Castle-street into Winchep, and è contra: whereas Winchep-gate carries no shew of the least antiquitie; and beside stands wide of Winchep, making the passenger wheel a∣bout, and fetch a compasse to come to it. Besides observe the name, which I suppose taken up and given it since the building of the Castle, Worthgate, that is (as I conceive) the Castle-gate, or gate by the Castle: Worth (as some interpretit Remaines of Surnames in verb. Worth. pag. 93.) signifying a Fort: or else VVorthgate, quasi VVard-gate, from the constant watch and ward (com∣monly called Castle-guard:) anciently kept in the Castle and Barbican, for the safeguard of it and the City, where∣of some ancient evidences have taken notice, as (amongst other) one of S. Radeg. Abbey Lib. Rad∣gund., made in Ric. 1. or King Iohns time, concluding thus. Haec emptio facta fuit illo tem∣pore quo VV•us de Hesheteford habuit wardam Castelli Cant. & eodem temp' Theoricus le Vineter fuit prfectus. But leaving this matter, let me tell you, that, accord∣ing London rode. to traditionall report, London rode lay anciently by this gate, untill Boughton way, as the more direct, came into request; which it did but lately as they say, how truly
I know not, but not improbably, (if for no other reason) because of the prison kept of old first in the Castle, and af∣terwards at or neare S. Iacobs (whereof more anon) pla∣ces most likely of the greatest through-fare. But as a thing uncertaine I leave it with a Fides penes lectorem esto, untill further enquiry shall inable me to give him better satisfa∣ction. But for certain, of old, in perilous times of hostilitie, all strangers coming by Dover, and those eastern coasts from forrein parts, being denied the common through∣fare of the City, were put to seek London-rode, by a lane leading to it not farre distant from this Gate, of some cal∣led Strangers way, of other Out-aliens way, which cros∣seth Strangers way. the rode at S. Dunstans Crosse a little on this side of Cockering ferme. Of this Gate I have nothing more to say in this place, because I shall have a second occasion for it, when I come to the Castle. I passe therefore from it to VVestgate. But first will it please you to heare my second thoughts, touching the rodes lying by this Gate, to and from Lon∣don? Some haply will more readily adhere to this opinion, because Mr Cambden Britannia in Kent. seems to be in a manner of their minde, by making Lenham (in his interpretation) the same with the Emperour Antoninus his Durolsuum men∣tioned in his Itinerary, as one of the mansions or stations upon the rode lying in his time between London and Rich∣borough. But therein (I take it) Mr Cambden is mistaken, If you Mr Cambdens opinion tou∣ching Lenham examination. will heare my reasons, first let me give you the Stations or Mansions which the Itinerary mentions lying in the rode between London and Richborough, with the distances be∣tween the stages, and the totall summe or number of miles in the whole journey, taking beginning from London.
Noviomago. m. p. x. In toto lxxiiij. Vaginacis. m. p. xviij. Durobrovis. m. p. ix: Durolevo. m. p. xiij. Duroverno. m. p. xij. Ad portum Ritupis. m. p. xij. Let me adde also the stages (and their distances) be∣tween London and Dover, and between London and Lin, with the totals also of their miles, as the same Itinerary sets them down. Item, à Londinio ad portum Dubris. M. P. 66. sic. Durobrovis. m. p. xxvij. Duroverno. m. p. xxv. Ad portum Dubris. m. p. xiiij. Item, à Londinio ad portum Lemanis. M. P. lxviij. sic. Durobrovis. m. p. xxvij. Duroverno. m. p. xxv. Ad portum Lemanis. m. p. xvj. Now the first of these stages betweene London and Richborough (Noviomagus) Mr Cambden conceiveth to be that which is now called Woodcote, a little village neare Croydon in Surrey. The next (Vagniac.) he takes for Maid∣stone, a Towne well knowne in Kent. The third (Durobro∣vis) for Rochester City. The fourth (Durolevum) for Len∣ham in Kent. The fift (Durovernum) for Canterbury City, and the next and last (Portus Ritupis) for Richborough neare Sandwich. As for the third and two last of these stages, there is no cause of doubt (as I conceive) but he hits them aright: the Quaere rests then onely upon the other three. Now it will, I thinke, be easily granted that the Roman-roads betweene Port and Port; and betweene one great Towne and another, were made and laid out as direct and streight
as might be Hae viae sum∣ma rectitudi∣ne tanquam pro∣tnsa linea, per quaecunque lo∣corum incommo∣da, tanta latitu∣dine ductae sunt. Twyne. De Reb. Albionic. lib. 2. pag. 152.: and that for the Posts and other Travellers both better direction, and also more swift and speedy dis∣patch of the journey; to facilitate whose passage they in∣vented, and made those causeyes, whereof we have in many places the remaines to this day. And that the rode or Port-way betweene London and these Port-Townes was streight and without much winding, appeareth plainely by the totall of the miles, not onely betweene them (e∣specially betweene London and Dover being reckoned but at 66. a distance which it holds almost to this day, though the English be longer then the Italian miles:) but also, if you marke it betweene London and Rochester, and between Rochester also and Canterbury, the former being 27. the latter 25. If this be so, the Traveller goes much awry and out of his way, that setting out of London, and bound for Richborough, goes first eight or ten miles wide of London, to Woodcote: from thence to Maidstone some 24. miles a∣sunder: and from Maidstone makes to Rochester (oblique∣ly all the way, without gaining a step nearer his journeys end, when he is there: and then quatering againe re∣turnes into Maidstone rode, and salutes Lenham, and so makes forward. He that takes his way thus shall finde it little lesse thrn 80. of our miles betweene London and Rich∣borough. The case thus standing, suffer me to give my weake conjecture how the Rode might lye in the Romans time; and to tell you whereabout I guesse these Stations, Man∣sions or stages that the Itinerary speakes of, were severally seated, and may now probably be found. As for the first then, being Noiomagus, or Noviomagus, and that seated tenne miles from London; I cannot con∣ceive Noviomagus. how it should be a stage for this rode, and lye wide of London, as Woodcote doth, so many miles, and consequent∣ly set the Traveller at as great a distance from the place whither he is bound (Richborough) as when he first set out
of London. Considering this, and the distance betweene London and Rochester, by the Itinerary, I should rather place it about Crayford, much about tenne miles from London, upon or alongst some Hill or Downe, since it is otherwise called Noviodunum. As for Vagniac, the next stage, 18. miles from Novio∣magus Vagniacae. (saith the Itinerary, not without a mistake, I beleeve of 18. for 8. miles, it being by the same Itinerary, but 27. betweene London and Rochester) I suppose it might stand about Northfleet, distant about 8. miles from Crayford, and about as many miles from Durobrovis or Rochester, the next stage upon the rode, and which I think Nennius rather in∣tends by his Caer Medwag, in his catalogue of Cities, then Maidstone. The 4th and next stage after Durobrovis, Durolevum, Durolevum. 13 miles (by the Itinerary) distanced from Durobrovis, I take to have been seated not farre from Newington a vil∣lage on the rode between Rochester and Canterbury: In this particular not a little strengthened and uphold∣en in my conjecture by the multitude of Romane urns lately found in digging there, at such place as is already discovered and discoursed of by the learned Meric. Ca∣saubon, then Batchelor, now Doctour in Divinitie, my ever honoured friend Notes upon Marcus Aurel. Antoninus his meditations. pag. 31. &c.. If any shall stumble at the disproportion of miles be∣tween it and Durovernum (Canterbury) let them know there is even as great between Lenham and Canterbury. Why it should be called Durolevum, I am altogether ig∣norant. What if I conjecture (because the Itinerary layes out the rode from London to Richborough, and not è contra) from having the river or water (of Medway) on the left hand of it, as by the inhabitants tradition, Newington some∣time had, and within about 2 miles of it yet hath? If any looking for better Remaines of a Romane stati∣on, shall object the mean condition of the present village,
such may know that Newington hath been a place of more note in time past then now. I read of a Nunnery there of ancient time, whereof and of the pristine estate of the place, please you to reade what Thorne hath written In vitis Ab∣batum S. Aug.. Apud manerium de Newington (saith he) fuerunt quon∣dam Moniales quae tenuerunt manerium illud integrè, scilicet id quod Dominus Abbas S. Augustini tenet, & id quod haeredes Domini G. de Lucy tenent, & id quod haeredes B. de Ripariis tenent, praeter id quod Richardus de Lucy adquisivit de Brunell de Middelton, & tunc defendebat illud manerium pro uno sul∣lingo terrae versus Regem apud Middelton. Postea contingebat quòd Priorissa ejusdem Monasterii strangulata fuit de conventu suo nocte in lecto suo, & postea tracta ad puteum quod vocatur Nonnepet: quo comperto, cepit Dominus Rex manerium illud in manum suam, & tenuit illud in custodia sua, caeteris monia∣libus usque Scapeiam ind amotis. Postea Henricus Rex Pater substituit quosdam canonicos seculares, & dedit illis illud ma∣nerium integrum cum xxviij pisis casei de manerio de Middel∣ton. Subsequenti verò tempore unus occisus fuit inter eos, de qua morte quatuor fuerunt culpabiles, & duo reliqui culpabiles non inventi, per licentiam Domini Regis portionem suam de∣derunt sancto Augustino, quinque partibus remanentibus in manu Regis usque dedit illas partes Domino Richardo de Lucy Iustitiario suo. Vnde Abbas S. Augustini tenuit praedictas duas partes quousque per concambium, ut supradictum est, unà cum xj sol. vd annui redditus in hamleto de Thetham fuit sibi satis∣factum, qui quidem Hamlet postea devenit in manus Abbatis de Heversham, ex dono praedicti Richardi de Lucy, qui Abbas de praedicto redditu ecclesiae beati Augustini respondet in praesen∣ti. Alia quaedam scripta tradunt illos praebendarios tempore Re∣gis Willielmi conquestoris sic deliquisse, per quorum deli∣ctum omnia sua ibidem in manu Regis fuerunt forisfacta, qui quidem Dominus Willielm' Rex duas partes saepe nominatas de∣dit Abbati S. Augustini. Quae verò istarum opinionum sit verior, in effectu ad eligendum relinquo optioni legentis.
Craving pardon for this digression, and leaving Worth∣gate, I come now as I promised erewhile, and as the order of my method requires, to Westgate. Edmerus the Monk of Canterbury shortly after the Con∣quest, Westgate. names unto us this and the Northgate of the City, telling us of Archb. Lanfranc's founding a double Hospi∣tall, the one for leprous, without the former, and the other for aged and impotent without the other gate Edmer. Hist. Novrum. lib. 1. pag. 9.. This of Westgate being decayed (as I have told you) was reedi∣fied by Archbishop Sudbury in Rich. 2. time. It hath its Church by it called Holy Crosse (with this addition, from the Gate:) of Westgate. The same gate the surest and largest about the City, Prison there. and therefore, and in respect also of the chief through fare under it, is at this day the common Gaole or Prison of the City, both for malefactors and others, and hath been so (as I suppose) almost ever since the new building of it: but certainly from the 31. of Hen. 6. For then (as Edw. 4th in his Charter recites) he granted it to the City by his Charter, in these words. Custodiam Gaiolae suae de Westgate praedict Civitatis suae Cantuar. ad prisones tunc incarceratos & extunc incarcerendos infra eandem Civitatem & suburb. pro quocunque crimine seu causa cuptos seu capiendos, detinendos in eadem per se vel Ministros suos &c. The Town Prison be∣ing immediately before its remove thither kept in another place, to wit before the now town-Hall or Court-Hall (whereof more hereafter:) as formerly it was at another place, to which I am copiously directed by the Records of Christ-Church, which shew it to have stood in the heart of the City, hard by S. Andrews Church, on the North-side of the street, even where since and now our corn-market is kept; which the boundary of a house of Christ-Church situate thereabouts anciently thus discovers. In parochia S. Andreae, inter venellam per quam itur ad carcerem Civitatis quae est versus East. And another thus. In angulo sicut itur ab
ecelesia St Andreae versus carcerem Civitatis Rental. vet. eccles. Christ. Cantuar.. This latter house I take to be that where Mr Taylor the Linen-draper lately dwelt, which is a Church-house, and it seemes was anciently, a corner-house, that being but lately put up which now stands betweene it and the Corne-market. This Prison in those dayes was knowne by the name of the Spech-house. Nicholaus de Wilt-shire Priso in Gaola Ci∣vitatis Cant. vocat Spech-house moriebatur, &c. say the Crowne-Rolls, 11. Ed. 2. And whilest it was kept there, the lane now called Angell-lane, to which toward the East it abutted, called parvus vicus juxta Spech-house, and Spech-house-lane. For a Townes-man in his Will, dated 1404. proved (according to an old Custome of the City) before the Bailifes of the place, deviseth his Tenement in St Mary Magdalens Parish in Spech-house-lane Liber. Civitat. Cant.; which of necessary consequence, must be this, there being no other lane in that Parish that leads to the Spech-house. The same records of the Cathedrall informe me of a yet more ancient common Goale or Prison then this, be∣longing Another Pri∣son. to the City, which in the time of Prior Benedict, about 450. yeares agoe, they call Novum Carcerem Civi∣tatis. It stood (say they) in a part of that which was after∣wards the Augustine Friers seate, since the dissolution be∣come the dwelling house (after many others) of Cap∣taine Berrye's heires, having then a lane leading to it, from Saint Georges street, called Lambertslane, afterward Brewerslane, and Vicus qui ducit ad veterem Gayolam. For the composition made in the yeare 1326. between those Friers, and the then Parson of St George (whereof more hereafter) bounds out their seate in this manner. In pa∣rochia St Georgii Cant. Iuxta quandam venellam vocat' Brew∣erslane, viz. inter praed. venellam, & tenementum Thomae de Bonynton versus North, & quendum locum vocat' Eald-gaole, & tenementum Ceciliae at Gayole vers. West &c. To which adde the boundary of the house, then of the Monks of
Christ-Church, now the dwelling house of Mr Peter Piard and some others, which in the same records is thus laid downe. Inter Regiam stratam versus North, & veterem Gayolam vers. South. This note added to the former plain∣ly points out the situation. And now in callem regredior, hoping this digression is neither in point of Antiquity impertinent, nor in point of method preposterous, being ushered in by so fit an oc∣casion. Our forefathers, whose wits the frequency of in∣vasion prompted to all manner of warlike invention, used to secure their City-gates against assailants, not onely with a Port-close to let downe before it, but also with a warlike device built over it, through which they could let downe any offensive thing against the enemy approch∣ing to assaile it. A Gate so fortified was called Porta ma∣checollata, from machecollare, or machecoulare, which (saith my Auther Coke upon Litton. lib. 1. cap. 1. Sect. 1. pag 5.) is to make a warlike device over a Gate or other passage like to a Grate, through which scalding water, or ponderous or offensive things may be cast upon the assailants. Thus he. After this manner were and are our two principall Gates built, this of Westgate, and in imi∣tation thereof that of Newingate, with each of them a Port-close, like as Burgate: now to Northgate. This Gate stands under apart of Saint Maries Church, Ngate. which is built over it upon the Wall, and to distinguish it from the other Maries of the City, hath this addition from the situation (of Northgate). Under the Quire or Chan∣cell whereof is a Vault, with an open space or lope-hole in the Wall fashioned like a Crosse. It was sometime an Hermitage, but is now belonging to the Parsonage. Come we now to Queningate. But where shall we seeke it? Thereis none of the name at this day, and few know Queningate. where it stood. I sought as narrowly for it as for Ants∣paths, and at length having found it will shew you where it was. It stood against the Priory of Christ Church, saith
our Wall-measurer, distanced from Northgate (saith he) 69. perches, but saith an Elder record of Christ Church, 71. perches. By these descriptions it must needs have stood neare the place of the now Posterne-gate, against St Augustines. And indeed a remanent of British brickes laid and couched Arch-wise at a place in the Wall, a little North-ward of the Posterne, showes the very place. A small Gate it was (Parva porta de Queningate, saith Ickham;) but I will assure you a very ancient one, as not onely the Bricks-betoken, but the records of Saint Augustine prove it, which tell that one Domwaldus (as I told you on a for∣mer occasion) gave to that Abby certaine land within Queningate. The very name hath antiquity in it, signify∣ing the King or Queenes gate, being haply Ethelbert and his Queene Bertha their passage from their Palace neare adjoyning to the severall places of their divers devotions: the one (if Thorne say true) at Saint Pancrace (so after∣wards called;) the other at Saint Martin, whereof more hereafter In S. August.. Where the Church or Chappell stood, that had it name from this Gate, being called Saint Mary of Queningate, St. Mary of Queningate Church. I cannot well tell. That such a Church it had, is most cer∣taine. I trace it in many records (some 450 yeares old and more) of Christ-Church, which had the Patronage of that and Saint Michael of Burgate, confirmed to them in and by a Bull of Pope Alex. 3. and in many like Buls since. The Parson thereof in the yeare 1381. as those re∣cords informe me, made an exchange of it and Burgate to which it was an annexed Chap. for Portpole Chantery in Pauls. This being certaine, it is no lesse sure that it stood not farre from the Gate, by the name of it; yet not very neare, it is like, because the bounders of the City-Wall and ground under it, betweene Northgate and Quenin∣gate, and betweene it and Burgate, granted to Christ-Church, neither of them mention it: and Ickhams
measurement saith Queningate stood versus Prioratum ecclesiae Christi, not versus, nor juxta ecclesiam or capellam de Quening. I must leave it, untill I am better instructed where to finde it. And so I have done with both Wall and Gates, and come now unto (my next Particular) the Ci∣ty-Ditch. Only let me but name unto you the Posternes, which (as erewhile I told you) were three. One against Posternes. Saint Augustine, a second at Saint Mildreds, and the third by the Sconce running from Abbats-Mill. Of what antiquity this Ditch is (I confesse) I cannot well tell. In the Survey of our City in Doomsday Booke, Ditch about the City how ancient. I meet with Fossatum Civitatis, but in what sense I doe not well know. For whether the City-Ditch be there inten∣ded, or some siege rather or beleaguering of the City (for that sense the word Fossatum also carries:) it is to me some question. Eleven of those Burgeses (saith Doomsday) that were in Canterbury in the Confessors time, Vastati sunt in Fossato Civitatis. If it had beene said eleven Burgeses houses or mansions were so laid wast, it had beene some∣what plaine. It might have beene supposed their Vasta∣tion had beene to make way for the Ditch. But you see what the words are. Either there is a figure in them, or the Ditch is not so old. If so old, neglected afterwards. For Queene Alianor's letters before presented, speake of fortifying the City, not onely muris, but fossatis too, as in want of both. This our Ditch (it seemes) was originally of a great Breadth of  Ditch. breadth, 150. foot over, as I find by the records of a suite commenced by the City against Archbishop Peckham, in the reigne of Ed. 1. the 18. yeare, who charging upon the Archbishop (but erroneously, the Jury finding it not his, but his Tenents fact) for incroching upon the City-ditch, and streightning of it with houses built upon it a∣bout Westgate, to the Cities great damage and annoy∣ance, in regard that the River running through that part
of the ditch, many times overflowed the banks, to the great detriment of the Town-wall, make challenge to a ditch of 150 foot broad in these words. Praeterea dicunt quòd ubi Dominus Rex habere debet & antecessores sui habere consueverunt fossatum circuens murum Civitatis praed. quod quidem fossatum debet continere extra murum illum centum & quinquaginta pedes latitudinis &c. A breadth which the Liber Camerae) atis Cant. present ditch, I think, in no part shews. But no marvell; for, as the wall, so the ditch too is in these dayes much negle∣cted. Little more then halfe the wall is now in-ditched, the rest being either swerved, or else filled up, and in ma∣ny parts builded upon; nay, the wall it self in some places easily scalable, what with piles and stacks of wood in some, what with housing and the like in other parts of it; a thing fatall unto some by the fall of the wall (Robert Quilter, De∣nis Tiler and Ioane London, being killed by the fall of a part of the wall in Ridingate-ward, as they sate in the said Ioanes house Crown-rolls. Anno 17. Ed. 1. (and both very unseemly and dangerous also for the City. What sayes the Civil law in this case? Aedisi∣cia (the words of the law) quae vulgò parapetasia nuncupant, vel siqua alia opera moenibus vel publicis operibus ita sociata co∣haerent, ut ex iis incendium vel insidias vicinitas reformidet, aut angustentur spatia platearum, vel minuat' porticibus la∣titudo, dirui ac prosterni praecipimus, &c. Aedisicium 13 deoperibus publicis. Pooeium. Every well contrived city should have a Pomoerium. And what is that? The law Lexicon shall tell you. Pomoerium lo∣cus erat, tam intrà, quam extra murum urbis, quem antiqui in condendis urbibus augurato consecrabant, neque in eo ullum fieri aedificium patiebantur Calvini Lexi∣con in verb. Po∣moerium. &c. Felinus the Canonist more suc∣cinctly defines it thus. Pomoerium (saith he) est locus ad in∣tra & extra, quo aedificare non licet DER scriptis c. Rodulphus num. 23.. But what respect we a Pomoerium? were it a Pomoerium, haply it would be better lookt unto. Witnesse the so much planting of the ditch in divers parts. What a shame is it for us in the mean time, that a little profit should banish all our care in this kinde,
and to see the greedinesse of a small advantage to bee a meanes (as it is) to betray the City at once both to danger and deformity? But I may forbeare Censure: for I despaire of its regard in these dayes, wherein Meum and Tuum, the private profit of some few, is with too many more conside∣rable then bonum & interesse publicum, the common good of many; which if it finde any regard, it is but base and secundary, like that of Vertue, post nummos. So much for the Ditch. The Castle. COme we now to the Castle, to which our passage from the City lay of old by a Bridge, and beyond that a Castle-gae and Bridge. faire Gate built at the entrance of the Castle-yard or Court, which I will prove unto you by an ancient deed recorded in the Lieger Booke of Estbridge Hospitall, concerning a piece of land lying (saith the deed) in the parish of St Mary-Castle: juxta Ianuam Castri ad caput pontis ex parte West. Af∣terward in the same deed thus described. Inter Regiam stra∣tam versus Est, & fossam dicti Castri versus South, & quan∣dam placeam terrae pertinent' ad ecclesiam beatae Mariae de Ca∣stro praedict' vers. North, &c. This Gate had it usuall Porter or Keeper. For I read that one William Savage, Ianitor Por∣tae Castri Cant. was questioned for taking the daughter of Hamon Trendherst, vi & armis, ex opposito Castri Cant. in Cant. and carrying her into the Castle, and there holding her eight dayes and upwards Crowne-Rolles. A. 15. Ed. 2.. To approach nearer to the Castle it selfe, whose entrance (seemingly) was by an ascent of Steps porcht over on the Castles Anti∣quity. West-side. Some there are will tell you that Iulius Caesar; other that Rudhudibras, or Ludrudibras, long before built it. You may beleeve them if you please. For my part I sub∣scribe herein to Mr Cambdens opinion. It carries (saith he) no shew of any great antiquity Britannia. In Kent., and very probably. For in all the sieges of our City, and the harrowing and sack∣ing of it by the Danes, at large related by our Historians,
especially that most remarkable (because most lamentable) one in King Etheldreds time, copiously storied by Roger Hoveden, and our Countryman Spott, telling us first of the siege of the City, with the continuance of it, the trea∣chery by which the enemy surprised it, and diverse other particulars thereof; what is there of any Castle, but altum silentium? It was builded by the Normans, saith Mr Camb∣den. Indeed both hee and Speed Hist. in vita Conquest. informe us, that the Conquerour, for his better subduing and bridling of the Britannia. In Cambridgeshire. suspected parts of the Kingdome, builded Castles at such places, namely at Cambridge, Lincolne, Nottingham, Staf∣ford, and elsewhere. A piece of policy, which I finde pra∣ctised abroad. In Marchia Brandeburgensi, cum Cives Berli∣nenses in suum tumultuarentur Magistratum, Fridericus Mar∣chio interveniens, imposuit urbi arcem frenum libertatis Tholosanus de Repub. lib. 2. cap. 5. num. 3.. Might not this be one of the Castles so built by the Con∣querour? I conceive not: for I take it to bee somewhat, but yet not much elder. Because it appeares by Doomsday-Booke, that the Conquerour had this Castle by exchange made with the Archbishop, and the Abbot of St Augustines; who had for it, the latter 14. the former 7. Burgenses. I suppose it built in the interim of the Danish massacre, and the Norman conquest. Cleerely Doomsday Booke hath it; but before, it occurres not any where. Shortly after (as I finde) certaine of the Monke of St Augustine, quitting the Abbey in the broyle betweene Archbishop Lanfranc and them, about Guido or Wido the 42. Abbat, sheltered them∣selves under, or within this Castle. For, of them some for their rebellion being committed to the City Prison, by Lanfranc's command, nunciatum est ei caeteros abire jussos sub Castro (ad ecclesiam St Miltrudis posito) consedisse Antiq. Britan. in vita Lanfran∣ci. pag. 114.. The next thing that I read of it is, that Lewis the French Dolphin (Stow is my Author) arriving in the Ile of Thanet, and afterward at Sandwich, and landing his forces, without re∣sistance, comes to Canterbury where he reeived both Ca∣stle and City into his subjection Stow. Annals in King Iohn. Common pri∣son in the Ca∣stle,. Within this Castle in former time there was a common
Prison kept. For proofe whereof I could muster up many Testimonies from records of good credit. But because tradition keepes it yet in memory with some, one shall suffice, which I have from the Crowne-Rols. Evasio (saith the Record) Walteri de Wedering, & Martini at Gate de Lamberherst. Prisones Domini Regis in Castro Cant. sederunt ligati in quodam loco vocat' Barbican juxta idem Castrum pro pane suo mendicando. Contigit quòd die Martis in Carnisprivio A•. R. R. Ed. Fil. Reg. Ed. ante occasum Solis, praedictus Walterus fregit seruram cathenae cum qualigatus fuit, & attrax∣it secum praedictum Martinum contra voluntatem ipsius Mart. ad ecclesiam beatae Mariae de Castro, ubi remansit & abjuravit Regnum Angliae, & praed. Mart. rediit in prisonam ex bona voluntate. The Prison continued here a long time after, even (as I take it) untill the ordinary passage through the Castle-yard, by making up the further Gate, was debarred, to the end in likelihood the better to secure the Castle. Which was done (some say) upon Wiats rising in Queene Maries dayes; others, upon a former insurrection in Ed. 6. time, called the Common-wealth; but I thinke before them both, because I meet with the Prison by Saint Iacobs, whither (it seemes) the Castle-prison was removed in Hen. 8. time: divers of our Townesmen about that time, di∣stributing their Testamentory, or dying almes, incarceratis prope locum St Iacobi. It had yet a second remove, and that even in our memory, to Westgate-street, where it conti∣nues. A few words now of the Barbcan, and I shall have done with the Castle. The Castle, it seemes, ad majorem cautelam (as the Civi∣lian Barbican. speakes) for the more security both of it and the City was anciently fore-fenced with a Barbican or Barbacan. Which exotick word S. H. Spelman  in verb. Barbaca thus interprets. Barba∣can (saith he) munimem à fronte Castri, alter antemurale dictum; etiam for amen in urbium Castrorumque moeniis ad traji∣cienda : necnon specula, & locus ubi excubiae aguntur. vox Arabica. So he, Minshew thus. A Barbican (saith hee) or out-nook in a wall, with holes to shoote out at the enemy. Dictionar.  hac voce.
Some take it for a Sentinell-house, a Scout-house. Chaucer useth the word Barbican for a Watch-to wer. Of the Saxon Ber-ic-ken. i. I ken or see the Borough, &c. Here I will briefely prove unto you two things. 1. That there was Barbican. 2. The place where it stood. In a record of the City Chamber, shewing how the Fee-ferme of the City in Hen. 3. time was to be raised, occurres the name of the Barbican, in these words. De Barbicane, 5s. qui debentur in comp'to super S'ccum. I finde also in the elder Rentals of Christ-Church, frequent mention of it, as a boundary to certaine of the Churches Demesnes lying neare it without Worthgate, in these or the like words. Extra Worgate juxta fossatum del Bayle, sed nunc Barbecan appellatur: and the like. Now that it was, is plaine enough. The place where it was, comes next to be inquired. I have seene a record of the 6. of Ed. 2. purporting that the City-Coroner coming to doe his office upon the dead Body of a murdered servant of the Prior of Christ-Church: he was not permitted, but the body being conveyed to the Barbecan, extra Castrum Cant. was there set upon and searched by a forreigne Co∣roner. Now it must of necessity follow that this place where the inquest was taken (the Barbecan) was without the Cities liberty: but there is not neare the Castle any place, save the Castle-yard, that is so. The Record (if you please to see it) is extant in my Appendix, pag. 298. The Castle-yard, and Wall then now much impaired with age; but sometimes set with divers Watch-towers, foure at least, and which was otherwise called the Bulwarke, being the fore-fence to the Castle, was undoubtedly the Barbican, or the place and structure, which former ages knew and called by that name. I collect and conclude it also from that of Fossatum del Bayle, &c. which cannot otherwise be under∣stood then of the Ditch about the Castle-yard-wall, which (untill of late that the piece of Wall was made betweene Winchep-gate and it at the one side, and the like at the other) compassed the same. Now for the better under∣standing of the use and condition of this military structure,
I referre you to Stowes Survey of London, pag. 62. where he speaks of the like somtime standing without Creeple-gate. And now I come to the River. One commendation that our City hath (and worthily) from Malmesbury, De gestis Pon∣tific. lib. 1. in Prologo. is the Rivers watering of it. This River we call Stoure, as did our Ancestors long ages. Inter gemi∣nales Rivos fluminis quod dicitur Stour, are the words of a Codicill or Landboc of King Cenulph the Mercian made to the Archbishop, and his Monkes of Christ-Church, Anno Domini 814 In archivis Ec∣cles. Cant.. Long before this, a Charter of Edric King of Kent, in Anno Domini 686. made to the Abby of Saint Augustine, giving certaine land in Stodmersh, mentioneth this River, bounding out the same to lye one way to a place called Ford-street, and on the other part to have Flumen quod nominatur Stur Thorne In vitis Abb. S. Aug.. And yet more anciently oc∣curres the name. For Sturrey which takes it name from this River running by it, is by that name together with Chiste∣let, granted by King Ethelbert himselfe (his Charter tels me so) to St Augustine. What the name signifies, or whence it was taken, certain∣ly River whene called Stour. I know not. Haply from the constant and continuall stirring and swift course or motion of it, to difference it from standing waters, whence probably the Britain name of the City, Durwhern. i. a swift river, or else from Store, for the plenty of water, and the many streames falling into it: as the river Stura, arising in the Alpes, one of the 30. which of the river Po are carried into the Adriatick Sea, whereof Plinie speaks, lib. 3. c. 16. is vulgarly called Store. Certes Stour is a name taken up, and given it since the Britains time. For Dur or Dour was with them the common name for all waters Cambd. Britannia. In Dorsshire pag. 209. Engl. edi∣tion. Antiq. Brit. pag. 34., (whence, as erewhile you heard, our Cities name of Durobernia and Dorob. and I take it, the name of Do∣ver sprang) as haply Stour was with the Saxons for all great∣er rivers. Dour or Stour, saith Hollinshead speaking of the Cam∣bridge river, as if they were all one, or that the latter were the proper name for that river to which the former had been given. I can but rove at uncertainties, and therefore quit the point.
For the sourse and course of this river I referre you to Hollinshead Chronicle fol 20. & Lambert Prambul. of Kent., who will copiously herein give you satisfaction. Commoditie hath ever her opposites atten∣dance. The great commoditie and conveniency of our Ci∣ties plantation by this river is attended by and with the dis∣commoditie and annoyance of inundation. But our Ance∣stors, the Cities first Incolae, weighed not the inconvenience of the one, for the benefit and accommodation of the other. And it is an inconvenience in these dayes scarcely considerable, because seldome happening; or that can hap∣pen in regard the City lies higher now then at thefirst, having in all parts of itbeen much raised at severall times, as cellar-diggers, and such like, who are much hindred in their work by old foundations which they meet with in their digging, daily finde: occasioned (as I conceive) by the many vastations of the City in the Danes time, and lastly about the yeare of our Lord 1160. by casuall fire. The greatest channell of this our river, ran anciently through the middest of the City, to the Kings-mill. For I finde Archbishop Pickham charged by the Citizens with the diverting of it, by certain cuts or trenches, for the bet∣tering of his mill at Westgate: which the Jury found to have been done before partly in Archb. Kilwarby, and partly in Archb. Boniface times Liber Camerae Civitatis.. The channell to Westgate then (it seems) became inlarged. But the first division of the stream was not then made. For, that Stour had it course that way much more anciently then those times, is most cleare. For I finde it to give name in the Conq. time, to the Archbishops Mannor, since and at this day called Westgate (from the situation of it neare that gate:) but then, from the standing of it by the Stour-side, Stour-seat, the seat by the Stour; as that other part of her divided chan∣nell gave name to the street it runs by, called to this day Stourstree, that is, the street by or nigh the Stour. The accommodation of the City by the scowring and Projects for the Rivers in∣largement hi∣therto fru∣strate. inlargement of this river hath been a thing at severall times attempted, but sine fructu, or without successe worthy the
designe. About the beginning of Hen. 8. reigne it was pro∣jected to have made that part of the river between Ford∣wich and Canterbury answerable to Fordw. river, that is, so to have cleansed, deepned and inlarged it, that lighters and boats might be brought to both alike. The matter procee∣ded so farre, and with such probabilitie of a good issue, that the project was allowed and authorised by act of Parlia∣ment 5 Hen. 8. c. 17., of this tenor (which I here insert verbatim and at large, because, being private, the ordinary edition of the Statutes doth not affoord it.) IN most humble wise shewing the Kings Hignesse his true and faithfull Subjects, the Maior, Aldermen, Citizens Act. of Parlia∣ment about it. and inhabitants of the City of Canterbury, that where the said Canterb. one of the most anci∣ent Cities of England. City is one of the ancient Cities of this Realm, and through the same hath been and yet is great recourse of Embassa∣dours, & other strangers from the parties of beyond the sea, where also the bodies of the holy Confessor and Bishop of S. Austin the Apostolike of England, and also many other holy Saints been honourably humate and shrined, is now of late in great ruine and decay, and the inhabitants thereof impoverished, and many great mansions in the same deso∣late; which ruine, decay and desolation, of like cannot be reformed, ne amended, unlesse the river that goeth and ex∣tendeth from the town of great Chart in the Countie of Kent to the said Citie, and through and fro the said Citie unto the haven of Sandwitch, may be so deeped, inlarged, & of mils & dams, and other annoiances, now being in & over∣thwart the same river, between the said Citie and the com∣mon crane in the town of Fordwitch, be avoided, scowred, and taken away: which river between the said Citie and crane, containeth in length two miles, so that carriages by lighters and boats may by the said river be conveied be∣tween the said crane in the said town of Fordwitch, unto the said City, which deeping, inlarging and scowring of the said river, as is before said, shall not be onely to the profit and availe of the said Citie, and inhabitants of the same, but
also shall cause the haven of the town and port of Sandwitch to be deeper and larger, to the great commoditie of great number of the Kings Subjects: in consideration whereof it may please the King, with the assent of the Lords spirituall and temporall, and the Commons in this present Parlia∣ment assembled, and by the authoritie of the same, to enact and establish that the said Maior, Aldermen, Citizens and inhabitants of the said Citie, and their successours, with the advise, assent and agreement aswell of the Reverend Father in God William Archbishop of Canterbury, or his suc∣cessors, and of two or three Knights being Justices of peace of the shire of Kent, for the time being, as of the Maior of the town and port of Sandwitch aforesaid, to the said work, at the request of the said Maior of the said Citie for the time being, desired and called, may lawfully at all and every time hereafter, in such places of the said river, as to the said Knights, Maiors, and Aldermen shall seem conve∣nient, deep, inlarge, cleanse, inhance and scowre, and cause to be deeped, inlarged and cleansed the said river, with all things thereunto requisite, between the said town of Chart, and the said Citie, and through the same, and fro the said City unto the said crane, in such manner as lighters and boats may have by the same river their full passage and course for carriage by the same to be conveied, and with∣out let, interruption, impeachment, disturbance or deniall of any person or persons. And after such deeping, inlar∣ging, inhancing, cleansing, scowring (as is before said) done, the said Maior, Aldermen, Citizens and inhabitants of the said Citie, with the assent and consent (as is before said) obtained, may lawfully aswell stop ditches, and make and inhance bayes, brinks, dams, and walls, for the advan∣cing and inhighing of the said river, as to take down, abate, and put away all mills, bridges, dams, walls, and other what∣soever impediment lying over or overthwart the said river, between the said town of great Chart to the said Citie, and through the same, and fro the said Citie to the foresaid common crane, and other things thereunto requisite,
whereby the concourse of the said lighters and boats should be letted: and that no action nor suit therefore be maintain∣able, or to be had against the said Maior, Aldermen, Citi∣zens, and inhabitants, or any of them, or their Assignes, for the premisses or any of them in manner aforesaid. Provided alwayes, that every person that shall be damni∣fied by putting away or abating of his mill; bridge or dam, or mils, bridges or dams, shall be reasonably satisfied there∣fore, for such damages, as he or they shall have by reason of the same, by the said Maior, Aldermen, Citizens, and in∣habitants of the said Citie, and their successors, as the said Archbish. of Canterbury that now is, or his successors, and the said Knights shall award, consider and adjudge. Execution, which is said to be the life of laws, was wanting here. This law, this Statute-law (it seems) was never so inlivened. For notwithstanding this faire way made, I can∣not tell by what infortunacy, nothing was done to any pur∣pose at that time. Too likely it is that the difference be∣tween the Archbish. and the City, as it diverted him from building here, what he built at Lambert Per∣amb. of Kent. in Otford. Otford, a stately Palace, did the mischief, and nipt the project in the bud, so that it came to nothing then, as neither did the like project after∣wards. For albeit it was revived, and in part put in practise with hopes of good successe, through the great further∣ance of one Mr Rose an Alderman, and sometime Maior of the City, in the late Queens time, who was an especiall be∣nefactor to the work while he lived, and dying ere the per∣fection of it, but well hoping it would be accomplish'd, by his will In Registr Consistorii Cant., gave 300 libr. towards it (a most pious act:) yet not being so well followed as behooved, through whose default I know not, succeeded now little better then be∣fore. It is now a third time undertaken, and by the good endeavours of industrious men in that forward, as not un∣likely to succeed: Gods blessing be upon the enterprise, and in due time crown it with perfection. Is qui principio medium, medio adjice finem.
I have no more to say of our River in this place, onely a Mills upon the River. word or two of the mills standing by or upon it, in and about the City, which are now but few in number, onely 5. 1. Kings-mill. 2. Abbats-mill. 3. Westgate-mill. 4. Shaf∣fords-mill. 5. Barton-mill: whereas about King Stephen's time, I finde Liber ecclesiae Cant., that besides these miles, were 7. other stand∣ing all upon this river, in or not farre from the City; and belonged to the Monks of Christ-Church, whereof the Cellerar of the place had the charge: to wit, the mill at Sa∣meletes ford (now vulgarly Shanford) Gudwoldsmeln, Mune∣chemeln, Hottesmeln, Crinesmeln, and the mills of Saliford, (now Shulford) and S. Mildreth. All which mills (I take it) are long since down, and so quite gone (except that of Shanford) that it is scarce known where they stood, nor hath Christ-Church any one mill left her at this day. Touching these quondam mills of the Church, I finde in their records letters of Hen. 2. written at the suit and in the behalf of the Monks, and directed Praepositis Cant. of this tenor. viz. Vt omnia molendina infra Civitatem & extra admensuren∣tur. atttemperentur, sicut fuerunt tempore Reg. Hen. avi mei. Et ea quae levata alti∣ùs sunt postea ad damnum Monachorum Cant. ad eam mensuram ad quam erant tempore Regis Hen. 1. demittantur, ut molendina Ecclesiae Christi ita bene & plenariè molere possint, sicut molebant temp Reg. Hen. & damnum quod indè Monachi habuerunt justè eis restaurari faciatis ab illis per quos damnum contigit, & nisi fe∣ceritis Vicecomes meus de Kent faciat fieri, nè in amplius clamo∣rem audiam pro penuria pleni Recti, &c. But leaving these, let me speak of the present mills. As for the first, Kings-mill. It was and is so called because Kingsmill. it sometimes was the Kings: and was otherwise called both Eastbridge-mill, and Kingsbridge-mill, from the neare si∣tuation of it to that bridge. Thorne In vitis Ab∣bat. S. Aug. the Chronicler of S. Augustines reports that King Stephen, being in a great straight at Lincoln, where he was surprised and taken priso∣ner by Robert Earle of Glocester, and put to a great fine for his ransome; towards his relief in that necessity, borrow∣ed of Hugh, the 2. of that name, Abbat of S. Augustine,
one hundred marks, and in consideration thereof, by his charter, gave to the monastery this mill. The effect of which Charter (saith he) was this. Stephanus Rex Angliae Archie∣pisc. Episc. Abbatibus, &c. salutem. Sciatis quòd pro salute animae meae &c. dedi & concessi Deo & ecclesiae S. Augustini molendinum quod habui infra Civitatem Cantuar. juxta East∣brigge, & totum cursum aquae illius molendini in restaurationem vadimonii centum marc arum quas ego pro necessitate mea ab ea∣dem ecclesia cepi, praesentibus Baronibus meis; quare volo & fir∣miter praecipio, quod praefata ecclesia S. Aug. teneat & habeat praedict molendinum cum omnibus eid' pertinentibus ad serviti∣um altaris illius ecclesiae, ita bene & in pace liberè & quietè & honorificè sicut ego aut aliquis Rex praedecessorum meorum meliùs liberiùs & quietiùs tenuit &c. From thenceforth the Abbey enjoyed the mill untill the time of Abbat Clarembald, who made it over to King Hen. 2. whereof the same author hath these words savouring of his dislike of the act. Et nota quòd istud molendinum per Clarembaldum superiùs nominatum, cum aliis rebus & possessionibus per eum nequiter distractis Domino Regi Henrico & successoribus suis alienatum, & ad opus suae Ci∣vitatis rehabitum. Iste tamen Hen. Rex ad recompensationem hujus injuriae isti Monasterio multas libertates scribitur conces∣sisse, &c. Afterwards when the City was granted in Fee∣ferme to the Bailiffs, by Hen. 3. this mill, as parcell, was Vbi supra ex∣pressely included in the grant. Whereof the same Thorne hath this note. Concessit (saith he) idem Rex Henricus istis temporibus Civitatem suam Cantuar. civibus ejusdem, sub gubernaculo duorum Ballivorum regendam, ad feodi firmam lx. librar. ad errarium suum annuatim solvend. cum omnibus con∣suetudinibus ad eand. Civitat. pertinent' cum molendino de East∣brigge, vel aliter Kingsmill dictum. Et hîc nota quòd praed' molendinum per Stephanum Regem ecclesiae beati Aug. ut dict' est extitit datum, per Clarembaldum intrusorem Henrico Regi tum Anglorum alienatum, & à successoribus Regibus adopus Ci∣vitatis injuriosè detentum, & per istum Hen. praed' Civibus unà cum Burgo in forma praedicta resignatum. Thus he. In a cause of tithes brought by the Parson of All-Saints,
against the miller of this mill; I finde Lib. Eccles. Christ. Cant. the miller brought to his answer. Who, requisitus an fuerat Firmarius dicti mo∣lendini, dixit quòd non, sed fatetur ipsum fore servientem Ma∣jorum Civitatis Cantuar. per eos ibid. deputatum. Item requisi∣tus, fatetur quòd omnes pistores villae totum bladum pro albo pane faciend. debent molere sine tollo, vel receptione aliqua in blado vel alio modo. Item oneratur, & fatetur, quòd de farina bladi pisto∣rum pro pane nigro, debent solvere pro mulctura tollum. Item omnes alii ibid.—The rest is wanting. This suit happened in the yeare 1366. however this pas∣sage of it mentions the Maiors of the City, which came not into being, by name, untill almost a 100. yeares after. Since these times, the case is altered with this mill. For (I take it) the City bakers of these dayes, neither are tied to grinde their corn at this mill (as by this note they seem to be:) nor yet have any such priviledge of grinding at that mill toll∣free, as then, for white bread. I have but one thing more to acquaint you with touching this mil. And it is that one Wil∣liam Bennet a Citizen and an Alderman of Cant. about the yeare 1462. in his will, appoints his executours to buy 300 foot of Asheler or Folk-stone to make a wharfe about the Kings mill Lib. Testamen∣tor. pes regist. Domini Arhi∣d a Cantuar.. I come now to Abbats-Mill, the next upon the Streame Abbats-Mill. to Kings-Mill. It was called so because it did heretofore belong to the Abbey of St Augustine. Whereof I finde men∣tion in King Stephens time. For then (as Thorne In vitis Abb. St Augustini. hath it) Hugh, the second of the name, Abbat of the place, distin∣guishing or setting out the offices of the Monastery: Mo∣lendinum de Abbottestnelle quod ipsemet proprio labore adqui∣sivit, ad Sacristiam deputavit, hac interposita conditione, ut tota annona Curiae scil. Aug. ibidem liberè absque thelonio mo∣latur, decimam praedict. molendini elemosinariae scil. Aug. sol∣vatur, residuum quoque profectus illius molendini in usus sacri∣stiae convertatur. This Mill is now the Townes. I passe next to Westgate-mill. A very old one. Dooms∣day-Booke Westgate-Mill. mentions it as the Archbishops: but then in the hands of the Canons of St Greg. The Tithe of it was by
Archbishop Hubert in King Iohns time, granted (amongst other things) to the Hospitall of Eastbridge, and that grant was confirmed by the Prior and Covent of Christ-Church Lib. Hosp. de Estbridge.. It is (the Mill) since returned to the Archbishopricke, and continues a parcell of the demeasnesse of the same. As for Shaffords-mill; 'tis but little I can say of it: yet Shaffords-Mill. I take it to be that, which I finde anciently. i. about Rich. 1. time called Scepeshotesmelne. Extra Westgate ab aquilonari parte versus Scepeshotesmelne, as in a deed of Eastbridge. The composition between the Prior and Canons of St Greg. Parsons of Holy crosse of Westgate, and the then Vicar in the yeare 1347. cals it molendinum de Shefford, and in ex∣presse words reserves the Tithes thereof from the Vicar to themselves Vide Composit, pag.; which clearely shewes it to be a tithable Mill, and not within the exemption of the Stat. of 9. Ed. 2. Cap. 5. Barton-mill was sometimes, and that ab antiquo belon∣ging Barton-Mill. to Christ-Church, where the Monkes Corne was ground for their owne spending within the Court. But it is now alienated, and so hath been ever since the Dissolution. So much for the Milles. And now have I done with the River. Onely let not my silence smother, or suppresse that due praise and commendation well knowne to appertaine unto it, for (what, but for the common pochers it would much more abound with) the plenty of singular good fish, which it breeds and yeelds of divers sorts, Trouts especi∣ally; whereof those at Fordwich beare away the bell, a place of note (as Cambden saith) in that respect. Fordwich Trouts. According to my proposed method, coming now to the Suburbs: my Survey thereof shall take beginning at the East part; and therein at Saint Augustines. Concerning which I will limit my discourse, to these two heads or par∣ticulars.
1. The first foundation and following estate of it. 2. A Survey of the present Remaines of it. FOr the first. Augustine the Monke, the Apostle of the 1. Particular. English, (as the ancient Charters of the Abbey call him) Pope Gregory the Great's Nuncio, his Alumnus, com∣ming over hither with this com-monachall associates, and being admitted first into the presence, and eftsoones into the favour of Ethelbert (the This is meant of the Saxons, who entred this Kingdome, and were formerly Idolaters: but the Britaines were Christi∣ans almost from the time of our Savi∣ours death, and so they conti∣nued, though at this time, li∣ving with their Bishops in the remote parts of this Iland of Britainy. first Christian Kentish King. Rex Ethelbertus inter Reges Anglorum Christicola primus, as it is in the bordure of the Quire-hangings of Christ-Church:) and having by his and his fellow-labourers preaching, both by life and doctrine, with Gods co-operating Grace, at length wrought his conversation to Christianity, was so well affected and thankfully handled of him, that, for reward of his service, amongst many favours, he obtained of the King his Patron, a certaine piece of ground on the East part of the City of Cant. Whereon afterwards, with the Kings helpe, he built this Abbey, dedicated when so first founded to the blessed Apostles, Peter and Paul, and so knowne a while, but afterward not (as Lambert Peramb. of Kent. in Cant. will) onely in memory of his benefit; but from the new dedication of it by Archbishop Dunstan, in honore Sanctorum Apostolorum Petri & Pauli, sanctique Augustini, in the yeare 978 Thorne. In vitis Abb. St Augu∣stini.: from thence (I say) his being added to the former Tutelars, and after that, untill the dissolution, called St Augustines. It may not be forgotten that one maine end of setting apart this Suburbian plot of ground, and of the erecting the Abbey upon it, (according to the meaning of both Ethel. and August.) was that it should be a common Sepul∣chre both for them and their successors, as well in the King∣dome, as in the Archbishopricke, for ever after. For it was not then, nor long after, the manner to bury within Vnlawfulnesse of buriall with∣in Cities. Cities (the City being a place not for the dead but the li∣ving, as it is in a Charter of Ethelb. which shall follow a∣none:) and it being a thing defended. i. forbidden to bury
Anno Dni MCCXL istud altare de dicat. in honorē Aplor Pet. et Pauli et sci Augustim v. kal. Nou. An. Dni MCCC XXV. istud altare dedic. fuit in honore Apost. Pet. et Pau. Sci Augustini Anglor Apli et Sci Aethelberti Regis kal. Marc. à Petro Epo Corhaniensi Place. between pag. 46. & 47
within Cities by the law of the 12. Tables: Hominem mortuum infra urbem ne sepelito, neve urito. A law (it seemes) standing till then; and long after in force here, yet more for the reason sake of it (as I conceive) fitting it to all Na∣tions, which was the prevention of fire by burning, and other annoyance by burying the carcasse within the City, then as being any otherwise a binding law to this kingdome, long before deserted by the Romanes, and no way now dependent on that Empire, or in subjection to it. The further discovery of this Abbeys foundation and originall; I leave to you to make and take (if you please) from the ensuing transcripts of the Founders Charters, foure in number, whereof the three former are of Ethel∣bert, and the other of Augustine, closed and fenced (as you shall see, according to the manner of former times) with such solemne and dreadfull imprecations upon the violaters of their Piety; that (if the Charters themselves prove true and not counterfeit, as some suspect them) I for my part (how light soever some doe, and will make of them) would tremble to be lyable unto, for all the good, for all the gaine, were it neare so much, that might accrew unto me by intermedling. But to the Charters, which I have taken from Reyners Copy, in his Apostolatus Benedictinorum, writing of this Monastery. Char. 1. IN nomine Domini nostri Iesu Christi: omnem hominem qui secundum Deum vivit, & remunerari à Deo sperat, & optat, oportet ut piis precibus consensum hilariter ex animo praebeat; quoniam certum est, tantò faciliùs ea, quae ipse à Deo poposcerit, consequi posse: quantò et ipse libentiùs Deo aliquid concesserit. Quocirca ego Ethelbertus Rex Cantiae, cum consensu venera∣bilis Archiepiscopi Augustini ac Principum meorum, dono & Donalio situ Abbatiae. concedo Deo in honorem sancti Petri aliquam partem terrae Iuris mei, quae jacet in oriente civitatis Doroberniae, ita duntaxat ut Monasterium ibi construatur, & res quae infra memorantur in potestate Abbatis sint qui ibi fuerit ordinatus. Igitur adjuro & praecipio in nomine Dei omnipotentis, qui est omnium rerum
Iudex Iustus, ut praefataterra subscripta donatione sempit enali∣ter sit consirmata, it a ut nec mihi nec alicui successorum meorum Regum aut Principum, sive cujuslibet conditionis dignitatibus & ecclesiasticis gradibus de ea aliquid fraudare liceat. Si quis Imprecatio. verò de hac donatione nostra aliquid minuere, aut irritum facere temptaverit: sit in praesente separatus à sancta communione corporis & sanguinis Christi: & in die judicii ob meritum malitiae Metae Abba∣tiae. suae à consortio sanctorum omnium segregatus. Circumcincta est haec terra his terminis, in Oriente ecclesia sancti Martini, in meridie via de Burgate, in Occidente & Aquilone Drouting∣street. Datum in civitate Doroberniae, anno ab incarnatione Christi. 605. indict. 6. •. Ego Ethelbertus Rex Cantiae sana mente integroque consilio donationem meam signo crucis propria manu roboravi confirmavique. Ego Augustinus gratia Dei Archiepiscopus testis consentiens libenter subscripsi. Edbaldus. Hamigisibus. Augemundus Referendarius. Hocca Tangil. Pin∣ca. Geddy. Char. 2. IN nomine Domini nostri Iesu Christi. Notum sit omnibus tam praesentibus quam posteris quòd ego Ethelbertus Dei gratia Rex Anglorum per Evangelicum genitorem meum Augustinum de Idololatra factus Christicola tradidi Deo per ipsum antistitem aliquam partem terrae juris mei sub orientali muro Civitatis Do∣roberniae, ubi scilicet per eundem in Christo institutorem Mona∣sterium Donatio. in honorem principum Apostolorum Petri & Pauli con∣didi; & cum ipsa terra, & cum omnibus, quae ad ipsum mona∣sterium pertinent, perpetua libertate donavi, adeo ut nec mihi, nec alicui successorum meorum regum, nec ulli unquam potestati sive ecclesiasticae sive saeculari quicquam inde liceat usurpare; sed in ipsius Abbatis sint omnia liberaditione. Si quis verò de hac Imprecatio. donatione nostra aliquid imminuere aut irritum facere tentaverit, authoritate Dei & B. Papae Gregorii, nostrique Apostoli Augu∣stini simul & nostra imprecatione sit hic segregatus ab omni san∣cta ecclesiae communione, & in die judicii ab omni electorum so∣cietate. Circumcingitur haec terra his terminis: In Oriente ec∣clesia S. Martini, & inde ad Orientem by Sibben-downe, & sic Termini. ad Aquilonem be Wykingesmerk, iterumque ad Orientem & ad
Austrum be Burgaweremarka, & sic ad Austrum & Occidentem be Kingesmearke, iterum ad Aquilonem & Occidentem be Kingsmerke, ad occidentem to Rederchepe, & ita ad Aquilo∣nem to Drouting street. Actum est hoc in Civitate Doroberniae Anno ab incarnatione Christi. 605. indictione octáva. ✚. Ego Subscriptiones. Ethelbertus Rex Anglorum hanc donationem meam signo sanctae crucis propria manu confirmavi. ✚. Ego Augustinus gratia Dei Archiepiscopus libenter subscripsi. ✚. Edbaldus Regis filius fa∣vi. ✚. Ego Hamigisilus Dux laudavi. ✚. Ego Hocca comes con∣sensi. ✚. Ego Augemundus Referendarius approbavi. ✚. Ego Graphio comes benedixi. ✚. Ego Tangisilus Regis Optimas con∣firmavi. ✚. Ego Pinca consensi. ✚. Ego Gedde corroboravi.
meae, & spem retributionis aeternae, obtuli ei etiam villam nomi∣ne Sturiag alio nomine dictam Chistelet, cum omnibus redditibus Sturiag. Chistelet. ei jure competentibus, cum mancipiis, sylvis cultis vel incultis, pratis, pascuis, paludibus, fluminibus & contiguis ei maritimis terminis eam ex una parte cingentibus, omniaque mobilia vel im∣mobilia in usus fratrum sub regulari tramite & monastica reli∣gione inibi Deo servientium, missarium etiam argenteum, scep∣trum aureum, item sellam cum fraeno auro & gemmis ornatam, speculum argenteum, armigausa oloserica, camisiam ornatam, quae mihi de Domino Gregorio sedis Apostolicae directa fue∣rat: quae omnia supradicto monasterio gratanter obtuli. Quod etiam monasterium ipse servus Dei Augustinus sanctorum Aposto∣lorum ac martyrum reliquiis, variisque ecclesiasticis ornamentis ab Apostolica sede sibi transmissis copiose ditavit, seseque in eo, Locus sepul∣turae Reg. & Archiepisc. & canctos successores suos ex Authoritate Apostolica sepeliri prae∣cepit, scriptura dicente, non esse civitatem mortuorum sed vi∣vorum; ubi & mihi & successoribus meis sepulturam providi, sperans me quandoque ab ipso Apostolici ordinis principe, cui Dominus potestatem ligandi atque solvendi dedit, & claves regni coelorum tradidit, à peccatorum nexibus solvi, & in aeter∣nam beatitudinis januam introduci. Quod monasterium nullus Immunitas monasterii. Episcoporum, nullus successorum meorum regum in aliquo laedere aut acquietare praesumat: nullam omnino subjectionem sibi usur∣pare audeat: sed Abbas ipse qui fuerit ordinatus, intus & foris, cum consilio fratrum secundum timorem Dei liberè eum regat & ordinet: ita ut in die Domini dulcē illā piissimi redemptoris nostri vocem mereatur audire, dicentis, Euge serve bone, &c. Hanc donationem meam in nomine patris & filii & spiritus sancti lar∣gitate divina, ut mihi tribuatur peccatorum remissio per omnia cum consilio reverentissimi patris Augustini condidi, idque ad scribendum Augemundum presbyterum ordinavi. De his igitur Interminatio. omnibus, quae hic scripta sunt, si quis aliquid minuere praesum∣pserit, sciat se aequissimo judice Deo, & beatissimis Apostolis Petro & Paulo rationem esse redditurum. Confirmata est haec do∣natio, praesentibus testibus, Reverentissimo patre Augustino Do∣roberniae Testes. ecclesiae Archiepiscopo primo, Mellito quoque & Iusto Londoniensis & Roffensis ecclesiae praesulibus, Eadbaldo filio
meo, Hamigisso &c. & aliis pluribus diversarum dignitatum personis. Actum sane 45. Anno regni nostri, Anno Domini 605. Char. 4. Privilegium St Augustini huic coenobio suo concessum. AVgustinus Episcopus Doroberniae sedis famulus, quem super∣na inspirante clementia beatissimus Papa Gregorius Anglicae genti Deo acquirendae legatarium misit, ac ministrum, omnibus successoribus suis Episcopis, cunctisque Angliae Regibus, cum suis posteris, atque omnibus Dei fidelibus, in fide & gratia salu∣tem & pacem. Patet omnibus quòd Deo amabilis Rex Ethelbertus primus Anglorum regum Christi regno sanatus nostra instantia, & sua prodiga benevolentia inter caeteras ecclesias quas fecit & Episcopia, monasterium extra Metropolim suam Doroberniam, in Doroberniam Regis Metro∣polim vocat. honorem principum Apostorum Petri & Pauli regaliter condidit, & regalibus opibus amplisque possessionibus ditavit, magnifica∣vit, perpetua libertate & omni jure regio cum omnibus rebus & judiciis intus & foris illi pertinentibus munivit, suoque regio privi∣legio, & superni judicii imprecatione, atque Apostolica sanctissimi papae Gregorii interminatione excommunicatoria contra omnem injuriam confirmavit. Ego quoque ejusdem libertatis adjutor & patrocinator omnes successores meos Archiepiscopos, omnesque ecclesiasticas vel saeculares potestates per Dominum Iesum Christum & Apostorum ejus reverentiam obtestor, atque Apostolica memo∣rati Patris nostri Papae Gregorii interminatione interdico, ne quis∣quam unquam ullam potestatem aut dominatum aut imperium in hoc dominicum vel Apostolicum monasterium, vel terras vel eccle∣sias ad illud pertinentes usurpare praesumat, nec ulla prorsus subju∣gationis, aut servitutis, aut tributi conditione, vel in magno vel in minimo, Dei ministros inquietet aut opprimat. Abbatem a suis Abbatis ele∣ctio & condi∣tio. fratribus electum in eodem monasterio, non ad sui famulatum, sed ad dominicum ministerium ordinet; nec sibi hunc obedire, sed Deo suadeat; nec verò sibi subjectum, sed fratrem, sed consortem, sed collegam in comministrum in opus Dominicum eum reputet. Non ibi missas, quasi ad suae ditionis altare, nec ordinationes, vel benedictiones usurpativè, sine Abbatis vel fratrum petitione exer∣ceat:
nullum sibi jus consuetudinarium vel in vilissima re exigat, quatenus pacis concordia unum sint in domino uterque, nec quis∣quam quod absit dominandi dissidio in judicium incidat Diaboli, qui superba tyrannide corruit de coelo. Reges gentium (inquit Do∣minus) dominantur eorum, vos autem non sic; cumque ab alieni∣genis, non à filiis accipiantur tributa, sic ipse Dominus concludit, ergo liberi sunt filii: qua ergo irreverentia patres ecclesiarum in filio Regni Dei sibi vendicant dominationem? maximè autem in hanc ecclesiam sanctorum the saurariam, in eujus materno utero tot Pontificum Doroberniae, Regumque ac principum corpora speramus Pontisices & Reges hic sepe∣liendi. alma refovenda sepulturae requie, ex authoritate scilicet Apostolica, & hinc ad aternam gloriam resuscitanda. Tales supremi Iudicis amicos si quis offendere non metuens hujus privilegii statuta viola∣verit, vel violatorem imitando vim suam tenuerit, sciat se Apo∣stolico B. Petri gladio per suum vicarium. Gregorium puniendum, nisi emendaverit. Haec igitur omnia, ut hic sunt scripta, Aposto∣lica ipsius Institutoris nostri Gregorii comprobatione & authoritate Confirmatio. servanda sancimus, suoque ore confirmamus, praesente glorioso rege Ethelberto, cum filio suo Eadbaldo, & collaudante cum ipso, & omnibus Optimatibus regiis atque ultrò volentibus reverendis∣simis fratribus nostris à sancta Romana ecclesia huc mecum, vel ad me in Evangelium Domini destinatis, scilicet Lawrentio, quem nobis Deo favente, successorem constituimus, & Mellito Londo∣niarum Episcopo, & Iusto Roffensi Episcopo, & Petro venerabili ejusdem monasterii principum Apostolorum Abbate primo cum cae∣teris in Domino adjutoribus meis; obnixè postulantibus, simulque in eos, qui haec fideliter servaverint, benedictionem; aut in im∣paenitentes, quod volumus, transgressores damnationem exercen∣tibus. These auspicious beginnings had answerable proceed∣ings. For the foundation of the Abbey thus laid, it be∣came in processe of time much advanced, both in the in∣largement of her buildings, and augmentations of her in∣dowment. For the first. After the death of King Ethelb. Eadbaldus (his sonne) at the instance of Lawrence the Archb' builded a faire Church in this Monastery which he
called S. Maries. After Eadbaldus, King Canute (the great Monarch of this Realme:) Egelsine (the Abbat that fled for feare of the Conquerour:) Scotlandus (whom the same King put in Egelsin's place:) Hugh Floriac (that was of kin∣dred to King William Rufus, and by him made Abbat:) were the persons that chiefly increased the building: some bestowing Churches and Chapels; some Dortors and Re∣fectories or dining places, and others other sort of edi∣fices Lamb. per∣amb. of Kent in Canterbury.. Now for the latter, her increase in possessions and indow∣ment, it would be too tedious a matter to particularize but the one halfe of the donations and grants of lands and re∣venues that were made and given by the multitude of be∣nefactors of all sorts, who out of the heat of their devotion to the place, for the double founders sake, the one the great instrument of Christianisme brought and wrought amongst the Saxon people of those parts, the other (by Gods bles∣sing on his endeavours) the first Christian King of the English-Saxon race, strived of holy zeal, according to their knowledge to out-strip one another in an open handed li∣beralitie to this Abbey. The Royall benefactors (for I shall Royall bene∣factours to S. Augustine Abbey. omit the rest) after Ethelb. (as Thorne informs me) were chiefly these. King Eadbald his sonne and next Successor, who gave the mannor of Northborne, consisting of 30 plough-lands. King Lothaire, who gave 3 plough-lands in Stodmersh. King Withred, who gave the mannor of Littleborne of 5 plough-lands. King Eadbert his sonne, who gave 6 plough-lands in Little-Mongeham. King Edmund, whose gift was 2 plough lands in Sybertsweld. Kenewulf King of Mercia and Cuthred King of Kent, who gave the mannor of Lenham, consisting of 20 plough-lands and 13 Denes. King Ethel∣wulf the West-Saxon, who gave 40 Caslatos (Mansions I take it) in Lenham. King Ethelhert the West-Saxon also, who gave the mannor of Merton in East Kent, of 3 plough-lands. King Canute, who together with the body S. Mildred the virgin of Thanet, gave unto the Abbey all the indow∣ment of that late Monastery. King Edgar who gave Plum∣sted,
of 4 plough lands. Edward the Confessor, who gave all the land he had in Fordwich. The succeeding Kings, for the most part, were rather confirmers or restorers of the old, then contributers of new possessions to this Abbey. Whose Charters (as the o∣thers) are many of them already published partly in Reyner's Apostolatus Benedictinorum, and partly in Wevers Funerall Monuments. Wherefore I spare their recitall here. Nei∣ther will I wade or enter farre into discourse of the once flourishing estate of this ancient Abbey, lest I finde it (as I may justly feare it) even endlesse. For so many were the priviledges, so wide the possessions, and so very great the estimation of this Abbey, in many respects (that of it being, of old, the selected place for the Royall and Archiepisco∣pall sepulture, not the least:) as few other in the King∣dome did or could in all points paralell it. Onely let me, ere my cloze, acquaint you from Mr Lam∣bert Peramb. of Kent. in Cant., that the house, before the dissolution, had five Co∣vents, consisting (saith he) of 65 Monks, Benedictines, or of the order of the Black monks of S. Benet, which began here in England with their Founder, (the nature hereof see hereafter in Christ-Church:) And, as he addes (beside Juris∣diction over an whole lath of 13 hundreds) it had possession of livelihood to the value of 808. l' by yeare. Herein, (I sup∣pose) following the estimate of her temporalties, taxed at that summe by the Popes Delegates, the Bishops of Winche∣ster and Lincoln, Iohn and Oliver, in the yeare 1292. authori∣sed to tax and rate the temporalties of all the Clergy both religious and secular throughout the Kingdome, for the levying of a tenth thereby, which the Pope had granted to the King (Ed. 1.) in subsidium terrae sanctae. But it seems Lib. Eccles. Christi Cant. that upon the surrender and suppression of the Abby, which happened 4. Decemb. 29. Hen 8. that estimate was well neare doubled. For (as Speed and Wever both have it) it was then valued, as the Record in the Kings Exchequer shows, at The Abbey of what value. 1412. lib. 4s. 7d. ob. q. Briefly this Abbey, and the Abbat thereof in right of his
Abbatie, had Cuneum monetae, allowance of mintage and coynage of money, by the grant of King Athelstan Leg. Athel∣stani in Archae∣on. Gul. Lamb. pag., which continued untill the time of K. Stephen, & then was utterly lost, Silvester the 45 Abbat, who died Anno 1161. being the last that enjoyed it. Whereof Thorne writing his life hath these words. Memorandum (saith he) quòd iste Silvester Abbas & multi praedecessores ejus Abbates habuerunt Cuneum monetae in Civitate Cant. sicut per inquisitionem factam per Ar∣noldum Ferre, Wulfinum Mercere & alios qui jurati dixerunt quòd quidem Abbas S. Aug. Silvester nomine habuit in Civitate Abbat of S. Austins had coynage of money. Cant. unum cuneum monetae & Elumdus Porre custodivit cune∣um illud ex parte illius Abbatis, & quando ille Abbas obiit seisita fuit Abbatia in manu Domini Regis unà cum praedicto cuneo, nec unquam aliquis Abbas qui ei successit, illius cunei recuperavit seisinam. Et fuit ista inquisitio facta temporibus Hen. secundi Regis, & Regis Richardi filii ejusdem. The Abbat moreover was Abbas intratus, first made so by Pope Alex. 2. as the same Thorne (in the life of Abbat Egelsin) relates. Who saith Dignified by the Pope with Mitre and san∣dals. that the same Egels. being sent on some Embassage to Pope Alex. 2. in the yeare 1063. was there the first Abbat of this Monastery, to whom it was of the same Pope permitted with his Successors, the Abbats of the place, to use the Mitre and sandals, in manner of a Bishop, the Pope thus then pro∣nouncing and saying, Hunc apicem habere perpetuò rectorem de∣crevimus Augustinensem, ob ipsius scilicet Romanorum alumpni & Anglorum Apostoli dignitatem. He was I say a mitred Abbat, that is by Cowels interpretation Interprete in verb. Abbat. pag. 2. an Abbat Sove∣reigne, exempt from the Jurisdiction of the Diocesan, ha∣ving Episcopall Jurisdiction within himself. He had place and voice not onely in Parliament as a spirituall Baron, but also in the generall Councell, where, by the gift of Pope Leo ixth, his place was to sit by the Abbat Montis Cassini Reyner in ap∣pendice ad Apo∣stolat. Benedi∣ctin. pag. 53. A Catalogue of these Abbats and others, who living, by their learning and pietie; or dead, by the reliques of their mortalitie, their deceased bodies, some honourably intom∣bed, others gloriously inshrined there, have enfamoused the place, I referre you to finde in Pitseus his Catalogue,
and Wever's ancient Funerall monuments. And hitherto of the flourishing estate of this Abbey. It neither may, nor will (I know) be imagined but that this Abbey tasted of both fortunes. Wherefore as you have heard somewhat of the weale, so now give me leave with what brevitie I can, to acquaint also with the wo; the detri∣ments I mean and dysasters, that have at any time abated, and at last fatally obscured and finally extinguished the glo∣ry and Majesty of this once famous and opulent Abbey. Whereof the first in time and not of least regard was her losse of the long enjoyed right and interest to the burialls of the Kings and Archbishops, of which, the former, in Archbishop Brightwald's, and the latter in Cutbert's dayes were first taken from it Lamb. Per∣amb. of Kent in Canterbury.. Another was the grievous and frequent infestation of Abby infected by the Danes. the place by the Danes: which (however their Chroni∣clers, for their Abbeys greater glory, sometimes ascribe their safety, defence and deliverance from those Invaders to a miraculous preservation:) yet doubtlesse either suffer∣ed their violence, or at the least, and at the best, purchased their peace (and so prevented their greater calamity) at a deare rate, and with costly redemptions, especially in that lamentable spoil and devastation of the City under King Etheldred, in the yeare 1011. The recorders of the tragi∣call story whereof, the elder Monks, Henry of Huntington, Roger Hoveden, and others, (whose pens a miracle so mainly tending to the advancement of Monkery, in all likelihood could not have escaped) tell of no such miracle as Thorne will have the Abbey then rescued and saved by, which was, that when a Dane had taken hold of S. Augustines pall or cloak (wherewith his tombe was covered) it stuck so fast to his fingers, that by no means possible he could lose it, till he came and yeelded himself to the Monks, and made sor∣rowfull confession of his fault. Which thing so terrified the rest of the Danes, that they desisted and ceased from inva∣ding the Monastery, and became chief protectors and de∣fenders of it. Cum Dani (as Thornes own words are) Ctu∣ariam
ferro undique & flamma vastantes saevirent, quidam illo∣rum sacrilegi, non causa orandi, sed depraedandi malitia mona∣sterium istud ultrò introierunt: moxque unus eorum ad malum proclivior, ad sepulchrum Apostoli nostri Augustini (ubi tunc jacebat tumulatus) improbè accessit, palliumque, quo illud pre∣tiosum Augustini mausolaeum operiebatur, furtim rapuit, atque sub axilla sua illum abscondit: sed divina ultrix miseratio ra∣ptorem mox rapuit, palliumque illud sub axilla furis abscondi∣tum, quasi connativum cutis axillis furis inhaesit; nec unguibus nec ulla violentia aut arte deponi poterat, donec reatum suum co∣ram sancto praedicto, & loci fratribus, veniam poscendo de com∣missis, fur ipse prodiderat. Quae ultio ita caeterorum Danorum multitudinem terruit, ut hujus Monasterii non solùm fieri time∣rent invasores, sed magis ejus praecipui forent defensores. Thus he. But (as I said) our elder stories have no mention of this miracle. Hoveden (I confesse) naming the then Ab∣bat of the place, sayes that he was suffered to escape or go his way, haply (& as it may be reasonably thought) because he had ransomed himself and his Abbey, by composition with the enemy. But that your belief may not rest upon my bare and singular opinion of this Abbeys partaking with the neighbour City, and Cathedrall in their Danish pres∣sures, I will stand by, whilest Reverend Archbishop Parker gives you his, who thinking it incredible that the Citie should so often suffer, by the Danes, and this Abbey escape, thus expostulates the matter. Quid dicam (saith he) de Monasterio Sancti Augustini, Doroberniae, omnium primo & an∣tiquissimo, Romanorum Pontificum, atque Regum Cantiorum pri∣vilegiis adeo superbo, quibus fretus ab omni subjectione & obe∣dientia sui Archipraesulis, immune se putarit? &c. Credibile∣ne est inter tantas procellas hoc insolens coenobium tutum & à Danorum impetu liberum esse potuisse, cum ipsam Deroberniam urbem inclytam, it a miserè depopulati sunt, ut supra retulimus: Thus he Antiq. Brit. In vita Celnoths. pag. 72.. A 3d & 4th great dysaster to this Abbey was, the firing of it Abbey fired. one time, & the almost drowning of it another. The former (by fire) happening in the yeer 1168. (Anno Dom. 1168. saith
Thorne) die decollationis St. Ioannis Baptistae combusta fuit ista ecclesia pro maxima parte, in qua combustione multae codicillae an∣tiquae perierunt, atque ipsum feretrum S. Augustini & multorum sanctorum hujus loci flebiliter sunt deformata; nec mirum cum ipsa pene tota ecclesia igne fuerat cnsumpta. Cujus infortunio misertus Alexander Papa ecclesiam de Feversham ad reparatio∣nem ecclesiae sic igne consumptae confirmavit; & ecclesiam de Menstre & Middelton ad acristiam pro reparatione istius eccle∣siae deputavit.) The latter (by water) in the yeare 1271. Abbey almost drowned. (Eodem anno (saith the same Author) die translationis St. Aug. facta fuerunt tonitrua & coruscationes & tanta inundatio pluviae, ut Civitas Cant. pene submersa esset. Occupaverat verò Vide Antiq. Brit. in initio vitae Kildward∣by. Mortmaine. aqua totam istam Curiam pariter & ecclesiam, ut prope submersae essent, nisi virtus Sanctorum ibi quiescentium obsisteret.) The next great crosse which befell this Abbey, but com∣mon to it with other, was the restraint of the Laitie from any longer extending the hand of their bounty, in passing over their fee to the Abbey, without speciall licence of the King, by the Stat. of Mortmaine, or the law of Amortization; which timely to moderate the before unlimited libertie of . Ed. 1. the Laity in that kinde, likely in time to give all to God, and leave nothing, or but little, for Caesar and themselves, by their over forwardnesse and extreame excesse in that kinde of operative devotion (a thing considering their full perswasion of the meritorious nature of it, nothing strange) provided a convenable restraint, tying and manacling the hands of the subject for the future from that kinde of over∣active charitie, without the foregoing privitie and consent of the Prince. But this crosse, this losse, was in part sup∣plied and made lesse sensible unto the religious, by a piece of policie which they quickly put in ure, and that was the procuring not onely of priviledges and immunities from payment of tithes, but also of Impropriations or Annexions Impropriati∣ons. of Churches, Parsonages I mean, to their houses; which though invented, and on foot long before, upon what pre∣text see Hay in his Astrum inextinctum. quaest. 2. num 9. & seq. fol. 98. 99. yet now, the other current of their gain being
stopt, much more abounding then ever before Downings Discourse Conclus. 3. § 5.. All of them, but especially the latter, things improperly enough in the hands of the Religious, and with cause enough reck∣oned among the 100 grievances of Germany Fox. Acts and Monum. vol. 2. pag. 85., but much more improperly in the possession of meer lay-men, as now they are most what; but generally like the gold of Tho∣louse, not without a curse, a crosse at least, either reall or personall, upon the person of the invader, or his estate, or both, which though he either cannot or will not himselfe, yet others both can and do see and observe to follow such profaners of the Churches Patrimony the improper Lay∣proprietaries of Parsonages and Church-livings. Amicus Plato, Amicus Socrates; sed magis amica Pietas. Pardon this digression, and I proceed. By the way would you be further satisfied concerning the grounds, upon which Impropriations of Churches to Monks and Monasteries first began, I find them briefly to be these. Illud inprimis agebant Episcopi, dum ecclesias Monachis attri∣buerent, ut paci ecclesiasticae subservirent. Quòd enim pleraeque earum ecclesiarum in ipsis Monachorum fundis conderentur, & ab eorum servis, qui terram extirpatis silvis novarunt, frequenta∣rentur; ne quid inter Clericos & Monachos sereretur dissidii, po∣stulabat aequitas, & concordia, ut Monachis traderentur guber∣nandae. Ea causa cum deerat, aliam Episcopis suggessit charitas, ut Monachorum sustentationi caveretur. Postremo id quoque cau∣sae accessit, ut ecclesiae meliùs regerentur, tum ob accuratiorem institutionem plebium, quibus Monachi ad omnem difficultatem praesto erant doctrinae per ea tempora fere principatum habentes, tum ob Presbyterorum, quos fere tunc erudiebant Monachi soli, delectum faciliorem. Itaque non paucae dotiones ejus generis signatè cavent ut in Monachorum potestate s Presbyterorum ele∣ctio, atque Ecclesiarum gubernatio, &c. S. Roverius in his Il∣lustrations upon the History of the Monastery of S. Iohns at Rheimes. pag. 606. But to S. Austins again. I do not remember that I have read of or met with any other much considerable losse, crosse or misfortune to have befallen this Abbey afterwards, untill that fatall blow of
utter dissolution was given it by Hen. 8. Little had all the 29. Hen. 8. 24. Decembris. former casualties been to the ruine of this goodly Abbey, had not that sudden and tempestuous storm (which bare down before it all the religious structures of this kinde throughout the kingdome) falling upon it, brought this with the rest, to irrecoverable ruine: whose uncovered walls stood so languishing in time, and storms of weather, that dayly increased the aspect of her ruines, till now lastly they are made subject to other publick uses, and the whole tract of that most goodly foundation in the same place no where appearing &c. as it is in Speed Hist. pag. 294.. Yet thither let me leade you, and have your patience whilest I survey the pre∣sent Remains of the place, which is my second Particular touching this Abbey. Amongst which, I finde scarce any of note beside Ethel∣berts . Particular. Tower and S. Pancraces Chapell. But ere we enter the Sept, a word or two of that. The sept or site of the Mona∣stery yet appeares and may be traced by the circuiting walls, within the compasse whereof the Elemosinary, by the Court-gate (a place where the almes of the Abbey, the Almnery. remaines of their food being sent thither, were distributed as a main part of their subsistence, to certain almes-people consisting of a society of Brothers and Sisters, having had a Chapell to it now desolate, and rotting in it own ruines) was included long ago, as it seems by a Composition Liber Eccles. Christi Cant., in the yeare 1237. (foure hundred yeares ago) made between the then Archbishop and his Archdeacon of the one part, and the then Abbat, of the other: (amongst other things) touching Jurisdiction, and right to the coertion of crimi∣nous persons of the Monastery delinquent in the Diocesse of Cant. extra septa sui Monasterii, quae continent elemosinari∣am extra portam eorum, as the composition wordeth it. Hugh the Abbat, of that name the second, when he divided and distinguished the offices of his Monastery Thorne in ejus vita., assigned the Church or Parsonage of Northborne, with the Chapells an∣nexed to this Almnery. Now enter we the sept, where the first thing in our eye Refectory.
observable (except the faire Hall, the late Refectory of the Monkes) is Ethelb. Tower. Not so called (as vulgar Ethelberts Tower. tradition will fabulously tell you it was) from the building of it, either by him, or by others in his time. In honor and memory of him I will grant it was, but yet long since his dayes, being not built (I take it) untill about the yeare 1047. For (as it is in the private Chronicler, Thorne) the then Archbishop Eadsin, beside some other acts of his bounty to the Abbey, gave 100. markes, ad turris aedifica∣tionem, quae tunc fuerat in construendo, meaning this Tower, as I conceive. Other certainty of the age of it, I cannot give, and so leave it with the words of Speed Hist. pag. 294., who in the close of his discourse touching this Abbey, thus speakes of it. Onely Ethelberts Tower (saith he) in memory and ho∣nour of the man, as yet hath escaped the verdict and sen∣tence of destruction, whose beauty, though much defaced and overworne, will witnesse to succeeding Ages the mag∣nificence of the whole, when all stood compleate in their glory together. The next thing (and what else onely is observable a∣mongst St Pancrace Chapell. these heapes of ruines) is the Chapell of St Pan∣crace, built (as the private Chronicler makes report) be∣fore Thorne. Augustine came; and used by the King, before his con∣version to Christianity, for the place of his Idol-worship, but after it, the first that Augustine, after he had purged it from the worship of the false, consecrated to the service of the true God, and dedicated to St Pancrace. Wherewith the devill all inraged, and not brooking his ejection from the place he had so long enjoyed; the first time that Augustine celebrates masse there, furiously assaults the Chapell to overturne it. But having more of will then power to actu∣ate his intended mischiefe, all he could doe was to leave the ensignes of his malice, the prints of his talons on the South-Porch-Wall of the Chapell, where they are visible to this day. Thus Thorne tels the tale. And no better then a tale can I conceive it to be. I will grant that a Chappell of that name, of no small antiquity there was sometime
standing, where a good part of her ruines are yet left, built almost wholly of British or Romane bricke (infallible Re∣maines of antiquity:) That on the Walls out-side of the South-Porch, such tokens as the Historian will have to be the markes of the Beast, are visible enough: That of latter time this Story became vulgarly received. (Hamon Beale, to instance in one for many, Anno 1492. gives by his Will Penes Regi∣strum Domini Archid. Cant. to the reparation of St Pancrace his Chapell within the precinct of St Augustines Church-yard, and of the Chapell where St Augustine first celebrated masse in England, an∣nexed to the former, 3l. 6s. 8d.) But that either this was the place, where Saint Augustine first said masse in England (St Martins was it, as Bede Ecclesiastic. Hist. lib. 1. cap. 26. will tell you:) or that the story is further true then I have granted, I cannot beleeve. To give you my reasons. Consult venerable Bede's pre∣face to his Ecclesiasticall Story, and you shall finde he there acknowledgeth his intelligence for these parts received chiefely from Albinus the then Abbat of St August. who with diligence instructed him in all things that either by written record, or tradition of his Elders, had come unto his knowledge, any way memorable. But take his owne words. Auctor ante omnes (saith he) atque adjutor opusculi hu∣jus Albinus Abbas reverendissimus, vir per omnia doctissimus, extitit. Qui in ecclesia Cantuariorum à beatae memoriae Theodoro Archiepiscopo & Hadriano Abbate viris venerabilibus at erudi∣tissimis institutus, diligenter omnia quae in ipsa Cantuariorum provincia, vel etiam in contiguis ejusdem regionibus à discipulis beati Papae Gregorii gesta fuere, vel monumentis litterarum, vel seniorum traditione cognoverat, & ea mihi de his quae memoria digna videbantur per religiosum Londoniensis Ecclesiae presby∣terum Nothelmum, sive litteris mandata sive ipsius Nothelmi viva voce referendo, transmisit. Thus Bede. Adde hereunto that this was a matter so remarkable, an occurrence, so much in itselfe, but in respect of the circumstances of time and place, much more memorable. Of time: It happening so in the very infancy of the English-Saxon Christian Church. Of place: Being such as from an Idol temple
was become, and that but newly a Christian Oratory, that, then it, there is not a thing more worthy to be kept in me∣mory in the whole story of the times: and therefore could not have escaped the one, the intelligencers (Albine's) knowledge, nor consequently the other, the Historian (Bede's) pen. But, for all this, looke and you shall finde, that Bede is so farre from making mention of it, that he remembers not so much as the Chapell. This is much. But let me adde yet further. The following Chronologers, for the most part Monkes all, passe it over in deepe silence. Could fame have beene (thinke you) so sluggish, or so con∣fin'd, that so famous a matter as this should fall from no Authors pen till (in comparison) but yesterday, till Spott and Thornes dayes? The case so standing for me, credat Iu∣deus apella. And so I leave it. Now being upon taking our leave of the Abbey, and Church yard. making our retraict, let me lead you (as the next way out) over the forgotten Sepulchres of the dead; the ancient Cimitery ground of the Abbey, and so out at the gate be∣fore Burgate. Which great and faire Gate, with a battle∣ment, and that warlike invention of machicollation, called Porta occidentalis Cimiterii St Augustini Sic in Compo∣sitione inter Abbatiam & Civitatem, de qua pag. 275., heretofore lead from Church-street (for so the street before it hath usually beene called) into St Augustines Church-yard. A buriall place not private and proper onely to the Abbey, nor only free to the choice of any that desired buriall there; but with all untill the Dissolution, the proper and onely Cimi∣tery belonging unto divers Parish-Chuches of the City, destitute of such Dormitories of their owne, of which the Abbey had the patronage: such as were St Mary Magdalen, St Andrew, and (as I verily beleeve) St Paul too; however because of late some question hath beene made of it, I will not contend. But what if it shall appeare, that for more then 100. yeares together, next before the Dissolution of the Abbey, not one of the many testators of those Pari∣shes have once mentioned any Church-yard of their owne, either in appointment of it for the place of their buriall (as
in other parishes that had Church-yards it was usuall to doe) or otherwise; though of their Churches often? That scores, if not hundreds of them have from time to time pitched on this common Cimitery of St Augustine for the place and purpose afore-said? that after the Dissolution, and that Cimitery withdrawne and taken from them, not yet a testator of succeeding times wills to be laid in any Church-yard of their owne; but, as now to seeke of a resting place for their bodies after death peculiar to them, betake them∣selves for buriall to the Church-yards of Neighbour-Pari∣shes? That as the situation of two of these Parish-Chur∣ches will not admit of any adjoyning Churchyard: the one, like Fan-Church in London, standing in the middest of the street, the other in a throng of contiguous houses; so the the third needed none in regard of the neerenesse of it to this Churchyard of the Abby, which in right & title (I take it) of foundation, had the patronage of it? That it was the knowne Monkish policy, for the gaine sake, to draw all the burials they could to their Abbey, and for that end proba∣bly A piece of Monkish po∣licy. at the Churches foundation, wittingly debarred the people of a Churchyard, to their Church: and lastly that this Abbey and Cimitery was built and set a part for a buriall of old, when as yet it was not lawfull to bury in Cities. If these things (I say) shall be made appeare and proved, as they easily may, what judicious and indifferent man then will conceive, against the strength of so much probability and presumption to the contrary, that these Churches had their proper Cimiteries adjoyning to them, however there may be some who (in confidence of not being gainesaid, because of their somewhat extraordinary age) shall say they had? But videant quorum interest. And so I leave this Abbey. The next thing after this Abbey, in the Suburbs, which I shall servey, is the Church of St Martin, much celebrated St Martin. both for the great antiquity of it, and also for the resort of Augustine and his fellow-labourers thither to their devoti∣ons at their first arivall Bede Eccles. Hist. lib. 1. cap. 25., by the licence of King Ethelbert,
imparted to them in favour of Queene Berta his wife (a Christian, and descended of Christian parentage, being the daughter of Chilperike King of France) to whom this Church built long before, to wit (as Bede saith) by the Ro∣mans, as some say in King Lucius dayes Vide Britan∣niar. Ecclesiar. Antiquitates. cap. 6. pag. 130., and dedicated to St Martin, was permitted for the place of her publicke devotions. The Church indeed seemes very ancient, be∣ing built (the Chancell especially) mostly of British or Romane bricke, the noted reliques and tokens of old Age in any kinde of building whether sacred or profane. At this place afterwards. i. from Archbishop Theodores untill Lanfranc's time by the space to wit of 349. yeares, there was a Bishops See Ms. in Archi∣vis Eccles Chri∣sti Cant., who alwayes remaining in the Country, supplyed the absence of the Archbishop, that for the most part followed the Court: and that as well in go∣verning the Monkes, as in the performing the solemnities of the Church, and exercising the authority of an Arch∣deacon. So Lambert Peramb. of Kent in Cantb.. But the Chaire happening voyde in Lanfranc's time: he whether because that two Bishops were too many for one City (the very reason which as some say, he gave for what he did) or by colour of that ordi∣nance of the Councell of London holden An. 1075 De qua vide Malmesbur. de gst. pot. lib. 1. pag. 23.. requi∣ring the remove of Bishops Sees from obscure rurall villa∣ges to Cities, or for that this Bp. was a Chorepiscopus, a kinde of Country Suffragan, an order (he well knew, no doubt) for just reasons, abolished abroad Canon Chorepis∣copi. 68. distinct.: or for what other cause it is not certaine. He I say (Lanfranc) refused to consecrate any other. Neverthelesse, because he needed the helpe of a Substitute, he created in his place and stead, one of his Chaplaines, Archdeacon of Canterbury Lambert ubi supra.. In Ed. 2. time, to wit in the yeare 1321. the Parson of this Church, and the Master of the Free-Schoole of the City fell at odds about the rights and priviledges of their severall Schooles: the Parson aforesaid, in right of this Church, and by concurrent Custome, challenging a liber∣ty to the keeping of a Free-Schoole there, which the other would not admit of, but with a limitation of the number
of his Scholars; of which more hereafter when I come to Christ-Church, within the moderne precinct whereof the City Free-Schoole (as I shall there show) was kept. And so I leave St Martins. Onely I wish that for the venerable an∣tiquity of the Church, and sometime Espicopall estate of the place, things that have much dignified both, it might better flourish in the maintenance of its due rights and re∣spects then I heare it doth. My Progresse next invites you to (my Lord-cheife-Iu∣stice Finch his Seate or Mansion house) the Mote. So called Mote. now and of latter time; but formerly, and that of old, Wyke: deriving it name, either from that neighbour Wic, or Vicus, called Fordwik, upon which it borders at that place (I take it) which in the second of King Ethelberts Charters is called Wykingsmerke. Or else being named Verstegan. Wyk, because (as the word imports) it hath sometimes beene a place of refuge or retreat, as it were a hold or for∣tresse in some time of hostility: a derivation not improba∣ble nor improper, if we adde and take this along with us, that there is a hill hard by it in the same Charter of Ethel∣bert, called Sibben-downe. i. The Downe (or Hill) of peace, or the Downe where the peace was made, intimating some battell or field there away fought, and afterward a truce entered, or a peace made there with the enemy. Lukedale. Here or neare this place sometime lay the Chantery-Lands of Lukedale, in our Cities perambulation called Lokindale, which being deserted and left desolate, because of the smallnesse of the meanes not sufficing to the main∣tenance of a Chantery-Priest with competent livelihood, was passed over to the Hospitall of St Iohns without North∣gate, where once I saw the deed of conveyance thereof, and thence tooke the following briefe. The revenewes of the Chantery of Lukedale, (called Contaria in Welle vocat' Lukedale) consisting of thirty two Acres of Land, 16s. 5d. ob. eight Cockes and nineteene Hens of annuall Rent with the appertanances at Wyke neare Cant. (which Chantery was forsaken for the smallnesse of the meanes)
were alienated and transferred, by Thomas of Garwynton the Patron, with licence of the King and the Lord of the Fee. i. The Abbat and Covent of St Augustine (with∣in whose Mannor of Lang-Port they did lye) to St Iohns Hosp' without Northgate, An̄no 1384. and 38. Ed. 3. Vt orent & celebrari faciant pro animabus Reginaldi de Cornhelle quondam fundatoris ejusdem Cantariae, Thomae patris dicti Thomae, and others, &c. The Chanteries foundation shall be exhibited to you in my Appendix. Pag. 288. This place our City perambulation fetcheth within her bounds and liberty. Here (or hereabouts) the Hospitall of St Lawrence had (haply still hath) a portion of tithes. For thus I read in the Hospitals private Leiger. Item praedict. Hosp. percipit totam decimam de campo vocat' Wikesfield, cum 2. crofts ibid' scil. Pitetokkyscroft & Homiscroft juxta Fish∣pole, & jacet inter regiā Strat' vers. South, & Wyke vers. North. & viam quae ducit a cruce quatuor capitum ad Trendels vers. West, & viam quae ducit à Fordwich usque Fishpole vers. East. Now let me lead you backe from the Mote to Long-port Long port. the ancient and first▪ Mannor of St August. Abbey, whose bounds and limits are still the same that you shall finde and meet with in the second of King Ethelberts foregoing Char∣ters. Lxx Burgenses erant in Cantuaria Civitate huic manerio pertinentes, saith Doomsday Booke. From this Long-port thus glanced at, let me lead you next by Chantery-lane, anciently called Nova-strata (New-street) to survey the Quondam Chantery there, called Doge's Chantery, built Doge's Chan∣tery. by an Officiall to the Archdeacon of Canterb. and the last Parson of St Paul (for in his time, and with his consent the Vicarage there was erected and indowed) one Hamon Doge, in the reigne of Hen. 3. in the yeare of our Lord. 1264. The foundation whereof Thorne records, thus. Anno Dom. (saith he) 1264. Magister Hamo Doge suae novis∣ssimae memor ordinavit Cantariam pro anima sua parentum suo∣rum, & pro anima Domini Rogeri de Cicestria Abbatis S• Augu∣stini, & pro animabus Successorum suorum, & pro conventu ejusdem loci, & benefactoribus suis, & eorum successoribus, de
toto capitali Mesuagio cum omnibus ad idem pertinentibus in No∣va strata in parochia sancti Pauli sit. cum quinquaginta & sep∣tem acris terrae & quatuor lib. sex solid. & novem den. annui redditus. Habend' & tenend' omnia praedicta, scilicet in terris, redditibus, messuagiis, viis, planis, pasturis, releviis, curiis; sectis, escaetis, wardis, maritagiis & omnibus aliis libertatibus. Et ordinavit in praedicta Cantaria duos Capellanos in perpetuum; & unus celebret in praedicto mesuagio in libera Cantaria, & alius ad altare Sti Iohannis Baptistae in ecclesia Sti Pauli Cant. nisi in∣firmitate ve aliqua necessitate rationabili fuerint praepediti. In creatione verò cujussibet novi Capellani & perpetui ad praedi∣ctam Cantariam admissi idem Capellanus solvet Abbati & Con∣ventui Sti Aug. Cant. xiij. sol. iiij. den. nomine relevii pro omni∣bus terris & tenementis quae de ipsis tenuerit. Ius verò conferen∣di, instituendi, in corporalem possessionem inducendi & inductum tuendi Abbati & conventui & corum successoribus dedit & con∣firmavit, &c. Steering our course Southward we come next to the ru∣ines of the late Nonnery, called Saint Sepulchres, founded Nonnery. (not as Wever will, by one of the Abbats of St Augustines, nor yet I beleeve to the end that Lambert sayes. i. to serve the necessity of the hot Monkes of that Abbey: but as Thorne reports) by Archbishop Anselm, upon a part of his soile there: The same (I take it) which his predecessor Wlfhelem (long before) purchased, described to lye juxta locum qui dicitur Rethercheap, extra portas Doroberniae Charta Eccles. Christi Cant.. But let me give you Thornes not of the foundation. Harum fundator (saith he) fuit Anselmus Archiepiscopus, & quanquam infra limites feodi beati Augustini sint constitutae, tamen in solo Archiepiscopatus sitae sunt. Erat namque ibi ecclesia parochialis in honore Sancti Sepulcri, de patronatu Archiepiscopi exiguis terris circumcincta, ubi in presenti constat eas esse fundatas. You have the foundation. Amongst the rest of the bene∣factors, that afterwards of their Charity endowed this house with revenewes, William Calvell a Citizen of Cant. (of whose name there was of ancient time a flourishing fa∣mily in the City) carries the name and fame for the chiefe.
After that King Rich. 1. had given the Wood or Forest of Blean to Christ-Church, W. the Prior and Covent of the same, granted to this Nonnery, and the Prioresse and Co∣vent Liber Eccles. Christi Cant. thereof as much Wood as one Horse going twice a day could fetch thence, where the Church Wood-Reeves stould appoint (summarium [summagium] unum in boscis Summarium. Summagium. nostris bis iturum [habendum] singulis diebus ferialibus, sumen∣dum ubicunque ministris nostris ad custodiam Boscorum nostro∣rum visum fuerit, &c. as the words of the grant are:) Which uncertainty in the yeare. 1270. the Nonnes releasing, had in lieu, and by way of exchange for it, a certaine part or portion of the said Blean-Wood assigned, and made over to them, to wit (as the words of the deed are) Octoginta & decem acras bosci, cum solo terra, fossis & fossatis in bosco Prioris & Conventus in Blen, jacent' in longitudine inter boscum Abbatis de Faversham, quod dicitur Bosindenne vers. West. & boscum Prioris & Conventus vers. Est, & in latitudine inter boscum eorundem Prioris & Conventus, versus North. & rega∣lem viam versus South Liber Memo∣ratus. Minchen-Wood.. The which Wood retaines to this day the name of Minchen-Wood, taking it name from the Nonnes, which our Ancestors, from the Saxon Mynecena called Minchens. Or if any man choose rather to derive it from the Latine Monacha, I shall not contend. For as in Egypt in times past, they used to call a Monke, or any man that became noted for his singular Sanctimony of life, Nonnus; so was it then and since, as ordinary for a Nonne or any like holy professor of that sex, to be called Monacha, as it were a shee-monke Lexic. Philolog. in vrb. Non∣nus.. In this Blean-Wood (as having this fit occasion I crave leave to observe) the Priory of Saint Gregories, and the Ho∣spitall of Herbal-downe, sometime had the like summarium bosci granted severally to them. The former by Hen. 2. in these words. Vnum summarium bosci in Foresta de Blen, ad usus fociin ipsa ecclesia, & in domibus eidem ecclesiae continen∣tibus in ipsa Civitate Canuar' Lib. eccles. Cantuar.: The latter by Rich. 1. in the like, to wit these: Vnum summarium in bosco de Sorotte, (which was a part of Blean-Wood, and is now called
Shoorth) ad attrahenda ligna ad opus fratrum Charta vctus Hospit.. In lieu and stead whereof they had severally the like quantity of 90 acres of wood in Blean, afterwards made over to them, as the Nunnery had Liber Eccles. Bant.. To which I return. In the yeare 1184. the Church. i. the Parsonage of St Edmund of Ridingate was granted to it by the Abbat and Covent of S. Aug. as I have shewed before more at large in my survey of that gate. The which Church was afterward. i. in the yeare 1349. with the Nunnes con∣sent (being Patrons) united by the then Commissary of Cant. to the Church of S. Mary Bredin, as I there also have noted. Time and Superiors indulgence bringing their corrupti∣ons, Nunnes inclo∣sed. Nunnes were not in processe of time such Recluses as their order required; whence, and upon the command of Pope Boniface the 8. by his letters written to Archbishop Winchelsey and his Suffragans in that behalf Vide Wal∣singham. Hist. Angl. de Ao 28 Ed. 1. & Anno Dom. 1301., as well as by that Decretall of his Cap. vic'. de statu regularium. in sexto. concerning the confining of Nunnes to their Cloy ster: the same Archbishop, in the yeare 1305. inclosed these Nunnes of S. Sep. according to that Constitution Liber Eccls. Cant. Elisabeth Barton. At this place sometime one Elisabeth Barton, more vul∣garly known by the name of the Holy maid of Kent, that great Impostor of her time, was a vailed Nunne and Vota∣risse. Whose pranks and practises, or rather the Monks and other Papalius, by her agency are obvious both in our Sta∣tutes and Stories. It would prove tedious to repeat the whole matter. Accept therefore of this compendium of it in Speeds words. The Romanists (saith he) much fearing that Babel would down, if Queen Anne might be heard against wicked Haman The Pope., sought to underprop the founda∣tions thereof, with certain devices of their own; and that the same might passe without note of suspicion, they laid their forgery upon Heaven it self; whose pretended ora∣cle Elizabeth Barton (commonly called the Holy maid Elisabeth Barton the false oracl of the Roma∣nists. of Kent) was made to be; and the pillars of this Godlesse fabrick were Edward Bocking, a Monk by profession, and
Doctor of divinitie, Richard Masters parson of Aldington, the The assiste of this false Prophetesse. town wherein she dwelt, Richard Deering a Monk, Hugh Rich a Frier; Iohn Adestone and Thomas Abell Priests, put to their helping hands, and Henry Gould Batchelor of Divinitie, with Iohn Fisher the Reverend Father of Rochester, imployed Reade Statute in Anno 25. H. 8. their pains to dawb these down-falling walls, with their un∣tempered morter. The Scribes that set their pens for her miracles, were Edward Thwaites gentleman, and Thomas Lawrence Register, besides Hawkherst a Monk, who writ a letter that was forged to be sent her from Heaven; and Ri∣chard Risby and Thomas Gould, were the men which disper∣sed her miracles abroad to the world. This holy maid, Eli∣zabeth, made a Votarisse in Canterbury, was taught by Bock∣ing her ghostly father, and suspected Paramour, to counter∣feit The counter∣feiting of Eli∣zabeth Barton. many feigned trances, and in the same to utter many vertuous words for the rebuke of sinne, under which, more freely she was heard against Luthers doctrine, and the Scri∣ptures Edw. Hall. Iohn Stow. Hollinsh. translation, then desired of many: neither so onely, but that she gave forth from God, and his Saints, by sundry suggestive relations, that if the King proceeded in his di∣vorce, and second marriage, he should not reigne in his Realm one moneth after, nor rest in Gods favour the space Cranmer. Cromwell. Latimer. of an houre. But the truth discovered by Gods true Mini∣sters, this oracle gave place as all other such did, when Christ by his death stopped their lying mouthes: for her self and seven Elisabeth Barton. Edward Bock∣ing. Richard Deering. Richard Risby. Richard Masters. Hy Gould. Two Monks. of her disciples were executed for treason at Tiburne, and the other six put to their fines and im∣prisonment. Thus he. Shortly this Nunnery was a corporation consisting of a Lady Prioresse and five black vailed Nunnes, whose habit or apparell was a black coat, cloak, coul and vail. It had a common seal and all other requisites of a compleat Nunne∣ry. All which at length tasted of the common calamity and ruine of religious houses in her utter dissolution by Hen. 8. At what time the estimate of her revenues arose unto 38. lib. 19s 7d ob. per annum. It seems the Parish Church of S. Sepulchre was born down S Sepulchres Church.
in the same fall with the Nonnery. For however frequent mention may be found, both of Parish, Church, and Church∣yard also before, yet since the suppression, the place of the two latter is unknown, the limits of the other uncertain, and the memory of all three almost extinct. Onely that Stonegate by the turning on your left hand to Dover-ward, seems to have been the Western doore of the Church, as I collect by this boundary. De terra quae jacet contra Ecclesiam Sancti Sepulchri juxta vicum quo itur versus Dudindale, ex parte australi dictae ecclesiae Rentale vetus Eclesie Christi Cantuar.. The boundary of the piece of ground directly over against it. The last Lady Prioresse of this house, by name Dame Philip Iohn, lies buried in the North Ile of S. Georges Church, which in her will she calls Capella beatae Mariae Lib. testamen∣to. penes regst. Dom. Archid. Cant. S. Lawrence.. Having done with the Nonnery, let us make next to S. Lawrence; an hospitall hard by, dedicate to the broyled Martyr S. Lawrence, when first built; (which as the private Lieger of the place shows) was in the yeare 1137. by Hugh, of that name, the second, Abbat of S. Aug. Hospitale S. Lau∣rentii juxta Cant. fuit fundatum per Dominum Hugonem secundum quondam Abbatem Monasterii S. Augustini Cant. & conventum ejusdem loci 7. kalend. Feb. anno ab incarnatione Domini 1137. & anno regni Regis Stephani, secundo pro 16 fra∣tribus & sororibus, & pro uno Capellano & uno Clerico in eod' Hosp. servien. Thus the Lieger. This Hosp. was intended Wever of an∣cient funer. Monum. pag. 255. for the leprous of the Abbey: viz. that if it should so hap∣pen that any profest Monk of that Monastery should be in∣fected with any contagious disease, but above all with the Leprosie, by reason of which sicknesse or infectious mala∣dy, he could not live within the precincts of the Abbey, without prejudice and scandall to the rest of the fraternitie, that then he should be provided for in this Hospitall of a convenient chamber, of meat, drink and apparell, in as full a measure as any one of his brethren living in the Mona∣stery. Also if it should so happen that the Father, the Mother, the Sister or brother of any Monk of this Monastery should
come to such great want and indigency, as that (to the re∣proach of any of these brethren) he or she be forced to aske at the Gates, the almes of the Fraternity, that then such of them so asking should be provided for in this Hospitall of sufficient sustentation, according to the ability of the house, by the advise and consideration of the Abbat of Saint Augustines, and the Master of this Hospitall for the time being, as further appeares by his Charter (which I have seene in the Hospitals private Leiger) confirmed by many of his successors. After the founder himselfe (who gave to the mainte∣nance of the Hospitall, nine Acres of ground upon which it was to be erected, and all Tith-corne of the Lordship of Langport, by his Charter of the following lines. Notum sit omnibus Dei fidelibus tam praesentibus quam poste∣ris, quòd ego secundus Hugo Dei gratia Abbas sancti Augustini ejusdemque loci conventus pro redemptione animarum nostrarum, praedecessorum nostrorum at que successorum concessimus ac dedi∣mus in elemosinam novem acras terrae de dominio nostro precio quondam adquisitas, ad faciendum Hospitale in illis novem acris supra memoratis juxta viam quae a Canterburia ducit ad Dover, in dextra parte viae. Contulimus etiam illi loco ad sustentationem infirmorum aut pauperum decimam totius annonae de tota terra illa quam habemus in dominio in dextra parte viae, & omnem decimam frumenti & pisarum totius terrae quae adjacet ad Lange∣port de dominio nostro in sinistra parte viae. Quicunque igitur pro amore Dei benefecerint insirmis illic habitantibus, & locum illum manutenuerint, benedictionem Dei habeant, & gratiam simul & commune beneficium loci nostri. The revenewes of this Hospitall were in processe of time much improved by the benevolence of many devoute people, that became benefactors unto it The whole revenewes at the Collection were rated at 131•. 7•. 10d.. Amongst the which one both of the first and most liberall was the Lord of Dodingdale, a neighbour, by name R. de Marci, who by his deed or Charter, gave unto this Hospitall in Franke∣almoigne, the Tithes of that his whole Mannor. The Char∣ter you shall have anone when I come to Dodingdale. Of
these Tithes shortly after, the Canons of Saint Gregories endeavoured to despoile the Hospitall. For I finde a peti∣tion Lib. dict. Hosp. directed to Herbert the Archdeacon of Canterb. by R. de Marci the foresaid Donor, to this effect, viz. That he would reseize the Hospitall of them as in former yeares, whereas they were that yeare, vi & armis, taken from it by the Religious of Saint Gregories, that he might have no cause of complaint to Richard de Luci, cujus homo sum (saith he) de tota terra mea. Concluding thus: Et certum sit vobis quòd illa decima & plures aliae de terra mea sunt de Capellaria mea, &c. This Herbert (to whom the petition is directed) that you may know the Age of it, was Archdeacon of Can∣terb. in Hen. 2. dayes Vid. Cat. Ar∣chid. pag. 200., as Richard de Luci (whom it menti∣ons) was chiefe Justice of the Realme about the the same time Gloss. D. H. Spelman. pag. 411.. It seemes this Hospitall, and Saint Gregories did not well agree together. For after this, to wit in the yeare 1225. the Proctor and brothers of this Hospitall, sued the Prior and Canons of Saint Gregories, before the Abbat of Fever∣sham, and the Prior and Archdeacon of Rochester (the Popes Deligates, it's like) for the Tithes of Molonde besides Hepyntone, to wit (saith the Leiger Liber. Hosp. Sti Lawrentii.) of 80 Acres of Land of the Earle of Glocesters Fee; but with what successe I doe not finde. Now to Dodingdale Tithes againe. Afterwards in the yeare 1320. Robert de Malling, the Commissary of Canterb. gave sentence with this Hospitall for the Tithes both of the same Mannor, and also of 300 Acres and more of Land of Thomas Chich and his Tenents, lying within the limits and bounds of Saint Mary Bredin's Parish, upon cleare evidence of the Hospitals right to the same by ancient Muniments and otherwise Liber. Hosp. Pauperum Sa∣dotum.. For these last named Tithes of the 300. Acres and upwards, there lay a tye of regratulation up∣on the Hospitall. For thus I read in the Leiger: Item prae∣dictum Hospitale percipit totam decimam de 300 acris terrae & ultra Iohannis Chich, de quibus 50 jacent apud Havefeld, & residuum jacet juxta curiam suam, & in Mellefield juxta Stum
Lawrentium. Et idem Iohannes percipiet de praedict. Hosp. in autumpno pro famulis suis quinque panes frumenti & 2 lagenas & dimid. cervisiae, & dimid' caseum quatuor denarior. Idem etiam percipiet unum par cirocecarum ferinarum pro seipso & unam libram cerae in candelis, & pro famulis suis percipiet tria paria cirocecarum Lib. S• Law∣rentii praed.. Many benefactors I could reckon up unto you which this Hospitall hath had: but let these suffice. For, it being now dissolved, and in private hands, I suppose there is lit∣tle of the Revenewes now remaining to it: although it seemes (because an Hospitall) the generall Dissolution tooke no hold of it. For in an ordinary visitation of the place in Cardinall Pooles time, Anno 1557. (long after the common Dissolution) this Accompt of the then state of it is given up to the Visitors, by the Sisters of the place Lib. in Regi∣stro Domini Ar chid. Cant.. Md. they being examined did say that Mr Christopher Hales had a lease of their land, and since his death from one to another till it came to one Tipsall of London, who did make all the spoile of the House. And they say there should be seven Sisters, and a Prioresse, and a Priest found out of the profit of their Lands. The value of their Lands they e∣steeme at xxl. Nomina sororum. Iohanna Francis Prior. Elizabeth Oliver. Florence Young, nondum soror. The cheife Governor of this (as generally of all Hospi∣tals) was called Custos Hospitalis. And he was ever one of the Monkes of St Augustines Abbey. Leaving now this Martyr (or rather martyred) Hospi∣tall; Dodindale. and coaftng still South-ward, we will next visite Du∣dindale or Dodindale, (now called Morton) a Mannor lying within our Cities liberty, knowne anciently and a long time together by the former of these names, whether because a Valley seated betweene Hils bearing out in that forme, or (as Dudley-Castle in Stafford-shire Cambden ibidem.) from one Dudo or Dodo, an English-Saxon of that name, that might
be Lord of it, or from what other radix or originall deri∣ved, I know not: but a name (I am sure) by which the an∣cient residentiaries of the place (as places were wont to give names to their Inhabitants) the family of Dudindale or Do∣dindale were of long time knowne, untill that of latter times (as I am credibly informed) the place became the seate of the Mortons, and so lost it former name. The Tithes of this Mannor (of Dodingdale) Richard de Marci (as I told you before in St Lawrence) betweene foure and five hundred yeares since, gave unto that Hospitall, by his deed or Charter of this Tenor Lib. Sti Law∣rentii.. Richardus de Marci omnibus suis hominibus Francigenis & Anglicis tam presentibus quam futuris, Salutem. Sciatis me con∣cessisse & dedisse decimas terrae meae de Dodingdale Hospitali Sti Lawrentii quod est juxta Cant. in perpetuam Elemosinam, pro salute animarum praedecessorum meorum, & mei, & uxoris meae, & meorum infantium: quare volo & praecipio quatenus praedi∣ctum Hospitale decimas praed' habeat & possideat bene & in pace & liberè. Praecipioque ex parte Dei & ex parte mea ut fratres & sorores praedicti Hospitalis habeant decimas illas nominatim ad lineum pannum emendum in festo Sancti Iohannis Baptistae, quia credo quòd tunc mei & meorum memores eru. The Church of Rochester hath, or at least sometime had, a portion of Tithes at or neare this place. For as M• Selden (from the Chartulary of that late Monastery) relates Hist. of Tithes. cap. 11. num 1. pag. 316.. Hai∣mo silius Guidonis de Dudindale, confirmes, in puram & per∣petuam elemosinam; the gift made by his Ancestors, Gerold his Grand-father and Guy his Father, of all the Tithes of his Land in Dudindale; which was afterward confirmed also by his sonne and heire Iohn. This Tithery at this day passeth by the name of Dodingdale Tithery. Of which all or some part (it seemes) lay within the limits of Saint Mary Castle Parish in Cant. as I collect hence, that (as I have it from Doctor Tillesley Animadver∣sions. 2. Edit. pag. 123. & 24.) a cause was brought in the yeare 1231. by Richard Vicar sanctae Mariae de Castello, against the Prior of Rochester, for the Tith of an Acre of Land, which was gi∣ven, by the predecessors of Iohn of Dudindale, to the Prio∣ry:
as by the sentence afterward appeared. Neere unto this place lyes another Dale or Valley called Monkesdane. (because it was parcell of the Monks demeasnesse of Christ-Church) Monkesdane. It lyes by the place, from the darke vaults (dungeon-like) which the much digging of chalke there hath occasioned, called the divells Court-hall. At this place there once happened a very sad dysaster, which stands upon record. For (as I read in the Crowne-Rolles) Simon filius Adae de Colynham, & Hen. filius Hen. Thetchere de Cant. sedebant die sabbati in crastino Sancti Marci, Anno R. R. Ed. filii Regis Ed. 17. in quodam loco subterraneo apud Monekesdan' in Suburbio Cant. qui cedebant lapides, pro calce ibidem faciend': quos per infortunium terra supercecidit, ita quòd corpora eorum conquassabuntur, unde moriebantur inconti∣nenti. Having done with this place and Dodingdale; let us Saint Iacobs. wheele about and come to Saint Iames, or to Saint Iacobs, as we now call it. An Hospitall for Leprous Women, dedi∣cate to the blessed Apostle Saint Iames. It lyes not (I must confesse) within the tether of our Cities perambulation: but yet borders upon it, the bounds of the City lying a∣longst the Hospitall Wall; wherefore I knew not how to balke it. It was built by Queene Eelanor wife to King Hen. 3. saith Lambert Peramb. of Kent in Cant., followed by Wever Ancient fu∣ner. Monum. pag. 238.. Upon what ground I know not. Surely erroneous. For of certaine it was an Hospitall before Hen. 3. reigne. In King Iohns time, and that toward the beginning of his reigne (for as it appeares by the Sigle, which is H: it was in Archbishop Huberts dayes, who dyed in the sixth or seventh of King Iohn) the Monkes, that is the Prior and Covent of Christ-Church, by their letters (as I may call them) of protection, tooke it into their custody, charge and patronage; and for the future ingage themselves to a perpetuall forme of reigle∣ment thereof, as you may see by what here followes Liber Eccls. Christi Cant.. OMnibus Christi sidelibus ad quos praesens scriptū pervenerit G. Prior & Conventus ecclesiae Christi Cant. in Do. salutem.
Sciatis quod intuitu caritatis & pietatis, de consensu & volun∣tate Domini nostri H. Archiepiscopi & ad petitionem magistri Firmini custodis domus sancti Iacobi extra Cant. recepimus in custodiam & protectionem nostram praedict. Domum Sti Iacobi extra Cant. sitam. Et tenebimus in eadem domo semper tres sa∣cerdotes hic per nos instituend. Qui erint professi in eadem prae∣dicta domo in forma & habitu religionis. Quorum unus cotidie celebrabit missam de beata virgine, alius cantabit requiem pro benefactoribus ejusdem domus, tertius dicet commune servitium, & isti tres sacerdotes habebunt unum clericum. Et erint in pre∣dicta domo. semper xxv mulieres leprosae per nos instituendae. De ecclesia de Bradegate & aliis redditibus & terris & substan∣tiis & elemosinis & obventionibus ejusdem domus providebimus tam sacerdotibus illis quam leprosis praedict' necessaria. Et ut haec supradicta firma & inconcussa permaneant imposterum pre∣senti carta nostra & sigilli nostri appositione roboravimus: sal∣va dignitate Domini Archiepiscopi. His testibus Gilberto Rof∣fensi Episc' H. Cant. Archidiac' Rogero Abbate sancti August. Algaro Abbate de Faversham, &c. Afterwards Hen. 3. towards the augmentation of the Hospitals indowment gives to it the personage of Brade∣gate, in these words Ibidem.. HEnricus Dei gratia Rex Angliae & Dux Normanniae & Aquitanniae & Comes Andegav' Archiepiscopis, Episc', Abbatibus, Prioribus & Comitibus, Baronibus, Iusticiariis, Vi∣car. Ministris & omnibus fidelibus suis Angl' Salutem. Sci∣atis me dedisse in liberam & perpetuam elemosinam & presenti carta mea confirmasse leprosis mulieribus Hospitalis sancti 1. apud Cant. ecclesiam de Bradegate cum omnibus pertinentiis suis. Ita quòd Mr Firminus libere omnia teneat & possideat tota vita sua, & post decessum ejus libera remaneant praedictis mulieribus leprosis. Quare volo & firmiter precipio quòd eedem leprosae mu∣lieres eandem ecclesiam habeant & teneant in libera & perpetua elemosina sicut predeterminatum est, bene & in pace, liberè & quietè, integrè & plenariè & honorificè cum omnibus pertinentiis
suis & libertatibus & liberis consuetudinibus suis. Hiis testi∣bus, &c. It had much other revenewes, as appeares by the Inven∣tory thereof taken and presented to the Commissioners authorised to examine such matters by the Stat. 37. Hen. 8. cap. 4. Amongst the which, one, both of the principall and first, was the Ferme in the Parishes of Hakynton and Blean, for Firmin's Barton (as the fore-cited Inventory cals it) vulgarly miscalled Infirme-Barton, and of some, miscon∣ceived to have appertained to Saint Augustine. Probably so named from that Mr Firmin or Feramin, the quondam Master of that Hospitall, whereof mention is before made in each of the Precedent Charters, the Donor thereof (I take it) and (I beleeve) a chiefe agent in the Hospitals do∣tation, if not first erection also. The rest of the revenew lay at Egerton, Charing, Mersham, Bleane, Hakynton, Natin∣don, Thamington, Shadoxherst, Kingsnoth, Rokinge, and in and about the City; altogether in the Inventory summo∣ned up, de claro, at 46l. 6s. 3d. If any thinke it worth their labour to peruse the Survey of the State of this Hospitall in every particular as it was presented to those Commissi∣oners, it is in my custody, at their service. It payeth now no Tith at all (nor by law ought to pay any de hortis et ani∣malibus Cap. 2. de ec∣cles. aedificand. Cui adjungas velim Statuta Huberti Ar∣chiep. in Hove∣den. pag. 809. edit. Francof.:) but by that Survey it evidently appeares a con∣sideration in money in lieu of Tith of the site of the Hospi∣tall, paid to the Parson of Thanington, viz. 18d. per annum. However the generall Dissolution spared this Hospitall, (as I thinke it did:) yet it seemes it did not long survive the same. For what saith the Record Liber Registri Domini Archid. Cant. taken of the State of it in Cardinall Pooles Visitation, holden Anno 1557? Me∣morand' (saith the same) that Young the Fermor saith that Freeman, and one Dartnall caused the Sisters to surrender the house to the King, and from the King this same came to the said Dartnall, by the Kings Letters Patents, and saith that their Lands were worth a hundreth markes by the yeare, and saith that it is in divers mens hands, whereof
Sr Edward Walton hath bought a great part of the lands which lieth about him, and he himself hath the Mansion house and a part of the land, and saith that the sisters have xlvjs. viijd. by the yeare pension, and there is but one alive that he knoweth. I will now crosse the meadows and river and make up to Herbaldowne Hospitall. Herbaldown, to take a survey of the Hospitall there. It lies also (I confesse) out of the liberty of the City. Yet, for neighbourhood sake, and in regard it was built for the be∣nefit of leprous people of the City (as I conceive:) and continues a harbour to the aged poore (chiefly) of the same, I have thought it worthy our survey. Before I enter upon which (because this was also a Lazar Leprosie. house) let me take a little notice of the wondrous com∣monnesse of that loathsome disease, the Elephantiasy, or Leprosie in this kingdome of old time: which Mr Cambden Britan. in Leicestershire. thinks entered this Iland with the Normans. A rare dis∣ease amongst us (thanked be God) in these dayes, and from what cause so much abounding as in our forefathers, is not now of us easily discovered. It seems to have been a nationall malady, and accordingly in all parts provision made for receit and relief of such persons as that (as I may call it) comitiall disease had marked out for sequestration from publick commerce. Whereof there were no lesse then three about this City, this of Herbald one, S. Iacobs another, and S. Lawrence a third. The chief for wealth in the whole kingdome, and head to all the rest, was that called Burton∣lazars in Leicestershire Idem, Ibidem.. The priviledges communicable to the benefactors (and those of the fraternitie) of which Spittle (the baits they laid to take devout people withall) the following instrument will shew, if you peruse it. VNiversis sanctae matris ecclesiae filiis ad quos praesentes lite∣rae pervenerint, Frater Willielmus Sutton Magister de Bur∣ton Burton Lazars. sanc' Lazari ordinis Ierlm' in Anglia & ejusdem loci confratres, salutem ac utriusque hominis incrementum. Quum quanto magis spiritualia dona erogantur, tanto ut credimus po∣tentiora
aeternae salutis praemia consequantur. Igitur verae dilecti∣onis vestrae innotescimus per praesentes qd' sanctae Romanae eccle∣siae Pontifices ex eorum plenitudine potestatis nobis gratiosè indul∣serunt ut omnibus qui de facultatibus & bonis suis eisdem à Deo collatis subvenerint, seu ad benefaciendum nobis alios exortati fuerint, vel in nostram fraternitatem extiterint assumpti toties quoties unum annum de injuncta eis poenitentia misericorditer relaxarunt, et ad plenam participationem omnium missarum ma∣tutinarum et aliarum orationum et devotionum in singulis eccle∣siis nostri ordinis per orbem Dei offerendarum admittunt, ac sin∣gulis annis die Veneris majoris ebdomadae proprio Curato ple∣nam concedunt potestatem eisdem absolvendi ab omnibus peccatis et criminibus nisi talibus super quibus sedes Apostolica sit meri∣tò consulenda. Vota igitur abstinentiae et peregrinationis quaecun∣que commutandi in alia pia subsidia et dona caritativa domui sive hospitali nostro de Borton sancti Lazari Ier'lm' eroganda, Votis ad terram sanctam et ad limina beatorum Apostolorum Petri et Pauli et voto castitatis in vita duntaxat exceptis: In articulo ve∣rò mortis omnium peccatorum suorum plenam remissionem. Per∣sonis autem ecclesiasticis in nostram fraternitatem assumptis qui propter notam irregularitatis sententiā à canone vel homine con∣tractam ad Sed. Apostolicam pro absolutionis beneficio deberent accedere, ut id à proprio Curato valeant recipere misericorditer concesserunt. Ac etiam ab eodem Curato proprio de horarum ca∣nonicarum aut servitii divini omissione pro recompenso plenam remissionem accipere valeant. Insuper si ecclesiae ad quas perti∣nent qui in nostram fraternitatem sunt assumpti ab officiis & servitio divino fuerint interdict' ipsósque mori contigerint eis∣dem sepultura ecclesiastica non negetur nisi vinculo excommuni∣cationis majoris nominatim fuerint innodati. Nos igitur Ma∣gistri & Confratres Hospitalis praedict' auctoritate Apostolica vi∣goréque privilegiorum in nostram fraternitatem sanctam Iohan∣nem Dyg & Iohannam consortem devotè recipientes nostro∣rum privilegiorum, Indulgentiarum & aliorum pietatis operum participes in omnibus facimus per praesentes sigillo nostrae frater∣nitatis signat'. Dat' apud Borton Sancti Lazari praedict' in domo nostra Capitulari, Anno Dom. Millesimo cccco octogesimo quarto.
Thus endorsed. AVctoritate Domini nostri Iesu Christi & ex spirituali gratia mihi concessa à sanctissimo Domino nostro Papa. Ego ab∣solvo te ab omnibus peccatis tuis quae contra Deum & teipsum fecisti, necnon ab omnibus sententiis, interdictis & suspensionibus concedo tibi plenam remissionem si in hac infirmitate decesseris & in mortis articulo existas, alioquin ex misericordia Dei salva sit tibi gratia donec fueris in mortis articulo constitutus, Amen. But enough of this. Come we now to the Hospitall it self. Whereof let me first give you the foundation, as Ed∣merus hath it Hist. Novor. lib. 1. pag.. Remotiùs verò (saith he, having immediate∣ly before mentioned the foundation of S. Iohns Hospitall without Northgate) quam à Boreali ab Occidentali porta Ci∣vitatis ligneas domos in devexo montis latere fabricans, (mean∣ing Lanfranc) eas ad opus leprosorum delegavit, viris, quem∣admodum in aliis, à foeminarum societate sejunctis. His nihilo∣minus pro qualitate sui morbi omnia quibus egerent de suis mini∣strari constituit, institutis ad hoc peragendum talibus viris de quorum solertia, benignitate ac patientia, ut sibi quidem videba∣tur, nemini foret ambigendum. Thus he. By which it ap∣peares who was the founder, the time also, and end or intent of the foundation of Herbald. Hosp. My Author you see specifies not the indowment setled upon it by the founder. With your leave I will supply that omission and shew you both what the originall indowment was, and how afterwards improved. Archbishop Richard, Beckets immediate Successor in a charter Iuter chartas Hosp. S. Iohan∣nis extra North∣gate. (which I have seen) of his to this, and S. Iohns Hosp. relating first their erection by his predecessor Lan∣franc, shews that he indowed them with sevenscore pound per annum, to issue and arise out of his Mannors of Reculver and Bocton, that is, to either Hospitall after an equall divi∣sion, 70 lib. per annum. This now was the originall indow∣ment of both these Hospitalls. With which the same Ri∣chard, finding them scarce well able to subsist, in augmen∣tation, added 20 lib. per annum more to their former means,
payable out of Reculver Parsonage. Which 160 lib. conti∣nued afterwards constantly paid unto them, and un-altered, untill Archbishop Kilwardby's dayes. For so it appeares by an exemplification made of certain Charters of those Ho∣spitalls, under the seal of Thomas Chicheley, D• of the De∣crees, Archdeacon of Canterbury, and Prothonotary to the Pope, and signed by his Registrorum Custos and Actorum Sri∣ba: namely, that from Beckets time downward untill Kil∣wardbyes, these 2 Hospitalls had and received by equall di∣vision yearely 240 marks or 160 lib. of the Archbishops Chamber, saving that 20 lib. of it was paid them of the Parson of Reculver. This, Kilwardby misliking, withdraws their stipend, and in lieu assignes and appropriat over to them his Parsonage of Reculver, with the Chapels annexed. But for some inconveniences (that of the leprous conditi∣on of the people of this Hospitall, the main, rendring them both unable and unfit to attend and intermeddle in a tithe∣ry, especially so remote:) his next Successor Iohn Peckham alters and revokes what he (Kilwardby) had done, and red∣integrates the Hospitalls into their former estate. Archbi∣shop Stratford afterwards gets the King (Ed. 3.) of whom this Parsonage held in capite, by his Charter, to appropri∣ate it mensae Archiepiscopali, to the Archbishops table, yet charged with that old payment or stipend, which Simon I slip afterwards, with consent of the Chapter, the Prior and Co∣vent, confirms unto them, and that (for the better strength∣ning of their title, maintainable as yet onely by customa∣ry right, having no sufficient jus scritpum to show) by his charter in writing, whereby to recover it, if at any time de∣nied or detained. Ever since which time they have peace∣ably enjoyed the same. These things I thought good the rather to deduce, that I might vindicate that false aspersion wherewith some of the old people of these Hospitalls, ig∣norant altogether of the premised passages, are wont to de∣prave some of the Archbishops of former times, for depri∣ving them of this and that Mannor, and I know not what other means, revenues and indowment, wherewith they
say and will tell you their houses were at first so richly in∣dowed, as they cannot think their Prior of old time, any lesse man forsooth then a Lord Prior, I wot. But thus o∣thers have told them, and they think they may take it up upon trust, and say as much after them. I shall not insist on the specification of the other reve∣nues of this Hospitall, whereof, by the charity of former times, it hath a pretty competency: Eilgar at Bourne and Iohn of Tonford neighbours to the place in their time being the prime (I take it) of the secular benefactors, as King Hen. 3. was of the Royall, who gave to the poore here 20 marks a yeare, out of of the City Fee-ferme, payable by the Chamber. This Hospitalls ancient governour, now called a Master, was a Deane. For to a very ancient deed of the Hospitall (amongst other witnesses) one Benedict in the first place subscribes, with this addition of tunc temporis Decani de san∣cto Nicolao. Pope Iohn 23. Inter Chartas Hospitalis. by his bull, discharged this Ho∣spitall of payment of tithes de hertis, virgultis & animalium nutrimentis. Hitherto and enough of the care taken for their bodies, and the furnishing of them with the necessaries of this life. Next, of the provision made for their souls, and their Chri∣stian instruction that might prepare them for that better one to come. Adjoyning to this Hospitall is an indifferent fair Church, lately (as the Hospitall) by the cost of the reverend Ma∣ster, S. Nicholas Church. Dr Iackson, much beautified, which sometimes was a Parish Church, and hath in it a Font (an ancient one) and to it a Church-yard (the badges and characters of a Paro∣chiall Church:) and in the account of the state and con∣dition of the Hospitall given to the Commissioners upon the Stat. 37. H. 8. c. 4. it is avouched to be a Parish Church, and to have parochiall rights; and Archbishop Stratfords ap∣propriation of it to Eastbridge (whereof anon) calls it eccle∣siam parochialem (the Parish Church.) It was indeed the Church of the Parish of S. Nicholas at Herbaldowne: the
bounds, extent and continent whereof I have not hitherto met with: onely once I saw a deed registred in the Lieger of Eastb. Hosp. 400 yeares old and upwards, mentioning a piece of land, abutting Eastward to the high-way leading to the Barton of Westgate (.i. Westgate-Court) from Ton∣ford, therein said to lie in the Parish of S. Nicholas of Her∣bald. A Parsonage it once was; payeth Procurations to this day, as a Parsonage, and by the same name was in the yeare 1292. at the generall valuation made of all ecclesiasticall livings in this Diocesse Lib. Eccles. Christi Cant., valued at 9 marks per annum, (more then most of the Parsonages in and neare about the City were rated at:) and accordingly the tenths set at xijs. And the ancient Incumbent thereof (as a Parson and Parsonage are relatives) was a Rector, or in the phrase of our Municipalls) a Parson Anno 37. Hen. 3. one Thomas Wal∣sham, by his charter granted Prout in Char∣ta quad. hujus Hosp. to William the brother of Gilbert, of S. Nicholas of Herbald. a certain croft, unto which deed one Luke the then Parson of St Michael of Herbald. (amongst others) was a witnesse. To this Church, and the then Presbyter thereof (the Parsonage and Parson, (as we since phrase it, of St Nicholas) Theobald the Archbi∣shop, by his Charter attested by Walter the then Prior of Christ-Church (amongst others) granted the tithes of his and his Sees Mannor of Westgate Lib. de East∣bridge.. The Parsonage thus improved, a Successor of Theobald, Iohn Stratford, in the yeare 1342. 15. Ed. 3. upon his novell ordination of the Ho∣spitall of Eastbridge in Canterbury, and in and by the same Charter, annexed and appropriated to that Hospitall (the Deed or Charter whereof I purpose shall follow in my Sur∣vey of Eastbridge:) But because it should seem that Church had been the Hospitall Church of St Nicholas, wherein the poore there had the Sacraments and Sacramentals mini∣stred unto them, by the Incumbent for the time be∣ing, (it was built for them, as Archbishop Parker sayes, by Lanfranc their founder) the appropriator, Stratford, to prevent and provide against all damage and detriment which that appropriation might occasion to St Nicholas
Hospitall, obligeth Estbridge Hospitall to the finding (not of a Vicar, the living was too slender to maintaine one, but) of a Chaplaine who should officiate and minister to them in divinis (as the foresaid Instrument will show:) In this, Archbishop Wittlesey afterwards finding some incon∣venience, Harbal downe Chantery. Anno 1371. erects a perpetuall Chantery, the Chantery-Priest whereof (because of the danger of con∣versing with the Hospitallers, being leprous people many of them) seated and housed a part, viz. over against the Hospitall gate, and endowed with a competency of reve∣new, partly from the one, partly from the other Hospitall; was charged with cure of soules, and to that end tyed to perpetuall residence upon it, as the instrument of that Chanteries erection and dotation (to be sought in my Ap∣pendix Vide pag. 241.) more at large will show. In this wise things stood with the Church of Saint Nicholas afterward untill the lat∣ter end of Hen. 8. or beginning of Ed. 6. reigne. About which time the Chantery and Chantery-Priest vanished. Since when, the Church continuing to the Hospitall, the poore are served there in divinis, by one in orders, a mem∣ber of the house. I was willing to enlarge my selfe in this matter the ra∣ther, because the state of this Church inquired into by some, but unknowne of most, I would make as evident as my reading and observation had enabled me. And so I have onely a tale to tell you from Erasmus touching an old cere∣mony used heretofore in this Hospitall (as Wever hath a∣bridged it:) and I shall take leave of it. In this house (saith Wever Ancient su∣ner. Monum. pag. 259.) was reserved the upper leather of an old shooe, which had beene worne (as they gave it out) by Saint Tho∣mas Becket: this shooe, as a sacred relique, was offered to all passengers to kisse; faire set in Copper, and Chrystall. What he there addes of a Priory of black Canons, which (as he saith) was originally annexed to this Hospitall by Lanfranc the founder, is but a tale. The man was mistaken in this, as he is much out in many other things about this City. The Priory, I wot, by him intended is that of Saint
Gregory without Northgate, over against Saint Iohns Ho∣spitall there of Lanfranc's foundation, to which it was not annexed neither, much lesse to Herbald. but an injunction onely laid upon the Canons of the place to minister unto the poore of Saint Iohns in things appertaining to their soules health, and in rites of buriall, as in proper place I shall further show. My progresse being circular I am bound next for Saint Stephens or Hakynton. Whither my next way lyes (by Beau∣sherne, Hakynton. Beasherne. anciently as still a parcell of the Demeasnesse of Poore Priests-Hospitall in Cant.) over Saint Thomas-hill. St Thomas. hill. Where I will stay you no longer then whilest I may give you the derivation of the Hils name. The Inventory of Rents and Revenewes of Esbridge Hospitall presented to the Commissioners upon the Stat. 37. Hen. 8. cap. 4. cals it Thomas Becket's Hill. And that (I suppose) either because the greatest part of the demeanes or endowment of that Hospitall, built by Archbishop Becket, and to this day cal∣led Hospitale sancti Thomae martyris de Eastbridge, lay, as it doth still, about that Hill; or else from a Chapell sometime standing thereaway, called Saint Thomas Chapell, where∣of in a deed of Eastbridge-Lieger of divers quit-rents extra Westgate, I read as followeth: Iuxta campum in quo nova ca∣pella beati Thomae Martyris fuerat. So much of that. Now for Hakynton. I might here enter into a large discourse of the fierce quarell that happened betweene Baldwin the Archbishop, and his Monkes, the Prior and Covent of Christ-Church about a colledge by him intended to have beene erected at this place, which (the cause of their opposition) would mainely have damnified the Monkes, had the project suc∣ceeded. But the story is delivered by so many hands alrea∣dy, and that so fully and at large, that (not desirous to make my booke swell with other mens labours) I purposely spare the recitall of it, and referre the Reader, for satis∣faction, to the Antiquitates Britannicae, the Catalogue of Bishops, to the Acts and Monuments, and Lamberts per∣ambulation.
I my selfe also shall have occasion to give a touch upon it hereafter, in the life both of the same Bald∣win, and of Alanus the Prior. I passe from Hakynton, and crossing the Meadowes and Barton. River at Barton (sometime a Mannor of Christ-Church, and that which Doomesday Booke calls Northwood, from it may seeme the sometime wooddy condition of some part of the soile; in speaking whereof Lambert Perambulati∣on of Kent in Norwood. commits some errors, especially in saying the Mannor was long time in the possession of certaine Gentlemen of the same name, &c.) I come next to the Suburbs without Northgate. Where, after we are past Iesus Hospitall, a Spittle for the Iesus-Hospital. poore served there with good annuall allowance by the Founder, Saint Iohn Boys Knight deceased, (whose Monu∣ment placed by his Tombe against the North-wall of the Body of Christ-Church, further sets forth what he was:) the Priory of Saint Gregories, and the opposite Hospitall of Saint Iohns minister unto me much matter of Survey. I shall first, from Edmerus Hist. Novor. lib. 1. pag., give you their foundation joyntly, and then treate of them in severall. Extra aquilonalem denique portam urbis illius lapideam do∣mum decentem & amplam construxit, & ei pro diversis neces∣situdinibus hominum & commoditatibus habitacula plura cum spaciosa eurte adjecit. Hoc palatium in duo divisit, viros viz. variis infirmitatum qualitatibus pressos uni; parti verò alteri foeminas se malè habentes instituens. Ordinavit etiam eis de suo vestitum, & victum quotidianum; Ministros quoque at∣que custodes qui modis omnibus observarent ne aliquid eis deesset, neque viris ad foeminas, vel foeminas ad viros accedendi facultas ulla adesset. Ex altera verò parte viae Ecclesiam in honorem beati Gregorii Papae composuit, in qua Canonicos posuit, qui regula∣riter viverent, & praefatis infirmis quae saluti animarum sua∣rum congruerent cum Sepultura ministrarent. Quibus etiam in Terris, in Decimis, & in aliis redditibus tantae largitus est, ut ad sustentationem eorum sufficientia esse viderentur.Thus Ed∣merus. The Priory (to begin with that) was you see a house of
regular Canons, otherwise called (from their habite, Saint Grego∣ries. which was a white coate, and a linen rochet, under a blacke cope, with a scapular to cover their head and shoul∣ders Tolyd. Virg. de Invent. Rer. lib. 7. cap. 3.) blacke Canons: of the order of Saint Augustine, as appeares by the Catalogue of the Monasteries of that order (among which it is reckoned for one:) which coming in and compounding with the King (Ed. 1.) about a subsidy (for deniall whereof by the whole cleargy, regulating themselves by the Popes constitution, and their Archbi∣shops example, they were by Parliament excluded from the Kings protection, and their goods pronounced confiscate to the King) obtained letters of protection Reyner Apo∣stolat. Benedict. in Appendice. pag 66.. It was (I take it) the first house of Regular Canons in the whole Kingdome. Sure I am it was erected long before the Priory (of the same order) at Nosthill in Yorkeshire, which Reynor Apostolat. Be∣ned. pag. 158. saith was the first the Kingdome had, being built (as he delivers) by Adelwold or Ethelwolph, Hen. 1. his confessor, that first (if we may beleeve him) brought the order into this Land. What number of Canons here were required by the foundation, I know not, but in a visitation Lib. Registri Consistor. Cant. of the Priory by Cardinall Bourchier, onely five give up their names with the Prior, who indeed then complained of the pauci∣ty of his Canons, which (as he layes the fault) was occasi∣oned by the diminution of their revenewes, or (in his owne words) their Lands, Tents and Rents. Which their reve∣new what it was, or where it lay, I can say but little; because I could never as yet get a sight of the Leiger. Concerning this Priory, in the Booke of Doomsday, in the Archbishops Mannor of Stove-saete or Westgate (as we now call it) thus I read. Et inibi sunt iterum xxx. & ij. mansurae & unum molendinum, quae tenent clerici sancti Gre∣gorii ad eorum ecclesiam. Ibique manent xij. Burgenses qui reddunt eis xxxvs. & molendinum reddit vs. The same Dooms∣day in another place, under the Title of the City mentions the same thing, but with some little variation, thus. Ar∣chiepiscopus habet infra Civitatem Cant. xij. Burgenses, & xxx.
mansuras quas tenent clerici de villa ingildam suam, & red∣dunt xxxvs. & unum molendinum reddit vs. This Priory had other indowment, consisting (as Edmerus showes) as well in Tithes as Temporalties. As for their Titheries, in the yeare 1292. (at what time their Temporalties in Canterbury, Natyndon, Hugevelde, Chertham, Tanintone, and Herbal∣downe, were together valued at xxxl. xvs.) they were these, the Parsonages of Taninton, Westgate, Northgate, St Dunstan, Natindon, Livingsborn, Waltham, Elmested, Be∣trichedenne, Stallesfield. Together with certaine Titheries in Goldstaneston, Berham, Plukele, and Risseburne Lib. eccles. Christi. Cant.. The whole revenew every way Mr Lambert reckons up to but 30l. fal∣ling much short of Speeds estimate, which is 166l. 4s. 5d. Whether of them is mistaken, I leave it to them to inquire that please to search the Record. As for any remarkeable matter or occurrence concer∣cerning this Priory untill the suppression, I read of none Lambert Per∣amb. of Kent in Canterbury. beside the firing of it in King Stephens dayes. As appertaining, so also adjoyning to this Priory, before and untill the Dissolution (yea and after too) was a Coemi∣tery or Church-yard, not proper onely to the Priory, for the buriall of the Domesticks, but which was (whether of right, or by curtesie onely, I know not) common to others also with them, and those not the Hospitallars onely (the reason why they were till very lately destitute of any Church-yard within themselves) but also the Parishioners of Northgate, their neighbours, of which Church this Pri∣ory had the Patronage, who did constantly, by their Wils, appoint their Burials in that Church-yard, and never men∣tion other of their owne: it faring with them as with those other Parish Churches of the City, which belonging some to Christ-Church, some to Saint Augustines, had their want of Church-yards supplyed by those Monasteries. This at Saint Gregories continued to the Parish of Northgate after the dissolution, untill (as the tradition goes) Sir Iohn Boys the late Tenent to the Priory obtained to appropriate and inclose it upon exchange of the moderne Church-yard
ground for it with the Churchwardens of Northgate for the time being. It continued (I say) till then to the Pa∣rish, for a buriall place; de facto, but was not acknowledged theirs of right. For at a visitation Lib. Consistorii Cant. holden in the yeare 1560. it is from Northgate, by the sworn men (inter alia) thus presented viz. That Mr May doth withhold part of the Church-yard &c. This Mr May (it seems) was then tenent to the Priory. Who in defence of himself being convented upon this presentment, exhibuit literas Regias patentes (as the act of court runs:) per quas patet cimiterium esse jus heredi∣tarium Reverendissimi, &c. Afterwards, viz. anno 1573. at another visitation Lib. ejusdem Consistorii., it was from the same place thus present∣ed, to wit, That their Church-yard is not decently kept, neither can they bury in it unlesse they pay 2d. for an old bo∣dy, and a penny for a childe. It hath been a thing much controverted between the Controversie between the City and S. Gregories. City and this Priory, whether it be of the Cities liberty or not. Now not out of any desire I have to stickle in the mat∣ter, but for manifestation and maintenance of a truth here∣in thē best I am able, unto which by occasion of the places survey, I am in a manner engaged, I shall without partiali∣tie deliver what, in matter of fact, I know may conduce to the clearing of this doubt and quieting the debate. In the yeare 1269. anno 53. Hen. 3. I finde Vide postea pag. 187. the Prior of St Grego∣ries, by the same writ with the Prior of Christ-Church, the Abbat of S. Augustines and others, after a legall discussion of the case by enquiry and verdict of select men of the City, and voicinage, acquited by the Kings writ of tallage, .i. of being within compasse of tallage with the City. Besides in the Argument drawn up by the Abbat of St Aug. in de∣fence of himself and his Abbey against the City, challen∣ging the Abbey and some of her neighbouring demaines to be of and within the liberty of the City in Hen. 6. time, amongst other heads thereof (that it might not seeme strange, that the Abbey being in the Suburbs, and so neare the City wall, should neverthelesse be exempt from the Franchise of the same, by shewing how the matter stood
in same state with other like places about the City: this Priory is pleaded to be as without the walls, so without the liberty also of the same City in these words, viz. Ac etiam quòd sunt aliqua loca adeo prope muros Civitatis praedictae sicut sunt loci in praedictis articulis ballivorum praedict &c. contenti quae semper fuerunt extra praedictam Civitatem, praecinctum, libertatem aut suburbia ejusdem, viz. vicus de Westgate, vicus Sancti Martini, Prioratus Sancti Gregorii, Hospitale Sancti Io∣annis de Northgate &c. In H. 8. time certain articles were concluded between the Prior of this house and the Covent of the same on the one party, and the Major and Common∣alty of the City of the other party, for the composing of this difference about the temporall Jurisdiction of the place. Which composition, from the records of the cham∣ber, I shall in my Appendix present the Reader with. Vide. pag. 246. But leaving these things, and the house, I come next to St Thomas Chapell. the ground lying behinde it, sometime the Canons orchard or garden: where are yet standing or rather falling (and yeelding to time) the ruines of an old chapell, a barn I wot of late, dedicate to that once reputed holy Martyr St Thomas of Cant. and called (as I finde by the will Penes registrum Consistor. Cant. of one William Harry of St Martin, anno 1461. who gave a legacy unto it) Capella fraternitatis sancti Thomae Martyris existen' in orto sancti Gregorii. I will close this discourse of St Gre∣gories with the following memorandum, touching the water∣course of Christ-Church running through this part of it. Christ-Church Watercourse. Memorandum (saith a book of Christ-Church) de carta Prioris & Conventus sancti Gregorii Cant. specialem mentionem faci∣end. & expressum quòd aquaeductum Prioris & Conventus eccle∣siae Christi Cant. per pomarium suum transeuntem salvum & il∣laesum quantum in eis est conservabunt, & permittent operarios dictae ecclesiae Christi Cant. quotiens necesse fuerit ad eundem aquaeductum emendandum per Curiam & portam suam liberum habere ingressum & egressum, &c. Dated anno 1227. I return now to the Hospitall, whose foundation being St Iohns Ho∣spitall. premised, her dotation should follow: but what I might
here say of it, is already said and may be seen in that of Her∣baldowne, the other twin as I may call it, for their parity as well in time as manner, both of their erection and originall endowment. This of S. Iohns time was fired in Ed. 3. time, as I finde by certain letters of the Hospitall under their seal, framed after the manner of a brief, & directed to all prelates in generall, wherein they in pitifull manner deplore their miserable estate occasioned (as they say) by a late lament∣able fire happening in their house, which had wasted their Hospitall and adjacent edifices, in the which were more then an 100 poore people sustained, with desire of their cha∣ritable relief, letting them know (as the most perswasive Rhetorick of that age) what indulgences had been grant∣ed to their benefactors by severall Archbishops and Bishops of former times. This Hospitall hath a faire Chapel to it decently kept, Chapell. wherein divine service is said, the Sacraments administred, and Gods word preached to them of the house. Their pre∣sent Chaplains stipend is the same with his predecessors of old, 8 lib. per annum. The Chapell hath had some dome∣stick benefactors. Amongst others, one William Garnar, who in the yeare by his will Penes Regist. Consist. praedict. gave xls to the mending of the steeple, and 4 lib. for a new bell. Iohn Roper another, who in the yeare 1526. by his will Ibidem. took order with his Exe∣cutour for the new building of the side Chancells Eastern window (being the window, as he calls it, of our Ladies al∣tar) proportionable and correspondent to that of the quire. The Chapell affoords these Monuments of some note. Orate proanima Aliciae Ashburneham filiae & heredis Williel∣mi Tooke armigeri & Aliciae Woodland uxoris ejus & antea fuit uxor Thomae Roper Gent. quae obiit xvij die April. Anno R. R. Hen. 8. xv. & Anno Domini 1524. Cujus animae &c. She lieth in the same side Chancell: in the said Eastwin∣dow whereof these words are yet legible. Orate pro—Rooper & probono—Thomasinae uxoris ejus —Domini 1529.
In the quire-window. Orate pro bono statu—Hyllys fratris istius Hospitalis & Prior, qui ab hoc seculo migravit, qui fenestram istam fieri fecit, Anno Domini 1474. It is a very brave window, having in so many panes, every of the twelve Apostles pourtrayed, with the severall ar∣ticles of the Creed that they are said to make. In the South-window. Orate pro animabus Domini Willielmi Septvans &—consor∣tis suae. Archbish. Stratford erecting and endowing the Vicarage of Northgate-Church, expressely reserves and excepts from the Vicar thereof the tithes of this Hospitall, in these words. Oblationibus & obventionibus Hospitalis de Northgate, duntaxat exceptis. In what case and estate the Commission∣ers upon the Statute 37. H. 8. c. 4. found the present Ho∣spitall, were it not too tedious of recitall, I would here sub∣joyne. I suspect a fleecing ofit as of other like places by the sacrilegious pilferies of those ravenous and wretched times set upon the spoil even of (what the Proverb might have stav'd them from) the very spittle it self. I could in∣stance in some particulars wherein it suffered, but my haste will not permit me. I have now surrounded the Suburbs, yet having hitherto said nothing of Westgate-street, the Suburbs (I mean) ly∣ing Westgate-street. without Westgate, exempt from the libertie and Fran∣chese of the City, give me leave here to give it a place a∣part, and therewith to finish my survey of the Suburbs, and then I shall enter the walls. I have seen a presentment in Eire, inrolled in the Kings Exchequer of the 21. of Ed. 1. wherein (inter alia) this street (Westgate-street) is presented and avouched, how truly I know not, to have anciently belonged to the Citi∣zens of Canterbury, subject with the City to tax and aid; but in King Iohns time to have been taken from the City by Hubert the Archbishop, to the Cities great damage, in re∣gard merchants and men of worth and estates withdrew
themselves thither, and there hous'd themselves, and were defended of the Archbishop against the Cities impositions. But whether this part of our Cities Suburbs, were not from all Antiquity, as now it is, clearely exempted from the Franchese and Liberty thereof, because part of the Arch∣bishops Mannor (and Hundred) of Westgate, as we now call it, or of Stoursaete, as of old it was named, distinct from the City-Hundred (as it seemes it was no other of old) may deserve inquiry and consideration, and the rather (sith Doomsday Booke Records, that the Archbishop then chal∣lenged to have Forisfacturam in viis extra Civitatem ex utra∣que parte ubi terra sua est) because the Archbishop, in right of his See, is Dominus Fundi (Lord of the Soile) on either side this Street. It makes much for this what Edmerus Hist. Novor. lib. . said upward of 500 yeares agone, that in the Lands of the Arch∣bishopricke throughout the Kingdome, by an ancient cu∣stome and usage, the Archbishop hath the sole mannaging of things aswell humane, as divine. But enough of the street. Somewhat I have heard of a Ferry sometime at this place, Ferry. belonging, as I am told, to the Archbishop, who did ar∣rent it out for 16d. per annum. But I have seene no record to warrant the relation, and therefore no more of that untill I be better instructed. The Archbishop and the Citizens, both (as bound by oath, if I mistake not) standing in the defence and main∣tenance of their liberties, the one of his See, the other of their City, have anciently much differed about liberties here, but now and of a long time all such matters have been well accorded and settled betweene them; wherefore, and because I much desire they should ever so continue, ex pro∣fesso, I decline the discourse of their quarels, least I may seeme to rub up old sores. Having now done with Westgate-street, I will take the next way into the City, and that is by Westgate. But ere we passe or enter further then the Gate, I must, according to my purposed method premise and say somewhat of the Wards of the City.
Division of the City into Wards. THe Wards of our City at this day are, as (I take it) Number and names of the Wards. they ever were, nor more nor lesse then sixe in number. In name distinguished and differenced from each other, by the names of the sixe principall Gates, that is. 1. West∣gate-ward. 2. Newingate-ward. 3. Northgate-ward. 4. Worthgate-ward. 5. Burgate-ward, and 6. Ridingate-ward. Of that number at first, haply in imitation of the Shires division into 6. Lathes, whereof it did of old consist. Of the first division made of the City into Wards, nei∣ther written Record, nor unwritten Tradition makes any Their origi∣nall. mention. But I conceive it very ancient. The whole Ci∣ty (it seemes) in the Conquerors time, was but one intire hundred. For Doomsday Booke speaking of the Churches Mannor of Barton, which it calleth North-wood, saith it was de hundredo de Cantuarberia, as the very words are. If so, it was not long ere a sub-division made of it, haply for more easie and good Government, into divers severall hundreds, namely into the sixe Wards or hundreds now under our Survey. For the more ancient appellation and terme given to those our Cities moderne sub-divisions of Wards, was Hundred, as almost all our eldest deeds and other like evidences doe witnesse, which generally, close with a memorandum, that they were first made and recorded in the hundred of that Division (as in the hundred of West∣gate, Burgate, and so alike for the rest) and afterwards in the Burgmote of the City. Another terme they had some∣what varying from the other in sound, but of synonymall sense and signification with it, which was Bertha, a frequent phrase in our ancient evidences. These Divisions, Fitz-Stephens, in his description of London, endeavouring to paralell it, all he could, with old Rome, calls Regions. Every of these Divisions, Hundreds, Wards, Regions, was committed and intrusted, for reigle∣ment, to an Alderman, one in office and authority, the
same (I take it) with Praepositus Hundredi, or the Hundreds Ealdor, as our Ancestors would phrase it. I will spare all discourse touching (what many mens inter∣pretation hath made of vulgar knowledge) the word, Alder∣man, both name, and office, in generall, derived, traduced and descended unto us from great antiquity, and confine my selfe to speake of those onely set over our City Wards. Whose antiquity I conceive to be from about Rich. 1. time; the generality of these Aldermen being said to bee of that ages production Vide Dn. Hen. Spelmanni Glossar. in hac voce. (foure hundred yeares old and up∣wards.) These Aldermen, every of them, had and kept within their Ward, and haply (as the Jewes held theirs Deuter. cap. 21 ver. 19. & cap. 16.) at their severall Gates, a Court holden every three weekes, which was called of our ancestors sometime the Hundred-Court, sometime the Wardmote, that is, the meeting or assembly Wardmote. of the Hundred or Ward, or the Portmote, as the Juris∣diction was called Port-soka. Their office, from their name, was called an Alderman∣rie; Aldermanrie. which it seemes was not (as now) elective, but as free∣hold either demiseable or deviseable, ad libitum of him or her that held the same: or if neither demised, nor devised of him nor her in life time, but indisposed of at death, then as inheritance and fee, descended to the next heire at law; and thence it was that (as I finde) most of the same Aldermanries continued in a name and family, through many descents and successions, as that of Burgate to the Chiches, of Northgate to the Polres or Pollers, as we now write it, of Newingate to the Digges, of Worthgate to the Cokyns, afterward to the Tiernes, of Westgate to the Brownes, and so of the rest. This last of Westgate, was in 10. Rich. 2. given by the Will Lib. Camerae Civitatis. of Henry Garnate to Sara his wife. It sometimes was in the Abbat of Saint Augustines possession, who (as Thorne tels me) Anno 1278. gave it to Mr Nicholas Doge, tenend'. & habend' eandem cum omnibus appendiciis tam in civitate Cant. quam extra in suburbio ejusdem vel alibi, de praefato Abbate &
Conventu in perpetuum, reddendo inde annuatim in thesaurario nostro. xl. sterlingorum pro omnibus servitiis, salva secta Burg∣moti Cant. quam ob eandem causam facere tenet. As Thornes words are. Before this. i. in the beginning of Hen. 3. time, I finde Lib. eccles. Christi Cant. it enjoyed by one William (as he writes himselfe) Cissor Domini Regis, the Kings Taylor, I take it. But of late dayes it was the Brownes. Whose then seate and inheri∣tance (before the Septvans) was the Mannor of Milton, or Middleton by Canterbury (from whence so called is of vulgar conjecture:) and continued to the name of the Brownes, untill of late the inheritrix married to Robert Honywood Esquire, sonne of that famous Mary Honywood (of whom I leave you to take further information, if her fame save you not the labour, from her Monuments Inscription or Epi∣taph in Dr Hakewill Apology. lib. 3. cap. 5. Sect. 7. pag. 224.) and father of Sr Robert Honywood of Charing, and Sr Thomas Honywood of Marks-Hall in Essex, whose it now is, the ancestor of whom Sr George Browne, in Rich. 3. dayes, taking part with Lancastrian Hen. 7. was, by Parliament, deprived for it of this Aldermanry, but his heires soone after. i. in the 1. Hen. 7. repossessed of it. I insist the more upon this Aldermanry, because I conceive it to have beene, if not absolutely the chiefe, yet one of more respect and consequence then the rest; which were all bought or otherwise gotten into the City, and made eli∣gible by the Maior and Commonalty early to that this was, which (it seemes) came not in untill about the time of the New ordination made by Hen. 7. which appoints two Alder∣men to every Ward. In some respects also it differed from the rest, which (I take it) were held onely by Freemen and inhabitants of the Franchise, whereas this was holden nei∣ther by one nor tother, a great inconvenience to the City, as in the fore-cited act of Parliment (1 Rich. 1.) in the pre∣face of it, is suggested. So much of the Wards in generall. Which, it seemes by an ancient Record Record. de An. 9. Rich. 2. You shall finde a copy of it in my Appendix. pag. 298., were annexed and appertaining to the Fee-Ferme paid by the City to the King, of whom they held in capite. Now of each of them in severall; beginning, because I
staid you (as you may remember) at Westgate, with West∣gate-Ward; and observing and surveying such things (as I shall doe likewise afterwards in the rest) as occurre therein any thing worthy of note or memory: saving that I shall reserve the Churches to a future mention by themselves. Westgate-Ward. MArching on therefore from the Gate into the City, by the high Street (that, I meane, terminated by this Gate at the West, and by the opposite Newingate at the East-end) we have on this side Kingsbridge, on either hand of us a Gate that leads us to a severall ruined Monastery. That on the right hand late the bare-footed Franciscans, or the Minorite-Observant-mendicant-Gray-Fryers. The other on our left, late the Minors also, or the Praedicant-black-Fryers. I will begin with the Gray-FF. or Franciscans. So called from Seraphicall St Francis (Wevers Epithete) the in∣stitutor Gray-Fryers. of their order. The legend of whose life and mira∣cles, because too tedious for my intended short method, and too too fabulous most what, I doubt, for your beleefe, for mine I am sure; I have thought good rather to over∣passe in silence, then to trouble either my selfe to write, or you to read the rabble of fopperies (if no worse) that are written of it and them, legible in Matt. Paris. Polyd. Virg. but more largely in Owens genealogy of Monks &c. the Chronicon Minorum, and elsewhere. Leaving therefore (I say) their Founder and Patron, I come to the Fryers Qui dicantr Monachi, & qui Praetres, item & quo dislent vide Paor. sup. cap. Causam quae. vt. De judic. l. 2 Decretal. & consil. 28. parte secunda. themselves. They were called Mi∣nors or Minorites, from the humility and low liuesse of minde which by the prescript of their Founder they ought ever to have: Observant, to distinguish them from a looser sort of Franciscans, then whom these were more carefull and observant to keepe the strict rules and orders of St Francis, and were therefore also called Regular Franci∣scans:
Mendicant, because pretending to Evangelicall perfection, and therefore professing wilfull povertie, they subsisted chiefly upon almes, which they used, with the Predicants, Augustines, and Carmelites, to ask and re∣ceive ostiatim, from doore to doore; whereby chiefly Friers were differenced from Monks, who kept home, and lived upon their own in common: Gray, from their habit, which (in imitation of their Founder Polyd. Virg. de Invent. Rer. lib. 7. cap. 4.) was a long gray coat down to their heels, with a Cowl or Hood, and a cord or rope about their loynes in stead of a girdle. Their govern∣ours proper name and stile was Guardianus. Monachi olim (saith one Barthol. Car∣tagena. in expo. . jur. Canon. lib. 3. . 35.) non omnes simul commorabantur, sed domunculas sparsim per montes & saltus structas habebant: quo derelicto, in∣ceperunt postea ad modum Reip. in communitate habitare, uno eo∣rum electo velut principe & gubernatore, qui eos regeret & gu∣bernaret, praeesset Monasterio, quem Graeci appellabant archi∣mandrita & coenobiarcha, nos verò communiter vocamus abba∣tem, licèt temporis lapsu factum sit, ut, multiplicatis monacho∣rum ordinibus illorum nomina etiam multiplicata sint: unde apud Domnicanos vocatur Prior, apud Franciscanos Guardi∣anus, apud Trinitarios minister. These Franciscans came first into England about the yeer 1224. in Hen. 3. reigne, as did the Dominicans. How or Harpsfield.  Hist. Eccl. Angl. saul. 13. cap. 11. where they were afterwards entertained with provision, and accommodation of housing, I finde not untill the yeare 1270. By which time, it seems (whether by their piety, or policy, I know not) they had so insinuated themselves in∣to the favour of a devout and worthy Citizen, and of a flou∣rishing family then in the City (as still in the County) one Iohn Digg, or Diggs, then an Alderman, and 12 yeares be∣fore (1258.) and also 3 yeares after (1273.) one of the Bai∣liffs of the City, whom Wever miscalls S• Iohn Diggs, that he purchased for them the Iland in Canterbury, then called Bynnewith, and shortly after translated them thither. Emit Insulam vocatam Bynnewight in Cantuar. & locum Portae super Stour-street ad opus Fratrum Minorum, & tempore opportuno transtulit Fratres ad illam, as Wever Ancient fu∣nerall Mo∣num. pag. 134. from Leland. Whence
the place, this Iland, might derive the name of Bynnewith, Binnewith. if I may conjecture, I shall tell you, either from a composi∣tion of two Saxon words, Binnan which signifies within, and With, an Iland, as it were the Iland within, in distinction of it from an Iland sometime lying without the City, by West∣gate, Northward, called simply With, whereofin the elder rentalls of Christ-Church mention is made thus. Parva In∣sula extra Westgate, versus Aquilonem, vocata With. Or else Binnewith quasi Bine-with, the double Iland; indeed it is no other, and an ancient rentall of Christ-Church (which once had ground, houses, and fee here) speaks of rent in St Peters Parish payable de duabus parvis Insulis ubi fuit Crine∣milne. For thereabout sometime stood a milne of Christ-Church, so called, unto which the lane in St Peters called Mead-lane, and of Speed in his Map of the City miscalled Maiden-lane, did leade, and from thence was called Crine∣melne-lane. For in an exchange anno 1294. made between Christ-Church and S. Austins, three tenements in St Peters Parish in Canterbury being granted to the Abbey, and of them is thus described and bounded, viz. quoddam tenemen∣tum jacens in magno gardino dicti Abbatis, juxta terram fra∣trum Minorum Cant. ex parte Australi, in venella quae dicitur Medlane, & quae olim (saith the deed In Lib. eccles. Cant.) vocabatur Crinemelle-lane. But may it not more probably be called Binnewith (that is Binney-Iland) from the same radix with the mead, or meadow-ground by it, called to this day Binney-meads; as the bridge thereaway, which we call Bingley-bridge, is rightly called Binney-bridge, from the Saxon, binnan ea sig∣nifying (as I said) within or between the water, because ly∣ing and inclosed within or between our Stour or rivers double channell, bounding it on either side: whence the Codicill or Landboc of Cenulph the Mercian that gave that ground to the Church copied in my Appendix pag. 301. thus describes it to lie. Inter duos gremiales rivos fluminis quod dicitur Stour. Which Mr Lambert reades thus. Inter duos genitales rivos &c. and accordingly would send us further up the stream, to finde out this ground about our
rivers spring-heads; whereas the very name yet remaining shows it to lie here. I may not so leave the places name. For though ancient A Family of Binnewiths. and even obsolete with us, yet of so much note with our Ancestors, as it served to give name to a family of Citizens, sometime the residentiaries of the place, and from thence called the Withs, or (as more frequently) the Binne∣withs, whereof one Iohn Binnewith about the beginning of H. 3. reigne was a benefactor to Herbaldowne Hosp. where I have seen his charter with the seal appendant, in the cir∣cumference of it thus circum-inscribed SIGILL. IOHAN∣NIS DE WITH. And one Arnold Binnewith was, anno 1221. and also again about the yeare 1227. one of the Bailiffs of the City Lib. Hosp. de Eastbridge.. The Friers having gotten possession of the place, both the Iland and her former Incolae or inhabitants, soon after lost their names. But leaving that, I proceed. The Friers being here seated, and many houses and much ground of the fee of Christ-Church Monks lying within the Ambitus or precinct of their Monastery, they (it seems) made bold to usurp them as their own, because within the confines of their seat, and so de facto, made themselves absolute Lords and possessors of the Iland. The Monks seeing the common people much inclined to favour them, and not willing to incurre theirs, lest it might bring with it the peoples displeasure also, make a vertue of as it were a necessity; and to shew themselves as forward in charitie to∣ward them, as the common people, after the Friers (by their connivence 'tis like) had been a pretty while in pos∣session without paying or yeelding to the Monks their ac∣customed rents and services, which their quondam tenents were bound to pay, viz. anno 1294. by composition, remit unto them all arrerages and duties past gratis, or intuitu cha∣ritatis, as they phrase it, and for the future make them an a∣batement of almost the moiety of the rent: as the Compo∣sition will show, which (because it sets forth in some sort the state of the Iland, and how it was peopled before the FF. time) I here propose, transcribed from the Records of the Cathedrall.
NOtum sit omnibus praesentibus & futuris quòd in festo Nata∣lis Composition between Christ-Church and the Friers. beati Ioannis Baptistae Anno Dom. Mccxciiijo. Regni ve∣rò Regis Edwardi xxijo. Ita convenit inter Priorem & Conven∣tum ecclesiae Christi Cant. ex parte una, & Gardianum & Con∣ventum fratrum minorum Cant. ex altera, viz. quod cum di∣versa tenementa continerentur infra ambitum ipsorum fratrum de feodo praedict' Prioris & Conventus, viz. tenementum quod quondam fuit Samuelis Tinctoris pro quo debebatur eis annuatim vijd. quad. Item pro tenemento quondam Beringeri in With pr∣quo xijd. Item pro tenemento ejusdem in Ottemed. pro quo vd Item pro tenemento quondrm Seronae de Boctone pro quo vjd. Item pro redditu Wiberti quondam Prioris ecclesiae Christi praed. juxta Ottewell, pro quo xijd. Item pro tenemento Stephani filii Lewini Samuel pro quo xviijd. Praefati Prior & Conventus remiserunt & quietum clamaverunt in perpetuum praedictis fratribus & eo∣rum Successoribus omnia arreragia sibi debit' de tenementis praed. intuitu caritatis. Ita viz. qd' iidem fratres & eorum Successo∣res de cetero per suos procuratores fideliter solvi facient annuatim praedict. Priori & Con. in Thesauraria sua iijs. anuui redditus pro omnibus tenementis praedict. viz. medium ad Pascha & ali∣ud medium ad festum Sancti Michaelis pro omnibus servitiis & secularibus demandis ad ipsos Prior. & Con. de eisdem tene∣mentis spectand. & si contingat praefat. procuratores post viginti dies postquam super hoc praemuniti fuerint in solutione praedicti annui redditus deficere, bene licebit praed. Prior. & Conventui & eorum ministris distringere omnia tenementa praed. pro arrer∣agiis quae à retrò fuerint de annuo redditu supradict. In cujus Rei testimonium Sigillum ecclesiae Christi praed. & sigillum commune fratrum praedict. huic scripto chirographato alternatim sunt ap∣pensa. Acta sunt haec apud Cantuar. die & anno supradictis. How this might stand with their Founders rule and their own vow, I see not. For consult their rule delivered arti∣culately in Matt. Paris, and you shall finde them clearely debarred and disabled, both by their vow of povertie, and by expresse prescript beside from all peculium and propriety. Fratres (saith the rule) nihil sibi approprient, nec domum,
nec locum, nec aliquam rem. Et tanquam peregrini & advenae in hoc saeculo, in paupertate & humilitate Domino famulantes, vadunt pro elemosyna confidenter &c. Whence that of Du∣rand Specul. jur. de monach stat. Lib. 4. Part. 3. n. 7. Gray-Friers priviledges., and others. Mendicantes sunt possessionum incapaces. These Franciscans or Minorite Friers being a great prop to the Papacy were prosecuted by severall Popes with many priviledges, immunities, indulgences and what not graces, that might assure them the Popes fast friends, and faithfull sonnes and servants. Beside their exemption and immunitie from Episcopall and all other ordinary Juris∣diction; in matter of tithes, they were priviledged from payment of any, either of their house, their orchard (or garden) and the nutriment. i. the herbage or agistment of their Cattell, as in the Decretalls Nimis prava. 12. de excessib. praelat.. They had withall in matter of buriall liberam sepulturam (paying the fourth part of the obventions to the Parish Church:) whosoever would, might elect and have their Church or Coemitery, for his place of buriall Cap. Dudum. de sepult. in Clementin.. And that was a thing whereof multi∣tudes were ambitious, and the rather because they were made beleeve, that who so was buried amongst them, espe∣cially ifin the holy and vertuous habit of a Frier, should not onely be secured from evill spirits that would else haply disturb the quiet of his grave, but also be as sure to go to heaven. There is authentick record of many worthy per∣sonages, and of worshipfull families that have been here in∣terred: the Catalogue of whom Wever Of ancient funerall Mo∣numents. pag. 238. hath collected and delivers, but under a wrong title, saying they were bu∣ried in the White, whereas he should have said the Gray-Friers: as I can make good to the satisfaction of any that makes a doubt hereof. As for benefactors to this Monastery, I finde these. One William Woodland of Holy crosse parish anno 1450. by his will In Regist. Cons. Cant. gave 5 lib. toward the reparation of their Church, and 5 marks beside to the repairing of their Dortor. Hamon Beale, a Citizen, and in his time twice Maior of Canterb. choosing their Church for the place of his buriall, as Isabell his wife had formerly done, gave 40s. in money to the Co∣vent.1492.
Indeed (to be short) almost every testate dying man of the City and neighbouring parts of any worth, remem∣bred these FF. The Dominicans also and the Augustines of this City, in their wills with some legacy more or lesse. One domestick benefactor I meet with, one Richard Mar∣tin, the Guardian (I take it) of the house, who in the yeare 1498. by his will In Registro memorato. gave liberally both to the Church and Co∣vent. He was (as it seems by his will) Parson also of Ickham, and Vicar of Lyd in Kent. But what may he mean by writing himself (as he doth) Bishop of the universall Church? a title so cried down and condemned as Anti-christian by Pope Gregory the Great; I conceive he was a titular Bi∣shop, a Bishop in name and title onely, endued with the Or∣der, but not with the Jurisdiction Episcopall, having no particular charge to intend, but generally officiating as Bishop in any part of the Christian Church. These titular Bishops were frequent with us in those dayes. About the same time one Thomas Wells, the Prior of S. Gregories by Canterbury, in his will In eod. Regist. Titular Bi∣shops. writes himself Bishop of Sidon. He was a titular Bishop likwise: an order as excepted against by some, so defended by other of the Trent Councell; where∣of I leave you to informe your self further (if you please) from Tholosanus Syntag. in universi Lib. 15. cap. 12. n. 44. and others. The use made of them (I take it) was to supply the Diocesan-Bishops absence in such affairs Episcopall as these, to wit, Consecration of Chur∣ches, and Church-yards, and their Reconciliation, confer∣ring of orders, Confirmation of children, and the like. But to our Friers again. Hugh Rich, the Guardian, or (which is all one) the Wardein (as the Statute Anno 25. H. 8. cap. 12. calls him) of this Covent, was one that conspired and suffered with Elisabeth Barton, the holy maid of Kent, whereof before in my survey of the Nonnery. This Monastery had, as the place still hath, a double gate and way to it, the one called Porta Orientalis, the other Porta Borealis; that in Stourstreet, in All-Saints Parish, this in High-street, in S. Peters Parish. Let me but acquaint you, that John Peckham Archbishop
of Canterbury in Ed. 1. time, was first a Fryer, and the Pro∣vinciall of this order, and I have done with the Franciscans, or Gray-Fryers. Leaving these then, I come next to the other sort of Mi∣nors, Black-Fryers. the Dominican, Blacke, Preaching FF. Preaching, because they were the onely Preachers of all the Fryers: Blacke, because of their habit Polyd Virg. de Invent Rer. lib. 7. cap 4., which was a blacke cope and cowle over a white cote: Dominican, because St Domi∣nicke was their founder, a holy man (they say) contempora∣ry with Saint Francis, and whose disciples (the first Fryers of this Covent) were even coaetaneous with the Franci∣scans of this City, coming both hither much about the same time. It is said of them, that King Hen. 3. at their co∣ming received them kindly (so did Stephen Langton also the then Archbishop Harpsfield. Hi. Eccles. Anglic. Saec. 13 cap. 11.:) and placed them at Canterbury, where (it seemes) he built them this late Monastery, which was the first that the Kingdome had of that kinde. Hence and from this ground I suppose Wever takes his warrant for at∣tributing the erection of this house to Hen. 3. The title proper to the governour of the Dominicans, was Prior. Like the Franciscans, they and the Monkes of Christ-Church, in the same yeare with the other (1294) came to composi∣tion about divers houses and lands lying within their pre∣cinct. The Churchyard of this Monastery was the place of Ren∣devous designed by the Citizens of Canterbury conspiring a revenge to be taken of the Monks of Christ-Church, for refusing them their ayde, and to joyne with them in the finding and furnishing of twelve horsemen imposed on the City by the King (Ed. 1.) for his expedition against the Re∣bellious Lewslyn Fitz-Griffin Prince of Wales, which Stow Annals in Ed. 3. Vide ti quit. Brit. in vita Rob. Kil∣wardby Ar∣chiep. (much mistaken in the time, and some other circumstances) thus relates. About this time (saith he, speaking of the 1. of Ed. 3.) the like stirre was made against the Monkes of Canterbury: whereof I finde recorded as followeth. King Edward preparing an Army into Scotland, comman∣ded the Bailiffes and Citizens of Canterbury to furnish him
twelve horsemen, and send them to New-Castle, toward which charge, the Citizens required ayde of the Monks: who answered them that without the assent of the King and their Archbishop they would not agree thereunto, for so much as the Kings of England had founded their Church in free and perpetuall almes. Whereupon Willi∣am Chilham Bailiffe, and many Commons of the City assembling themselves in the Preaching Fryers Church-yard, conspired and sware against the Monkes as fol∣loweth. 1. That they would overthrow the pentises, windowes and milne, belonging to the Monks. 2. That no Citizen should dwell in any house belonging to the Monks. 3. That all rents belonging to the Monkes of Canterbury should be gathered to use of the Commons. 4. That no man should send or sell to the Monks any victu∣alls. 5. That they should seize all the horses, and beasts that came into the City with carriage to the Monks. 6. That all such Monks as came forth of their house should be spoiled of their Garments. 7. That a trench should be cast, to stop all men from go∣ing in or coming out. 8. That every Pilgrim should at his entring sweare that he should make no offering. 9. Also that every of those Commons aforesaid should weare on their finger a ring of gold that belonged to Thomas Becket: Thus he. This Churchyard is in part now become the Campus Mar∣tius for our young Artillery of the City. Wevers collection of ancient funerall monuments will ac∣quaint you of divers personages of note and quality bu∣ried here. At this place the Parish Clarks of the City once had and Fraternities of Parish Clarks.
held a gild or fraternity, commonly called the Fraternity of St Nicholas. I have my direction for this, from the fol∣lowing legacy of one Richard Cram sometime of this City, who by his will In Registro Consist. Cant., dated 1490. gave to the Fraternity of St Nicholas kept by the Parish Clarkes of Canterbury, in the house of the Fryers Preachers of Cant. vjs. viijd. as his very words are. Of these Fraternities, our City hath had divers; amongst which that of the Smiths newly revived, is the most ancient. The elder rentalls of Christ-Church bounding out some Land of theirs lying without Newin∣gate, make mention both of it and of certaine ground be∣longing to it, in these words. Terra quae pertinet ad gildam fabrorum. This and all other like Fraternities (if the Disso∣lution of the Monasteries spared them, yet) the Stat. of 1o. Ed. 6. cap. 14. tooke hold of, and dissipating the socie∣ties, seized on all their goods and endowment. If any de∣sire further information touching them and their antiquity, I referre them to St Henry Spelmans Glossary, in Verb. Gilda. This Monastery had a treble passage to it, namely by three Gates, one, and that the most private, that opening before the Street by Saint Alphege Church, a second by the Waterlocke, the third in Saint Peters street (as we call it) built (it seemes) not long before the 30. of Ed. 3. for then these Fryers, by their Charter or deed passe over to the Hospitall of Estbridge a place, shops and garden lying to∣wards the West and North, (inter novam portam nostram, say they, & introitum ad ecclesiam nostram in parochia sancti Pe∣tri, &c.) as in Estbridge Booke; in another part of the Booke thus described and bounded. In parochia sancti Petri Civitatis Cant. inter gardinum & mansionem fratrum praedi∣catorum Cant. versus North & West, & quandam venellam vocat' Brekyepottislane versus East. Approaching to an end of my discourse touching these Fryers, I cannot (me thinkes) close better then with Mat∣thew Paris his relation of the controversie, in or about the yeare 1243. happening betweene them and the Franci∣scans, which together with his glosse (which he addes) up∣on it, and them, verbatim followes,
ET ne mundus (saith he having made mention of other discords) turbinibus undique multiplicatis vacare videretur, Controversie betweene the Franciscans and Domini∣cans. inter fratres Minores & Praedicatores controversia eisdem tem∣poribus ventilata, multos, eò quòd viam perfectionis, videlicet paupertatis & patientiae, videbantur elegisse, movit in admira∣tionem. Asserentibus enim Praedicatoribus se fuisse priores, & in hoc ipso digniores, habitu quoque honestiores, à praedicatione meritò nomen & officium se sortiri, & Apostolica dignitate ve∣rius insigniri, respondent Minores: se arctiorem vitam & humiliorem pro Deo elegisse, & idcirco digniorem, quia sancti∣orem, & ab ordine Praedicatorum ad ordinem eorum fratres posse & licenter debere, quasi ab inferiori ad ordinem arctiorem & su∣periorem, transmigrare. Contradicunt eis in faciem. Praedica∣tores, asserentes, quòd licèt ipsi Minores, nudi pede, & viliter tunicati, cinctique funiculis incedant, non tamen eis esus carni∣um, etiam in publico, vel dieta propensior, denegatur, quod fra∣tribus est Praedicatoribus interdictum: quapropter non licet ipsis Praedicatoribus ad Minorum ordinem, quasi arctiorem & digni∣orem avolare, sed potius è converso. Sic sic igitur, sicut inter Tem∣plarios & Hospitalarios in sancta terra, sic & inter illos, humani generis inimico zizania seminante, ortum est discordiae enorme scandalum, & quia viri literati sunt & scholares, universali ecclesiae nimis periculosum, in indicium magni Iudicij prae foribus imminentis. Et quod terribile est, & in triste praesagium, per trecentos annos, vel quadringentos, vel ampliùs, ordo Monasti∣cus tam festinanter non caepit praecipitium, sicut eorum ordo, quo∣rum fratres jam vix transactis viginti quatuor annis, primus in Anglia construxere mansiones, quarum adificia jam in Regales consurgunt altitudines. Hijam sunt, qui in sumptuosis & diatim ampliatis adificiis, & celsis muralibus, the sauros exponunt im∣preciabiles, paupertatis limites, & basim suae professionis, juxta Prophetiam Hyldegardis Alemanniae, impudenter transgredi∣entes. Morituris magnatibus, & divitibus, quos norunt pecu∣niis abundare, diligenter insistunt, non sine ordinariorum injuriis & jacturis, ut emolumentis inhient, confessiones extorquent, &
occulta Testamenta, se suumque ordinem solum commendantes, & omnibus aliis praeponentes. Vnde nullus fidelis, nisi Praedica∣torum & Minorum regatur consiliis jam credit salvari. In ac∣quirendis privilegiis solliciti, in curiis Regum & potentum con∣siliarii, & cubicularii & the saurarii, paranimphi & nuptiarum praeloquutores, Papalium extortionum executores, in praedicatio∣nibus suis, vel adulatores, vel mordacissimi reprehensores, vel confessionum detectores, velincauti redargutores. Ordines quoque auctenticos, & à sanctis patribus constitutos, videlicet à sanctis Bendicto & Augustino, & eorum professores, contemnentes, prout in causa ecclesiae de scardeburc, in qua Minores turpiter ceciderunt, patuit, suum ordinem aliis praeponunt. Rudes reputant, simplices, & semilaicos, vel potius rusticos, Cistercienses Monachos: Nigros verò, superbos, & epicuros. Thus he. I have but onely to tell you that Robert Kilwardy, after∣wards, first Archbishop of Canterbury, and then advanced to a Cardinall-ship, was first a Fryer of this Sect of the Do∣minicans, and I leave them. My progresse in this Ward, brings me next to Estbridge or Estbridge Ho∣spitall. Kingsbridge Hospitall. An ancient Spittle, and as now knowne (Christened, as it were) by the name, so first ere∣cted and endowed by the Charity and Piety of St Thomas Becket in Hen. 2. time; and thence to this day called the Hospitall of St Thomas the Martyr of Estbridge. For this we have the testimony of Archbishop Stratford, a successor of his: who upon his novell ordination of the Hospitali, and in the Charter thereof, (as shall be seene anone) ac∣knowledgeth him the first founder and indower of it. For other Record either of the foundation of the Hospitall it selfe; or of the intent wherefore it was erected, besides that Charter of Stratford, is not, nay in his time (as it seemes by him) was not extant, or to be found. The rea∣son probably why the Record of the state of it taken by the Commissioners upon the stat. of 37. Hen. 8. cap. 4. ascribes the foundation unto Stratford; whereas he (as his Charter will declare) did but restore the foundation, and give lawes
and a forme of government to it, to supply the former which were lost, and so the Hospitall in hazzard of confu∣sion for want of them: as you shall easily perceive by this transcript or copy of it, if you peruse it. IOhannes permissione divina Cantuar. Archiepiscopus totius Angliae Primas & Apostolicae sedis Legatus. Dilecto in Christo filio Domino Rogero de Rondes presbytero magistro Hospitalis pauperum de Estbreg in Civitate Cantuar. patronatus nostri Sa∣lutem, gratiam & benedictionem. Et si votivus noster invale∣scat affectus, decus & commoda locorum ad miserabilium perso∣narum & pauperum receptionem & sustentationem divinique cultus augmentum providè deputatorum nobis potissimè subdito∣rum, quatenus possumus procurare: tamen conservatio & rele∣vamen necessarium Hospitalis de Estbregpraedict' per beatum & gloriosummartyrem Thomam olim Cant. Archiepisc. praedeces∣sorem nostrum fundati antiquitùs & dotati, ob ipsius martyris Fundator quis. qui suis veneratoribus opem porrigit, honorem praecipuum prae caeteris locis hujusmodi insident nobis cordi. Sane tua petitio nuper nobis exhibita continebat, quòd idem Hospitale per beatum mar∣tyrem antedictum, pro pauperum peregrinorum Cantuar. conflu∣entium receptione nocturna, & sustentatione aliquali ab olim, & pro jam incumbentibus eidem oneribus dotatum exiliter per ipsius Hospitalis incuriam magistrorum, qui ejus prostrarunt nemora, eaque & alia jura possessiones & bona ipsius tam mobilia quam immobilia modis alienare variis temerè praesumpserunt, ad su∣premam egestatis inopiam est deductum ac aeris alieni immoderatè per ipsos fatuéque contracti plurimis oneribus, ad quorum solu∣tionem bona dicti Hospitalis absque remedio & auxilio extrinseco his diebus non sufficiunt, primitus manifestè in suis etiam domi∣bus olim sufficienter constructis deformitates evidentes in tantum patitur et rutnam, quòd nisi ejusdem Hospitalis provideatur in∣digentiae aliunde, illud nedum peregrinos hujusmodi ad ipsum post gloriosum triumphum et canonizationem dicti sancti plus solito consluentium, admittere non valebit, set desolationis tantis subiciet obprobriis quòd vix aliquis aut nullus idoneus invenietur, qui recipere velit hujusmodi regimen Hospitalis. Quapropter
nobis humiliter supplicasti, ut ad relevamen omnium praemisso∣rum, & pro sustentatione pauperum peregrinorum illuc copiose indies confluentium pleniori, ecclesiam parochialem beati Nicholai Ecclesia paro∣chialis. Sancti Nicholai de Herbaldowne. de Herbaldowne nostrae Dioc. cujus ad dictum Hospitale jus spe∣ctare dinoscitur patronatus eidem tibi successoribus{que} tuis ipsius Hosp. magistris ex causis praemissis in proprios usus in perpetuum concedere, annectere, & unire vellemus. Nos siquidem Hosp. praedict' quod nuper visitavimus defectum notorium quem patitur intuentes tam circa divina obsequia quam alia caritatis opera in∣ibi exercenda sub formâ competenti & indubia sicut convenit mi∣nimè ordinati, ipsiusque indigentiis evidentibus paterno compa∣tientes affectu, tuis etiam justis in ea parte supplicationibus in∣clinati, super causis superiùs expressatis, ac veritate ipsarum, vocatis ad hoc omnibus evocandis de Iure, per viros fide dignos in forma juris juratos, & singillatim examinat. sufficientem prae∣missorum noticiam optinentes, authoritate nostra, inquisitione juxta exigentiam juris facta, demum super his cum religiosis viris filiis nostris Priore & Capitulo nostrae Cantuar. ecclesiae in ipsius capitulo tractatum diligentem habuimus & solempnem prout requiritur in concessionibus hujusmodi perpetuis & alienati∣onibus ecclesiarum de Iure. Et quia dictas causas & per te nobis in hac parte suggestaomnia & singula invenimus esse vera legi∣timeque probata, necnon justa & sufsicientia fore ad appropria∣tionem dictae ecclesiae faciend. cum urgens necessitas ac evidens notoriè subsit utilitas in hac parte, praefatam ecclesiam beati Ni∣cholai de Herbaldowne, interveniente in ea parte quorum inte∣rest consensu, cum Priore & Capitulo nostris praedictis, tractatu ut est dictum super his solempni & diligenti praehabito, ac de ipsorum consensu, concurrentibusque omnibus & singulis quae in praemissis & ea tangen. requirebantur de Iure, praedictisque ex causis, authoritate nostra ordinaria, Hospitali praedicto tibique & tuis successoribus magistris ejusdem ministraturis in eo, ap∣propriamus, annectimus & unimus, ipsiusque ecclesiae fructus, redditusque & proventus in dicti Hospitalis usus proprios & tuos ac Successorum tuorum magistrorum ejusdem & peregrinorum pauperum ad illud confluentium, juxta modum inferius annota∣tum concedimus in perpetuum convertendos, salvo idoneo sacer∣doti
dictae servituro ecclesiae in divinis qui & animarum curam exercebit in ea, tuo successorumque tuorum magistrorum ibidem arbitrio deputando & amovendo, propter exilitatem ecclesiae ante∣dictae ad perpetui vicarii sustentationem & onerum relevamen hu∣jusm' minimè sufficntis, pro suis victualibus & sustentatione de ipsius ecclesiae fructibus, redditibus, & proventibus congrua por∣tione; alia siquidem onera eidem ecclesiae incumbentia per magi∣strum Hospitalis praedicti volumus supportari. Ceterùm quia super modum divina celebrandi officia in Hosp. praedicto, & caritatis opera caeteraque peragenda inibi exercendi clara, sufficiens & in∣dubia ordinatio minimè reperitur, licèt quaedam observantiae in his & praecipue in provisione pauperum usitatae in eo nobis fuerunt inti∣matae. Nos ad perpetuam rei memoriam super his certos modum & formam in Hosp. praedict' in perpetuum observandos cdere seu con∣stituere duximus, & taliter ordinamus, viz. quòd in ipso Hosp. Statuta sive Regulae Ho∣spitalis. per nos & successores nostros Archiepisc. Cant. ponatur seu praefi∣ciatur Magister, qui tempore quo ponetur seu praeficietur eidem, sit in sacerdotali ordine constitutus, cui per Nos & successores nostros hujusmodi dicti Hosp. regimen committatur, prout canonicis eon∣venit institutis. Magistrum etiam quemlib' hujus modi cum ipsum hosp. primò adeptus fuerit infra mensem sequentem prox. de ipsius hosp. bonis singulis singillatim & specificè Inventarium plenum con∣ficere, ipsius{que} copiam infra mensem eundem Priori nostrae Cant eccl' qui erit pro tempore tradere, ac eidem vel Suppriori ejusd' dicto prioratu vacante, seu alteri ad hoc deputando per ipsorum arbitrium, suo casu, in ipso Prioratu, vice Cant. Archiep. & authoritate prae∣sentium annis singulis inter sancti Michaelis & omnium Sanctorum festa de administratione sua reddere plenam & distinctam volumus rationem. Ordinamus insuper qd' magister ipse qui erit pro tempore unum alium ad se habeat continuè secum in hosp. praed' idoneum Ca∣pellanum secularem ponend' & amovend' prout eidem magistro vi∣debitur expedire. Quod{que} magister & Capellanus hujusm' in Hosp. praed' matutinas & ceteras horas canonicas ad invicem, legitimo im∣pedimento cessante, secundum usum Sar. eccl' psallere vel conveni∣enter dicere & devotè ac divina, viz. unus eorum missam de die, alius verò diebus dominicis, de sancto Nicholao, diebus Martis de beato Thoma Martyre antedicto, diebus Iovis de beata Virgine Cathe∣rina,
caeteris vero diebus ebdomadatim missam pro defunctis & pro benefactoribus hospitalis praedicti teneantur diebus singulis cele∣brare, ac orum quilibet orationem, Rege quesum' Domine famu∣lum tuum Pontificem nostrum, & caetera pro nobis quam diu agi∣mus in hac vita, & post solutum nostrae carnis debitum, orationem. Deus qui inter Apostolicos sacerdotes, diebus ad hoc aptis compe∣ten'dieere, necnon in Canone missae pro nobis specialiter orare, no∣strique habere memoriam specificam in celebrandis suis missis sin∣gulis in perpetuum sit astrictus. Ordinam' preterea quod ad dicti magistri dispositionem & curam solicitam, fructus, redditus & proventus dictique totius hosp. regimen, quamdiu magister ibi∣dem fuerit cum moderamine pertineant infrascripto. viz. quòd magistro & Capellano hujusm' celebraturis & ministraturis pro tempore in hospitali praedicto singlis communibus diebus de uno fer∣culo duplicato, in dominicis verò diebus & festis duplicibus ac so∣lempnibus cum hujusmodi ferculo de una pitantia non mimus sum∣ptuosa deserviatur in mensa. Inhibemus insuper & interdicimus ne commune sigillum in hosp. praedicto habeatur à modo vel exi∣stat. Peregrini siquidem valetudarit pauperes quos arripit infir∣mitas in suae peregrinationis itinere non leprosi in hosp. suscipiantur eodem, & in fata decidentes ibidem, in Cimiterio nostrae Cantuar. ecclesiae sepeliantur in loco ad hoc antiquitus assignato. Sani autem Sepulturae lo∣cus ubi. peregrini pauperes accedentes ibidem per noctem unam recipiantur duntaxat: in quorum tam valetudinarior. quam sanor. peregri∣nor. hujusmodi usus ad ipsorum vitae subsidium diebus singulis ad quatuor denarior. estimationem de bonis hosp. praedict. volumus & ordinamus expendi. Peregrinos valetudinarios pauperes illuc con∣fluentes cum sanis tam ad moram quam ad vitae subsidia in estima∣tione praedicta percipienda sanis volumus anteferri. Quod si dierum aliquo in usus praedict. peregrinorum hujusmodi de bonis hosp. ipsius propterea quia nullos vel paucos peregrinantes hujusmodi con∣tigerit declinare ad estimationem non expendat. eandem; ordi∣namus & volumus quòd diebus aliis seu temporibus copiosoris ad∣ventus peregrinorum praed' ibidem, quod minus dtebus praeced' est expensum, in ampliori receptione subsidiorum{que} vitae necessorior & ministratione pauperum peregrinorum hujusmodi juxta modum su∣periùs annotatum suppleatur tali cum affectu quòd in usu tam pio &
laudabili de bonis hosp praed' ad summam iiijd. pro numero singulor' dier' in anno discretione prvia integraliter & fideliter erogetur. In hosp. etiam praed' 12. lectos competentes ordinamus debere inper∣petuum consistere ad usum confluentium pauperum peregrinorum ibidem, ac mulierem aliquam honeste vitae, quae quadraginta annorum etatem excesserit ministerio peregrinorum hujusmodi tam in lectis quam vitae necessariis ut praemittitur ministrandis esse volumus intendentem, cui mulieri de bonis Hospitalis prae∣dicti ministretur in singulis vitae suae necessariis competenter. Et ad ordinationem praesentem in singulis suis articulis prout est pos∣sibile fideliter observand. & quatenus in eo est facere fieri obser∣vari, necnon de corrodiis, pensionibus, possessionibus, nemoribus aut bonis immobilibus seu juribus ipsius Hospitalis non vendendis, concedendis in perpetuum, vel ad tempus donandis, vel alio quo∣vis alienationis titulo non alienand. nobis aut successoribus no∣stris Archiepiscopis Cantuar. inconsultis, et non consentientibus ad hoc expressè, per quoscunque magistros Hosp. praedict. quibus ejus regimen committetur imposterum praestari volumus et ordi∣namus in commissionibus singulis de ipso faciendis eisdem cor∣porale ad sancta Dei Evangelia Iuramentum. Commissionem autem Hosp. praedicti si facta fuerit alteri quam in sacerdotio con∣stituto, vel praedicto non exacto vel praestito Iuramento fore volu∣mus ipso facto irritam et inanem. Reservata nobis et successori∣bus nostris Archiepisc. Cantuar. hujusmodi ordinationi nostrae addendi, detrahendi, eamqe mutandi et corrigendi prout expedire videbitur plenaria potestate. Acta et dat' in Capitulo dictae nostrae Cantuar. Ecclesiae xxiij o. die mensis Septemb. Anno Domini MCCCXLIJ. et nostrae translationis nono. By this time you see who was both the first and second founder of Eastbridge Hospitall. The ancient rules and or∣dinances prescribed to it, the union and annexation made of St Nicholas of Herbaldowne Church to it, into which the Leiger showes the Masters induction and investiture by the Commissary of Cant. by mandat from (the appropriator) Archbishop Stratford. I must now looke backe to the times intervening these two founders. In which I finde In lib. private hujus Hospita∣lis. Hubert the Archbi∣shop
in King Iohns time, an especiall benefactor to this Spittle: giving to it the tithes of Westgate-Mill, of a Mill and two Salt-pitsat Herewic (in or neare Whitstable, I take it) of a Wind-mill in Raculfre, and of another Wind-mill in Westhalimot in Thanet. This, with the confirmation of the then Prior and Charter of Christ-Church. In this Archbishops time, there was another Hospitall neighbouring unto this of Estbridge called Cokyns Hospi∣tall, Cokyns Haspi∣tall. built and founded by one William Cokyn a Citizen of Canterb. and of a worthy family, whose name in his poste∣rity  Ibidem. did long survive him in this City: some of whom were Bailiffes of the City in their time. The Hospitall was de∣dicate to Saint Nicholas, and (the Virgin and Martyr) Saint Catherine, and stood sometime in the Parish of Saint Peter in Cant. almost directly opposite to the now Blacke-Fryers Gate: having had a Lane by it aforetime called Cokyns-Lane, now shut up and built upon, often mentioned in Cokyns Lane. Eastbridge Booke, and not forgotten of some yet living. I collect by Charters which I have seene, that the Founder lived by that Lane. And finde that for 18. markes de gersu∣mâ, or for the consideration of 18. markes, purchased of Stephen the Priest, and Godesman, the sonnes of Richard Mercer of Canterb. with the consent of their Widow-mo∣ther Cicely, a messuage next adjacent to his owne, thus in the deed or charter described. Totum illud messuagium cum omnibus pertinentiis suis, quod habet in latitudine versus chemi∣nium in Domini Regis 42. pedes, & in longitudine quantum ex∣tendit à cheminio Domini Regis, usque ad aquam quae dicitur Sture. Quod vero messuagium adjacet proximo messuagio lapideo praedicti Willielmi, & messuag. Walteri mercatoris in parochia sancti Petri. Having purchased this messuage hee either builds there a new Hospitall or else converts his purchase into one. Afterwards, by his Charter (wherein he saith the Hospitals of Saint Nicholas, Saint Katherine, and Saint Tho∣mas of Eastbridge in Cant. were united, haply and probably by Archbishop Hubert, and that union by Pope Innocent con∣firmed) intitles these Hospitals to all his Lands, possessi∣ons
and Chattels, and makes them his heires. This done, and one Godelman sonne of Richard the Merchant, challen∣ging an interest in the soile where the Hospitall stood; for 7s. consideration he is bought out, and makes a Charter to Archbishop Hubert, acknowledged in a full Burgmote of the City, of release of all his right thereunto. i. De terra (as his words are) in qua Hospitale fundatum est quod Willielmus Cokyn fecit, quae jacet inter terram quae fuit W. Cokyn, & ter∣ram Thomae mercatoris, scil. à magna via regali usque ad Sturam. The Priory of Saint Gregory (it seemes) had some interest here also. For Robert the Prior and his Covent of the place, did by their Charter made to the Hospitall confirme, Do∣nationem quam Willielmus Cokyn fecit fratribus Hosp. Sancti Nicholai, & Sancti Catherinae, & Sancti Thomae martyris de Eastbridge, de illo messuagio quod est in parochia Sancti Petri proximo adjacen' Hosp. Sancti Nicholai et Sanctae Katherinae versus West, quod est in tenura nostra, as the Charter runnes. Eastbridge Hospitall being thus (i. by union or consolidati∣on) possessed, and become owners of Cokyns Hospitall: it ceased soone after (I take it) to be used as an Hospitall, or in the way of an Hospitall, and was hired and rented out. In the yeare 1238. Peter the then Rector or Keeper of Est∣bridge Hosp. and the brothers of the same, grant and de∣mise to one William Samuel a parcell thereof, to wit, Totum tenementum cum aedificiis supra positis tam ligneis quam lapideis et omnibus pertinentiis suis quod jacet in parochia Sancti Petri Cant. inter domum Osmundi Polre quae est ex parte orientali, et venellam quae appellatur Cokyneslane, quae est ex prrte occidenta∣li, et Regiam stratam quae est ex parte Aquilonari, et Sturam quae est ex parte Australi. The lane there (by the way) was asyet open, as you may see; and that it might continue so, hear∣ken to what followes in the Deed. Preterea ita convenit inter partes praedict' quòd nec praedict' Petrus, nec fratres nec succes∣sores corum, nec praedict' Willielmus, nec heredes sui nec sui assi∣gnati poterint praedct' venellam obstruere, quin utraque pars possit uti commodè via praedictae venellae eundo & redeundo. So much for Cokyns Hospitall: and now I returne to Estbridge.
Stephen Langton the next Archbishop after Hubert, by his and his Covents Charter Liber. memorat., confirmes unto this Hospitall, the gift of Blean Church or parsonage, made unto it by the Patron, Hamon Crevequer, after the resignation of it by the Blean parso∣nage. till then incumbent Parson, William Crevequer. Whereupon the Master or Keeper of the Hosp. became afterwards Par∣son there, to whom and to the Brothers of the Hosp. the And parsonage house. same Hamon, by another Charter, grants totum messuagium cum pertinentiis quod fuit Lefwini sacerdotis personae ejusd' ec∣clesiae, & quod postea fuit Archidiaconi de Petters personae ejusdo ecclesiae, & quod postea fuit Willielmi de Crevequer personae ejus∣dem ecclesiae: that is, the Parsonage house. The Parsonage thus to the Hosp. assigned and confirmed in proprios usus, Archbishop Islep afterwards, induced by many reasons, founds a perpetuall Vicarage there, indowing it in such wise Blean Vicarage as the Charter or Instrument thereof in my Appendix, will demonstrate, pag. 247. At this place (the Bleane) lay the most of this Hospitals demeanes and revenewes. Amongst which the principall (I take it) is the Mannor of Bleane given Liber memo∣ratus. to the Hosp. by Thomas de Roos de Hamlak, Anno 33. Ed. 3. the same man (I take it) whose death Walsingham thus mentions in the yeare 1399. Eodem Anno (saith he) Dominus Thomas de Roos dum reverteretur à terra sancta in Insula de Cypro civitate Papho, tactus aeris regionis incommodo, diem clausit extremum. By Cambden in Kent. English Edition. pag. 334. probable conjecture, he dwelt at Chilham Castle, from whence the yeare before, his mother Margery Lady Roos daughter of Bartholomew Lord Badlesmere, and Widow of William de Roos de Hamlak, who as a benefactor to the worke, hath his name and effigies set up and pourtrayed in a Window of the Chapter-house at Christ-Church, dates a Charter of hers to the Master of this Hosp. and at her pre∣sentation, as patronesse in the yeare 1349. the See of Can∣terbury being then voyde, one Osbertus is admitted by the Prior and Chap. ad liberam capellam beatae Mariae in Castro de Chilham, there personally to serve and officiate as a perpe∣tuall Chaplaine Liber Eccles. Cant.. This by the by.
The very next yeare after this gift of the Mannor of Bleane, by Thomas de Roos, viz. anno 34. Ed. 3. one Sr Iohn Lee Knight by his deed or charter (as I finde by a copy of it in the Lieger of the house) gave to this Hospitall one mes∣suage 180 acres of land, 27s rent of assise, 9 cocks and 21 hens in villa de Blean. in augmentum operum pietatis in eodem Hospitali &c. With leave and liking of Archbishop Langham a certain chantery in the Church of Livingsborne, that is Beaksborne founded in the yeare 1314. by one Iames of Bourne, with the revenues of the same was translated to this Hospitall by one Bartholomew of Bourne Vide copiam fundationis Can∣tariae de East∣bridge in Ap∣pendict, pag.. There was sometime a windmill standing neare the Nonnery without Ridingate, which this Hospitall held by the grant of the Nonnes there Lib. bujus Hospitalis.. The very place of situa∣tion whereof was in quarta parte unius acrae in parva Foxmold versus Occidentem, in hundredo de Ridingate. So go the words of the deed. The conditions mutually agreed upon at the time of the grant were, that the Nonnes bearing the fourth part of the charge of the mill, should reap the fourth part of the profit of it, and have their own corn ground there for them when they would gratis, or of free cost. And the Ho∣spitall to finde a way to it à Cheminio magno Regali. .i. from the rode or high-way by it. And this about King Iohn's time. By the Bull of Pope Honorius (I take it) the third, this Hospitall was priviledged of and from paying tithe, de hor∣tis, .i. of their gardens Ibid.. The City Chamber hath a record dated the 7. Rich. 2. anno Domini 1391. whereby it appeares that the Master of this Hospitall ought to repair, erect and sustain the neigh∣bour-bridge, .i. Kingsbridge. The account of the Hospi∣talls estate given up to the Commissioners upon the stat. 37. H. 8. c. 4. chargeth the Master with the paving also of the street there. The Hospitall hath a neat handsome Chapel, to which have belonged two bells to ring to service. So it is reported Chapell at Eastbridge.
to those Commissioners, by the Parson and Churchwar∣dens of All Saints: who say withall, that the said Hospitall (as their own words are) is a Parish Church, wherein there is continually ministred all Sacraments and Sacramentalls to the poore people thither resorting, and to the keeper of the said Hospitall and his houshold, and all other remain∣ing within the precinct of the same by the Chantere Priest &c. Truth is, this Chapell was served heretofore by a Chantery Priest which had x. lib. vjs viijd. yearely wages, Chantery there. besides his Mansion or dwelling, which was that at the West end of the Hospitall, whereof the Stat. 1. Ed. 6. cap. 14. for the superstitious quality of it, hath long since deprived it. However, to satisfie the inquisitive, I have given the foundation a place in my Appendix. I have nothing fur∣ther Vide pro Si∣ptura sexta in Appendice. to say of the Chapell, but that one Cressy a Jew building against the head of it, that house which yet stands there, and now belongs to Christ-Church (to which upon the ex∣pulsion of the Jewes it was, with other, given by the King:) he was faine afterwards to agree with the Hospitall, that he might have their sufferance for the standing of it, and had it in writing, the Charter whereof dated 1236. I have seen in a Lieger of Christ-Church intitled Carta Remissionis, made by Peter the then Rector, and the brethren of the Hospitall of St Thomas of Eastbridge Cant. to Cressie the Jew, de omni∣bus querelis occasione domus vel fundamenti vel muri quam in parte orientali in capite capellae nostrae aedifieavit, ut nunquam questio movebitur in Curia Christianitatis vel seculari &c. as the deed runs. For brevity and dispatch sake, I balk and spare the men∣tion of much of this Hospitalls indowment. But there is yet a parcell more, which I may not so passe over; and that is of certain tenements in All-Saints Parish, situate between the signe of the George West, and the Queens head East, in the high-street. Thither then I will make next: But first, for some satisfaction to them that cannot understand the foundation of the house formerly laid down in Latine, I desire first to set down the state of it in which it stood at
Cardinall Pooles visitation of the place, anno 1557. taken in English. viz. Memorandum they are bound to receive wayfaring and hurt men, and to have 8 beds for men, and 4 for women, to remain for a night and more if they be not able to depart, and the Master of the Hospitall is charged with the buriall, and they have 20 loads of wood yearely allowed, and 26s. a yeare for drink. Now to the tenements which haply seem to be so mean as scarce worthy of any notice. True. But for what hath sometime stood here, and into the place whereof they have succeeded, I think scarce a place in the City more remark∣able, if at all so memorable: which was an Exchange, a roy∣all Exchange. Cambium Regis: mention whereof often Exchange. occurres in the old rentals and other records of Christ-Church, whose tenement (now the George) is anciently bounded Eastward to this Exchange. It was standing it seems untill Ed. 3. dayes, and in likelihood received its fa∣tall period from him. For he in augmentation of the Ho∣spitalls indowment gave it Lib. de East∣bridge. to the then Master of East∣bridge, by name, Thomas New of Wolton, for life, and after∣wards to his Successors for ever. Which Thomas shortly af∣ter, dividing it (it seems) into tenements, hires them out in fee-ferme to severall Tenents, viz. one part thereof to the then Commissary of Cant. Thomas Mason by name, viz. quandam placeam terrae cum domibus superedificatis muris & aliis pertinentiis suis quae pars fuit tenementi vocat' la Chaunge jacen' in Civitate Cant. in parochia omnium Sanctorum, simul cum quodam introitu ducente ab alto vico ex parte South per ma∣gnum hostium dictae placeae usque ad eandem placeam, inter te∣nementum heredum Willielmi Child versus East, & tenem' Pri∣oris & Conventus ecclesiae Christi Cant. versus West, & tenem' Edmundi Horne versus North, & tenementum praedicti Thomae de Wolton quod pars est tenementi vocat' la Chaunge versus South. This anno 43. Ed. 3. The other part or residue thereof, unto one William Sil∣kenden and Ioane his wife, in these words, viz. quandam pla∣ceam
quae pars est tenementi quod la Chaunge vocabatur, & quod Dominus noster Rex qui nunc est mihi dedit ad terminum vitae meae & meis successoribus in perpetuum ad augmentum dotis Ho∣spitalis memorati, in qua quidem placeae unum cellarium, duo so∣laria & una domus intermedia ad instar aulae cum quadam pecia gardini jacen' ad finem dicti cellarii, quae omnia conjunctim ja∣cent & situantur in dicta Civitate in parochia omnium Sancto∣rum inter unam partem dicti tenementi vocat' la Chaunge quam modo tenet Magister Thomas Mason ex dimissione mea versus North, & aliam partem ejusdem tenemeti de la Chaunge quam etiam idem Mr Thomas tenet ex traditione mea, & quasdam choppas dicti Hospitalis versus West, & tenementum heredum Willielmi Child versus East, & Regiam stratam versus South. Tres etiam choppas praefati Hosp. cum una parva placea jucen' per longum inter ipsas choppas, & ten' dicti Magistri Thomae quod etiam habet ex dimissione mea ex parte North, & introitum quendam antiquum in ipsum tenementū de la Chaunge ex parte East, & Regiam stratam versus South, cum uno muro lapideo qui est ad finem ipsarum placeae & schopparum, à tene∣mento dicti Magistri Thomae linealiter extenso usque ad hostium dicti introitus ex parte sinistra ingredientium per illud. This anno 47. Ed. 3. Both which demises I was desirous to ex∣presse at large, because I have not seen any other record that sets forth at all what kinde of building this Exchange was. For the antiquity of its continuance here before the sup∣pression; Antiquity of ts standing here. I cannot say much. In the sixt yeare of H. 3. anno Domini 1222. I meet with the Kings Exchange at Canterb. For Henry the third (Stow n is my author) in the sixt yeare of his reigne, wrote to the Scabines and men of Ipre, that he Survey. pag. 51. ult. edit. and his counsell had given prohibition, that none English∣men, or other, should make change of plate, or other masse of silver, but onely at his Exchange at London, or at Canter∣bury. Shortly, there was sometime a family in our City, which from their neighbourhood or other relation to this place, took name from it, and were sirnamed De Cambio.
An exchange relates to a Mint, or place of mintage and Mint. coynage of money; but of old, as will appeare by the Stat. anno primo H. 6. cap. 4. they might not be together, but were kept apart, and a place there was sometime neighbouring to the Exchange, on the other side of the same street, even there where now the Inne called the Crown or some part of it stands where our Mint was kept. In angulo monetariae versus East, is part of the boundary to that which is now the dwelling house of Isaac Clerk. The Officers and Ministers retaining to this Mint had their housing hard by it in some tenements of Christ-Church. Whence in their old rentalls is frequent mention De monetariis in parochia Sanctae Mariae Bredman. This Mint (I take it) was silenced about the same time with the Exchange, for of latter yeers I finde no men∣tion of it. From what antiquity it had stood and been kept at this Antiquity of it place I know not. But amongst the places where King Iohn in his letters makes mention of Mints kept in England, this City is one Stow. Survey. pag. 46., and had been so (I suppose) for many ages. King Aethelstane appointing out the places for Mints, and the number of minters throughout the Kingdome Limbert. Ar∣choeonom., begins with Canterbury, to which he allowed seven minters: a greater number then to any other place in the Kingdome, except London, which was allowed to have eight. Of these 7, foure were for the King, two for the Archbishop, and the seventh for the Abbat of S. Augustines. The Archbishops mint (it seems) is yet elder. For Mr Selden in his notes up∣on Edmerus, and Speed in his History make mention of two severall coynes, one of Archbishop Plegmund under Alfred, the other of Celnoth under Ethelwolf extant, and presented in figure, by Speed the latter, by Selden the former. When or how the Arohbishop lost or left off his mintage here, I do no where finde. Of the time when the Abbats ceased I have showed before out of Thorne, in my Survey of S. Aug. Amongst other pieces of antique (Romane, Britain, Saxon, Danish and Norman) coyne which I have met with and reserve, some were stamped in this Mint, I take it; in
this City, of certain, the reverse of the coyne saith so; I have withall a piece or two of H. 8. coyned at Canterbury, not here, but as I conceive at the place now called the Mint by the Court-gate of Christ-Church; where after the dis∣solution he coyned money for the service (they say) of his French warres. Ever since which time, the place therefore retains the name of the Mint, and the court or yard which it incloseth is called the Mint-yard. So much for the Mint. Retreating a little from this place, on the same side of the street there is a place where sometime the Jews, that, of old, Jewes in Cant. for a long time together, were suffered to dwell amongst us in most of our chief Cities, kept their residence; being housed in this street and in the lane by it, from thence to this day called Jury-lane, the same. (I take it) which of old I finde called Little-pet-lane Rental, vel. eccles. Cant.. There was of their houses hereaway to the number of almost 20. All which, toge∣ther with their Synagogue, or (as more frequently called) Schola Iudaeorum, their School, upon their generall banish∣ment out of this and all other parts of the kingdome in Ed. 2. daies (at what time their number amounted unto 16511 Matt. weslm. de anno 1290..) as confiscate, escheated to the King: and by him were eft∣soones, some of gift, some otherwise alienated, some to one, some to another, but the most (to the number viz. of at least 12. and a void piece of ground which was Commu∣nitatis Iudaeorum Civitatis, .i. the Jewes in common) to the Monks of Christ-Church Lib. eccles. Christi Can.. Their Synagogue or School stood about where now some part of the Saracens head Ta∣verne doth, as appeares by the Records of Christ-Church. Which have this bound to certain fee of the late Monks hard by it, viz. Terrae in parochia omnium Sanctorum inter ma∣gnum vicum qui est versus Aquilonem, & Scholam Iudaeorum quae est versus Austrum, juxta venellam qua itur à praedicto ma∣gno vico versus sanctam Mildritham: being that ground (I take it) whereon the forepart (to the street-ward) of that which is now the Saracens head Taverne, being in show newer then the back-part, was afterward built. To which ground the very next house above (the Mitre) is bounded
Westward, and called domus juxt a scolam Iudeorum, thus ex∣plained in the Rentall, viz. Domus lapidea quae est contra terram ubi scola Iudaeorum sita est versus Occidentem. By all which I collect and verily conceive, that the now Stone-Parlour of the Saracens head, mounted upon a Vault and ascended by many Stone-steps (as the Iewish Synagogues and Schooles were alwayes built aloft Moses and Aaron. lib. 2. cap. 2. pag. 80.) is the Remaines of a good part of that which was our Canterbury Iewes Schoole or Synagogue. I could here very much enlarge my selfe in giving you the Story of the Iewes first advent or entrance into this Land, their time of continuance here, with their behavi∣our and dealings during that time, and the causes, reasons and motives for their expulsion at last: which were chiefely two; their immoderate usury; and their barbarous practice of crucifying, at places where they abode, any Christians child they could get about Easter time. But I am preven∣ted here in by many others that have severally divulged these things already to the full; as Harpsfield, and Stow, but more exactly and most elaborately and like himselfe, our learned Selden, Purcases guide and Author for a purposed discourse of this kinde; wherefore I forbeare, ne actum agerem: onely adding what I have seene noted, (but how truely I know not) that the Iewes, when living here, were such notorious Vsurers, that Usury, among the Christians, Vsury called Iudeisme. became called Iudaisme. Pro praemiss is Abbas donatorem ac∣quietavit de 28. in Iudeismo, loco gersumiae: as it is in an old deed. And they still continue this trade wheresoever they become, whereby they grow rich even to envy every where, yet (as one saith Sandys Relati∣on of Religi∣on, &c.) many of the Christians doe use them under hand in improving their unlawfull rents to their utmost proportion. Now a word or two of the Gild-hall (or Court-hall, as Gildhall. we call it) and my survey of this Ward is at an end. Here then, as in the fittest, and most convenient place, being the principall street of the City, is the Court, Tribunall, or place of Judicature of the City seated and kept: where di∣stributive
Justice in both, civill and criminall causes, of se∣cular nature, sorting to the cognizance of that Court, is administred. Vulgarly we call the place the Gildhall. The etymology and derivation whereof is from the Saxon (or old English) word, Gild, signifying a society or corporati∣on. Here is a Court kept every Munday throughout the yeare, for Law-matters, and for the deciding of differen∣ces and righting of grievances betweene party and party; and on every other Twesday a Court of Burgmote holden beside, for meeting and treaty about the affaires and good government of the City. It had not the name of the Gild∣hall untill (as it were) of late yeares. That name of it oc∣curres not in any record that I could yet meet with, untill the 26. of Hen. 6. who then in his Charter of the change of the Bailiffes into a Maior, makes mention of this Tribunall by that name, granting (inter alia) that the Maior shall hold pleas in le Guildhall Civitatis praedict. as his words are. A∣foretime Spech-house. it was commonly called and knowne by the name of the Spech-house; and the common goale or prison of the City, since removed to Westgate, being then kept by it, that is in that part of it which is to the street-ward, was from it adjacency to it, so called also. For proofe both of one and tother read the following notes extracted from certaine witnesses examinations, Anno 1414. taken in a cause of defamation, betweene a couple of the City (for calling one the other Thiefe, a crime and calumny where∣in the defamed of those dayes did usually after purgation, right himselfe in Court Christian) and recorded in a Booke of Depositions remaining in the Office Regist. Consist. Cant.. Whereof one is this: Dicit (saith the witnesse) quod Iohannem Copherst semel vidit in quadam domo vocat' Spech-house scituat' juxta Hospiti∣um Leonis in alto vico Cant. in parochia sanctae Mariae Bredman. Another this. Occasione hujusmodi verborum dictus Thomas fuer at arrestatus ad prisonam vocat' Spech-house in alto vico Cant. scituat' & ibidem dictus T. B. movebat querelam contra eum ad summam decem marcarum, coram Ballivo & juratis dictae villae. A third, and the last, this. Interrogatus penes
quos opinio dicti Tho. sit denigrat' dicit apud Ballivos Cant. Io. Browne & Will. Bennet, & apud omnes Burgenses pro tunc existentes in domo vocat' Spech-house Cant. The Towne-Court hath not alwayes beene kept at this place: but, as now it is and of long time hath beene here, so both it and the prison were formerly kept together else∣where, and that (I take it) at the place of the now Corne-Market, and were then also called the Spech-house (of which before at large:) Very properly did they stand con∣tiguously together, if Tholosanus De Republica. lib. 2. cap. 7. judgement in this point be to be followed who saith. Iuxta tribunalia & continentes sint carceres qui ad custodiam judicandorum aedificari debent, tuti & contra vim omnem muniti ut inde facilius & cum minori periculo ad judicium duci & reduci possint. Thus he. But why the place of Judicature called the Spech-house? Proper∣ly, Whence called the Spech-house. some thinke, from the arguing and debating of matters there, not without much vociferation. And not unlikely. With as much congruity (I dare say) as For us is of Isodore derived a fando, from speaking. But I leave it, and this Ward, and proceed (up the street) to Newingate-Ward. Newingate Ward. IN which what is most remarkeable of us, are the Re∣maines of the Augustines Fryers, whereunto a reasonable Augustine Fry∣ers. faire Stone-Gate in Saint Georges street leadeth; the now Mansion or habitation of Captaine Berries Heires, after many other mesne owners, since the suppression: before which time it was the seate of the Augustine (as I said) Ere∣mite, mendicant Fryers. Mendicant because it was one and the first of the foure orders of begging Fryers: Eremite and Augustine, because Saint Augustine, that famous Afri∣can Father (they say) was their founder, who being and li∣ving in Eremo or in the Wildernesse, erected and institu∣ted their order, and prescribed them a rule of living; A∣bout which they and the Regular Canons are at contestati∣on
as you may read elsewhere. They were otherwhile and of some called also the White FF. (though properly and strictly the Carmelites are understood by that Epithete) because that they doe weare Owen Gene∣alogy of Monkes, &c. a long white wate of cloth downe to their heeles all loose, with a cowle or hood of the same, when they are in their Cloisters; however when they goe abroad, they weare a black coate over the other, with another cowle, having both their coates then bound close to their bodies, with a-broad leather girdle or belt, saith Ōwen. The generality of these FF. came first into England, from Italy, about the yeare 1252. saith Bale. These in par∣ticular came hither, and setled themselves here, about the yeare 1325. For that very yeare the then Archbishop of Canterbury sends and directs these his mandatory letters Liber Eccles. Cant. concerning them to his then Commissary, viz. Walterus permissione divina &c. Dilecto filio Commissario nostro Cant. salutem, gratiam & benedictionem. Licet univer∣saliter tamjura civilia quam canonica prohibeant ne quis absque pontificali authoritate Oratorii domum de novo construere praesu∣mat, ac sedes Apostolica per multa privilegia specialiter indul∣erit & expressè, ne quis in fundo ecclesiae Cant. praeter authori∣atem Cantuar. Archiepiscopi & capituli, ecclesiam, capellam vel oratorium de novo edificare moliatur. Fratres tamen heremi∣tarum sancti Augustini hac die dominica in festo Natalis beatae Mariae Virginis in quadam domo Civitatis Cant. in fundo eccle∣siae Cant. absque licentia & assensu nostro & Capituli nostri, ora∣torium seu ecclesiam de novo erexerunt, & pulsata campanae mis∣sarum solempnia publicè celebrare & oblationes, ecclesiae parochi∣ali debitas temere recipere ut asseritur praesumpser'. Quocirca vo∣is firmiter injungendo mandamus quatenus per viros fide dignos jus rei plenam noticiam habentes diligentem faciatis inquisi∣ionem. Et si per inquisitionem praedict' suggestae inveneritis eritate fulciri, tunc ipsum locum in quo praedicti fratres sic ut praemittitur temere celebrarunt, & adhuc ut dicitur celebrant, vice & authoritate nostra ecclesiastico supponatis interdicto. Ci∣tantes nichilominus nominatim illos fratres quos in praedicto loco
per dictam inquisitionem convinceritis celebrasse, ac ipsos fra∣tres ibidem commorantes, si qui sint, quòd compareant coram nobis die legitimo per vos statuendo ubicunque in Civitate Dioc. seu Provinc. nostrae Cant. tunc fuerimus de hujusmodi injuria & contemptis nobis & ecclesiae nostrae Cant. per eosdem illatis respon∣suri, ulteriusque facturi & recepturi quod canonicis convenit∣institutis. De die verò receptionis praesentium, & quid feceritis in praemissis nos dictis die & loco certificetis per literas vestras patentes harum seriem continentes. Dat' apud Tenham 18. Kal. Octob. Anno Domini Mcccxxvo. For the Fryers Lib. eccles. Christs Cant. having purchased and gotten possession of a house or tenement and appertenances, in the Parish of Saint George in Canterbury of one Thomas of Bonynton, bounded out as followeth, viz. by a certaine lane, some∣time called Lambertslane, afterwards Brewerslane, that is, betweene the same lane, and another tenement of the said Thomas toward the North, and a certaine place called Eald-gaole and the tenement of Cicely at Gayole toward the West, and the tenement of. Thomas Chich toward the East, and the tenement of Thomas Clement, and of the Hospitall of Priests toward the South: the Fryers (I say) having pur∣chased and gotten possession of this tenement; forthwith build them a Church, and therein erect Altars, and all of their owne authority: So busily bestirring themselves, that both the Monkes and the Parson of Saint George were in danger to be prejudiced in their severall interests, the one (the Monkes) to an annuity of 20d. per annum, payable to them (that is the Prior and Covent of Christ-Church;) the other (the Parson) to the tithes and other rights ecclesia∣sticall payable to him, out of the said Tenement. At length within a yeare after or such a matter, the Monkes and they came to composition for their annuity, of whom they obtained a remission and release of all arrerages there∣of past, so as the Fryers see to the due payment of it for time to come. The Parson also, Iohn of Natyndon by name, after he had (for the timely prevention of his owne and his Churches prejudice, by the Fryers alteration of the state
and property of that late house, which beside primitias de∣cimas & oblationes, yielded him and it other commodities before the Fryers time) brought his action against them before Iohn Badesley the Chancellor, and Robert de Weston, Auditors of causes under the then Archbishop (Walter Rei∣nolds) to the end to compell them by course of law (as but right and reason required) to secure him and his Church against detriment and deterioration in this behalfe; came also to composition with them: in and by the which the house is quietly yielded and confirmed to the FF. with liberty to make their abode therein, and to get their Cha∣pell, oratory or Church and Altars already erected upon the place, and also a certaine plot of ground laid out for a Churchyard, to be dedicated: and IXs to be yearely paid by them, for and in lieu of all dues, to the Parson of Saint George for the time being for ever; whereof the one moie∣ty at Midsummer, and the other at Michaelmas; subject∣ing themselves to the Archbishop, or any other Judge or∣dinary, or delegate, for compulsion, in default of pay∣ment. The Parson being tyed to obey sub poena excommuni∣cationis, and the Fryers, sub poena interdicti. The Fryers afterward Lib. Eccles. memoraae. enlarging their seate by purcha∣sing of Iohn Cherh of Canterbury, quandam placeam seu are∣am in fra prochiam sancti Georgii Cant. existen' super stra∣tam Regiam apud Clothmarket, upon part of which they built their outward Gate: in the yeare 1356. they enter into ob∣gation, and doe binde themselves and their house to the Prior and Covent of Christ-Church (of whose Fee it seems it was a part) to pay them 2s 4d. per annum for it. And thus have I shewed you when and in what manner these Fry∣ers came to house first, and afterward compleately seate themselves here. A great ornament afterward to this place, and to the Iohn Capgrave. whole order was Iohn Capgrave, in his time, that is, Anno 1484. or thereabouts, a famous Fryer of this house, and a great Writer, the Catalogue of whose workes may be seene in Pitseus, who is very large, if not lavish in his com∣mendation
for a man of most excellent parts. For benefactors to this Monastery of note, I read of but two: the one a Widow woman, one Amabilia Gobyon; who made choise of these Austin-Fryers-Church for her place of Sepulture, and gave by her will Penes registrum Consist. Cant. ten markes to the re∣paire thereof. This in the yeare 1405. The other one Sir Iohn Fineur Knight, who in Hen. 7. time became a most li∣berall benefactor to the place, as, if you peruse the follow∣ing Instrument Ms. penes meipsum., will appeare unto you. Vniversis sanctae matris ecclesiae filiis praesentes literas vi∣suris seu audituris Willielmus Mallaham Prior Conventus domus fratrum heremitarum divi Augustini ordinis in Civitate Cantuar. sit' & fundat' ac ejusdem loci fratres, salutem & since∣ram in Domino caritatem. Cum in officiis caritatis illis primo loco teneamur obnoxii ex quibus nos beneficia recepisse cognoscimus, nec magnum immo dignissimum fore arbitremur ut illos spiritua∣libus reficiamus epulis qui nos temporalibus dotaverunt: & Domi∣nus Iohannes Fyneux miles Dominique Henrici Regis septimi Dominus Io∣hannes Fyne∣ux. necnon & octavi capitalis Iusticiarius ad placita coram eisdem Regibus tenend' vir utique prudentissimus, genere nisignis, Iustitia praeclarus, pietate refertus, humanitate splendidus & caritate fecundus, ex ejus munificentia & bonitate circa ecclesiae nostrae, refectorii, dormitorii nostri, murorum nostrorum repara∣tionem & refectionem quadraginta librarum summam ampliús∣que largissimè exposuerit. Hinc est quòd Nos Willielmus Prior antedictus & ejusd' domus fratres hujus dignissimi viri carita∣tem fecundam advertentes pro hujusm' ejus largitione suapiissi∣ma unanimi consensu & assensu, concessimus, donavimus ac prae∣sentis donationis nostrae scripto roboravimus & pro perpetuo con∣firmavimus prout per praesentes confirmamus eidem Iohanni Fy∣neux heredibus & successoribus suis unum Capellanum ex fratri∣bus nostris quotidie & imperpetuum apud altare in honore beatae Mariae Virginis vocat' in Capella beatae Mariae edificatade visi∣tatione ejus, missam quae vocabitur missabeatae Mariae inter ho∣ram septimam & octavam celebraturum. Et quòd idem Capella∣nus pro tempore celebraturus quotidie post offeratorim, & ante manuum lotionem ad cornu Altaris conversus alta voce recitabit
in quadam tabula nomina infra scripta ut sequitur. Oretur di∣vina clementia pro animabus Domini Iohannis Fyneux militis & Elisabeth consortis suae, Henrici Regis ejus nomine septimi, Io∣hannis Morton Cardinalis quondam Archiepiscopi Cantuar. Willielmi Apuldorfeld & Mildredae consortis suae, ac pro anima∣bus omnium fidelium defunctorum. Et ut haec donatio & conces∣sio nostra firmiter & perpetuò observetur: Nos Willielmus Prior praefatus & hujus ejusdem loci Conventus hanc doationem & concessionem nostram non solum sigilli nostri communis & Capi∣tularis appositione sed & manuum nostrarum subscriptione con∣firmavimus, & per praesentes confirmamus. Dat' in domo nostra Capitulari praedictae domus nostrae apud Cantuar. vicesimo octavo die mensis Novembris Anno Domini Millesimo quingentesimo vicesimo secundo. Et ego frater Willielmus Wederhall Doctor in theologia & Provincialis ejusdem ordinis fratrum heremitarum omnia & sin∣gula praedicta condignò & salubriter percontentus fuisse concessa & condonata, pro confirmatione omnium & singulorum, sic ut praefertur per Priorem & confratres praedictos concessorum & condonatorum ad specialem rogatum & requisitionem praefatorum Prioris & Conventus, praescriptis concessioni & condonationi sigillum meum quo ad talia negotia utor apposui. Dat' quoad si∣gillationem hujus confirmationis nostrae vicesimo die Decembris Anno Dom. supra dicto. Hitherto and enough of the Aug. Friers. Having for∣merly discoursed at large of the old Gaol or Prison some∣time standing about this place; for avoiding of repetitions, I forbear all further discourse ofit here. And so finish with this Ward: finding nothing more observable in it, except the goodly conduit there, which, because of a future occa∣sion which I shall have to make mention of it, I shall deferre to speak of here. Northgate Ward. THis Ward offers and affords three remarkable places, to our Survey, and they are, 1. The place called Stable∣gate.
2. the quondam house of the Templars. 3. The late house of the black Princes chantery Priests. I will begin with Stablegate. A borough or hamlet by the Stablegate. Charter of Hen. 6. made to the City excepted from the Franchise of the same, as being a parcell of the vill of West∣gate, and of the see and liberty of the Archbishop, to whom of old it hath belonged: it being taken for the very place where Augustine the first Archbishop of Canterbury, and his company were entertained and seated by King Ethelbert, before he resigned to him his royall Palace. Concessit cis (Thornes words) locum habitationis in civitate Doroberniae sci∣tuatum, viz. infra parochiam Sancti Aclphegi, ex opposito regiae stratae versus Aquilonem; per murum Palatii Archiepiscopalis in longitudine se extendit, in quo Augustinus cum suis domesticis usque ad conversionem Regis hospitatus est. Fuerat tunc temporis quasi oratorium pro familia Regis ut ibi dorarent & Diis suis li∣beros immolarent. Sanctus verò ille hospes tanta hospitium suum voluit libertate promovere, & ab exactionibus quorumcunque per∣petualiter acquietare, quòd neque Civibus in tallagiis & assessi∣onibus quoquo modo debeant respondere, vel eis subsidium aliquod praestare: sed Archiepiscopo in omnibus subjacere, & ut suum Palatium firma libertate gaudere. Ita ut si fures vel homicidae vel alii quanis indictati situm de Stablegate valeant introire; ut in ecclesia, libertate gaudebunt. Thus he. Whence it took the name of Stablegate, I am as yet igno∣rant. Some surmise from the staple of wool which ancient∣ly was kept in the City. Canterbury being one of the places where by the stat. 27. Ed. 3. it was ordained to be kept, and the onely place that two yeares before (25. Ed. 3.) the same King appointed for the keeping of it at, for the ho∣nour of St Thomas Stow. Survey. pag 496. ult. ditionis.. If so, then is there a mistake in the wri∣ting of it Stablegate, for Staplegate. There was sometime a family in our City, who from their habitation either at or neare this place, were sirnamed De Stablegate, and of Stab. whereof one Edmund Stablegate Edmund Stable∣gate. (the same man I take it that Lambert speaks of. Peramb. of Kent, in Bilsington) in the 42. Ed. 3. was a Bailiff of the City.
For to a deed or Charter of Nicholas at Crouch, made to the Hospitall of Eastbridge (de quieta clamatione juris sui in quodam tenemento cum gardino & pertinen' scituat' in parochia sancti Petri Cant. inter curtilagium de Estbridge versus East, & murum lapideum fratrum minorum Cant. versus West, conti∣nen' in longitudine a regia strata versus North usque ad aquam del Stour vers. South 136 pedes, & in latitud. 46 pedes) this Edmund, by the title of one of the Bailiffs of the City is, with others, a witnesse. He had also a seat or habitation in the Suburbs by Natindon, limitaneous to the Cities Fran∣chise thereaway, as the perambulation thereof will show. I leave Stablegate, and passe to the house of the Tem∣plars. House of Templars. An order of Knights that began in the yeare 1118. These Knights Templars (saith Stow Survey pag. 438. & 439., speaking out of Mat∣thew Paris, of the Temple in London) took their beginning about the yeare 1118. in manner following. Certain noble Knights bound themselves by vow in the hands of the Pa∣triarch of Ierusalem, to serve Christ after the manner of Re∣gular Canons, in chastity and obedience, and to renounce their own proper wills for ever: the first of which order were Hugh Pagan and Geffrey of S. Audomar. And whereas at the first they had no certain habitation, Baldwin, King of Ierusalem, granted unto them a dwelling place in his Palace by the Temple, and the Canons of the same Temple gave them the street, thereby to build there∣in their houses of Office; and the Patriarch, the King, the Nobles, and the Prelates, gave unto them certain revenues out of their Lordships. Their first profession was for safegard of the Pilgrims, co∣ming to visit the Sepulchre, and to keep the high-wayes a∣gainst the lying in wait of theeves &c. About ten yeares af∣ter, they had a rule appointed unto them, and a white habit by Honorius the second; then Pope; and whereas they had but nine in number, they began to increase greatly. After∣ward in Pope Eugenius time, they bare crosses of red cloth, on their uppermost garments, to be known from others, and in short time because they had their first Mansion hard
by the temple of our Lord in Ierusalem, they were called Knights of the Temple. Many Noblemen in all parts of Christendome, became brethren of this order, and builded for themselves Temples in every City or great Town in England, but this (saith my Author) at London was their chief house, which they build∣ed after the form of the Temple neare to the Sepulchre of our Lord at Ierusalem. They had also (saith he) other Temples in Cambridge, Bristow, Canterbury, Dover, War∣wick &c. That in Canterbury Stow speaks of, was situate in North∣gate Parish, in or neare Waterlock-lane (the lane, I con∣ceive, under the Town-wall, and leading by Northgate Church within, down to the river running from Abbots∣mill.) For I reade Thorne in vi∣tis Abbat. Sancti Augustini. of a messuage, which in the yeare 1271 was given to St Austines Abbey by one Edmunde de Cambio scituat' in venella de Weterloke in parochia de Northgate, prope domos Templariorum &c. When this sect of the Templars was abolished, and why, as also what became of their posses∣sions, you may finde elsewhere. Leaving them then, I shall show you next where the black Princes Priests. Princes Chantery Priests were once housed, and so I shall have done with this Ward. Their house stood, I may say it yet stands (for so I take it, in part it doth) very neare, if not in the place where some part of the Templars habitati∣on was situate. But let me first show you that such a house there once was, and that I shall do from the charter or deed of this Princes Chanteries foundation, in which are these words. Promora siquidem dictorum sacerdotum assignavimus quendam habitationis locum juxta elemosinariam dicti monaste∣rii (meaning Christ-Church) in quo construetur &c. where∣with concurreth the relation of the Priests themselves (one of them at least) to Hen. 8. Commissioners, which hath these words ofit. Also the said Prince Edward gave to the sid. Chaplains and to their Successours for ever a house in S. Alphies Parish, the yearely value of it is XXs. &c. Next let me observe unto you that over an ancient
stone-porch opening to the lane leading you from Stable∣gate, Westward, towards the lane turning to Abbats-mill, there are yet undefaced the Black-Princes armes obvious to the eye of any observing passenger. And so by this time (I hope) the place is sufficiently discovered, and my task for this Ward absolved. Worthgate Ward. COming now to Worthgate ward. The first thing I shall survey there is the quondam Hospitall of poore Priests. Hospitall of Poore Priests. A Spittle first built and founded by Simon Langton Arch∣deacon (and brother of Stephen Langton Archbishop) of Canterbury about the yeare 1240. Not (it seems) altoge∣ther of his own purse, but chiefly by and with the alms and charitie of pious and devout benefactors. Quod Hospitale idem Archidiaconus diversorum elemosinis dicitur fundasse, saith Thorne relating the foundation of this Spittle. It was (I conceive) intended for a place of succour and relief to poore Priests. i. Chaplaines, Curates, and other like unbe∣neficed Clerks, chiefly those (I suppose) that either by age or other infirmity, were disabled for the performance any longer of their holy function abroad in the world, and there∣fore were here accommodated with a Chapell (wherein to pray, sing and celebrate for their benefactors, and to per∣forme Chapell. other divine duties) contiguous to this their habita∣tion, dedicate, as their Hospitall, to the blessed Virgin; whose first fabrick was not, as now, of stone. One Thomas Wyke (Master, I take it of the Hospitall) anno 1373. new built it of stone, but it is now made and parcelled out into dwellings and work-houses. Shortly after the Hospitalls foundation perfected, at Langton the founder his instance, the then Abbat and Co∣vent of S. Augustines granted to it the Parsonage of Stod∣mersh, of their Patronage. Of which grant my Author (Thorne) gives this Copy.
OMnibus Sanctae matris &c. R. Dei gratia &c. Ad univer∣sitatis Grant of Stod∣mersh Church. vestrae noticiam volumus pervenire, nos, divinae pie∣tatis intuitu ad instantiam viri venerabilis & amici nostri ka∣rissimi Magistri Simonis de L. Archidiac. Cant. Ecclesiam Sanctae Mariae de Stodin. quae ad nostram pertinuit donationem perpetuè concessisse & dedisse Hospitali pauperum Sacerdotum quod situm est in parochia de Sancta Margareta in Cant. ad su∣stentationem eorundem cum proventibus quatuor acrarum singu∣lis annis de Dominio nostro de Stodmarsh antiquo more de gratia nostra speciali percipiendum: hoc adjecto, quòd in dicta parochia nullas terras vel redditus de nostris tenentibus, dicti Sacerdotes vel eorum procuratores ement vel aliquo titulo sibi appropriabunt nisi de nostro vel Successorum nostrorum licentia speciali, nec de∣cimas aliquas de Domnio nostro de Stodm. requirent in fu∣turo. Quando autem dictam eis fecimus donationem Syndcus dicti Hospitalis de voluntate Archidiaconi memorati, nomine di∣ctorum Sacerdotum & Hospitalis supradicti nobis & ecclesiae no∣strae Sacramentum praestitit fidelitatis, & hoc idem facient omnes Successores sui. Dictus autem Procurator vel aliquis Sa∣cerdos Hospitalis supradicti omni anno super majus altare in ec∣clesia nostra in die S. Augustin' unum cereum unius librae in signum recognitionis praemissorum &c. To this Parsonage, not long after, to wit anno 1271. ano∣ther was added, that I mean of S. Margaret in Cant. given to this Hospitall by the same donors that the former, or if you will (as the private Lieger of the house hath it) by Hugh Mortimer then Archdeacon, authoritate ordinaria, the See being void, with consent of the Patrons, the Abbat and Co∣vent aforesaid. Anno Domini Millesimo Cclxxjo (saith Thorne Grant of S. Margarets Church. of it) data fuit ecclesia Sanctae Margaretae Cant. Hospitali pau∣perum Sacerdotum ibidem in liberam & perpetuam elem' ab ab∣bate R. quae fuit ante nostri patronatus. Et non licebit Syndico vel Sacerdoti Hosp. praed' aliquas terras redditus vel tenementa in dicta parochia sanctae Margaretae de tenentibus nostris emere, vel aliquo titulo sibi appropriare sine licentia Abb. & Con. speciali.
Syndicus autem praed' Hosp. qui pro tempore fuerit in recogni∣tionem Iuris nostri praed' sacramentum nobis praestabit fidelitatis in Capitulo eum ad hoc fuerit requisitus. Pulsatio vero in eadem ecclesia siet contra Dominum Abbatem quotiens eum per illam ec∣clesiam transire contigerit. I shall not further insist on the particulars of this Hospi∣tals demaines and revenewes, saving the Iland behinde it, and a forgotten milne sometime both neighbouring and belonging to it, called Medmilne, either I take it, because Medmilne. situate by the Meadowes, quasi Meadmilne, or else because standing about mid-way betweene Saint Mildreds Mill on the one, and Eastbridge on the other side, quasi Middle∣milne. Before the Hospitals erection it was the proper Mill of one Lambinus or Lambin, from either his birth-place or parentage, sirnamed Flandrensis or Fleming, who dwelt where since and now the Hospitall is seated; and living there, gave to Eastbridge Hospitall, beside 14. perches of his land lying in With, an annuity of one quarter of wheate out of the said Mill, of which gift I once tooke this note from Eastbridge Booke. Carta Lambini Flandrensis filii Adae de Berghes, Hospitali de una summa frumenti de molendino meo quod vocatur Medmilne, & 14. perticatis terrae meae quae jacet Binnewytt inter ter. [ten.] Samuelis tinctoris versus North, & terram Godardi molendinarii vers. South, super Sturam Cant. The Poore Priests afterwards succeeding Lambine in his seate, succeeded him (it seemes) in this Mill also. For in the yeare 1325. a controversie arising betweene the two Hospitals about this Mill Liber sancti Lawrentii., and that brought before Robert de Malling then Commissary of Canterbury, He, causâ prius cognitâ, adjudged the Mill to the Hospitall, of Poore Priests. It stood charged neverthelesse with a Resolute of certaine bushels of wheat to Eastbridge Hospitall which it seemes by my Inventory of the present Hospitall taken in Hen. 8. time was foure bushels. For in the recitall there of the rents Resolute yearely going out of the same Hospitall, this is one. Item, to the Hospitall of Eastbridge in Canter∣bury in wheate foure bushels.
Now as for the Iland behind this Hospitall, and lying Iland. betweene it and the Fryers, called by a Saxon word With, it was sometime belonging to this Hospitall serving the poore Priests for a garden, but aforetime appertained partly to Christ-Church, and partly to severall private men: whereof one family long agoe, tooke their sirname, and from this their habitation were called the Withs or Binne∣withs, as some of those were (as you have seene before) which inhabited the neighbour With or Iland, the late Gray Fryers seate. Part if not all the Iland anciently lay in the Parish of Saint Margaret. For the elder Rentals of Christ-Church who had rents here, make mention of seve∣rall tenents and parcels of ground here, as of and within that Parish. And the private Leiger of this Hospitall so menti∣ons the house of one Solomon of Binnewith, Anno 1239. At Way to the Iland. or about which time the common and ordinary way or pas∣sage to this Iland was by the now little and streightned lane leading from the street before the Hospitall (called Stour-street) to the common washing place on the North-side of the Hospitall, and from thence over the Stour by a Bridge crossing the streame. For the situation of that which is now the dwelling house of Peter Noble (then one Robert de Hotwells) on the North-side of the Chapell is in an ancient rentall of Christ-Church described thus. Inter domum quae fuit Lambini Flandrensis & vicum sicut itur ad With. i. be∣tween the house sometime of L. F. (which I told you is now the Hospitall) on the one side, and the lane as you goe to With or at the Iland on the other. In another Rentall thus described. Tenementum quod est inter capellam Hospitalis sa∣cerdotum versus South, & quandam venellam quae ducit ad In∣sulam praed' Hosp vers. North, & regiam stratam vers. East. And that on the lanes other side thus. In parochia sanctae Mariae de Bredman inter domum lapideam Samuelis tinctoris vers. Aquil. & domum Roberti de Hotwell vers. Austrum, in∣terjacente quadam venella qua itur versus Stur, & regiam stratam vers. Orien. & Stur versus occiden. Which first described house was sometime belonging to Christ-Church:
of all right and title to which house (or challenge thereof) the poore Priests Anno 1242. coming to be neigh∣bours to it (and their neighbour-hood, it seemes, of the jealous Monkes suspected) make a Charter Liber eccles. Cant. of release to them, namely (as the words of it are) de Iure suo in quadam terra & domo apud Hottewell (for so it seemes, the place was Hottewell. called) quae est juxta pontem ex parte aquilonari; to which they put Simon Langton the Archdeacons Seale, because they had then (as they say in their Charter, by reason, I take it, their Hospitall was but newly founded) no seale as yet of their owne. The late owners of the Gray-Fryers have exchanged this house (which was theirs) with the City, for that Iland, which now goes with the Fryers, and is parcell of the same. But now to our Hospitall againe, which I finde clearely to The Hospitall spared by the Dissolution. have stood out and escaped the generall dissolution, un∣suppressed. In Queene Maries dayes, Anno 1554. the Ma∣stership thereof with the Rectory of Saint Margaret, which went still with it, was conferred upon one Hugh Barret, pre∣sented thereto by the Patron Nicholas Harpesfield the Arch∣deacon, to the Deane and Chapter of Christ-Church, Or∣dinaries, or Keepers of the spiritualties in the Sees then vacancy, who gave the presented Institution with letters mandatory to the Archdeacon or his Officiall for his Indu∣ction: whereof a Booke of that Church keepes this Re∣cord. VIcesimo septimo Iulii 1554. D'nus admisit Hugonem Bar∣ret presbiterum ad Hospitale pauperum sacerdotum Civita∣tis Cant. necnon & Rectoriam sive ecclesiam parochialem divae Margaretae ejusdem Civitatis dicto Hospitali appropriat. per mortem naturalem Nicolai Langdon ultimi Incumbentis ejusdem vacan'. Ad quam sive quod per venerabilem virum magi∣strum Nicolaum Harpesfield legum dectorem Archidiaconum Cant. dict. hospit. & ecclesiae verum & indubitatum ut dicitur patronum D'no praesentatus extitit. Ipsumque Praepositum Magistrum sive Rectorem instituit & investivit canonicè in &
de eisdem eum suis juribus & pertinentiis universis, Curamque & regimen animarum &c. sibi in Domino commisit, Iuribus capitularibus, &c. & ecclesiae Metropol' Christi Cantuar. di∣gnitate et honore in omnibus semper salvis, ac praestito Iuramento per Iacobum Canceler procuratorem supradicti Hugonis Barret in hac parte legitimè constitutum, de observand' statutis et ordina∣tionibus dicti Hospitalis juxta fundationem ejusdem, ac etiam de canonica obedientia, &c. Scriptum fuit Archidiacono Cant. sen ejus Officiali pro ipsius inductione, &c. But afterward, to wit Anno 17. Eliz. (and not before) When surren∣dred. this Hospitall was dissolved, being then surrendred to her Majesty, by Blase Winter the Master, Edmund Freake the Patron, and Matthew Parker the Ordinary, and eftsoones granted by the Queene to the City, whereunto ever since it hath belonged, and is called Bridewell Hospitall: Bride-well, Bride-well. because of the house of correction there kept; and Hospitall, both for the old names sake, and because of a certaine number of Boyes (poore Townesmens Children) kept there in an Hospitall way. Of the foresaid Royall grant my Appendix shall give you a Copy, if you desire Vide pro Scrip∣tura 7ma in p∣pendice. the sight of it: So much of this Hospitall. Of the state whereof in 37. Hen. 8. whilest it yet was in Esse, if any desire satisfaction, I shall be willing to give them a more exact ac∣compt, from good record thereof, which I can produce. One thing being very pertinent to our discourse of this Spittle, since I wrote the premisses come to my knowledge, and therefore hitherto omitted; I desire leave to mention here, though the place in some respect be indeed impro∣per; and that is, that in the interim of this Hospitals foun∣dation, and the appropriation of St Margarets Church un∣to it, the Parson and the Hospitall with consent and confir∣mation of the Abbat and Archdeacon, did come to com∣position about the tithes and other ecclesiasticall rights and duties of this Hospitall: a Copy whereof taken from a Lieger Booke of Saint Austins, you shall finde in my Ap∣pendix, Scriptura ixa.
I come next to Maynards, or more rightly Mayners Spit∣tle, Mayners Spit∣tle. so called from the founder, one Mayner, sometime a Citizen of Canterbury dwelling in St Mildreds Parish Rentale vetus ecclsiae Christi Cant.: and that (as I have good inducement to avouch) in H. 2. dayes. A man in his time (it seemes) of noted wealth, and (I sup∣pose) therefore, and to distinguish him and his family from another family of Mayners which were Dyers about the same time, sirnamed Dives, and so styled and called in ancient writings that make mention of him, viz. Maynerus Dives, or Mayner le Rich, an addition whereby his succession or posterity were knowne and called after him, by name Ethel∣stane and Wiulphus, Wilulphus or Winulphus (for so variously is he written) his sonnes, and afterward, Maynerus, his Grand-child (I take it.) Of which the two former lived in Rich. 1. and King Iohns dayes (and in the first of King Iohn, Winulphus, who lived where Alderman Sabin now dwells Rale eccles. prad., was one of the Praepositi of the City) and the latter in Henry the thirds; in the thirteenth yeare of whose reigne he was a like Governor of the City. I finde n the Hospitall called both Hospitale Mayneri and Hosp. Winulphi [Wiulphi]. For this cause (I conceive) that  Sic in Archi∣vis ecclesie prad. the Patronage of the Hospitall though the first founder were dead, yet continued to the sonne. And so Maynerus the father dying, the Hospitall tooke name afterward from W. the sonne, the succeeding Patron, whilest as yet the City had not the patronage, power or government of it. Or else thus. The foundation was imperfect in the Fathers dayes, and became afterwards either perfected or bettered by the sonne, and so it gained the name of Winulphs or Wiulphs Hospitall, which latter name it hath now clean lost, and is knowne onely by the former. The Hospitall hath a neate little Chapell to it (of late incumbred and indangered too, by part of a house and a chimney put up against it) which together with the Hospi∣tall was dedicate to the blessed Virgin o.  Ex Archivis the moral. As for the endowment, possessions and goods of this Hospitall and Chapell, what they are now, or at first were,
I know not; but what they were in Hen. 8. dayes, you may learne from this following Inventory taken of them and delivered up to the Commissioners upon the Stat. 37. Hen. 8. cap. 4. Maynards Hospitall. The house and the Garden is by estimation one halfe acre and the rodde. Item, in the Spittle lane they have three tenements, the rent of them all is yearely xiijs Item, in Castle-street be two tenements, the rent is yearely of both vjs Item, in the same Castle-street, in the Parish of St Margarets they have one tenement by the yeare vjs viijd Item, in the same street other three tenements all by the yeare at xvs Item, in the same street other three tenements, by the yeare all ixs Item, in Wincheape one tenement, by yeare iiijs Item, in Waterlocke lane in the Parish of St Margaret, there they have two tenements by the yeare x Item, they have three little pieces of Garden roomes, every of them goeth for 12d by the yeare iijs Item, they have a little stripe of ground leading them from their Wood unto the Kings high-way iis iiijd Item, they have a Wood called the Brotherhedds Wood in the Parish of Fordwich containing by estimation sixe Acres. In the Chapell. Item, one Chalice. Item, two Masers bound with silver. Item, two Candlestickes for two Tapers of Catten. Item, one Corporas and the Case. Item, two vestements and two Albs.
Item, one painted cloth for the forefront of an Altar. Item, one Bell. Item, one great chest in the Chapell. Adjoyning to this Hospitall, or rather within it is ano∣ther Cottons Hospi∣tall. like Hospitall, erected of late by one Leonard Cotton Gentleman, sometimes an Alderman and Maior of this City: whose commendable piety is as yet so fresh in me∣mory, and his Will so obvious to any that will search the Office for it, and therein the nature and condition of the foundation so largely set forth, that it shall not need my further mention. Ridingate Ward. VVHerein the Dungeon, a Mannor lying in this Ward, The Dungeon. so called, challengeth the next place in our Survey: whose name time (I perceive) hath sported with, calling it sometime Danzon and Dangon (totam terram nostram quam habuimus ad Dangonem [Danzonem] as in an old deed of St Lawrence:) as also Dangun (in campio qui vocatur Dangun, as in a deed of 47. Hen. 3. And, particula terrae meae cum per∣tinen' jacent' apud Dangun, as in a deed of 14. Ed. 1.) Like∣wise Daungeon (juxta le Daungeon, as in old Rentals of Christ-Church:) and Dungeon so Roger Brent of Canterbury in his Will In Registro Co Can∣tuarien. dated Anno 2486. mentioning his Mannor there, calleth it, and so doe we at this day, and the Hill hard by Dungeon-Hill:) Names much alike all. And as the Man∣nor (I take it) derived it name from that of the neighbour∣ing Hill; so the radix and originall of that, I conceive to signifie the Danes worke: and therefore corruptly called Dungeon-Hill for Danian Hill, or Danes-Hill: and that be∣cause it was either theirs against the City, or contrariwise the Cities against them. For my part, I conceive first that it was the proper worke of the Danes, (the great and fre∣quent molesters, invaders and wasters of our City:) and
that probably at such time as they beleaguered the City in King Etheldreds dayes, which stood out against them and their siege twenty dayes, and then was not mastered aperto Marte, by open force, but by base treachery surprised: if we may follow Henry of Huntington; Osborne Vide pro Scrip∣ra xxxj. in Appendice. that was (and writ the story) many yeares before him, making no mention of any treason that the other saith was plotted or practiced in the winning of the City. Next I am perswaded (and so may easily, I thinke, any one be that well observes the place) that the workes both within and without the present Wall of the City, were not counter-workes one against the other, as the vulgar opini∣on goes; but were sometimes all one entire plot containing about three Acres of ground; of a triangular forme (the out-worke) with a mount or hill intrenched round within it. And that, when first made and cast up, it lay wholly without the City-wall: and hath been (the hill or mount, and most part also of the out-worke) for the Cities more security, taken and walled in since: that side of the trench encompassing the mount now lying without, and under the wall, fitly meeting with the rest of the City-ditch, after either side of the out-worke was cut thorough to make way for it, at the time of the Cities inditching, as I suppose it cannot seeme unlikely to have beene, to any that shall con∣siderately marke and examine the place. But leaving that, a word or two more of the Mannor of Dungeon, which was sometime the Chiches, a family of Chiches a fami∣ly. Gentlemen, for many generations knowne in our City, though now extinct to one poore Sparke, to whom the Al∣dermanry of Burgate apperteined. Of which Thomas Chich (whose name in an old Character, together with his effigies are set up in the West Window, as his coate is in the Chan∣cell, in stone-worke, of St Mary Bredins Church) was Anno 1259 Recorda ∣cles. Cant., and againe Anno 1271 Recorda ∣cles. Cant., one of the Bailiffes of the City, as was also Iohn Chich Recorda ∣cles. Cant. in the 23th, and againe in the 26th yeare of Ed. 3. After the Chiches, it was the Brents, then the Butlers, and shortly after (as now) the Hales.
This Ward affoords me nothing else observable, where∣fore I leave it, and betake me to the next. Burgate Ward. VVHerein I shall observe first the Market-crosse at the Bull-stake: and thereof let me give you the Bull-stake: true antiquity from a rythmicall brazen memoriall fastened to one of the columnes, which is this. Iohn Coppyn of Whitstabell in great devotion, And William Bigg of Canterbury in Christs Passion Did do make this Crosse, in Heaven God them solace, Mcccc and xlvj. in the yeare of Grace. This Crosse (it seemes) was built to supply the decay of a former standing here. For in the story of Archbishop Stra∣fords troubles recorded in the Antiquit. Brit. my Author maks mention of a writ of summons against the Archbishop set up at noone day, ad crucem excelsam extra portam Priora∣tus Cantuariensis Antiq. Brit. in la Stratford. pag. 24.. Now for the name of the place, the Bull-stake: which it tooke from the baiting and chasing of Buls there, by an an∣cient order and custome of the City, used by the City But∣chers, before their killing, not so much (if at all) for plea∣sure, as to make them mans meate, and fit to be eaten; which Buls flesh, without such baiting and chasing, is not held to be. At this place (the Bullstake) is a mercate holden twice a weeke, viz. every Wednesday and Saturday throughout the yeare, plentifully serving the City and neighbouring parts with houshold provision of victuall of divers kinds, especially of poultry, and that ab antiquo: whence in a composition Lib. eccles. Cant. betweene Christ-Church and Saint Augustines Monkes, made Anno 41. Ed. 3. that part of the street by it, i. betweene it and the now Lane called Angell-lane, is termed le Polettria, the Poultry (in quodam Messuagio cum
cellar' & shop, ad idem pertinen. dictorum Prioris & Conventus The Poultry. in parochia sancti Andreae Cant. in le Polettria scituat' inter Regalem stratam vers. North & alia tenementa ipsorum P. & C. vers. South, & quandam venellam vocat' Clementeslane vers. East, & quandam placeam communem vocat' le Bolstake versus West, as it is in the Composition). Offa King of Mercia in the yeare 785. gave unto Eald∣berht his Minister, & his Sister Seledrith the Abbesse, vicum qui dicitur Curringtun in urbe quae dicitur Dorovernensi, in aqui∣lonali parte venalis loci. Where to finde this Market place I Mereats in the City and Sub∣bs. know not. But here (as in a place which I have purposely reserved, as most proper for it) let me show unto you what severall Markets and Market-places our City had of old. For, as we now see they are, and like as the Philosopher in his Politicks Aristot. 7. Po∣liticor. cap. 12. in like case requires (where he saith, Fora haec separanda sunt pro faciliori commercio, ut alibi oves, alibi alia animalia, alibi carnes, alibi pais veneant, si modo civitas aut oppidum locorum commoditatem admitat; aliter una & ea∣dem platea forum admittere poterit, &c.) So have our mer∣cates beene of old, kept apart, each commodity almost Wheat market. having a distinct place to be vented in. As (for example) first Poultry and other like privision here at the Bull-stake. Upwards, i. without Burgate in Saint Pauls Parish, was of ancient time a Wheat-market (De quodam tenemento apud Wheat-market, and De novis shoppis quae sunt apud Wheat-mar∣ket in parochia sancti Pauli, as in old Rentals of Christ-Church, mentioning their now houses, at and about the corner on your left-hand without Burgate. A deed or Charter of Lands given to Saint Au∣stins, by one Dumvoldus, in the yeare 760. makes menti∣on of a Mar∣ket-place by Quenegate, in these words. Villam  quae jam ad quenega ∣bis Dorov in soo pos. Rush-market. Cloth-market.) Come we backe againe, and at the Red-well, by the Palace backe∣gate, there was another market, commonly called and to this day remembred by the name of the Rush-market. In Saint Georges street, about the Augustine Fryers Gate, there was a Cloth-market kept (a touch where of I have given before in speaking of those Fryers) whence the Lane now called Iron-barre lane, was then called and described, venella quae ducit à Cloth-markes versus Burgate Rle vs eccles Christi Cant. Thorough∣hall lane.. The same Lane (by the way) was sometime called Thorough-hall lane, whe∣ther
or no from a house in or by it of Christ-Church, called in their old Rentals, Aula Sancti Dunstani; I leave to con∣jecture. Below this Cloth-market, was, as it is still, the Flesh-market, or Flesh-shambles for Butchery ware. To the repaire whereof, and for paving the street thereaway, Al∣derman Bennet by his Will In Registro Domins Archid. Cant. Anno 1462. gave xl. Thus occa∣sionally induced, let me observe that the City in those dayes lay generally unpaved, and so continued a good space of time afterwards. But in the 17. yeare of Ed. 4. by a particular act of Parliament made for that purpose, order Act of Parlia∣ment for pa∣ving the streets. was taken for the paving of the principall streets, as by a copy of the same act, which you may finde in my Appen∣dix Striptura 8v• will more fully appeare. Yet lower downe (to returne to our mercate-places) to wit in the High-street, besides St Mary Bredmans. Church, was wont in time past to be kept a Fish-market. In medio Fish-market. mercati ubi venduntur pisces Cant. juxta ecclesiam beatae Mariae Bredman, as I finde in the examination of a witnesse men∣tioning where certaine words of defamation were uttered by one that was sued for them, in Anno 1414z. This Fish-market (it seemes) was of long continuance kept here.  Ex Rgistro Consistor. Cant. For in a deed of Christ-Church dated 1187. mention is made of a house, scituat' in parochia sanctae Mariae, quae voca∣tur ecclesia Piscariorum in Cant. passed over to the Church (in exchange for another) by the Nonnes of Saint Sexburgh in the Ile of Shepey. And before that, Odo the Prior of Christ-Church leased out Managium Lamberti Gargate juxta Fismannecherich, ubi ipse Lambertus manere solebat, scilicet partem illam quae est proxima ecclesiae, &c. as the demise runs. Now I conceive this to be the Church intended by those deeds. And so, as it is now, from the Bred-market by it, called Saint Mary Bredmans Church, it was more anciently called Saint Mary Fishmans Church. I proceed. Upwards, a little without Newingate, at Oaten-hill, Oaten-hill. now the Cities place of execution, was that commodity of oats, sometime vented; as at the same place before, salt Rentale vet. cles. Christi  was sold; whence it was called Salt-hill. It had a market-crosse
to it: for I reade of Crucem de Oat-hill. The place hath a crosse still, but it is ill marketting at it. Not farre hence, to wit, by the Nunnery, at the meet∣ing of the foure weuts or wayes there, another market was kept, or the former continued thither, whence the field over against the Nunnery, Southward, now almost all over digged for chalk, is anciently called Market-field Lib. S. Law∣rentii. & Ren∣tale Eccles. Ca.. Here were, as not farre hence yet are, cattell bought and sold, especially (at this day) bullocks, oxen, and the like: whence (as I conceive) the market took it name at first of Rether∣cheape, Rethercheape. which being a compound of two Saxon words Hry∣thera and Ceape, may be rendred in Latine, Forum armen∣torum, and in English, the Drove-market,  in the Saxon signifying a drove of oxen, or such like big cattell. Whence in a Latine Charter of Cuthred King of Kent, made to Archbishop Wlfred, which I have seen in Christ-Church, Campus armentorum, is englished, . For the anti∣quitie sake of this market, I cannot but take notice of the mention made of it in the second of King Ethelberts char∣ters to S. Augustines Abbey. There was yet another market, and that of old was kept Wincheape. in Wincheape. A mercate haply for wines. For so the name imports. Cheap signifying a mercat: whence the name of Cheapside in London, Chepstow in Monmouthshire, and other like Market places: as Chapman, for a trader there. Our words also of Cheapening, Chopping (as chopping and changing) and of Shop, anciently written usually (in Law∣yers Latine) Choppa, as also of Lieu-cope (signifying a sale or bargain made upon the place) have thence all their deri∣vation: springing from the Saxon Radix, which is Ceap, signifying wares, or merchandise, and Cyppan, to buy. Cambden. Spelman. This market had it crosse too, and that standing within mans memory, upon the Green before the street built of stone, with a crosse-house about it, and was called Barnacle-Crosse. Barnacle-Crosse. But there is neither market, nor market-crosse there now. 'Tis true there is hard by, a crosse; but (as that other at Oaten-hill) it spoils their marketting ever after
that once market thereat. And therefore let us hasten from it. Cathedrall, and Parish Churches. HAving briefly surveyed our Cities Wards, the order of my proposed method requires, in the next place, my survey of the Cathedrall, and Parish Churches of and about the City. First then of the Mother Church (the Ca∣thedrall) and then of the Daughters. The former indeed the thing which I account the chiefest glory both of the City, and my present survey thereof. Which Malmesbury  In prolog. lib. 1. de gestis Pontif. haply not knowing how to commend enough; amongst the many commendations which he gives our City (as, for the situation and exceeding fertility of the soile adjoyning, for the soundnesse of the inclosing walls, for the rivers water∣ing Malmesb. com∣mendation of Canterbury. it, for the commodiousnes of the neighbouring woods, for the vicinitie also of the sea yeelding store of fish to serve it, for the noble and generous disposition of the people, as well of it as of the countrey, prone and propense to of∣fer courtesie to others, and impatient of any injury offered to themselves, and the like) sayes no more of the Church, but this. After the conversion of the English to Christiani∣tie, the prime Episcopall See was fixed at Canterbury, and there continues: Saving that anon after he addes. There is the Archbishops chief Seat, who is the Primate and Patri∣arch of all England. But I canot so contain my self; yet for my more methodicall proceeding, much being to be said of this Metropolitane Church, my whole discourse thereof shall be referred to these heads. 1. The antiquity of the foundation, and the nature thereof. 2. The historie of the Churches Fabrick. 3. A survey of the present Church, with the monuments there∣in, as also of the more ancient buildings throughout the Praecinct both of it and the Palace, with the Ambitus, or Praecinct it self.
4. A Catalogue of the principall Benefactors to the Church. 5 A Catalogue of the 1. Archbishps. of the Church. 2. Priors. 3. Archdeacons. TO begin with the first. The Antiquity and nature of 1. Particular. the foundation. In the former of which I shall be brief, that so I may not dictum dicere, and make no needlesse re∣petitions of what others, many others, for even vulgar satis∣faction, have already said upon the point, as Bede, Parker, Cambden, Lambert; a few of the many that have largely and worthily written hereof. It may not be expected, nor will it (I conceive) become me, post tot Homeros scribere Ili∣ada. Neither can I in this matter say what is not vulgarly known already. And Crambe bis cocta, will not please I know in such dainty times as these. Yet, not altogether to put you over to other mens instructions, and to let you see that the ancient Liegers of the Church, in thankfulnesse to the Founder, keep him and the foundation in memory; I shall here by way of Corollarie, or (to speak in the language of mine own profession) ex superabundanti, produce and pre∣sent unto you a double note faithfully taken from the Lie∣gers, which doth memorize both one and tother. The one thus penned. Sanctus Ethelbertus Rex Anglorum qui suscepit Christia∣nitatem à beato Augustino misso à beato Gregorio Papa Anno Domini Dxcvito. in ecclesia Christi Cant. dedit eidem Augu∣stino & Successoribus suis Palatium Regium & sedem perpe∣tuam in Civitate Doroberniae quae nunc dicitur Cantuar. cum ecclesia veteri quae ab antiquo tempore Romanorum ibidem fu∣erat fabricata, quam ipsemet Augustinus S. Salvatoris nomi∣ne dedicavit post consecrationem suam Arelatenis factam. Statuit etiam idem Rex authoritate S. R. E. ut in Ecclesia Cantuar. ordinem Monasticum Monachi in perpetuum obser∣varint, nè primorum viz. praedicatio Monachoram à memo∣ria deleretur, sed semper recens in mentibus succedentium per∣severaret &c.
The other thus. Aethelbertus Rex, anno Regni sui XXXV. ad fidem Christi per sanctum Augustinum conversus statim palatium suum ei∣dem Augustino & Successoribus suis infra Civitatem Doro∣berniam perpetuè dedit, ut ibi sedem Metropolitanam in evm haberent: Quam beatus Gregorius primam totius Regni esse decrevit & confirmavit, ut sicut prima fuit fidem suscipiendo, prima esset in dignitate. Hoc donum fecit Rex Anno Domini Dxcvij. Thus the Liegers; testes indeed domestici, but in regard of the many consentient testimonies (if not of themselves) of indubious credit. So much for the Antiquity. Now the nature of the foundation appeares from these Extracts, plainly shewing the intention both of Augustine, Ethelbert, and Greg. to be to make it (as it afterward be∣came) both a Monastery and a Cathedrall, or rather a Ca∣thedrall Monastery. The better to understand me, you must know that (as Reyner Apostolat. Be∣nedictin. tract. 1. Sectio 1. §. 17. pag. 77. hath it) since and from the time that Christianity was first imbraced by the Saxons inhabi∣ting this Iland, there have been in England two sorts of Monasteries, the one Claustrall, the other Cathedrall. Et∣enim duo genera coenobiorum (saith my author) habuit Anglia, à prima fidei Christianae receptione: unum claustralium dun∣taxat, aliud verò Cathedralium; vocabantur claustralia, in qui∣bus sub Ahbate aut Priore, Abbatem proprium non hahente, occu∣pabatur conventus in divinis officiis, actibusque regularibus ad perfectionem singulorum Monachorum acquirendam ordinatis, sine onere & cura regiminis dioecesani. Cathedralia verò, quo∣rum Abbas erat Episcopus, & conventus erat capitulum cathe∣dralis ecclesiae, atque adeo Monachi erant canonici cathedrales, ad quos omnia munia pertinebant, quae in ecclesiis cathedralibus sae∣cularibus, ad saeculares canonicos spectare dignoscuntur &c. Of Christ-Church▪ a Cathedrall Monastery. the which latter sort was this our Monastery, a Cathedrall Monastery. Now of what order this Augustine and his Monks were, and consequently this foundation originally was, is of some
made disputable in these dayes; the received opinion un∣til now of late without question affirming them Benectines, or followers of the order of the black Monks of St Benet. The adversaries of which opinion haply are sufficiently an∣swered in Reyner's Apostolatus Benedictinorum &c. to which I referre the unsatisfied. Now what kinde of order this of St Benet was, will best be learned from the story of it Au∣thor, St Benet himself. Take here therefore a relation  De Invent. Rerum. l. 7. c. . thereof borrowed for the more part of Polydore Virgil Authors vary in the yeare, but agree that in the fift Cen∣tury Story of S. Benet. or age of the Church, one Benedictus Nursinus, a man born in Umbria, a Region in Italie, having lead some cer∣tain yeares a solitary life in those desart places, at length retired to Sublacum, a town distant 40 miles from Rome, whither many people (by reason of his great fame and inte∣grity and holinesse of life) resorted unto him: but within a while he departed thence, and repaired to Cassinum an an∣cient City in that region, where he built a Monastery and in a very short time gathered together all such Monks as then wandred here and there in the woods and desarts of Italy, and gave them certain rules and statutes to observe and keep, and withall bound them to three severall vows (by the example of St Basil, who had prescribed them in the East-Countrey to certain Monks of his, about the yeare 383. which Basil was the first that gave rules or orders unto Monks:) The one of Chastity: the second of Poverty: the last of obedience. To live chastly, to possesse nothing, and to obey their Superiours commands. Again Benet gave un∣to his Monks a new kinde of habit, he appointed them also a certain form of praying, and intending to allow them but mean commons, prescribed them a new rule of abstinence. You have the story. By the way, this congregation of St Benet grew by little and little to be so great, that it is almost incredible. There were no Monasteries (saith Reyner Apostolat. Be∣nedict. tract. 1. §. 1 sect. 1 pag 11.) amongst the English from the time of King Edgar, till the time of William the Conquerour, but Benedictines. Yet in the end there hap∣pened
such a schisme among them, that it was and still is divided into many families, as the Cluniacenses, Camalduen∣ses, Vallisumbrenses, Montolivitenses, Grandimontenses, Cister∣cienses, Sylvestrenses, Coelestini, and diverse others, who are now adayes either united with other Orders, or else quite extirpated and abolished. Those that were first instituted by this Saint (as they themselves confesse, saith Polydor) are Vbi supra. Benedictines their habit. those that now adayes wear a black loose coat of stuff reach∣ing down to their heels, with a cowl or hood of the same which hangs down to their shoulders, and their Scapular shorter then any other of those Monks: and under that coat another white habit as large as the former, made of stuffe or white flannen, and boots on their legs. They shave their heads, except one little round circle which they call their crown, and perpetually abstain from flesh, unlesse when they are sick &c. This Order (saith Reyner) came first into England with Augustine the Monk, Archbishop of Canterbu∣ry. So you have in brief both the story of St Benet, and the condition of his order: wherewith if you would be further acquainted, I referre you to the Decrees or Constitutions of it, recommended by Archbishop Lanfranc to the obser∣vation of his Monks of this Church, (whereof Reyner's fore∣cited book affoords a copy;) and to the Ceremoniale Bene∣dictinum. And so have I done with the first Head or Parti∣cular, and proceed to the next. The History of the Churches Fabrick. THe records of the Church, concurring with the com∣mon opinion of our Historians, tell us of a Church in Canterbury, which Augustine at his first arrivall here found standing in the East part of the City. A work (saith Bede)  Ecclesiast. Hist. lib. 1. cap. 33. of the ancient faithfull or beleeving Romans. This Church Aug. had of gift from King Ethelbert, which, after his con∣secration at Arles in France, he commended by speciall de∣dication to the patronage of our blessed Saviour. Whence it afterward became called Ecclesia S. Salvatoris. All extant
Stories, Coucher-books or Liegers and Records that ever I could yet see, affoord no remarkable matter concerning this fabrick (the miraculous preservation of it from the in∣jury of all weathers then very tempestuous in neighbouring parts, whilest it was in roofing, at the prayer of Archbishop Odo, onely excepted) from the time of this her infancy un∣till  Malmesb. de Gest. Pontif. lib. 1 pag. 201. ▪  Francort. The Cathe∣drall burned. that lamentable Danish demolition of it in the dayes of King Etheldred. When a common fire kindled by that im∣placable insatiable rout of Danish-Divelish furies, malicing not the persons onely, but for their sakes, the place too, consumed both it and the City: whereof see a full relation (if you please) in my Appendix taken from Osborne the Monk of Canterb. and never before printed. viz. Scriptu∣ra 31. Shortly after which vastation, it arose again, and was (I Reedified. reade) by Agelnoth the Archbishop (at whose coming to the See it was begun to be repaired after that Danish spoil) brought to perfection Antiq. Brit. i jus vita pag. 94.. About which time, to wit in the yeare 1023. haply by the same Archbishops procurement, (for being well beloved of the King, he perswaded him to many worthy acts) and not unlikely for recompense and expiation of the late spoil of the Church, made by the Kings Countreymen the Danes (Anglos quoque omnes, hortatu Em∣mae Reginae, sibi reconciliare studens, multa eis donaria contulit; they are the words of Matt. of Westminster of King Knute in that very yeare 1023.) Knute gave the port of Sandwich (or Sandwich. rather restored it, for King Egeled had given it 44 yeares before) to this Church. A thing thus recorded in one of the Liegers of the place. 1023. Kanutus Rex dedit ecclesiae Christi in Dorobernia portum de Sandwico cum corona sua aurea quae adhuc servatur in capite crucis majoris in navi ejusdem ec∣clesiae. Portum illum dedit Monachis cum thelonio ejusdem villae, wrecco mais & omnibus aliis consuetudinibus ad portum illum pertinentibus. Which gift Hen. 2. afterward renewed and enlarged, granting to the Monks by his charter consuetudi∣nes portus Sandwici ex utraque parte aquae, viz. ab Eadburgate usque ad Mrkes fleete, & naviculam ad transfretandum &c. as I
have it in the Church Records: all which exceptis domibus Lib. Eccles. Christi Cant. eorum & Kaiis, ac libero passagio in portu praedicto in batello qui dicitur verebote, and free liberty for themselves and their men to buy and sell toll-free, were of the Monkes in exchange, pro lx. libratis terrae in alio loco competenti, in Com' Kan' resigned to the King, not Ed. 3. as Mr Cambden delivers, but Ed. 1. and that Anno 18. Regni sui, to wit Anno Domini 1290. But let's to our Church fabricke a∣gaine. Which it seemes by fire or otherwise fell shortly to decay The Cathe∣drall fired a second time. a second time. For of certaine it was greatly ruinated, when Lanfranc came to the Chaire. Hic ergo Lanfrancus (saith Edmerus Hist. Novor. lib. 1. pag. 7.) cum Cantuariam primò venisset, & ecclesiam Salvatoris, quam regere susceperat, incendio atque ruinis pene nihili factam invenisset &c. Indeed Edmerus elsewhere saith expressely that the Church was burnt the third yeare  Ead Hist. cod. lib. 1. pag. 9. before Lanfrancs coming to the See; an accident enough in it selfe, but for the losse of those ancient priviledges (certaine Charters or Muniments) of the Church, which (as the same Author also there witnesseth) perished in that flame, much more deplorable. Of certaine then, fire brought this fabricke to a second desolation before Lan∣francs time. And as certaine it is, that his care, piety and pity raised both the Monastery and it in all parts of new, Reedified by Lanfranc. and that in a novell and more magnificent kinde and forme of structure then was formerly here used, which made it a precedent and patterne, to succeeding structures of this kinde in the Kingdome. Per totam terram illam (Edmerus words againe) religio aucta est, & ubique nova Monasteriorum  Pag. 7. aedificia, sicut hodie apparet, constructa; quorum aedificiorum constructoribus ipse primus exemplum praebens, ecclesiam Christi Cantuariensem, cum omnibus officinis quae infra murum ipsius Curiae sunt cum ipso muro aedificavit. Indeed it is observed Stow. Survey of London. pag. 352. lt. Edit. Daniel. Hist. in vita Conquestoris., that, before the Normans advent, most of our Monasteries and Church-buildings were of Wood (all the Monasteries in my Realme, saith King Edgar, in his Charter to the Ab∣bey of Malmesbury, dated the yeare of Christ 974 D. H. Spel∣man. Concil. pag. 488.. to
the outward sight are nothing but worme-eaten and rotten Timber and Boords:) and that upon the Norman Conquest such Timber-fabrickes grew out of use and gave place to stone buildings raised upon Arches: a forme of structure introduced by that Nation furnished with stone from Cane in Normandy. In the yeare 1087. (Stows words of the Ca∣thedrall at London) this Church of Saint Paul was burnt with fire, and therewith the most part of the City. Mauricius then Bishop began therefore the foundation of a new Church of Saint Paul, a worke that men (of that time) judged would never have beene finished it was to them so wonderfull for length and breadth, as also the same was builded upon Arches (or Vaults) of stone, for defence of fire; which was a manner of worke before that time un∣knowne to the people of this Nation, and then brought in by the French, and the stone was fetcht from Cane in Normandy. Saint Mary Bow-Church in London being built much about the same time and manner, that is, on Arches of stone, was therefore called (saith the same Author) New Mary Church, or Saint Mary le Bow▪ as Stratford Bridge, being the first builded with Arches of stone, was called therefore Stratford le Bow. This doubtlesse is that new kinde of Architecture, the Continuer of Bede (whose words Malmesbury hath taken up) intends, where speaking of De gest. Reg. Ang. lib. 3. pag. 102. edit. Fran∣cof. the Normans In-come, he saith Videas ubique in villis eccle∣sias, in vicis & urbibus Monasteria novo aedificandi genere con∣surgere. I have digressed, but returne and proceed. Lanfranc you see new built the Church, and that proba∣bly (as I conceive) after this new French forme, and with∣in the space of seven yeares (saith Edmerus Hist. . pag. 8.) à fundamentis fermè totam perfectam reddidit. Which so by him perfected, probably, he innovated the name and title of it, dedica∣ting the same to the Holy-Trinity. For as untill then it Name of the Cathedrall altered. had beene called (as you see before) Ecclesia S. Salvatoris: So in his time and from thence forth it became called (as by Doomsday Book appeares) Ecclesia sanctae Trinitatis. The inscription on the Churches first seale (made no doubt since
the conquest, they not being in use in this Kingdome be∣fore▪) shewes as much, which in allusion (it seemes) and  Cambd. Erit. In Essex pag. 444. Engl. Ed. reference to the Churches dedication was this. Deus pater, Deus silius, Deus spiritus sanctus. Thus I am told; how truely, I make some doubt, both because, though conversant in the Church Records, I never as yet met with any such seale, and for that the seale which was in use not long after the Conquest, namely both in the time of Anselme the Archbishop (Lanfrancs immedi∣ate successor) and Arnulfe the Prior. 1. about the beginning of the eleventh century, which I have often seene, hath no other inscription at all on it, but this (nor would the proportion of the seale admit of a larger) Sigillum ecclesiae Christi. But to goe on. Next after Lanfranc succeeded Anselme, as in his See, so in his piety. For in his time, and chiefely by his care, Cathedrall in∣larged. cost and providence, that fabricke begun and perfected by his predecessor, became much enlarged; whereof Edmerus makes a double mention, to wit first, pag. 35. and againe pag. 108. Super hoc (saith he) ipsum Oratorium, quantum a majore turri in orientem porrectum est, ipso patre Anselmo pro∣vidente, disponente auctum est. The Monkes (it seemes by Edmerus) magnificently finished this worke which Anselme piously began, the King (Hen. 1.) affoording it and them his countenance and encouragement. For when some evill∣minded persons, maligning the worke, suggested to the King that the Monkes were mad, and prodigally wasted to superfluous uses what might stand him much in stead in his Regall expenses; he answers them thus. Quid (saith Edmer. Hist. Novor. lib. 5. pag. 109. he) in externas expensas, in saecularia aliqua, in vana & ordini suo contraria opera, res suas Monachi ponunt? At, si in aug∣mentum & gloriam Domus Dei, eas expendant, benedicatur Deus, qui & illis hujusmodi animum inspiravit, & hanc mihi suo munere gratiam tribuit, ut meis diebus, meamater ecclesia crementum potius capiat, quam detrimentum. Matthew Paris Records a dedication of the Church of Canterbury in the yeare of Christ 1114. being the yeare of Anselmes death.
Haply it was of that new piece or new worke, as Edmerus cals it. This doubtlesse is the part meant by Malmes bury De Gest. Pon∣tific. lib. 1. pag. 23. Editio. Francosurt., ascribed to Ernulfus the then Prior of the Church, and of him (erroniously it seemes) said to have beene built in the place of a like part then demolished, whereof he hath these words. Cantiae (saith he) dejectam priorem partem ecclesiae quam Lanfrancus aedificaverat, adeo splendide erexit, ut nihil tale possit in Anglia videri, in vitrearum fenestrarum luce, in marmorei pavimenti nitore, in diversi coloribus picturis, quae mi∣rantes oculos trahunt ad fastigia lacunaris. Thus he. This Church thus new built, and thus also enlarged fell Cathedrall si∣red a third time. againe by fire about the yeare 1130. Shee happily found such as pitied her misfortune, and tooke commiseration of her ruines: whereof Archbishop Corboyt is said Antiq. Brit. Harpsfield. Godwin. in ejus vita. to be the chiefe, who of his owne purse set it up againe, and then after a most solemne manner did dedicate the same, in the presence of the King, the Queene, David King of Scots, most of the Bishops, and a great number of the Nobility of both Realmes. Whereunto the King of England pre∣sently became a Benefactor, giving and granting, besides an annuity of ten ponnds in money, the Church (or Prio∣ry) of Saint Martin in or neere Dover, to this Church for ever Harpsfield ubi supra. Cathedrall a∣gaine named.. In and at which Dedication, the Churches name was againe changed, from Ecclesia sanctae Trinitatis, to Ec∣clesia Christi Cant. Thorne (St Austins Chronicler) records the thing, but under the yeare 1128. Anno Domini 1128 (saith he) quarto nonas Martii, fuit ecclesia sanctae Trinitatis Cant. dedicata, a praefato Willielmo Archiepiscopo, quae postmo∣dum ecclesia Christi Cantuariae est vulgariter vocitata. And then also was the Churches Common Seale renewed, which in the fore-part had this inscription about it. Sigillum eccle∣siae Christi Cantuariae primae sedis Britanniae; and in the reverse, this about our Saviours Picture. Ego suam via, veritas & vita. This Seale continued till Beckets Martyrdome, and then was a third time changed, as you shall finde here∣after. About forty yeares after that, viz. in the yeare 1174 Liber Ecclesiae Cant. & An∣siy. Britan. pag. 291.. I
read of yet another combustion of this sacred edifice. At whose cost it recovered it selfe then, I finde not; saving that the Popes Bulls shortly after provide that the offerings In Archivis Ecclesiae. to the then newly murdered and canonized Archbishop, Thomas Becket, should goe and be converted in restauratio∣nem ecclesiae (one cause haply why it was called Saint Thomas Church:) And that way (I beleeve) such store of Coyne might come in, (the devotion of that age to Saint Thomas inclining many to bee forward and liberall benefactors) that it cannot seeme a thing improbable for the Church to have recovered by that meanes. The Monkes now at length more neerely affected with the woefull havocke which these frequent fires had made of their Church-fabricke, either occasioned or furthered by some neighbouring edifices, carefully provide to re∣move that cause, and for that end, divers houses belong∣ing to St Austins, being built and situate neere unto their Campanile or Steeple standing on the Southside of their Campanile of Christ-Church Church-yard; after much suite, they prevailed at length with those their neighbours the Monkes of Saint Aust. to exchange the houses with their ground about them for the like elsewhere. Let me inlarge this matter to you out of Thorne who records and reports it as followeth. Anno Do∣mini 1177. (saith he) facta fuit quaedam commutatio terrarum censualium inter Monasterium istud & Monasterium sanctae Trinitatis. Habebat enimistud Monasterium quasdam terras ex parte meridiana cimiterii sanctae Trinitatis juxta Campanile corum, quae terrae reddebant huic Monasterio singulis annis xxs & xjd: & quia istae terrae erant ipsi ecclesiae de sancta Trinitate it a propinquae & in casu ignis multum periculosae. Ideo praedictus electus & conventus sancti August' licet invitè, precibus tamen Regis Henrici Fortè potiùs, coacti. coactus mutaverunt praedictas terras cum qui∣busdam terris quae fuerunt de Dominio sanctae Trinitatis diversis locis in Civitate jacentibus, quaeterrae reddebant singularis an∣nis xxijs. ijd. Haec commutatio est confirmata sigillo Regis Hen∣rici, & sigillis utrius que Monasterii, &c. Thus he, recording Vide pro Scrip∣tura x•. in Appendice. also the Composition it selfe, whereof my Appendix shall
give you a Copy. This exchange (it seemes) was made to good purpose: for afterwards I finde the Church free of all fires. Once indeed since, and that shortly after this ex∣change, it was in danger to be fired, but was preserved mi∣raculously, if you will beleeve my Author (Gervase, a Monke of the place about that time:) whose words (if Harpesfield report them aright) are these. Quo Cantuariae sedente (saith he, speaking of Archbishop Richard, Beckets immediate successor) constagravit Civitas Cantuariae, cum∣que jam pluribus aedibus consumptis, incendium ad Christi eccle∣siam serperet; consternati monachi, cum res humanam opem su∣perare videretur, ad divinum & divi Audoeni patrocinium se contulerunt. Sanctas it aque ejus reliquias igni, magnaopis fidu∣ciâ opponunt; quae nec fuit inanis. Flamma enim divina qua∣dam virtute repulsa, se reflexit ac resiliit, nec ultra progressa est. Thus he. And so farre Historically of the generall fabricke of the Church. Now I shall descend to particu∣lars, and shew how severall parts of it were some built, some repaired at severall times, and by whom. For new buildings in the first place. I read that Arch∣bishop Body of Christ-Church new built. Sudbury, by whose time the Nave (or body) of the Church (the Aula ecclesia, so Edmerus cals it) the Auditori∣um, as with the ancients I may style it, was so decayed with age that it could not, and so farre behinde the upper part in Majesty of building, as with his good liking it might not stand any longer, tooke it downe, with a purpose of his owne purse to have built it of new after a more magni∣ficent manner; but being cut off by the fury of those Re∣bels (Wat Tiler and his complices) in Rich. 2. time, was prevented. He dying, the burthen of that great worke lay upon the Monkes, or rather they consenting (as it seemes) in a common forwardnesse, willingly undertooke it, and with the helpe of Sudburies two next Successors (Courtney and Arundell) at length, brought the body, together with the Chapter-house and Cloister to full perfection. Inferio∣rem autem ecclesiae suae partem (Harpesfields words of this mat∣ter Hist. Eccles. Angl. saecul. 15. cap. 14. pag. 634.) quam demolitus erat Simon Sudburiensis Archiepiscopus,
magnificentiùs eam extruendi animo, quod & perfecisset, nisi indignaillum caedes repentè è medio sustulisset, maximis mona∣chi impensis nobili structura exaedisicarunt. For their both in∣couragement and inablement to finish which worke begun, too chargeable for them to perfect without some addition to their present revenewes; after they had that way ex∣pended above 5000 marks; the parsonages of Godmersham Godmersham. westwell and Westwell in Kent, at their petition, were by Archbishop Arundell, with both King and Popes licence, appropriated to them, as I have it from the Instrument of that appropri∣ation recorded in a Leiger of the Church, dated in the yeare 1397. Which hath these words of preface. COnsiderantes (saith the Archbishop to his Monkes) ex∣pensas graves & sumptuosas quas circa constructionem & reparationem ejusdem ecclesiae urgente necessitate fudistis & in∣evitabiliter successivis temporibus, prout futura per praeterita praecaventes animi compassione sentimus, vos refundere oporte∣bit, praesidium vobis & ecclesiae vestrae quod cum Deo possumus procuremus, ne forte tam laudabile & necessarium opus inceptum, moderni (quod absit) subtractione Prioris, vel aliàs ex adversae fortunae insultu perfectum diutinè non consequatur effectum, aut alicujus temeritatis incursus sanctorum diminuat numerum mo∣nachorum, aut robur vestrae sacrae religionis infringat; hinc est quod exhibita nobis pro parte vestrâ petitio continebat, quod cum bonae memoriae Dominus Simon de Sudburia quondam Archie∣piscopus Cant. praedecessor noster navem praefatae nostrae ecclesiae prosterni fecerat funditùs, & suis sumptibus demoliri, causa ipsam erigendi de nevo prout proposuit & ferventer optavit, si non per Dei emulos fuisset inauditâ per prius populi furoris auda∣ciâ decollatus. Vosque Prior & Capitulum circa constructionem navis praedictae, & alia necessaria opera ejusdem ecclesiae nostrae de communibus bonis vestris ultra quinque millia marcarum laudabiliter expenderitis, ut gaudium operum exempla cuncto∣rum oculis manifestant, quodque incepta opera & alia inibi de necessitate fienda prostrati claustri vestri & capitularis Domus vestrae pensatâ imminente ruinâ, cum sex millibus marcarum
perficinequeant, & reparari decenter, attentâ Hospitalitate Do∣minorum & aliorum diversorum Regnorum apud vos indies con∣fluentium, quam declinare non poteritis cum honore, &c. Thomas Chillenden was Prior of the Church at this time. He it seemes (as best able) of the Monkes was most bene∣ficiall to these workes. The quoted Instrument so insinu∣ates and intimates, and the Epitaph on his Tombe (where∣of hereafter) verifies as much. Archbishop Courtney (as I told you) was another benefactor. I have it from his Will In Archivis eccles. Cant., wherein he makes it his petition to the King (Rich. 2.) Ne successor meus (as his owne words are) pro reparationibus quic∣quam plus debito petat piè & justè habendo respectum in quo statu eccl' & maneria mea unà cum Castro meo Saltwood inveni, & qualiter subsequenter, non obstante terraemotu, non sine gravibus & sumptuosis expensis, sicut novit Prior meus & seniores & sani∣ores Capituli, atque valentiores totius Diocesis, ipsa pro meo posse & tempore reparavi. And also gives (saith his Table follow∣ing the Author of the Antiquit' Britannicae, both, I take it, misinformed, 1000l.) 200l. & plus juxta dispositionem Execu∣torum meorum, & secundum informationem ministrand' per eos pro nova facturâ sive constructione unius panae claustri ab hostio Palatii usque in ecclesiam se erecto tramite extendentis. So his Will. Archbishop Arundell may not be forgotten, who questionlesse was not onely an encourager, but a bene∣factor also in his owne particular to the workes I treate of, though I doubt of his building that Steeple, which Arch∣bishop Parker followed by Bishop Godwin and some others, ascribe unto him, for some reasons which when I come to survey it, I shall propound. Hitherto of parts new built. Now shortly of parts re∣paired and beautified. I read Liber eccles. Cant. Quire repai∣red. that in Hen. the Priors time, viz. in the yeares 1304. and 1305. the whole Quire was repaired, with three new doores, and a new Pulpit or ascent unto it, as was likewise the Chapter-house with two new Gables; all which cost 839l. 7s. 8d. I finde also Vbi supra. And Beckets Crowne. that upon the beautifying of Saint Thomas Crowne, that is Beckets
Crowne, was expended in the same Priors time, to wit in the yeare 1314. in gold and silver and pretious stones 115l. 12s. So much for reparations. And now have I done with the Story of the Fabricke. Onely I may not omit what had almost slipt my memory, that Archbishop Chicheley, Arun∣dell, immediate Successor built the Steeple called of Bi∣shop Godwin Oxford-tower, but vulgarly Dunstan-steeple, or the most part of it, and also the Library Author Antiq. Brit. & God∣win in ejus vitae. A Survey of the present Church, with the monuments there∣in, as also of the more ancient buildings within the pre∣cinct both of it, and the Palace, with the ambitus or pre∣cinct it self. COming (in the next place) to the survey whereof; I  Particular. will begin (à digniori) with the Church it self, that which (as Erasmus Peregrinatio Religionis ergo. hath it) tanta majestate sese erigit in coe∣lum, ut procul etiam intuentibus religionem incutiat. That is, raiseth it self aloft with so great a majesty and statelinesse, that it striketh a sensible impression of religion in their mindes that behold it afarre off. Before our entrance whereinto let me acquaint you with what I have from the same Erasmus Vbi supra Porch. who observed it, that over head at the en∣trance of the South Porch of the Church, sometimes stood the statues cut in stone of certain armed men, those name∣ly which murdered Archbishop Becket, not in approbation of their fact, nor for any honour intended them thereby more then is given to Iudas, Pilate, Caiaphas, or the band of Souldiers, whom (saith Erasmus) you shall see elaborately engraven in guilded altars. They are (saith he) set out to sight for premonition, that no Courtier afterward should lay violent hands either upon the persons of Bishops, or their possessions. Now enter we the body of the Church, a right noble Body. structure. Ingressis aperit sese spatiosa quaedam aedificii maje∣stas, saith the same Erasmus Vbi supra.. This questionlesse is the identicall nave or body, of whose age and authors you so
lately heard. Turres sunt ingentes duae procul veluti salutantes advenas, miroque nolarum aenearum boatu longè latéque regionem vicinam personantes, saith Erasmus Vbi supra.. Now that Steeple which you see at the West-end and South-side of the Church, is the Oxford-tower, or Dunstan-steeple I so late∣ly Dunstan-steeple. spake of, and one of them. And the opposite one with the lofty spire or shaft covered with lead is the other, and the same that is said to be of Archbishop Arundells building, Arundell-steeple. and at this day called by his name. But under correction, without warrant of truth, as I conceive, induced thereunto partly from the work of the Steeple which I hold elder then Arundells time, by comparing it with other pieces of that age, and partly by this note in the records of the Church, seeming to me by the Character almost as ancient as the time of Arundell. Pondus quinque campanarum in campanili Angeli de novo do∣natarum per Reverend. in Christo patrem & D. D. Tho. Arundell Cantuar' Archiepiscopum Anno Dom. 1408. &c. This note you see calls it Angel, not Arundel-steeple, as I suppose it would have done; or at the lest have mentioned him the founder, had he indeed erected it. Besides I meet with the Angel-steeple in the Church-records long before Arundells time, .i. in the dayes of Henry of Eastry the Prior, 1317. and by the same name this very Steeple I finde to be called in divers dead mens wills In Registris Consistorii & Offi.  Cant. since Arundells time. Let me but adde that Harpsfield in the life of Archbishop Arundel mentions not this Steeple amongst the rest of his acts of note, and I proceed. This nave or body of the Church omnes recepit (saith E∣rasmus) admits of all comers, but at the upper end for the better security of the upper part of the Church, where the shrine was and other treasure, was of old parted off from the Quire by certain iron grates or barres; the doores whereof for the same reason doubtlesse, Archbishop Winchelsey, by his Statutes Liber ms. Ec∣cles. Christi Cant., commanded to be kept alwayes close shut, unlesse in time of Divine Service, or at other times of ne∣cessary ingresse and egresse. Without offence to which in∣junction
let us enter. At or neare which place of entrance sometime stood a great crosse, in the head whereof was kept and inclosed that golden crown which (as is shewed be∣fore) King Knute gave to the Church, and under it an altar: which was known by the name of Altare sanctae crucis inter chorum & navem, and Altare sub magnacruce ecclesiae  archivis Eces. praed.. Next observe we the first crosse-iles (wings some call them) of the Church, those (I mean) between the nave and the quire, which by the work, seem of like age with the body, saving that the North-Ile (the goodly and glorious window at the head whereof, a piece in it kinde beyond compare, was the gift of Ed. 4. as may be seen upon it) with the lofty Tower or Steeple in the middest or meeting of the Crosier by these capitall letters T. G. P. with the three gold stones; the mitre also and pastorall staffe in them both and Archbishop Warham's coat of armes beside in the roof of the latter (the Steeple;) I conceive of some∣what a later building, and perfected, as in the time, so chiefly at the cost of Prior Goldstone in Hen. 8. dayes. In this North-Ile, between the cloyster-doore and the Lady-chapell is a place inclosed and set apart, called to this day the Martyrdome. Archbishop Becket (as tradition hath Martyrdome. it) being here or hard by (at or upon the third or fourth griece or step of the Pulpitum or ascent to the Presbytery or quire, as some will) murdered, martyred they call it, whence these verses, on each leafe of the doore one, yet legible in part. Est sacer intralocus, venerabilis, atque beatus Praesul ubi sanctus Thomas est Martyrizatus. Here sometime stood an Altar, by the wall, where now Dr Chapman's monument is set up, commonly called Altare Martyrii Sancti Thomae. Which together with the place E∣rasmus saw, and hath left it thus described Peregrinatio religionis ergo.. Illis (saith he) ostenditur altare ligneum Divae Virgini sacrum, pusillum, nec ulla re visendum, nisi monumento vetustatis luxum hisce tempo∣ribus exprobrante. Illie vir pius (meaning Becket) dicitur ex∣tremum
vale dixisse virgini, cum mors immineret. In ara est cuspis gladii, quo praesectus est vertex optimi praesulis, ac cerebrum confusum, videlicet quo mors esset praesentior. Hujus ferri sa∣cram rubiginem amore martyris religiosè sumus exosculati. From being the keeper of this Altar, Roger the Abbat of St Augustines was chosen to that Abbacy by the Monks there, in hope that he would bring with him some speciall reliques (saith my Author Thorne in vi∣tis Abbat San∣cti Augustini.) of the blessed Martyr; herein not deceived, for (saith he) he conveied to them a great part of Thomas his bloud that was shed, and a piece of his crown that was pared off. A thing which they of Christ-Church could not of a long time digest, nor would they suffer the other in quiet with the purloyned reliques untill at length some amends was made them by that composition made between the two houses, passing over unto Christ-Church (in exchange for other elsewhere) those houses and ground beside their Campanile, whereof you may reade before: as Thorne comments on it, nobis (that is to S• Austins) multum inutilis & incommoda. But in callem regredior. This place (no doubt) was of high esteem with our Ancestors, the walls whereof seem to have been hangd, and was a place pickt out for the solemnity of Ed. 1. espousalls with his Queen Marga∣ret, whereof I reade thus in the records of the Church Anno Dom. 1299. Quinto idus Septembris, Dominus Robertus Cant. Archiepiscopus celebravit sponsalia inter Dom. Edwardum Re∣gem Angliae & Margaretam sororem Regis Franciae in ostio ec∣clesiae versus claustrum juxta hostium Martyrii Sancti Thomae. Lady-chapell. I passe hence to the Chapell contiguous, commonly cal∣led the Lady-Chapell, a piece not old; by the work, it should be much what about the age of Dunstan-steeple. In Anno Dom. 1452. I finde Antiq. Brit. in vita Stafford. pag. 289. it called Nova Capella beatae Mariae. I confesse I reade of the Lady-chapell long before. Archbishop Richard, Beckets immediate Successor, was bu∣ried in it. But that Chapell stood within the old body of the Church, and was parcell of it. I have it from the Church records verified by the leaden Inscription and Pontificall reliques, to wit, his Cope, Crosier and Chalice lately found
in digging Dr Anian's grave by St Iohn Boys his monument on the North side of the body, toward the upper end. That old Chappell was not heard of since the present body of the Church was built. By the entry or testudo, under the greeces or steps (the pulpitum as wont to be called) leading up to the Quire, from the body, I proceed and come to S. Michaels Chapell, S. Michaels Chapell. standing on the other (the South) side of the Quire. A Chapell indeed in name old. For Archbishop Langton in Hen. 3 dayes is storied Antiq. Prit. in ejus vita pag. 149. to have been there intombed. But the work of the building of the modern Chapell will not bear that age. I am therefore perswaded that the old one was fain to be taken down, whilest the body and crosse Iles of the Church were in building, to give better way to that work, and that that being finished, this was new built as now it is. Ascend we now by the steps or Pulpitum to the Quire Quire. (Chancell or Presbytery.) Ad hunc conscenditur multis gra∣dibus, saith Erasmus: which whole work of the Quire, from end to end, I mean, from the Westerne doore thereof un∣to the Archiepiscopall throne or marble Chair behinde the high Altar, with the side-iles, crosse-iles and other build∣ings on both sides the Quire (the Quires curious Westerne doore-case onely excepted, built, I take it, about the time that the body was) together with the under-croft (or vaults) to them (except the Princes Chapell there) are much of an age; there is that harmonious symmetry and agreement betweene the parts. But certainly of what age I cannot define; onely confessing it farre elder then the Nave; I dare constantly and confidently deny it to be elder then the Norman conquest: because of the building of it upon Arches, a forme of Architecture though in use with and among the Romanes long before, yet after their departure not used here in England till the Normans brought it over with them (as I told you) from France. So that (I say) elder then the conquest this piece Vide pag. 113. cannot be, and I dare not pronounce it, the roof of it at lest∣wise
to be so old, because of the many combustions, beti∣ding the fabrick since the Conquest. But by many induce∣ments I am throughly perswaded that it is (for the main) the upper part of that new Church which Lanfranc first built, whereof I have treated sufficiently before. And so I have shortly done with the antiquity of this fabrick, the Quire. Now a word or two of the Ornaments, and what else in it may worthily call for our speculation. To begin with the Hangings. Hangings setting forth the whole story both of our Savi∣ours life and death. They were given, one part of them by Prior Goldstone, and the other by Richard Dering the Church-Cellerar, in H. 8. dayes. Witnesse these severall memorialls legible in the bordure of the hangings. On the South-side. Thomas Goldstone hujus ecclesiae Prior sacraeque Theologiae Professor me fieri fecit. Anno Dom. Millesimo quingenmo. undecimo. On the North side. Richardus Dering hujus ecclesiae Commonachus & Celerarius me fieri fecit Anno Dom. Millesimo quingenmo undecimo. In the Church records I meet with Inferior and Superior chorus; and one Thomas Ingram of Canterbury, by his will 1486. in the office gives cuilibet Monacho de Superiori choro ecclesiae Christi Cant. xijd. & cuilibet Monacho de inferiori choro ejusdem ecclesiae viijd. Now as we see there are two rowes of stalls (an upper and a lower) on either side the Quire: so I conceive the seniors and superiors of the Monks used to sit in the up∣per, as the juniors or inferiors in the lower row; and that thence sprang the name of the superior and inferior chorus. Above these stalls on the South side of the Quire stands the Archbishops wooden seat or chaire, sometime richly guilt and otherwise well set forth, but now nothing speci∣ous through age and late neglect. It is a close seat made after the old fashion of such stalls, called thence Faldisto∣ria Glossar. D. H. Spelman. in hac voce.. A little higher up, on the other side of the Quire, be∣tween
Chichlies, and Bourgchiers tombs was provision made heretofore for the storing and treasuring up of Saints re∣liques. This Repository was shewed to Erasmus, who spends these words upon it. Ad latus Septentrionale (saith he) refe∣runtur arcana, dictu mirum, quantum ossium illine prolatum est, calvaria, menta, dentes, manus, digiti, integra brachia, quibus omnibus adoratis fiximus oscula: nec erat futurus finis, nisi qui mihi tum comes erat ejus peregrinationis parùm commodus, in∣ter pellasset ostentandi sludium &c Peregrin. Re∣lig. ergô.. Hence Erasmus then be∣held, as we may now, the Altars table and ornaments; in∣deed (thanks to the piety of the times) very rich and beco∣ming such dayes of blessed peace as our Church (by Gods mercy) now enjoyes, but not comparable surely to those that Erasmus saw, or else he much hyperboliseth, where he saith: Diceres Midam & Croesum fuisse mendicos, si spectares vim auri atque argenti Erasm. ubi supra.. This Altar was and still is called the high Altar, more properly so, heretofore, then now, be∣cause it was the chief one in the whole Church, Christs Al∣tar, and to distinguish it from the Saints Altars, whereof the Church had many, 25. in number, one in the middest of the crosier between the nave and the Quire, a second in the Altars. Martyrdome, a third in the Lady-chapell, a fourth in St Michaels chapell, two in either wing of the Quire viz. in each semicircle there one, one in the Vestry, one in St An∣selmes Chapell on the other side of the Quire, three neare unto the high Altar it self, whereof one was St Dunstans, a second St Elpheges, a third (and that standing behinde the high Altar) St Blases, two at least in Beckets Chapell, where∣of one in the little side Chapell against Hen. 4. monument, and the other beyond the shrine, in the place called Beckets-crown, besides seven other in the undercroft, and two in the body of the Church which I had almost forgotten, whereof one was belonging to Arundels, and the other to Brenchlyes chantery there. One more there was, and that in the now Deanes-chapell. But leaving these things and the Quire too, let us now Beckets-chapell ascend. Post Altare summum rursus velut in novum templum
ascenditur, saith Erasmus. To this I proceed, the upper part of the Church (I mean) from the grate between the Ar∣chiepiscopall throne or marble chaire, by the Mosaick or Musaick-work Vide sit dict. vide Pancirol. par. prior tit. 23. & Martin. Lexic. Philolo∣gic. verb. Musi∣vus., upwards, called (from the standing of his Shrine there) Beckets Chapell: which, with the vertex of the work, called Beckets crown (intended by Erasmus, where he saith Peregrin. Relig. ergô., Illic in sacello quodam ostenditur tota facies op∣timi viri inaurata multisque gemmis insignita &c.) the either side-Iles, (except the Chapell on the North-side, and the undercroft of it) I hold to be somewhat lesse ancient then the Quire and it undercroft: The ocular and peeked or pointed form of the arch, the round marble pillars or co∣lumnes both above and below (to passe by other disagree∣ments easily observable) showing a manifest discrepancy and difference of one from the other. For truth is, about the place where the Quire ends and that Chapell begins (observe but the works above and underneath, and you will easily perceive it) the Church once ended, and ex∣tended no further, the pillars and work coming on and clo∣sing there. The certain age of this part neither can I finde, but from great probability do conceive it to be that new work (whereof Edmerus speaks) begun and furthered by this Pa∣tron) Archbishop Anselme, but continued and consumma∣ted by Enulph the Prior with the help of his Monks in Hen. 1. time. A work that (as I told you erewhile) was so envi∣ed of some about the King, and on the other side so much applauded and extolled by William the Monk of Malmes∣bury, who for the windowes, pavement, and other orna∣ments of it preferres it to any other in the whole kingdome. Nihil tale (saith he) possit in Anglia videri &c. as before. Properties wherein it yet justly deserves the comparison. Some haply may here ask me why Beckets crown, if it be Beckets-crown. a piece so ancient, is so imperfect on the top? For answer unto them, I say, that time was when that piece was to the minde of the first founders complete, being built not alto∣gether so high at first as now it is. The Monks (saith tra∣dition)
at the the time of the Dissolution were in hand (in honour of Becket) to have advanc'd the building to a high∣er pitch, but their fall prevented that's rise. So that where∣as before it had a handsome complete battlement, it is now a great blemish to the Church, and an eye-sore to specta∣tors, by the ragged and imperfect ruines of it. This is that Corona Sancti Thomae, in beautifying whereof the Church Records tell me and I have before told you 115 lib. 12s. was expended in Hen. the Priors time. Now retreating let us take a view of the Vestry. A place Vestry. of the Greeks called Diaconion and Diaconicon; but of the Latines Sacrarium, Secretarium, and Vestiarium. This Ve∣stry stands (like as Vestries generally do) on the North∣side of the Quire. Post haec ducimur in Sacrarium (the words which Erasmus Peregrin. Re∣lig. ergo. spends upon it:) Deus bone, quae illic pompa vestium holosericarum, quae vis candelabrorum aureorum! Ibi∣dem vidimus pedum Divi Thomae. Videbatur arundo lamina argentea obvestita, minimum erat ponderis, nihil operis, nec al∣tius quam us que ad cingulum &c. The keeper or curator of this place was usually called Sa∣crista: Sacrist. we English it the Sacristein or Sexten, and was one of the but three at first, afterwards foure Obedientiarii or officers (for so the word signifies, as Obedientia Cowell. In∣terpreter in hac voce. doth an office) of the Church; to one or other of which all the under Officers and Ministers within the precinct, some few of the Priors retinue excepted, did relate & appertain, viz. the Cellerar, the Sacrist, the Chamberlaine and the Trea∣surer. Within and under the Sextens office were these Liber Eccles. Cant.. 1 Custos de Wexhouse (being, I take it, the small dark vault or grot under the steps leading up to Beckets Chapell.) 2. Primus serviens ecclesiae ad pulsandum. 3. Vigil ecclesiae. 4. Plumbarius Sacristae. 5. Duo clerici Altaris beatae Mariae. 6. Duo clerici tumbae & Martyrii. 7. Quatuor servientes ecclesiae ad pulsandum. 8. Vitriarius & garcio ejus. 9. Ostiarius Chori.
10. Serviens feretri. 11. Aurifrig. & lotrix ecclesiae. For which last (the rest being of easie understanding) I conceive it was one that wrought the Church Vestments or hangings and the like in gold: but referre you to Sir H. Spelmans Glossary, and Martinius Lexicon upon the word Aurifrigium, for fuller satisfaction. Here, as season∣able, let me remember unto you, that Gervasius Dorober∣nensis, the Monke of this place, for his good authority, so often cited of our late Historians, was in his time, dignified with this Office, of the Sacrist here, a part whereof it was to deliver the Crosier to the new made Archbishop, which Ceremony this man very solemnely performed to Archbishop Hubert Harpsfield. Eccles. Hist. sae∣cul. 12. pag. 342. Threasury.. There is a Roome next wall to this, having had a doore leading into it from hence, wherein partly, and part∣ly in the lost over this Vestry, the Church Records are kept. The Threasury we call it, but it was knowne to former times by the name either of Armarium or Armariolum Repertorium Munimentor. ecclesiae Cant.: and properly, since it was the Church Arcenall, yeelding them weapons or muniments wherewith to secure unto the Monkes their possessions and priviledges, whence also the Curator thereof was called Armarius. Now a word or two of the Deanes-Chapell, and my sur∣vey Deanes-Cha∣pell. of the Fabricks upper part is at an end. This Chapell, with the closet to it newer then the Chapell, fell to the then Deanes share upon the division of houses & buildings made anone after the change of the foundation by Hen. 8. By what name it was formerly called, is a thing uncertaine, or wherefore built. That Division calls it onely the Chapell next the Dorter. But observing the pictures of Pope Alex. 3. and Lewis 7. of France drawne on the Chapell-walls, the one opposite to the other, towards the East-end: observing also Beckets picture (as I take it, conjecturing by the new white glasse put in place of his coate of armes in the upper South-window, as the like was done generally throughout the Church where either this or his name was found:) and
then considering what a Patron, Pope Alex. 3. was to Becket, what a friend K. Lewis 7. was to him in his exile, and lastly what a benefactor, for his sake to the Monkes after his death, and that the Records of the Church have a Charter of Ed. 2. of xxl. worth of land to be purchased for the su∣stentation of seven Chaplains that should dayly celebrate in the Chapell of S• Thomas the martyr neare the Priory∣gate for the soules of himselfe, his Ancestors &c. Consi∣dering lastly, that the Priors ancient Gate, or the Gate of the Priory was and is, neare this Chapell, being the same which leadeth from the Green-Court into that which we now call the darke Entry, and so to the doore there now stopped up, the Timber-frame whereof is yet hanging on the things, and anciently lead into the Priors Cellar, as that other hard by it into his Chamber. All these things (I say) observed and considered, I am assured that this was St Thomas Chapell, otherwise Anno 16. Ed. 2. called Capella beatae Mariae & beati Thomae martyris juxta portam Prioratus; our Lady pictured in many of the Windowes sharing (it seemes) with him in the dedication. Over this Chapell is the Church-library, not the same to the repaire whereof Archbishop Hubert gave the Church of Library. Halstow, this being built (as erewhile I told you) by Arch∣bishop Chichley, and borrowed from the Chapell, or super∣added to it; the juniority of the worke, and the passage to it plainely intimate so much. It was by the founder and others once well stored with Bookes, but in mans memory shamefully robbed and spoiled of them all, an act much pre∣judiciall and very injurious both to posterity, and the Com∣mon-wealth of letters. The piety of the present Church∣men hath begun to replenish it, and may it have (what it well deserves) many benefactors, to the perfecting of the faire beginning; with which wish I leave both it and the Chapell. And now I shall desire you would take notice of the Windowes, especially in the Churches upper part, which Windowes. both for the glasse and Iron-worke thereof are well worthy
your observation. This part of the Church was highly commended of Malmesbury De gest. Pon∣tifi. lib. 1. pag. 234. Edit. Francofurt. in his time, amongst other things, for this ornament. Nihil tale possit in Anglia videri, &c. saith he. And, I thinke his words hold true still. And I beleeve as much may be said of the Iron-worke about them, apparently various in every Window. Besides, these Windowes affoord and offer to our view certaine verses containing a paralell of the old and new Testament. They are many and therefore to avoyde too great an interruption here, you may finde them in my Appendix Scriptura 3. Let me now leade you to the Undercroft. A place fit, Vndercroft. and haply (as one cause) fitted to keepe in memory the subterraneous Temples of the Primitives, in the times of persecution. The West part, whereof being spatious and lightsome, for many yeares hath beene the Strangers-Church. A congregation for the most part of distressed French-Church. exiles, growne so great and yet daily multiplying, that the place in short time is likly to prove a hive too little to con∣taine such a swarme. So great an alteration is there since the time the first of the tribe came hither, the number of them then consisting of but eighteene families or there∣abouts, which with the termes or Articles granted them at their humble suite by the then Maior and Communalty of the City, upon their first admittance, will appeare unto you, if you peruse what here followes Lib. camerae Civilatis Cant.. Dignissimis Dominis Domino Maiori & fratribus Consiliariis urbis Cantuariensis Salutem. Supplicant humilimè extranei vestra libertate admissi in ista urbe Cantuariensi quat' velitis sequentes articulos illis conce∣dere. Prior articulus. 1. Quia religionis amore (quam libera conscientia tenere percu∣piunt) patriam & propria bona reliquerunt, orant sibi liberum exercitium suae religionis permitti in hac urbe, quod in fiat
commodius sibi assignari templum & locum in quo poterint sepelire mortuos suos. Secundus articulus. 2. Et ne sub eorum umbra & titulo religionis profani & male morati homines sese in hanc urbem intromittant per quos tota societas malè audiret apud cives vestros; supplicant nemini liberam mansionem in hac urbe permitti, nisi prius suae probi∣tatis sufficiens testimonium vobis dederit. Tertius Articulus. 3. Et ne Iuventus inculta maneat, requirunt permissionem dari praeceptori quem secum adduxerunt instruendi Iuvenes, tum eos quos secum adduxerunt, tum eos qui volunt linguam Galli∣cam discere. Quartus Articulus. 4. Artes ad quas exercendas sunt vocati, & in quibus laborare cupit tota societas sub vestro favore & protectione sunt Flo∣rence, Serges, Bombasin, D. of Ascot Serges, &c. of Orle∣leance, Frotz, Silkwever, Mouquade, Mauntes, Bages, &c. Stofe Mouquades. Nomina supplicantium sunt. Hector Hamon Minister verbi Dei. Vincentius Primont Institutor Inventutis. Egidius Cousin Magister operum, & conductor totius congrega∣tionis in opere. Michael Cousin. Iacobus Querin. Petrus du Bose. Iohannes de la Forterye. Noel Lestene. Nicolaus Dubuisson. Antonius du verdier. Philippus de Neuz. Robertus Iovelin. Iohannes le Pelu. Petrus de spoptes. Iacobus Bouclet. Tres viduae. But enough of this. Returne wee to our Undercroft. Where, under the South-crosse Ile or wing of the Quire, was and still is (though not so used now) Prince Edw. Cha∣pell. The story whereof take here from the relation of its Blacke Prin∣ces Chapell. estate given up to the Commissioners; these Emissaries
sent to inquire and examine the state of all Chanteries, &c. upon and according to the Stat. 37. Hen. 8. cap. 4. which tels that the said Chantery was founded in Christ-Church, in a place called the Undercroft in the yeare of our Lord God 1363. by the aforenamed Prince Edw. who with li∣cence of his Father, King Ed. 3. purchased lands Fawkshall Mannor by London. Lib. eccles. Cane., and made agreement with the Prior and Convent of Christ-Church for the contentation and stipend of two Chaplains: Ordeining Sr Iohn Steward, and Sr Nicholas de Lodington and their Successors for ever to receive yearely of the said Prior and Convent, forty markes above all charges of reparati∣ons or otherwise. Also the said Prince Ed. gave to the said Chaplaines and to their Successors for ever, a house being in Saint Alphage Parish of the yearely value of xxs. whereof 4d. is yearely resolute to St Austins: the reparation whereof to be kept alwayes at the proper cost of the said P. and Co. of Christ-Church. Hence you may perceive the Founder and time of foundation of this Chapell. At or shortly after this relation given up, the Chap. formerly with grates and barres parted off from the rest of the Un∣dercroft growing out of use and deserted, was laid open to it, and sithence (I take it) the double way beaten and made through the wall, for a passage, by that Chapell, to the French-Church there. I may not leave this Chapell before I have observed the roofe of it, a piece of newer and more curious worke then the rest of the Vaults about it, and yet the over built Structure as old as any that stands within the neighbour Vaults of elder-fashioned-worke. How this might be thus made, haply some will wonder. But their satisfaction is easie. For the elder Roofe of the Chapell (as it might well bee without indangering the Church) was undoubtedly taken downe, and that the Chapell might in all parts the better correspond and suite with the dignity and degree of the Founder, was rebuilt in that neate quaint manner that now it is. Leaving now this Chapell, come we to the next, com∣monly Lady-Chapell. called the Lady Vndercroft, an edifice, since the
Dissolution and Reformation quite deserted also and de∣spicable, but formerly so much celebrated, of such high esteeme, and so very rich, that the sight of it debarred to the vulgar, was reserved for persons onely of great qua∣lity. Erasmus, who by especiall favour (Archbishop Warham recommending him) was brought to the sight of it, de∣scribes it thus Peregn. Re∣lig. ergô.. There (saith hee) the Virgin-mother hath an habitation, but somewhat darke, inclosed with a double Sept or Raile of Iron, for feare of theeves. For indeed I never saw a thing more laden with riches. Lights being brought, we saw a more then Royall spectacle. In beauty it farre surpasseth that of Walsingham. This Cha∣pell (as he addes) is not shewed but to Noble men, and especiall friends, &c. The Chapell doubtlesse is ancient. For in the Church-Records I read of Altare beatae Mariae in Cryptis almost 400 yeares agoe, to wit in the yeare 1242, and againe in the yeare 1322. At what time the Altars in the Undercroft are recorded to be these: St Iohn the Bap∣tist, St Thomas the Apostle, St Clement the Pope, St Kathe∣rine the Virgin, St Nicholas the Bishop, St Mary Magdalen, and St Mary the Virgin. If this word Altar amount not to prove it a Chapell: Capella (I am sure) it is called in the foundation of the Lady Mohunes Chantery, in the yeare 1397. long before Archbishop Mortons dayes, who some say was the founder of it. Which mistake in Print of the Chapells Antiquity, thus corrected, let us proceed. A few steps forward brings us to Beckets Tombe, the Beckets Tombe place (I meane) above the Lady-Chapell, so called, and that from Archbishop Beckets first interment there; whose dead body the Assassinats giving out they would take and cast it forth into the open fields to be a prey for beasts and birds, or otherwise abuse the Carkasse Antiq. Bit in ijus vita. pag. 137 Matth. Paris. st. Angl pag 167. Editio Lon∣don., the then Monkes forthwith buried here, where afterwards it rested untill such time as Stephen Langton his Successor translated it in such solemne manner as you shall heare hereafter. In the meane time comes Hen. 2. with bloudy feete to visit this place, and pray at his Tombe, in part of his penance Roger Hove∣den. Anal. par. postr. pag. 39. Editio. Francosurt..
Hither also came Lewis the seventh of France, and here offered his Centum modios vini, per quandam cuppam auream in perpetuam eleemosynam annuatim in Castellaria Pistiaci reci∣piendos ad opus Conventus Cantuariae Lib. eccles. Cant. Anno 1179.. This parcell of the Undercroft (a most godly Vault and rarely paraleld, and a place, heretofore untill Beckets shrine and Saint-ships ut∣ter downefall and casheering, no doubt much set by, and celebrated) fell to the share of D• Bray his predecessors up∣on the division of houses and places of accommodation for the Deane and Prebendaries, whereof I have often told you. Which is all I have to say of it (unlesse I should re∣member the Altar once standing there, called Altare Tum∣bae beati Thomae martyris:) and periods my Survey of the Churches Fabricke, both Crypticall and other, saving that in a word or two I must remember the Cloister and Chap∣ter-house. For the latter of which, questionlesse it is the same, Chapter-house which in Prior Chillendens time (as whilome was said) was new-builded; you may finde his name (as a benefactor) over the entrance, in the foote of the West-Window. This was not onely the place for Capitular meetings and treaties about Church-affaires, but also for the exercise and exe∣cution of regular Discipline. Hence the discipline here said to be inflicted on Hen. 2. for Archbishop Beckets mur∣der, whereof our Stories tell Antiq. Brit. in ejus vita. pag. 138. Cloister.. As for the former (the Cloister, the keeping whereof, and so of the Refectory, the Dormitory and the Infirmary, very private, was cautiously provided for of Archbishop Winchelsey by his Statutes Liber ecee. Cant., especially excluding women thence) it likewise seemes to be the same which was then new set up. The South-pane or Quarter whereof, some∣what more beautified then the other three, I take to be that which Archbishop Courtney (as was shewed before) tooke order by his Will to be made, and hath his Armes set up about the entrance to it at the West-end. As for the many other Armes thicke set about the Cloister, by the way, I suppose them to be theirs that were benefactors in their
time, either to the Church or Monastery, or both: where∣of I perswade my selfe the number was not small, as may probably be argued from that one instance which Master Cambden gives of the new building of Crowland Abbey in Lincolnshire; whither I referre such as desire to know and learne, by what meanes such mighty huge and faire Reli∣gious houses and buildings as these were raised in former times. And this shall suffice to have spoken of the Church. Now to make my Survey compleate, I must another while play the Mystagogus, and shew you the Monuments, Monuments. purposely reserving them till now, because being many, and some of them yeelding length of discourse, they would have too much interrupted my Survey of the Fabricke, if I should have intermixt them with it. Here I intend not a recitall of every Monument I meet with, but chiefely of the more ancient ones; those of latter times, being either fresh in memory, or more easily knowne by the Inscripti∣ons and Epitaphs cut in the grave-stones, then those of el∣der times, either wanting Inscriptions ab initio, or else done in Brasse, which for the most part is either with age defaced, or the Brasse it selfe by wicked hands purloined. And not all of them neither will I set downe in this place, purposing to mention the Archbishops and Priors Monu∣ments in their severall Catalogues. And so I begin with the first (I meane, the lowermost) Monument in the body of the Church. Where is a very Bishop Bokin∣ghams Monu∣ment. faire grave-stone with much of the Brasse yet remaining, and having almost all the Inscription or Epitaph still intire, saving (the principall) the interred parties name upon it. It begins thus. Hic jacet in requie—and there (the brasse being worne or rather torne away) breakes off. My dili∣gence to inquire of the ancient retainers of the Church, whose Monument it was, could have no satisfaction. Yet at length one of them told me that the name was extant since his memory, which he said (as his memory served him) was either Bobingham or Robingham, or the like. This brought into my minde the name of Bokingham, which
This Font was giuen / consecrated by the right reverend father in God, John L. Bishop of Rochester / Oxford this present yeare, 1630
Pay 181.
with Bokingham Chantery I had often read of in Records both of the Church and Consistory. From this hint there∣fore given, I proceeded in my search, and at length found God. Catal. of B B in Lin∣colne. & Harpsf. saecul. 14. cap. 27. this story of one Iohn Bokyngham or Buckingham, viz. That in Rich. 2. dayes he was keeper of the privy Seal; afterwards Lord Bishop of Lincolne. From whence in the yeare of our redemption 1397. Pope Boniface the 9th, bearing him some grudge, translated him perforce unto Lichfield, a Bishoprick not half so good, which he refused to accept, and choosing rather a retired Monastick course of life, be∣came a Monk of this Church, where he spent the rest of his dayes. Afterwards amongst the Church Records I met with the foundation of his Chantery (the Instrument or Charter thereof I mean) his Will likewise, in which he ap∣points to be buried In Navi ecclesiae deorsum &c. By this time (I suppose) you are satisfied with me whose monu∣ment this is. In the Covenants between him and the then Prior and Cov. for his Chantery, one article required them with all convenient speed, to build him à Chantery Chapell neare unto his sepulchre: but I finde none he had. By his will (inter alia) he gave to the fabrick of the high Altar (made it seems, about that time) xx lib. His monument thus restored I proceed. Observing by the way, and that in the next place, one Font. rare piece of novelty, which, because it hath been hitherto omitted, and is so worthy as I may not altogether balk or utterly passe it over in silence, I must affoord a place here, and that not altogether improperly, since it is a monument; not of the dead, I confesse, but (which is much better) of the operative and exemplary piety of the living Donor. Whosoever knows not my meaning may know, that by the munificence of a late worthy member of this Church, Dr Warner, the now right reverend Lord Bishop of Roche∣ster, the Church, this part of it at least, is newly much graced with (what before it never had, though much wanted) a fixed Font, and that such a one, as whether it be more curious or more costly, I am not able, if worthy to
judge; but both wayes (I am sure) so excellent and ex∣quisite, that the Author cannot but be famous for it, whi∣lest the Church continues graced by it: and the rather, because it is (I take it) the first thing of worth, that by any private hand hath been offered to this Church of latter times. Leaving this let us on. In the same body, somewhat higher up, upon the grave∣stone of one Sr William Septvans, I reade as followeth. Icy gist Gulian Septvans chevalier qui morust le dernier iour Sr Wm Septvans Knight. D'aust, Can de Grace. M. cccc. vij. de quele alme Deux eit pite & mercy Amen. This Sr Wm. (saith Wever) served in the wars of France, under Ed. 3. Milton by Canterb. (I take it, and as I gather by his Willr) was his seat. In and by which his Will, it is re∣markable In Regist. Con∣sistor. Cant. Manumission. that he gave Manumission to divers of his slaves and Natives. Hard by the former. Sub hoc marmore jacent corpora Willielmi Septvans militis, Sir Wm. Sept∣vans Knight and Elisabeth his wife. qui obiit quarto die mensis Martii Anno Dom. 1448. & Elisabe∣thae uxoris ejus filiae Iohannis Peche militis, quae obiit 28. Martii. sequen' quorum animabus propitietur Deus. Sum quod eris, volui quod vis, credens quasi credis Vivere fortè diu, mox ruo morte specu. Cessi quo nescis, nec quomodo, quando sequeris, Hinc simul in coelis ut simus quoque preceris. This family of the Septvans, or de septem vannis, a long time together flourished in these parts. Molond in Ash was a seat of theirs, where in one of the windowes, this mot∣to or impresse, properly, pertinently and most significantly alluding to their coat, is found. Disspabo inimicos Regis mei ut paleam. Many of the family lie inter'd in Ash-church. And of the name one, a Knight Templar he was as it seems by the crosse-legged posture of his effigies on the grave-stone, hath a monument in the Chancell of Chartham Church. He was one I suppose of the Septvans of Milton, anciently a Chapell to Chartham. In callem regredior.
Not farre hence. Hic jacet Odomarus Hengham armiger qui obiit 4. April. Odmar Heng∣ham. Anno Dom. 1411. On the South-side of the Body. Hic jacet expectans misericordiam Dei, pernobilis vir Iohan∣nes Sir Iohn Guil∣ford. Guilford miles, unus Consiliarior. illustrissimi Regis Hen. 7. qui quidem Iohannes obiit 19 die Mensis Iul. 8. Hen. 7. An∣no 1493. Cujus animae propitietur altissimus. Iesu Filius Dei miserere mei. Of him and his familie Wever hath many things. On the same side. Hic jacent Willielmus Bruchelle (sive Brenchley) miles, Sir Wm. Brench∣ley Knight and Ioane his wife. quondam Iustitiarius Domini Regis de communi banco, qui obiit in Holborne in Suburb. London XXo Maii 1446. & Ioanna uxor ejus quae obiit 1453. Aug. 8. He had a Chantery and Chan∣tery-chapell, the revenues whereof the Dissolution seized on and swept away. The Chapell is that (I take it) hard by his monument, which is now called Deane Nevells Chapell, from his buriall there, and his cost in repairing it, whilest he lived for that purpose, after it had lien long desolate. There also. Here lieth Edmund Haute Esquire—1408. By his Will In Reg. Consist. Cant. Sir Thomas Fogge Knight and Ioane his wife., Sir Edmund Haute. he gave ten pounds operi ecclesiae Christi Cant. On the North-side of the Body. Thomas Fogge jacet hic, jacet hic sua sponsa Iohanna, Sint celo cives per te Deus hos & Osanna; Regni protector Francos Britones superavit Nobilis Rector sicuti Leo Castra predavit Et quoque militiam sic pro patria peramavit Ad summam patriam Deus hic ab agone vocavit. Reade more of him, and others of his name and family, if you please you may in Wever. I finde ten marks given by him in his Will In Registro praedict., ad opus ecclesiae Christi Cant. Anno 1407. There. Sub isto marmore requiescit corpus magistri Ricardi Wille∣ford, Richard Wille∣ford. quondam Capellani Cantariae de Arundell, cujus ani∣mae &c. obiit 1520.
There also. Hic jacet Robertus Clifford armiger, frater recolendae memo∣riae Robert Clifford. Domini Richardi Clifford Episcopi Londoniarum, qui obiit ixo die mensis Martii, Anno Dom. 1422. Cujus &c. There also. Hic jacet Dominus Willielmus Arundell miles Iusticiarius S• Wm. Arundell Knight. Domini Regis. In the same body are also the monuments of Prebendary Milles, of one Thomas Ho the younger of Cant. 1407. of William Lovelace Serjeant at Law, and high Steward of the liberties of Christ-Church, and of Anne his first wife 1576. of Dobs an Alderman of Cant. 1580. of the Lady Crook wife of S• Gerard Crook Knight 1579. as also of divers other, but mostly obscure and mean personages, which I think not mention-worthy. Wherefore I leave the Nave, and step to the Martyrdome. Where I reade upon one of the grave-stones. Hic jacet Iohannes Fyneux miles, & Elizabetha uxor ejus S• Iohn Hyneux Knight and Elizabeth his wife. filia—Paston—the rest gone. To supply which de∣fect, I desire you to look back to the Augustine-Friers, where you shall finde that he was Lord chief Justice of the Common pleas, both under Hen. 7. and Hen. 8. and an espe∣ciall benefactor to that Covent. In the Lady-Chapell. Hic jacet sub hoc marmore expectans misericordiam Dei, ve∣nerabilis Archd. Bourg∣chier. vir Magister Iohannes Bourchier Archidiaconus Cantuariensis, qui quidem Iohannes migravit ad Dominum sexto die mensis Novemb. 1495. Cujus &c. In S. Michaels Chapell. Where (as Wever hath it) between her two husbands Margaret Dutchesse of Clarence and her two hus∣bands. (Iohn Beaufort, Marquesse Dorset, lying on her left side, and Thomas Plantagenet Duke of Clarence, on her right) Mar∣garet, daughter of Thomas, and sister, and one of the heires to Edmund Holland, Earls of Kent, lieth gloriously intomb∣ed. Of her and them you may be further informed, if you please to consult Wevers monuments. For I hasten. And am now come to Beckets Chapell, where is offered Black Prince.
to our view the sumptuous monument of Edward sirnamed the Black Prince, (so by named, not of his colour, but of his dreaded acts in battell) with his Epitaph, both in prose and verse, in the French tongue. It is large, and Wever hath taken it out already and englished it, wherefore that labour is saved. This was that Prince Edward, for whom, and by whom, in my survey of the Church, I told you, the Chapell and Chantery was founded in the Undercroft. Here also is the tombe of Hen. 4. King of England, (gra∣cious Henry 4. and his two wives. in his time to the Monks of this Church by his confir∣ming to them the ancient priviledges and prerogatives of the same Harpsfield Saecul. 15. cap. 14. pag. 634.) and of Ioane his second wife, daughter of Charles the fift, King of Navarre. Of them both, as also of Mary, the same Henrie's first wife, Wever hath many things, of him especially, both in verse and prose: amongst the rest his Will. In which (inter alia) I note that he willed to have a Chantery to consist of 2 Priests to sing and pray for his soul in this Church, and in such place thereof and manner as should seem good to his Cousin the Archbishop of Can∣terbury (Tho. Arundell.) In all probabilitie the little Chapell on the North-side of his monument is the very Chapell which was built for that purpose: the window-work where∣of, by Prior Goldstones name in the foot of it, seems to be of his repairing. I leave this Chapell and descend to the Undercroft. Isabel Coun∣tesse of A∣tholl. Where are two Lady-monuments, the one of Isabel Coun∣tesse of Athol, whereof let Wever further informe you. The other of the Lady Mohun, wherewith I will better Ioan Lady Mohun. acquaint you from the Charter or Instrument of her Chan∣tery, recorded in a Lieger of the Church. She lived in the dayes of Rich. 2. and writes herself Domina de Donesterr, springing (it seems) from that noble and mighty house or family of the Mohuns of Dunster-castle in Sommersetshire, which (as my Author Cambd. Bri∣tannia in Sum∣mersetshire. addes) flourished from the Con∣querours untill Richard the 2. dayes. In the Indenture be∣tween her and the then Prior and Covent, for the summe of 350 marks sterling (and certain utensils, and accoutre∣ments
convenient for her Chantery) with which money the Mannor of Selgrave was purchased and amortized to them (the P. and C.) with license of the King in that behalf, a perpetuall Chantery is granted unto her, by them, who covenant with her beside, that when she died her corps should be laid in the tomb which she of her own cost had prepared and caused to be set up neare the Altar of our La∣dy in the Undercroft: And being there so entombed should never be removed, nor the name of the tomb ever altered, but be honourably kept, and 5s per annum given to the Clerk that kept the Lady-chapell, for the keeping clean of her tombe, with many other clauses inserted in the same In∣denture, which to the end the Chantery might not vanish out of memory with their Successors the Monks caused to be enrolled and recorded in their Martyrologe, that upon her obit-day it might be annually recited. The indenture is dated in the yeare 1395. 19. Ric. 2. I will give you the very words of her Epitaph, because Wever hath set it down imperfectly. Pour Dieu priez por l'ame Iohane Burwaschs, que fut Dame de Mohan. And so I have done, as with hers, so with the rest also of the monuments mentionable in this place. The Church it self, with her appendent, annexed and connexed buildings thus throughly surveyed, my proposed method sends me to survey next the other ancient build∣ings within the precinct of it and the Palace &c. I begin with the Palace. Augustine the Monk, and the first Archbishop of this See Archbishops Palace. and his associats, being kindely received of King Ethelbert, and admitted into the City; for their present accommoda∣tion were seated (as whilome was told you) first at Stable∣gate, neare unto this Palace, where presently they beganne (saith venerable Bede Hist. eccles. lib. 1. c. 26.) vitam imitari Apostolicam. By which and other meanes at length converting the King to Chri∣stianitie, and daily winning upon his favour; the King short∣ly after removing and withdrawing himself and his Court
to Reculver, and there setling, as his Successors in the Kentish Kingdome whilest it lasted ever after did, (as some report Antiq. Brit. in vita Augustini.) bestowes upon his beloved Augustine (for a perpe∣tuall seate for him and his Successors) his owne Roy∣all Palace in the City, conceived to have stood much here∣about. This Palace with the neighbouring Church, Augu∣stine afterward converted both into a Cathedrall and a Mo∣nastery, yet (as I take it) not dividing his dwelling or set∣ting out his habitation apart from the Monkes; but, as he was to them considered as Cathedrall Canons, Bishop, and considered as Claustrall Monkes, Abbat, or in place of Ab∣bat; and è converso, they to him considered as Bishop, Ca∣thedrall Canons and Chapter, and considered as Abbat, a Convent of Claustrall Monkes: So he and they and both their Successors intercommuning, as in goods and posses∣sions, so in one and the same habitation, of one intire pre∣cinct ever after untill (I take it) Lanfrancs dayes. Who innovating and altering the most of our fashions, and for∣mer usages in Church-affaires, and haply not digesting this amongst the rest, thought good (its like) to change it. For no mention of any such Palace or like severall habitati∣on for the Archbishop, is to be found before his time. He indeed, amongst his other structures built him a Court or Palace distinct from the Monkes. Edificavit & curiam sibi, &c. saith Edmerus, speaking of the same Archbishop Hist. Novor. lib. 1. pag. 8.. He it was that first shifted and setled (in that manner that Doomsdayes Survey found them) the Mannors and Possessi∣ons betweene himselfe and the Monkes; setting out to each of them and the Successors of them both their distinct and proper parts Lib. ecclesie Cant.: and so no marvell if he discommoned himselfe and his Successors by a Palace, per se, from the Monkes ever after. Lanfranc then (I am perswaded) first furnished the See with a Palace here. Whereof I thinke little or no part is left to be now surveyed: Neither Hall, Chapell, or other whole piece about it (I exclude the Hall where the Archbishops civill-Court is holden, which I shall shew was but of late laid to the Palace) being to my seeming of that Antiquity.
And no marvell: for this house (saith Lambert') by that Peramb. of Kent in Cant. time Hubert the Archbishop had aspired to the See, was decayed, either with age, or flame, or both. Who there∣fore (saith he) pulled downe the most part of it, and in place thereof laid the foundation of that great Hall and other the Offices that are now to be seene. But by reason that himselfe wanted time (prevented by death) and some of his followers lacked money to performe the worke, it rested unperfect till the dayes of Boniface, who both sub∣stantially and beautifully finished the whole; and yet (as some thinke) Stephen Langton had accomplished the great Hall thereof before him. Thus Lambert. Harpesfield is ex∣presse for Langions building of the Hall. Egregiam illam (saith he Ecclesiastic. Hist. Saecul 13. Cap. 5 pag. 434.) Palatii Cantuariensis ille aulam aedificavit. For the rest, all or most of it is certainly much newer, as the work plainely discovers: whereof the present Gate-house (Iam told) was sometime used for the Lollards-Tower or Prison, and so called. Thus my Survey of the Palace would shortly end, but Great-Hall. that I may not let the Great Hall (a piece of goodly stru∣ture) passe without some little digression and enlargement of my discourse touching the same, it being famous for ma∣ny solemnities and celebrious assemblies there. Amongst the rest, for that of King Ed. 1. his Wedding feast kept there Stow. Annals in Ed. 1.. As also for that great state and solemnity of Arch∣bishop Warhams intertainment both of the Emperour with his Mother, and the King and Queene of England, at a supper in the same Hall, and also of his owne entertain∣ment there at his first coming and inthronization into the See; whereof his Successor (Archbishop Parker) and others make mention. And lastly for the intertainment there which the same Archbishop Parker gave the late Queene Elizabeth, and the French Monsieur, the Duke of Rhetz, and many of the English Nobility. So much for the Pa∣lace. I come now to the Church-precinct: which how it lyes Church-pre∣cinct. and where it goes at this day, is a thing easily traced and
found out, as thus. From the partition Wall betweene the Palace and it, neare the Rush-market to the Church-gate, and so directly upwards almost to Burgate, from thence by the Towne-Wall included to the Chancell-head of North∣gate-Church, and from thence by the Almnary (or Mint-yard) Wall (crossing and taking in the way betweene the South-West corner of that Wall, and the opposite Palace Wall) to the Court-Gate, commonly called the Porters-Gate. Thus lyes the moderne precinct of the Church. But time was when it lay otherwise, Lanfranc coming to the See; Omnes Officinas quae infra murum Curiae sunt, cum ipso muro aedificavit (saith Edmerus Hist. Novor. lib. 1. pag. 7..) Si quis in praedicta eccle∣sia (saith Theobald the Archbishop in a Charter of his) vel infra ambitum murorum ecclesiam & curiam nostram & mona∣chorum cingentium, &c Liber ecclesiae. Cant.. The Court and Church you see was sometimes walled in; the Church-yard was the like. For by a Charter of Hen. 2. the Monkes of the place had a way granted them, or rather restored, circa murum Cimi∣terii sui tempore guerrae nuper sublat. (meaning, I take it, that which happened at the end of King Stephens reigne:) which the King chargeth Iohn and Hamon the then Praepositi of the City to deliver them Liber ecclesie praedict.. Some remaines of this old Wall yet appeare, as at D• Causaubons a little remanent of it, and a larger parcell and of good height by the Covent or Com∣mon-garden: whereby it appeares that this Wall stood some pretty distance from the Wall of the City. The in∣terposed ground betweene which double Wall, not being then any parcell either of the Church demesnesse or liber∣ty, lay partly in Northgate, partly in Burgate-Ward. That (I am sure) betweene Queningate and Burgate, called Queningate Lane, being in the Church-Records, before it came to the Monkes said to lye in Berthade Burgate, as I conceive it thence probable, the rest to have lyen in North∣gate-Ward. Besides, within the moderne precinct, and that about the now Co. Garden, lay the best part of Saint Michaels Parish, and Queningate Parish betweene that and Queningate, within which Saint Austins Abbey, and di∣vers
private men beside sometimes had houses, land and other interest, as they had also lower downe on the South-side of the now Church-yard. I will therefore (as pertinent) shew how in time the Church became possessed of the whole precinct as now it is. And first for the South-side of the Church-yard, I read thus Liber ecclesi memoratae.. Anno Domini Miijo. Ethelredus Dux dedit ecclesia Christi particulam terrae in Dorobernia quam sibi rex Ethelredus dedit XV virgarum in longitudine, & viij virgarum in lati∣tudine. Termini terrae sunt hii. In orientali parte terra Regis. In parte australi placea civitatis. In occidente terra ecclesiae Christi. In Aquilone cimiterium Christi. This parcell of land must needs lye on the South-side of the Church-yard, the North and South bounds argue it so plainely. Hen. 1. by his Charter confirmes to Hugh, Abbat of Saint Austins, and to the Monkes there, Omnes illas terras quas Monachi S. Tri∣nitatis eis dederunt pro excambio terrae quam ab eis receperunt ad amplificandum cimiterium suum, &c. Saint Augustines Abbey (as you may remember I told you) had sometimes also divers tenents, tenements and ground on the same quarter of the Church-yard, neare and behinde the Campanile or Clocarium of the Church, the ruined foundation whereof appearing now in the forme of a little Mount lyes inclosed in M• Archdeacons Garden. These houses and lands in Hen. 2. time, and by his helpe, were obtained (upon exchange) of that neighbour Mona∣stery, by the Monkes of this Church, as by what I have said hereof before, and by the composition made touch∣ing the same, copied in my Appendix, may further ap∣peare. One Gervasius de Cornhill, whom that Composition (as you shall see) makes mention of, had divers tenements of his owne neere this Campanile, which the Church also a∣bout the same time, and for the same reasons purchased of him, his sonne Reignald and Maud his Wife, exchanging for them certaine ground in Friday-street London, which together with the former exchange were confirmed by se∣verall
Charters of Hen. 2. to be seene in the Liegers of the Church. It seemes by the premisses that this Campanile did terminate both the Church-ground and liberty at this time. But after this double exchange I suppose those houses taken downe, and the ground there laid open unto the back∣side of the row of shops along Burgate-street (Shops I call them, for such they were built for, and not for dwelling∣houses, because, I take it, of fires, which the neighbour∣hood of dwelling-houses might occasion to the Church; witnesse those by the Steeple, which we see were there∣fore purposely gotten in and had away:) And the same ground being so dishoused and laid open, was made cimi∣tery ground, and became part and parcell of the Church∣yard, and so accounted. For the reason which the Prior and Covent render and show to Archbishop Winchelsey in Ed. 1. time, why they ought not to contribute to the repa∣ration of Saint Mary Magdalens Church in Canterbury, in respect of their rents of those shops, was, that the same were infra limites Cimiterii ecclesiae Christi Cant. & de manso Ecclesiae Liber ecclesiae memoratae. &c. Hitherto of the Church-ground there. Now for the ground betweene Northgate and Quenin∣gate. This parcell came first to the Church in Hen. 2. time, and of his gift. For by his Charter extant in the Leigers of the Church, he gives to the Church, in augmentum elemo∣sinariae suae (as the words of it are) placeam illam inter murum Civitatis & murum qui claudit curiam Prioris & monachorum, quae jacet inter Norgate & Queningate. Quae quidem placea continet in fiue suo versus Or. xlj pedes in latitudine, & versus Occiden. xxiiij pedes similiter in latitud. In medio sui xvij pedes, & in longitudine lxxj perticas. In the yeare 1305. the Monkes are presented and charged by the Citizens to have stopped or made up the way betweene Queningate and Norgate: a thing confessed on the Monkes part, but de∣fending themselves by this Charter, they are acquited Liber ecclesi Cant.. However for more surety (as I guesse) Hen. 4. afterwards by his Charter, grants them viam infra murum Civitatis Cantuar. quae ducere solebat de Northgate usque Queningate: as
the Church-Records informe me. And so much also for that parcell of the now precinct. For the rest of it thereabout, namely at and neere Que∣ningate, and betweene it and Burgate, that is the ground knowne of late dayes by the name of the Co. Garden. I have seene In Archivis ejusd. eccles. severall deeds, that shew how, by parcells, it became added to and inclosed within the Church-precinct. As first, the Church hath a Composition made by the Monkes of the place with their neighbours of Saint Austins, and dated in the yeare 1287. wherein many houses &c. with∣in Queningate, are (in exchange for other) passed over to the Church. De terris & tenementis (so runnes the Deed) quae dicti Abbas & Conventus habuerunt infra Queningate, viz. iijs. viijd. de duabus domibus Sacristiae suae, & viijd. de una vacua placeajacente à vico ibidem usque ad murum ecclesiae Chri∣sti praed'. Item iiijs. viijd. redditus de quadam domo elemosinariae suae quam ibidem Aldhelmus tenuit simul cum una pecia terrae quam similiter ille Aldhelmus tenuit ibidem. Item xjs. de tribus domibus Thesaurariae suae ibidem. Quae tenementa (marke this) & redditus cum pertinentiis remaneant dictis Priori & Capitulo & eorum successor. libera & quieta ab omni redditu & servitio in feodum & dominium & tus ecclesiae suae in perpetuum. After∣terwards. i. in the 41. Ed. 3. I finde the two Monasteries come to Composition about certaine other houses and land situate and lying about this place. The preamble of the Indenture thus states the matter. Quod cum iidem Prior & Conventus certa messuagia & tofta de quibus iidem Abbas & Conventus redditum xvs. particulariter percipere consueverunt continentia in longitudine & latitudine dimidiam acram, di∣mid. rod. & quartam partem unius rod. terrae, & quae de Nico∣lao Horne, Iohanne Calward, Henrico ate Forstall & aliis in Queningate-lane separatim acquisiverunt, & partem inde ca∣lumpniarunt, & residuum eorund. Messuag. & Toftor. in aug∣mentationem gardini ipsorum Prio. & Conv. ibidem includere praetendunt, &c. Thus you may perceive the Church-pre∣cinct extending and spreading further and further. And this composition gave scope for it. For after that preamble
it is yeelded by the Abbat and Covent of Saint Austins, what lay in them, that the Prior and Covent of Christ-Church, might at their pleasure inclose those messuages and ground. After this came yet another parcell of the ground there∣abouts to the Church. For I meete with a Deed or Char∣ter of Ralph Broughton and Iohn Tent Chaplaines, made to the Church 16. Rich. 2. (amongst other things) of one Messuage in the Parish of Saint Michael in Canterbury neare Quenegate, and of one Acre of Land in the same Parish neare Quenegate-lane: The house holding of the King. in Burgage, and the Land of Saint Austins for xs. rent per annum. By this time (I take it) the Church had gotten in all the ground hereabouts, saving what lay betweene Queningate and Burgate, a slip called Queningate-lane. Now for that, Queningate-lane. I finde that by an Act of Parliament. 1. Rich. 3. (by which the Aldermanry of Westgate was granted to the City) the same parcell of ground, together with the Posterne and Bridge, was granted to the Church. But in case of eviction of the Aldermanry from the City, the slip of Aldermanry of Westgate. ground and premisses was to returne to the City, a part of whose demesnesse it was in Fee-ferme. And surely so it did; for in the 1. Hen. 7. the same Aldermanry, by a like Act of Parliament was restored to S• George Brownes heires, who by the former Act were made incapable of it, for their Father taking part with Hen. 7. against Rich. 3. But yet at length, after all this, by a composition betweene the Church and the City, made Anno 7. Hen. 7. the Church be∣comes ever after quietly seized both of the same ground and Wall, with the Towers, Posterne, and Bridge. Thus have I shewed you (as neere as I thinke it may be found) the extent of the ancient precinct, and how and when it became enlarged to that bignesse that now it beares. And so much of the precinct in generall. I come now to the survey of the particular ancient buil∣dings Church-Gate. in and about the same, beginning with the Church-gate.
A very goodly, strong and beautifull structure, and of excellent artifice, built in the yeare 1507. as appeares by this now scarcely legible inscription on the Gates-Front. Hoc opus constructum est Anno Domini Millesimo, Quingentesi∣mo septimo. Thomas Goldstone the Junior, as I may call him, there being two (and he the latter) of that name, being then Prior, and (as he was famous for his piety that way) this workes great benefactor. A new Gate it is, and not the first (I take it) was builded there, but succeeding a former standing where this doth. For that which is now Alderman Nicholsons dwelling house, is anciently. i. 41. Hen. 3. descri∣bed Charta in lib. Hosp de Est∣bridge. to stand ante portam ecclesiae sanctae Trinitatis: the most ancient Gate standing higher up, somewhat neerer Burgate, a good part whereof is yet remaining, but built up, and converted to private use. This (I suppose) is that vetus portacimiterii the old Records of Christ-Church so often mention, the opposition of it to that which is now Master Fidges, and the other contiguous houses to his being Church-houses, serving to bound out and describe their situation in the ancient Rentalls, calling them Magna do∣mus contra veterem portaem cimiterii. I have done with this Gate. By which entring the Church-yard, and walking up to∣wards Cimitery-Gate. the Covent Garden, on the right hand, within the Cimitery-Gate there (so called, I take it, because it had Cimitery ground lying on either side of it, that within it be∣ing called Interius cimiterium) I finde yet standing the old Schoole-house, now put to other use, but (I am assu∣red) that which was the Schoole-house, before the present Schoole-house. Shoole-house in the Mint-yard. The often-cited Division of houses betweene the Deane and Preb. appointing out Master Archdeacons now Prebends-house, and ground, bounds it out one way to the Schoole-Garden. There are that remember the Free-Schoole kept there, and that by one Master Twyne (sometime a Magistrate of the City) as they tell me. For it was a Free-Schoole for the City chief∣ly, and so called, and sometime was of the liberty thereof,
anciently wayed unto, and having a passage to it from some part of Burgate-street (I take it) leading you to the old doore of entrance which it had now made up at the South∣end and West-side thereof, haply that which Anno 32. Hen. 3. is called venella quae tendit de Burgate-street versus portam domus Sacristae Lib. Hosp. Pau∣perum Sacerdot. Cantuar.. It was a place of situation, for privacy and retirednesse, well chosen. In deligendo loco certo audi∣torii civitatis electae, adhuc danda opera, ut is quantum incom∣moditas civitatis patietur, sit salubris & separatus à tumultu transeuntium, maxime curruum seu planstrorum, ne interpel∣lentur docentes aut discentes, &c. So Tholosanus Repub. lib. 18. cap. 6. um. 1.. What An∣tiquity the Free-Schoole in this place carries with it, I am uncertaine. Arch. Theodore, the seventh after Augustine, we read erected at Canterbury by licence of Vitalianus the Pope, a Schoole or Colledge (a kinde of Academicall foundation it was) wherein he placed professors of all the liberall sciences, which (saith my Authorq) was the very • Lamberts Per∣ambulation of Kent in Canter∣bury. patterne to that Schoole which Sigebert the King of East-Angle afterward builded, &c. But this Schoole long since vanished. The Danes have so often wasted, and other ac∣cidents and casualties have so altered the face of the City, that it were much folly now to seeke with hope to finde but the place. Ipsae periere ruinae. Therefore no more of that Schoole. This we have in hand occurres to me Ms. in Archi∣vis eccles. Cant. first in the yeare 1259. when as Robertus Rector ecclesiae Scholarium Civitatis Cantuar. his presence is taken to witnesse an appeale of the Prior and Covent in a cause of theirs then depending be∣fore the Officiall of Canterbury. A while after this I read that Robert Winchelsey, that in time came to be Archbishop of Canterbury in Ed. 1. time, was a Scholar here: at Canter∣bury they say Harpsfield eccles. Hist. in ejus vita.; and therefore I suppose here. In whose immediate Successors time, there arose a great controver∣sie betweene the Rector of this Schoole, and the Parson of Saint Martin (who it seemes by the right and custome of his Church held and kept a kinde of pettite Free-Schoole there) about the rights and liberties of either
Schoole. The Records of the difference registred in Christ-Church, and faithfully extracted thence will best report the matter with the circumstance, which therefore my Appendix shall make publike, Scriptura xj•. Of this Schoole the Archbishop sede plena; and the Church, sede vacante, were patrons. The Archbishops right will appeare unto you from those Records. The Churches I gather from this note taken from other like Records. Col∣latio magisterii Scholarium grammaticalium Civitatis Cant. per Ricardum Priorem magistro Iohanni Bocton quem investivit per ferulae & virgae traditionem, praestito per eum Iuramento de fide∣liter & diligenter regendo. This was in the yeare 1374. at what time the See was voyde by Archbishop Wittlesey's death. So much for the Schoole. The next thing falling under my Survey are certaine old Honors. buildings called Honors or the Honors; in the apportion∣ment of dwellings amongst the first Deane and Preb. by that name divided and shared betweene the predecessors of Doctor Ieffery, and Doctor Vossius now Prebends. With Sir Henry Spelman, and Doctor Cowells helpe, I understand the terme; but how to apply it, or how it may suite with the present buildings I know not: Unlesse in that the late Pri∣ory of Christ-church being a Barony, and the Prior there, in right of his dignity, one of the spirituall Barons of the Parli∣ament, those buildings (sometime the prime part of his seat) might specially appertain unto him in right of the Ba∣rony, or be annexed to the Honor of the Barony, and thence take the name of Honors. Their name occurres not to me in any Record of the Church before this Division, else haply I could have said more of it, and with more certainty. A step or two further brings me to the ruines of that building which in the Division is called the Fermary-Chapell. Fermary-Cha∣pell. Capgrave Quem refert Author Antiq.  vita Cut∣berti. tells of a Chapell which he calls St Iohns stand∣ing almost contiguous to Christ-Church, built by Cuthbert the Archbishop, amongst other intents, for a place of buri∣all for him and his Successors, and that he was therein inter∣red.
Hence, and because of the Statue or effigies of St Iohn (as they suppose it to be; though St Iohn, I take it, is no where pictured with a long beard and like an old man, but there) with St Iohns, Ecce major me &c. in part yet legible up∣on an open scrowl in his hand (though in a charactter I dare say lesse ancient then the Conquest:) and from the neare site of it to the great Church, some are of opinion that this was that St Iohns Chapell Capgrave speaks of. By their fa∣vour I think not. For first, granting for truth, that there sometimes was such a Chapell, and we have barely Cap∣graves testimony for it (somewhat a weak ground to build upon;) yet I cannot imagine that so much as is yet standing of this Chapell could survive and stand out so many Da∣nish inrodes, devastations and other combustions as have betided this place since Cuthberts dayes. Besides, Capgrave that tells of the beginning and foundation, withall straight∣way shows the end and overthrow of that Chapell where he sayes. But this Church of St Iohn many ages since, to∣gether with Christ-Church, and the offices thereof exchanged her substance with fire. Of the repaire or reedifying whereof I never read. Some supposing this and that other part of ancient building that is below it West-ward, to have been one intire structure, and to have had dependance one upon the other, do conceive it to have been the Church of S. Trinitie which Archbishop Lanfranc built. Indeed the arched or embowed work of it inclines my belief that it was a building erected since the Conquest. But others will have it to be the remaines of the old Church of St Saviour, that was built and standing before the Con∣quest, that haply which Agelnoth the Archbishop in King Knutes time, after the former was destroyed and burnt by the Danes, reedified. But by their favour, it was neither this, that, nor tother. Truth is, as there is an upper and a lower part of this building, so was each part a distinct stru∣cture by it self, and not one intire piece, the lower West∣ern part whereof was sometime a Hall, for the pulling down whereof there passed a decree in Chapter anno 1545. whence
in the Division the very next yeare following it is called the late long Hall. And the upper or Eastern part of the building was this very Fermary or Infirmary-Chapell. The same Division calls it so, and that in regard-it did sometime appertain and was appropriate to those of the Infirmary or Infirmitory (the Nosocomium I may call it) of the Min∣ster situate by it, consisting chiefly of an Hall or Refecto∣ry, for their common board or table (if able and fit to come to it, otherwise feeding in their chambers) a kitchin to dresse their necessary provision in, a Dormitory or Dortor for their place of sleep and repose, distributed into certain distinct and severall chambers; of which, that one might not disturb another, every of the infirme folk had one proper to himself. And a private Chapell for their devoti∣ons, who either were sick and could not, or diseased and might not accompany their brethren in their more pub∣lick and common devotions in the Temple. Dr Langworth a late Predecessor of D• Blechynden (as it is noted down in a Chapter book) anno 1579. took down a crosse wall between his house and D• Lawses (a Predecessor of D• Brayes) at the Churches charge, and paved the way between them with the stone. In all likelihood it was the Western wall of this Chapell, or the wall which terminated the Chapell West∣ward, a cleare argument of the disjunction and separation thereof from that other lower part of building. The Infir∣mary hall or Refectory, which the Division calls the Ta∣ble-hall, Infirmary. yet stands perfect and intire, being the same which is now D• Blechyndens hall to his prebendall house, built with other rooms (as I finde) about the yeare 1342. For out of Threasurers Accompts of the Church, in that and the next yeare following, I have these notes. viz. Pro nova aula & una Camera de novo factis infirmar. 96 lib. 8s. 2d. praeter 20 marcas receptas à Feretrario pro nova camera faciend. Item pro novis cameris in firmar' & pentistis circa aulam ibid. 61 lib. 1s. 6d. Item pro novo pentisio juxta novas cameras infirmar. 6 lib. 15s. 4d. ob.
This Infirmary or domus Infirmorum I reade of in our Chronicles in King Iohns time. For the Monks of this Church quitting the Monastery by command of the King sorely offended at them, for their choice of Stephen Lang∣ton for their Archbishop; 13 sick Monks which could not remove, were left behinde (saith my Author Matt. Paris. pag. 299.) in domo In∣firmorum. The same had a bath at or neare the entrance of it, haply the leaden cistern yet remaining, of what use you may gather from the Decrees of Lanfranc in Reyners book. Archbishops Winchelsey's Statutes Liber ms. Ec∣cles. Cant. also mention it, which have provided many things touching the place. Amongst the rest, that as a place of great secrecy, no secu∣lar should be admitted into it to view or see it. And that the Prior of the Church should, if not twice, yet at least once a week personally visit and view the place, to see that there be nothing wanting to the sick there, nor ought else amisse, or if so, to see it reformed. It had a speciall Cura∣tor beside, who was called Infirmarius. But let us hence. Of ancient buildings the next unto this is the Dortor, Dortor. the common Dormitory for the Monks, a very old piece, as any now stands (I beleeve) within the precinct. Here the Monks (according to S. Benets rule) slept vestiti. i. in their clothes, their regular habit, lying in the woollen, and without either sheet or shirt. Would you know why? Part∣ly (I take it) to further them in the way of Mortification of their bodies, and partly for their more readinesse to attend their Nocturnes, that is, their night Devotions, which in imitation of the Primitives, they observed at certain of their Canonicall houres. To prevent disturbance this place Ms. memorat. had two Vigils or Watchmen that guarded it every night; the one till midnight, the other till break of day. By Arch-Bishop Winchelsey's Statutes, no woman or stranger might by any meanes have accesse thither. Neare unto this Dortor, are the ruines of the Kitchen, Pantry, Larder, and other like rooms or offices built for the common use and service of the Covent in point of food and repast, which was served in to them in their Common
Hall or Refectory built contiguous to the Kitchen (the Refectory. Remaines whereof show it to have been a very goodly, large and curious piece of structure) opening on the South∣side with a faire doore into the Cloister, before which doore sometimes stood a double cistern, partly (I take it) for the service of the Hall, and partly as a layer used at that Ceremony of washing the hands and feet of the Monks by the chief Prelate or Superintendent by our Saviours ex∣ample towards his Disciples, commanded by St Benets rule at certain times, especially at their Mandy, to be observed Decreta Lan∣franci & caeri∣moniale Bene∣dictin. This Hall they called the Fratria, in old English the Frater (so the Division calls it) because it was the common place of resort and meeting for the Fraternitie to their repast served into them from the contiguous Kitchen. Their or∣dinary fare and food here was fish and fruits, where they were not more commonly and constantly served in, then flesh was rarely or never. Abstinence from which being, as to all sorts of Monks in generall, so to these in particular expressely enjoyned, and strictly imposed, the common Refectory might upon no terms admit of or affoord any. But were any of the family sick, it was to be had for him in the Infirmary. The guests likewise in the Cella Hospitum (the guessing chamber I may call it) were not denied it: and besides, the Prior (to whose conscience and discretion in this behalf much was left) if he saw cause to refresh any one or more with the flesh at his own table in his private chamber, he might call unto him thither now and then such as he thought fit. Thus and in these cases and places flesh might be at any time, and was many times eaten. But within the publick Refectory never, and that (as I con∣ceive) because of the rules violation in that behalf, which these specialties were so farre from infringing, that like as exceptions do a generall rule, they rather con∣firmed the same in the generality of it. For as in point ei∣ther of the office or other like agends in the Church, or of rest and repose in the Dortor, by observing the rules (that is, the rites and customes) of the Monasterie in those cases
in the places proper thereunto, the Church and Dortor; by the generality of the Monks, the rule in those cases was conceived and construed to be kept and fulfilled: So like∣wise by observing the Monastick rules and customes for food and repast (and particularly this of abstinence from flesh) in the Refectory, the proper place of common refe∣ction to the whole Convent in generall, the rule in that case was by common intendment kept unviolated. And that it might be so, it was (no doubt) one main end of de∣vising and erecting these common Refectories. For might the Monks have been allowed their particular Cells, and a Praebenda, or portion set them out wherewith to finde themselves, and provide them of their own commons, as our Prebendaries now have, it might justly be feared that the rule in this point of abstinence from flesh, would be ei∣ther not at all, or nothing so well observed, as in the com∣mon and publick Refectory, where each one saw what his fellow ate. The consideration whereof probably moved Wlfred the Archbishop of this Church 800 yeers ago and up∣wards (when by his Codicill he allowed the then Monks of this place their proper Cells, or houses) to provide that the having of them should not excuse nor hinder their re∣sort to the Church, for prayers and other like agends there, at their canonicall houres, from the common Refectory for their boord, nor from the common Dormitory for their bed. As you shall finde by the Charter it self (if you peruse it) in my Appendix Scriptura 36. The Latine is much to blame, and the sense somewhat imperfect and incoherent, but I thought it not fit, nor my part to vary from it in the least syllable. Of this Hall and the provision for the same and the or∣dering thereof, the chief care and oversight was intrusted to the Cellerar one of the foure great Obedientiarii (or Cellerar. Sacrst. Chaberlain. Threasurr. Officers) of the Monastery, as I told you: The Sacrista, Camerarius and Thesaurarius being the other three. The Threasurers office was to collect and gather in the rents and revenues of the Monastery. The Chamberlains chiefly
consisted in the care of vestitus or clothing for the Monks, and therefore he had the charge of the Sartrinum and Su∣trinum, the store-houses of that sort of provision, as I guesse by officers and retainers to them, such as these Lib. Ecclesiae Cantuar. Magister Cissor. Secundus Cissor. Pelli parius. Magister sutor & gar∣cio ejus. Tres servientes in Lavendria &c. whence he was also called Vestiarius. It was the Sacrists or Sextens office and businesse to see the Church, the Temple, kept sartum tectum, and to have care of the sacred vessells, the vest∣ments, ornaments, books and utensils of the Church, and to dispose of and order both the place and manner of inter∣ring the dead, both Monks and others. And our Cellerars office regarded the Or victum. Cibum Monachorum, the provision of food for the Monks and the ordering thereof, to which end he had the Pistrinum and the Bracinum (the Bakehouse and the Brewhouse or Maulthouse) under his charge. Accord∣ingly, at the setling of the Churches Mannors by Arch∣bishop Lanfranc some were assigned and allotted to the feeding, other to the clothing of the Monks: as you shall finde by the distinction which is observed in the recitall of those Mannors in Doomsday book, where some are said and set down to appertain to the Monks ad cibum, other ad ve∣stitum. By the way will you heare a learned mans opinion of this distinction of Monastick Offies, and assigning out unto them their peculiar ferms and revenues? Non est dubium (saith Roverius in his Illustrations of the History of S. Iohns Monastery at Rheimes pag. 649.) Quin inde maxima fuerit & disciplinae & rei familiaris in Monasteriis labes, quòd domesticis inprimis administris, ac subinde etiam Monachis singulis suae at∣tributae fuerint sigillatim praediorum aut proventuum Monasterii partes. Nam lapsum inde est paupertatis studium, jacta avaritlae semina, charitas publicè imminuta, traductae in affines Monaste∣riorum facultates, licentiae, ac vitiis suppeditata alimenta. Ir∣repsit verò haec lues in Monasteria vulgò post annum millesimum. Ac licèt eatenus administrationes ejuscemodi obedientiae diceren∣tur, quòd solo Abbatis & Capituli imperio, atque arbitrio quam∣diu
libitum esset gererentur; tamen band multò postea Benefi∣ciorum nomen, ac jus obtinuerunt, magnamque monastic is sta∣tutis, vitaeque religiosae puritati, ac perfectioni perturbationem attulere. Thus he. And now I proceed. The Cellerar no doubt was a great man in the Colledge. Archbishop Winchelseys statutes Lib. eccles. Cant. agreeably to Lanfranc's decrees, which say he ought to be Pater Monasterii, expres∣ly call him so. Item omnes Custodes Maneriorum, necnon omnes Obedientiarii excepto duntaxat Maiore Celerario, qui pater dicitur Monasterii, &c. and that he was a great man in his place may appeare by the large extent of his charge. In the list of the Churches family taken in the yeare 1322. I finde all these persons sorting to his Office. Senescallus Libertatum. Clericus sen' Libertatum. Senescallus aulae hospitum. Ianitor portae exterior. Curiae. Ianitor portae cimiterii. Panetar. in Celar. Garcio ejus. Hostiarius Claustri. Garcio ejus. Panetarius aulae. Vigil Curiae. Scutellarius aulae. Potagiarius. Scutellarius refectorii. Garcio ejus. Lardarius qui est jus coquus. Conventus & garcio ejus. Secundus cocus conventus. Cocus aulae & garcio ejus. Salsarius qui est Ostiarius Coquinae, & garcio ejus. Focarius coquinae. Portarius. Partitor coquinae. Tractor vini & cervisiae Qui est Cupparius. Garcio ejus. Armiger Celerarii. Stabularius Celerarii. Carectarius Celerarii Et duo garciones ejus. Coltonarius interior. Coltonarius exterior. Venator, & garcio ejus. Ianitor portae aulae. Garcio ejus. Custos prati Celerarii. Gayolarius. These (I take it) with those of the Bakehouse and Brew∣house Cellerars-Halimot. or Malt-house, were the officers and retainers, whereof the Cellerars Halimot occurring to me in a very
ancient Deed of this Church did consist, which I suppose was holden of him in his proper Hall, and thence tooke it name of Halimot, to say, Conventus aulae. The office was indeed so exceeding great and troublesome, that like as the Prior, for the same reason had his Sub-Prior, or Prior claustri; the Sacrist or Sexten, for the like cause his Sub-sa∣crista: so had this our Cellerar his Sub-Cellerarius to assist him and beare a share with him (and surely need enough) in the managing of this burthensome office, and weighty province. I read Spelman. Glossar. in Verb. Cellerarius. that in the Abbey of St Edmunds-bury, illustris aedium pars cum latifundiis ejus muneri designata fuit, as my Authors owne words are. So had our Cellerar here. For he had a large part of principall housing alotted him, all conti∣guous to the Covent-Hall and Kitchen (the Sphere where∣in he chiefely moved) namely his Hall and his Lodgings, as they were called. His Hall that which is now the Arch∣bishops Cellerars-Hall for the keeping of his temporall Courts. An anci∣ent peece, and (I take it) a parcell of that housing Edmerus Hist. Novor. lib. 1. pag. 7. & 8. speakes of, which he saith Archbishop Lanfranc upon the increase of the number of his Monkes pulling downe the former too little for their use, secondly built better and larger then the former: the Dortor and North-Hall, being other part of it, as I conceive, all built upon brave arched vaults of stone. Into this (the Cellerars) Hall, the present passage lyes by the Palace Greene or Court; whereas the ancient ordinary way to it was on the other side the Hall, in at a faire doore, over which is cut in the stone-worke the resemblance of the Holy Ghost in the Doves forme de∣scending on our Saviour, and under his feete the statue of an Archbishop (haply the Founder) in his Pontificalls. Be∣tweene this Hall and the Court-gate sometimes lay a pas∣sage by and through the long low Entry, in the Division called the Pantise, whereby ingresse and regresse, carri∣age and recarriage might be made to and from the Hall. His Lodgings lay on the West-side or Quarter of the Celler. Lodgings. Cloister, into which it had a double doore, having in the
Windowes, the name, coate of armes and Rebus or name∣device of Richard Dering the Monke, one of them Vidc Stat. 25. en. 8. that conspired with the Holy Maide of Kent in Hen. 8. dayes, and saluted Tiburne for his paines, who in his time was Cellerar to the Church. The same Hen. 8. afterward in his new erection and dotation of the Church, expressely re∣serves to him and his Successors both Hall, and Lodgings, by the names of the Cellerars Hall, and the Cellerars Lod∣gings. But they are since come to the See, and laid to the Palace, and passages made to them from the same. I have done with them, and passe from thence to the Court-Ga. Court-Gate, commonly called the Porters-Gate, built (as I take it) by the old generall founder Archbishop Lan∣franc. On the North-side whereof stands an ancient stone-worke-pile, the North part whereof. i. from the staires or ascent North-ward, is now Dr Casaubons Prebends house. The name of which building is now quite lost, saving that some call it Hog-Hall: haply rather (as Hogia, Hoga, Hogi∣um Hog-Hall. and Hogum is by St Henry Spelman Glossar. derived from the German Hog, signifying high, or mounted) because of the high and lofty site and posture of it, then, as some dreame, from the dressing of Hogs sometime in the Undercroft of it, a use for which it were absurd to thinke it built. Others from the site of it call it, and so doe some of the Church-Records, North-Hall, and magna aula juxta portam curiae versus Aquilonem. I finde it also in some of the Church Re∣cords called Oriall; but whether from the same originall with Oriall Colledge in Oxford, which name some conceive to be a corruption of Aul-royall, I leave to other mens judgements. But all this while we are without satisfaction for what use so strong and goodly a foundation as this is standing upon Vaults, and having to it a very gracefull ascent by stone-steps, be set on either side with smal Marble Columnes and other (arched) stone-worke was intended or how used in former time. If I may speake my opinion, I shall tell you (and I thinke rightly) what it was. There was (you must know then) before the Dissolution
(as by Saint Benets Rule there ought to be) Hospitality kept and intertainment affoorded and allowed both at Bed and Boord unto such strangers (Travellers and Pilgrimes espe∣cially) as resorting to the Monastery should crave it of the Monkes: and consequently there was a place in the Mona∣stery set apart for that purpose. This place of receipt they called Aula & Camera Hospitum. Now I am perswaded the Aula Hospitum. present building was that Aula & Camera Hospitum. I will give you my reasons. First it stood and stands most conveniently for the pur∣pose, 1. being by the Court-Gate, remote from the Mona∣stery which strangers were not to pry into. And Archbishop Winchelsey his Statutes Lib. Ms. eccles. Cant. making mention of the place, seeme to intimate the standing of it within the Court. Item aula Hospitum & paralitorium & quaecunque officia ac domus ex∣terioris curiae, &c. Say the same Stat. Secondly the Cellerar had charge of it. Now the Pen∣tice or Entry betweene the Court-Gate and his Hall did (as 2. it were) make them meete. Thirdly the present building was not onely a Hall, but 3. divided (as appeares by it) into an Hall and a Chamber (or Parlor) so to accommodate the intertained guest with both Bed and Boord, and what doe the same Winch. Statutes call it but Aula Hospitum & Paralitorium? as you see be∣fore. I must acknowledge to have received some light also in this matter from the following story. A Keeper of Prince Edwards Ward-Robe (say the Records of the Church) in the great North-Hall of the Court, in the yeare 1304. kills another man within the precinct, and flyes streight way to the Chamber of the Hall, and though he were re∣quired by the Steward of the Church, refuseth to come forth, or to suffer any to enter. Whereupon the Prince being consulted, another Keeper is sent downe, and order given to have the malefactor brought to his triall by a pre∣fixed time. In the interim the Justices in a Sessions holden ante portam castri Cant. inquire of the murder and finde it.
Shortly after the malefactor is brought before some Judges regia placita tenentibus in the Archbishops Palace, where it being demanded of him how he would or could acquit himself, he answers that being a Clerk, he cannot sine Or∣dinario suorespondere: whereupon, being first found guilty of the fact by the Jury, he is, as convicted, delivered over to the Ordinary, and sent to the Archbishops Gaole at Maidstone. Thus goes the Story. Now I collect from hence that the Prince himself had been received here, and intertainment affoorded to his wardrobe after his de∣parture; a use sutable to the condition of the place in hand. By this time (I trow) you see enough to perswade your beleef of this building to have been the Aula and Camera Hospitum. And now knowing what it was I shall next ac∣quaint you with what I further reade concerning it in the Church-records. The Hall had her poper and peculiar Steward; who, under the Cellerar, was to see to the accommodation of the guests with all necessaries according to the Statutes and Customes of the Monastery. He was called Senescallus au∣lae Hospitum. Here was intertainment to be had of charity, for religious and secular guests, and that (by the Statutes of Archbishop Winchelsey) for the space of at least a day and a night: horse and man. On the top or by the foot of the Staire-case of stone vaulted underneath, anciently hung a gate, whereof (it seems) there was a constant keeper, who had his chamber hard at hand. For in the yeare 1382. I finde the Prior and Covent make a donation Custodiae portae interioris juxta aulam Hospitii servienti & armigero suo, cum camera dicti Custodis &c. So muh of this pile. But by the way we must allow the Steward of the Liber∣ties Stewards court. a part of this building for the keeping of his Courts, which have been holden here from good antiquity: wit∣nesse these words extracted from a Charter In Archivis Eccles. Cant. of H. 6. de Cu∣ria tenenda &c. Sciatis (saith he) quod nos considerantes quòd Prior eccl. & ejusd. loci conven us & praedecessores sui usi sunt & cosueverunt a tempore quo hominum memoria non existat
habere tenere apud North-hall, inframetas & septa eccles. sive Prioratus praedicti coram Ballivo suo pro tempore existente do tribus septimanis, in tres septimanas quandam curiam vocatam High Court, & in eadem Curiatenere, audire et terminare placitae &c. This Court (it seems) was first set up with the Arch∣bishops lience many ages since. Concessit autem eis Archi∣episcopus gratis habere curiam suam de propriis hominibus eo∣rum, as Roger Hoveden hath it speaking of Archbishop Hu∣bert, sub anno 1200, and recording there the agreement made between him and the Monks, first falling out about the Chapell at Lambeth. I have nothing more to observe of this Court, except the smallnesse of the room that it is kept in. The reason whereof may be this. The Dissoluti∣on diminishing the revenues of the Church made the Churchmen (I suppose) to lessen their Court. Hard by this place, in times past and untill the Dissolu∣tion stood the Almnery or Elemosinary of the Church, be∣ing Almnery. the place where the poore were daily fed with the re∣maines of such fare as came from the Refectory and other tables kept within the Monastery. Omnes etiam reliquiae & fragmenta tam ciborum quam potuum Refectorii, camerae Prio∣ris, mensae Magistri, Infirmitorii & etiam Aulae hospitum in vasis ad id congruis colligantur, & ad elemosinam plenè & integrè re∣serventur, in usus alios quam puram elemosinam nullatenus con∣vertenda: say the private Stat. of this Church made by Archbishop Winchelsey. Agreeable to that ordinance in the Provinciall Constitutions Cap. omnm. de sta regular. Omnia autem victualia religiosis apponenda sine subtractione aliqua eis apponantur tam in con∣ventu quam alibi ubi reficiuntur. Et de omnibus appositis totum residuum sine diminutione aliqua cedat in elemosinam per Ele∣mosinarium egentibus simul erogandum. It a quòd nec Abbas nec Prior nec Elemosinarius possit contra hoc dispensare. The Monk that was intrusted with the care of this place was cal∣led Decanus Elemosinariae and Elemosinarius Ecclesiae, the Church-Almoner. King Hen. 2. by his Charter, gave unto the Monks, for and in augmentation of this their Almnery, the ground between Northgate and Queningate as is afore
shewed. And Archbishop Richard (Beckets immediate Sue∣cessor) appropriated to this Almnery (or, if you will, to the Monkes ad usum Elemosinariae) the Churches of Monk∣ton, Eastry, Mepham, and Eynesford. Whereof Harpesfield thus. Hist. eccles. Secul. 12. Magnum tamen sui (saith he speaking of that Arch∣bishop) pauperibus quibus liberaliter perpetuae elecmosina prospe∣xit, ad quem usum appropriavit ecclesias Monakensem, Estri∣ensem, Mephamensem & Eynesfordensem, desiderium reliquit. Afterwards Lib. eccles. Cant. in the yeare 1319. 11. Ed. 2. Henricus de Estria the then Prior of the Church, within the precinct of the same Almnery, erected a Chapell and founded a Chantery of sixe Priests to pray, sing and celebrate for the soules of King Ed. 1. Ed. 2. Archbishop Lanfranc and Winchelsey, with the Founder himselfe and someothers, confirmed by the Kings Charter. Contiguous whereunto hee built a Chamber for the Priests, and afterwards. i. in the yeare 1327. his Successor, with consent of the Covent assigned and appropriated the Parsonage of Westcliffe by Dover to the Almnery for ever, for the sustentation of the Priests, and the maintenance of the Chapell, and Chamber, &c. Which both are as yet standing, but converted to the Free-Schoole and housing for the Schoole-Master. This Alm∣nery was taken and pared from the Church at the Dissoluti∣on, but restored by Queene Mary, through her Cousin Cardinall Pooles meanes. In the Charter of which restitu∣tion  mention is made of a Mint there, somtimes kept by her Father (Hen. 8.) from whence it tooke (as I told you An Archivis esue prd. formerly) and to this day retaines the name of the Mint or Mint-yard. And thus I have done with the third particular head of my discourse concerning the Church: and come in the next place to (my third particular) the Catalogue of benefactors.
A Catalogue of the principall benefactors to the Church. SOme, it is well knowne, have written whole Bookes of 4. Particular. the foundations, gifts, donations, and endowments of Churches, Colledges, and the like. Witnesse (amongst the rest) for the parts of Germany chiefely, the Codex dona∣tionum written by Miraeus. And all this to very good ends, namely to preserve the honour and memory of such pious and devout benefactors, and to commend the worthy ex∣ample of their zeale and piety to the imitation both of the present and future ages, at home and abroad. And for the very same purpose have I pitched upon the ensuing Cata∣logue, containing the goodly company of pious benefa∣ctors to the Church of Canterbury, with a briefe memoriall of their severall gifts, as I finde them there upon Record. Donationes Maneriorum & Ecclesiarum ecclesiae Christi Cantuarie. & nomina donantium, unà cum privilegiis & libertat' eid. eccles. concessis. EThelbertus Rex, Anno regni sui xxxv. ad fidem Christi per Palatium regium in Cantuar. sanct. Augustinum conversus, statim Palatium suum eidem Augustino & successoribus suis infra Civitatem Doroberniam perpetuè dedit, ut ibi sedem Metropolitanam in evum haberent In quofundata est ecclesia Can∣tuarien. & in nomine sancti salvatoris dedi∣cata. As in an∣other Ms. of the Church. Adesham., quam beatus Gregorius primam totius regni esse decrevit & con∣firmavit, ut sicut prima fuit fidem suscipiendo, prima esst in dignitate. Hoc donum fecit rex Anno Domini. Dxcvii. Ethelbaldus filius Ethelberti dedit monachis ejusdem ecclesiae manerium de Adesham ad cibum, Anno Domini Dcxvi. cum campis, siluis, pascuis & omnibus aliis ad villam illam rite perti∣nentibus, liber ab omnibus secularibus servitiis, & fiscali tri∣buto, exceptis istis tribus consuetudinibus, expeditione, Pontis Arcisve constructione. i. communi labore de quo nullus excipie∣batur.
Anno Domini Dclxxx. Cedwalla Rex dedit Wilfrico Archie∣piscopo Pageham. Pageham, cum appendiciis ejus. scil. Slindon, Scrippaneg, Ceretun, Bucgrenora, Beorgamstede, Chrismehamme, Mundan∣ham aquilonare & aliud Mundanham. Anno Domini Dclxxxvij. Cedwalla Rex cum conjuge sua Geddinge. Wodetone. Keneldritha dedit Theodoro Archiepiscopo & familiae ecclesiae Christi in Dorbernia, Geddinge & Wodetone, laberè sicut Ade∣sham. Anno Domini Dclxxxxiij. Withredus Rex Cantiae dedit ter∣ram Nunhelme∣stun. quatuōr aratrorum pro amore Dei & Brithwaldi Archiepi∣scopi, ecclesiae beatae Mariae quae sita est apud Liminge, quae terra vocatur Nunhelmestun, L. S. A. i Liberê sicut Adesham. Piscaria de Lamhethe. Anno Domini Dccxlj. Eadbriht Rex dedit ecclesiae Christi in Dorobernia capturam piscium in Lamhethe, & alia quaedam ecclesiae de Liminge, tempore Cuthberti Archiepiscopi, L. S. A. Anno Domini Dccxlvij. Eadbertus Rex Kanciae dedit eccle∣siae de Reculure, tempore Bregwini Archiepiscopi tributum unius navis in villa de Fordwic. Anno Domini Dcclxxiiij. Off a Rex, Ianiberto Archiepisco∣po Hlyden. rogante, dedit monachis ecclesiae Christi Doroberniae Hlyden juxta Sandwicum, L. S. A. Eodem Anno Off a Rex totius Angliae dedit Ianiberto Ar∣chiepiscopo Hlyden. ad ecclesiam Christi Dorober. terram trium aratro∣rum, quam Cantiam Anglice dicunt thre swolinges in occiden∣tali paerteregionis quae dicitur Mersware, ubi nominatur illa terra data Hlyden. Et signatum est hoc scriptum signis praedict. Regis & Arch. episcopo, & similiter Kinedrithae reginae, trium Epi∣scoporum, quinque Abbatum, Edbald; Ducis & xi. Principum. Wullafus dedit Bramling Monachis ecclesiae Christi Cantuar. Bramling. qui illud habuit ex dono Edwlfi Regis idem donum confirmantis, ut scriptum suum inde testatur. Anno Domini Dcclxxxiiij. Eadmundus Rex Kanciae dedit Sheldwich. Hwatrede Abbati de Reculure, & ejus familae ibidem degenti Scheldwihc, scil. terram xij aratrorum. L. S. A. Anno Domini Dccxc. Off a Rex Anglorum Anno regni sui xxxviij. ad instigationem Athelardi Archiepiscopi, dedit eccle∣siae sancti Salvatoris in Dorobernia xc. tributaria terrae bipartita
in duobus locis, lx in loco qui dicitur Lingahaese & Gedding as, Lingahaese. Geddinges. Twicanham. circa rivulum qui dicitur Fisces burna, & xxx in aquilonali ripa fluminis Tamis, ubi appellatr Twicanham: lx ad emenda∣tionem ecclesiae Salvatoris, & xxx ad indumentum fratrum qui Deo serviunt in illa sancta ecclesia. Anno Domini Dccxcj. Off a Rex dedit ecclesiae Christi Doro∣berniae, Otteford. Ye∣cham. Rokin∣ge. Sandherst. Bocholt. Blean & al. Otteford, & terram quindecim aratrorum in provincia Canciae nomine Yecham, ad cibum monachorum. Perhamstede, Rokinge & Andred ad pascua porcorum. Dunmalingdene, Sand∣herst, Smnthelmmgdene. Et in silvis qui dicuntur Bocholte & Blean Heaubric. Et aliud inter torrentem nomine Eortburna & Aghne, Orgariswike, treon, & pastum unius gregis juxta The∣ningden, & quinquaginta porcorum bnnan Smed. Tenham. Eodem anno. Cenulfus Rex, rogatu Athelardi Archiepiscopi Doroberniae dedit vicario munere terram duodecim ararorum bi dicitur Tenham, ad Metropolem Salvatoris ecclesiam in Doro∣bernia. Hanc munificentiam maxime fecit Rex quia idem Ar∣chiepiscopus gratia recompensationis terram xij aratrorum dedit in loco ubi dicitur Creges emilina. Anno Domini Dccxcix. Cenewlfus Rex, Archiepiscopo A∣thelardo Cherring. Chert. Burne & al. rogante, ecclesiae Christi in Dorobernia reddidit terras quas Off a Rex abstulerat laniberto Archiepiscopo. scil. Cherring. Selebertes Chert ad vestimentum monachorum. Brumgland & Burne. Terra in Cant. Anno Domini Dccciiij. Cenulfus Rex & Rex Cuthredus de∣derunt ecclesiae de Liminge, ubi jacet corpus beatae Eadburgae sex mansuras in civitate Doroberniae, rogatu Athelardi Archiep. Anno Domini Dcccv. Athelrdus Archiep. dedit vel potius Burne. restituit monachis ecclesiae Dorobern. villam dictam Burne, ad victum monachorum, scil. terram quatuor aratrorum, quam ter∣ram prius homo bonus, nomine Aldhun, qui in hac regali villae hujus civitatis Praefectus fuit, praedictis monachis contulit ad victm, sed rapacitate Off ae Regis de eadem terra privata est ea∣dem ecclesia. L. S. A. i. Lihere sicut Adesham. Bocholt. Eod. Anno Cuthredus Rex Canciae, cum licentia Cenulsi Regis Merciae, tempore Wlfredi Archiep. dedit ecclesiae Christi Cant. terram duorum aratrorum, quae dicitur Bocholte & Kingescua∣lond. L. S. A.
Eod. Anno Cenulfus Rex dedit Wlfredo Archiepiscopo, ad epus Bixle. ecclesiae Christi in Dorobernia terram x aratrorum scil. Bixle. L. S. A. Anno Domini Dcccix. Cenuifus Rex Canciae dedit Wlfredo Archiepisc. Doroberniae, & monachis ecclesiae Christi, terram Bercham. septem aratrorum, quae dicitur Bereham. L. S. A. Anno Domini Dcccxj. Wifredus Archiepisc. emit à Cenulfo Gravene. Elmested. & al. Rege has terras, ad opus ecclesiae Christi in Dorobernia, scil. Gra∣venea. Cassingburnan. Ealmestede. Suuithunigland juxta Gra∣ven, & Appingland. L. S. A. Anno Domini eod. Wlfredus Archiepisc. Doroberniae concam∣bium Eastria pro Burn. fecit cum conventu suo de villa de Eastria pro Burne. Anno Domini Dcccxiiij. Cenulfus Rex dedit Wlfredo Archi∣episcopo, Binne. & monachis in ecclesia Christi Doroberniae circiter xxx jugera inter duos gremiales rivos fluminis quod dicitur Stour, & vocatur terra illa Binne. L. S. A. Lyfchild dedit Mddeltone Wlfredo Archiepiscopo, & mona∣chis Meltone. ecclesiae Christi Cant. & postea scil. Anno Dom. Dcccxxij. Cenulfus Rex Merciorum idem donum confirmavit, ab omni secu∣lari gravitate liberum, & fiscali tributo. Anno Domini Dcccxxij. Cenulfus Rex dedit Wlfredo Ar∣chiepisc. Shaldeford. Coppanstan. Gretamarsc. & Shaldeford. L. S. M. i. Libere sicut Meltone. Godmrsham.. Eod. Anno Beornulfus Rex Merciorum dedit ecclesiae Christi Godmersham, ad victum & vestitum monachorum, rogante Wl∣fredo Archiep. L. S. A. Eod. Anno Wlfredus Archiep. Doroberniae concilium cele∣bravit Harghes. Ged∣ding. Cube, & al. in loco praeclaro qui dicitur Clovesho, presente Beornulpho Rege Merciorum; super libertate ecclesiae, ubi idem Archiepisco∣pus recuteravit quasdam terras ecclesiae Christi Dorobe ab∣latis, scil. Harghes, Herefordingland, Wambelean, Gedding & Cumbe. Anno Domini Dcccxxiij. Cenulfus Rex dedit Wlfredo Ar∣chiep.  in Cant. & a. quandam terram infra moenia urbis Doroberniae, sl. lx pedum in longitud. & xxx pedum in latitud. partem etiam extra civitatem ab aquilone Civitatis xxx jugera, xxv in arido campo & v agros prati. Lifstanus dedit Southcherch monachis ecclesiae Christi Cant. Southcherch.
Et postea Celulfus Rex Merciorum dedit eisdem, et idem donum confirmavit. Anno Dom. Dcccxxiiij. Wlfredus Archiepiscopus dedit Mo∣nachis Eghethorne & Langdone pro  ecclesiae Christi Dorobern. Eghethorne et Langedone pro commutatione de Bereham. Item idem dedit eisdem villam quae dicitur Eastur-Walding∣ton Terra in Cant. in occidentali plaga ecclesiae Christi, infra moenia urbis Do∣roberniae, intra ripam fluminis Stoure. Item idem dedit eisdem terram quae vocatur Folquingland in Byri. regione Estriae. Ruriculum quoque unius aratri in loco qui voca∣tur Byri. Anno Domini Dcccxxviij. Wiglaf Rex Merciorum dedit ec∣clesiae Brotewelle. Christi Dorobern. et Wlfredo Archiep. ejusd. ecclesiae Bro∣tewelle in Midd. L. S. A. Anno Domini Dcccxxx. Werhardus Presbyter praepotens in Anglia, de praecepto Archiepiscopi dedit Monachis ecclesiae Chri∣sti Harghes. Otteford. & alia. Dorobern. terras prius ablatas, scil. Harghes Ciiij. hydas. Otteford C. hydas. Graveneyam xxxij. hydas. Burnan xliiij. hydas. Seswalun x. hydas. Bereham xxxvj hydas &c. Anno Domini Dcccxxxij. Rex Athulfus instinctu Ceolnothi Ebbeney & alia. Archiepisc. dedit Ebbeneyam, Deferthesia, Mistanham, Lan∣gebornam, Blakebornhamme, Plegimunhamme, Ofnehamme, & silvam quae vocatur Ostrynden, & villam juxta civitatem Do∣roberniae quae vocatur Bertun, ad quam pertinent quinque jugera & duo prata apud Scertingan, & aliud apud Tanintun. omnia L. S. A. .i. Liberè sicut Adeshm. Lose. Ethelwlfus Rex dedit Lose Suete viduae & filiae ejus, & illae dederunt Monachis ecclesiae Christi Cantuar. & est de vestitu eorum. Anno Domini Dcccxxxv. Cinnewarra Abbatissa dedit Hum∣berto Duci terram juris sui, nomine Wircesmuth, ea conditione ut omni anno det ecclesiae Christi in Dorobernia pro gablo, plum∣bum trecentorum solidorum ad opus ejusdem ecclesiae Archiepisco∣po Ceolnotho, & successoribus suis in perpetuum. Eod' anno Hadleghe in Suthfolca data fuit per Elsledam sci∣ente & consentiente Ethelredo Rege. Hadleghe. Anno Domini Dcccxxxviij. Ecgbertus & Athelwlfus Rex Mallings.
filius ejus dederunt ecclesiae Christi in Dorobernia Mallings in Suthsexan, quod viz. manerium prius eidem ecclesiae dedit Bal∣dredus Rex, sed quia non fuit de consensu magnatum regni, do∣num id non potuit valere. Et ideo isto anno in concilio apud Kingstone celebrato ab Archiepisc. Doroberniae Ceolnotho re∣stauratum est ecclesiae antedictae. L. S. A. Anno Domini Dcccxxxix. Ceolnothus Archiepiscopus pro∣pria pecunia sua emit Chert à quodam principe vocato Halethe Chert. concedente Rege Athelwlfo, & eandem villam eccles. Christi Mo∣nachis dedit. L. S. A. Anno Domini Dcccxxxix. Athulfus Rex dedit Ceolnotho Archiepiscopo Eastreasta Delham, scil. vij jugera, quae viz. ter∣ra adjacet ecclesiae S. Mariae de Liming. L. S. A. Anno Domini Dccclxxj. Elfredus Dux dedit Ethelredo Ar∣chiepiscopo Chertham. Doroberniae, & Monachis ejusdem ecclesiae villam de Chertham, ad vestitum Monachor. ut patet per chartam suam in∣de confectam, quam potius Codicellum dicimus. Anno Domini Dcccxcv. Wefingwerhs juxta flumen quod di∣citur Romeeya datum fuit per Plegmundum Archiepiscopum ec∣clesiae Christi. Anno Domini Dcccxlix. Another Ms. calls it Ethered∣sh. [Heh. Heth dat' fuit per Elfredum Re∣gem Plegmundo Archiepiscopo, & successoribus suis ad opus ec∣clesiae et Monachorum. Anno Domini Dccccxxiij. Wlfelmus Archiepiscopus agros comparavit ab incolis qui nominantur Waldland & Wlfreing∣land, juxta locum qui dicitur Rethercheap, extra portas Doro∣berniae. Anno Domini Dccccxxvij. Athelstanus Rex, pro anima pa∣tris Folksane. sui Edwardi & honore Wlfelmi Archisacerdocis Dorober∣niae, dedit Folkstane sitam super mare, ubi quondam fuit Mona∣sterium & Abbatia sanctarum virginum, ubi etiam sepulta est S. Eanswitha, qui locus à Paganis destructus fuit. L. S. A i. Liberè sicut Adesham.. Anno Dom. Dccccxxxiiij. Eylfleda dedit Hamme Ecclesiae Hamme. Christi Cant. Anno Domini Dccccxxxix. Winhelmus dedit Wlfelmo Ar∣chiep. Terra à meridi Doroberniae. Dorober. xj. agros Iugera, as in another Ms. à meridie Doroberniae. Et est terra illa circumdata his terminis. Ab oriente Adredsland, ab aquilone
Kingsland, a meridie publica strata, & ab occidente Brihtelmes∣land. Factum fuit donum istud in praesentia Athelstani Regis. Anno Domini Dccccxl. Eadulfus Dux per concessionem Re∣gis Mepeham. Athelstani, praesente Wlfelmo Archiep. dedit Mepeham. L. S. M. Anno Domini Dccccxlj. Prestantun. Wingham. Wolecumbe, Prestantun Wingham & al. Swerdlingan, Bosington & Graveney restitut. ecclesiae per Ead∣mundum Regem, & Eadredum fratrem ejus, & Edwinum fili∣um ejusdem Edmundi. Athelstan Rex dedit villam de Terrings sitam super mare in Terrings. Suthsexan, ecclesiae Christi in Dorob. L. S. A. Anno Domini Dccccxliij. Eardulfus Rex Cantiae dedit He∣ahberthae Abbati de Racul & ejus familiae, scil. Monachis con∣sistentibus in illo loco vocato Raculfre, et etiam unius aratri in lo∣co qui nominatur Perhamstede. Anno Domini Dccccxlvij. Pecchings dat' ecclesiae per Pecchinges. Wlfricum, presente et consentiente Rege Edredo, matreque ejus Regina Eadgiva, Odoneque Archiepiscopo Doroberniae, Wlstano Archiepiscopo Eborac. et aliis multis nobilibus. L. S. A. Anno Domini Dccccxlix. Edredus Rex presente Odone Ar∣chiepiscopo Monasterium Raculfense. Eadgiva regina matre ipsius Edredi dedit ecclesiae Christi in Dorobernia Monasterium Raculfense bis denis se∣misque estimatum cassatis cum omnibus pertinen' sive litorum sive camporum, agrorum, saltunmve. L. S. A. Anno Dom. Dcccclviij. Villa de Iccham data fuit per Athel∣wardum, Iccham. praesente Odone Archiepiscopo. Anno Domini Dcccclxj. Ediva regina, alio nomine dicta Meapham & alia. Edgiva, scil. mater Eadmundi et Eadredi Regum dedit Mepe∣ham, Coulings, Osterland, Leanham, Pecham, Farnleghe Monketone, et Aldintone, huic ecclesiae. Anno Domini Dcccclxiij. Dunstanus, de consensu regis Ed∣gari dedit huic eccles. Fengg' vij. aratrorum, quod Anglicè di∣citur vij hides emptorum de Ingelram Optimato ejusdem regis. Anno Domini Dcccclxiiij. Ethelstanus, consentiente et con∣cedente Archiepise. Dunstano dedit ecclesiae Sanctae Mariae de Liminges, ubi sepulta est sancta Eadburga terram unius jugeri quae Vleham nominatur.
Anno Domini Dcccclxxix. Egelredus Rex dedit ecclesiae in Sandwich. Estrey. Dorobernia Sandwich, ad vestitum Monachorum, et Estreyam ad cibum Monachor. L. S. A. Anno Domini Dccccxcj. Aschwinus Dorsetensis Epi∣scopus Risbergh. reddidit ecclesiae Christi Alfrico Archiepiscopo Risbergh. Anno Domini Dccccxcvij. Elfgiva regina dedit huic eccle∣siae Newinton et Brotewelle in regione de Oxinaford, et calicem Newinton & Brotewell. & al. aureum cum patena aurea, in quo sunt xiij. marcae de puro auro, et duo dorsalia de pallio, et duas capas de pallio cum tassellis auro paratis. L. S. A .i. Liberè sicut Adesham.. AoD. Dcccclxxx Mxv. as in another Ms. Holingburne.. Athelstanus filius Aelthredi, de consen∣su et licentia ejus dedit ecclesiae Doroberniae Holingburnan, ad cibum Monachorum, quam villam emit à patre suo. L. S. A. Edmundus Rex filius Edivae Reginae dedit Preston .i. Copton. Preston & Eylwarton. Laling. Illegh. Hadlegh., et Eyl∣wartone Monachis ecclesiae Christi Cantuar. et est de victu corum. AoD. Dccccxlj. Dux Brithnotus iturus ad bellum contra pa∣ganos, dedit Laling, Illegh, Hadlegh, consentiente Rege Ethel∣redo, presente Sirico Archiep. Dorober. AoD. Miijo Ethelredus Dux dedit ecclesiae Christi particu∣lam Terra in Cant. & extra. terrae in Dorobernia, quam sibi Rex Ethelredus dedit, xv. virgarum in longitud. et viij. virgarum in latitud. et vj. agros extra murum. Termini terrae infra murum sunt hii. In orientali parte terra Regis, in parte australi placea civitatis. In occidente terra ecclesiae Christi. In aquilone coemiterium Christi. AoD. Mvj. Ethelredus Rex confirmavit omnes donationes Consmatio Do∣nationum & Li∣bertatum. terrarum quae datae sunt ecclesiae Christi in Dorobernia, et super hoc scriptum suum dedit Elfrico Archiep. cumpiscationibus, ve∣nationibus, aucupationibus, et aliis omnibus libertatibus, exceptis illis tribus in Adesham, signo ipsius confirmatum, una cum xxxj. signis optimatum suorum. Eod' anno Ethelric & Leofwina, annuente rege Ethelredo, Bocking & Mersey. dederunt Bocking et Mesey ad victum Monachorum. Anno Domini Mx. Elfegus Archiepiscopus adauxit ecclesiae Werehorne & alia. Christi Cantuar. quandam terram, nomine Werehorne, Freming∣ham et Wodetone, et est de vestitu Monachorum. L. S. M. .i. Liberò sicut Milton. Mesteham. & Cheyham.. Anno Dom. Mxviij. Mesteham et Cheyham, duae villae in regione Surreyae dat. per Ethelstanum, qui et Livingus.
Eod. anno Knuht Rex• dedit Livingo Archiepiscopo, ad opu ecclesiae, silvam Heseleherst. L. S. A. AoD. Mxxiij. Kanutus Rex dedit ecclesiae Christi in Doro∣bernia Portus Sand∣wici. portum de Sandwico cum corona sua aurea, quae adhuc ser∣vatur in capite crucis majoris in navi ejusdem ecclesia. Portum illum dedit Monachis cum thelonio ejusdem villae, wrecco maris & omnibus aliis consuetudinibus ad portum illum pertinentibus. AoD. Mxxxij. Apuldre, Orpintone, Palstre, & Wihttrische∣ham dat' ecclesiae per Edsinum presbiterum Episcopum S. Martini, quae ecclesia sita est extra Civita∣tem Dorober∣niae in Oriente. as another Ms. hath it. Apuldre & alia. Horsleghe. Heth & Salt∣wode. Godmersham., consentientibus Ca∣nuto Rege, & Elfgiva, Regina sua. AoD. Mxxxvj. Theored. consentiente & concedente Knuto, dedit Horsleghe, ad opus & victum Monachorum. L. S. A. Memorandum quòd idem Rex Kanute, confirmavit privilegia praedecessorum suorum legalia in libertatem Monasteriorum infra Kanciam positorum. Eod. anno. Hethe & Saltwode data ecclesiae per unum de princi∣pibus Angliae, nomine Haldene. Eod' anno. Godmersham data fuit ecclesiae per Egelnothum Ar∣chiepiscopum. AoD. Mxxxviij. Knuthus Rex reddidit ecclesiae Christi in Do∣robernia Folkstane. villam de Folkstane, quam olim Rex Atbelstanus filius regis Edwardi eidem ecclesiae dedit, ea conditione hanc donatio∣nem fecit Knutus, ut nunquam alienaretur eadem villa per Archi∣episcopum sine licentia Regis & Monachorum. Wlstanus, cognomento Wildepreost, annuente Domino suo Har∣deknuto, Thurrock. dedit huic ecclesiae Thurrock. AoD. Mxliiij. Egelricus Bigge dedit huic eccles. Chert, Stouting & Meletune. Chert. Stout∣ing. Meletune A. D. Mxlvj. Wlfgith relicta Elfwine, & Godwinus, consen∣tiente sancto Edwardo Rege dederunt ecclesiae Christi in Dorober∣nia, Stistede. Gog∣geshale. Stistede & Goggeshale in Essex, ad victum Monachorum. L. S. A. A. D. Mlj. Villae de Chertham & Waleworth concessae & con∣firmatae Chertham & Waleworth. fueru per sanctum Edwardum, cum maneriis jam habi∣tis, & multis libertatibus concessis. Praedictam villam Walworth Edmundus Rex dedit cuidam joculatori suo nomine Hitardo.
Tempore tandem Regis Edwardi idem Hitardus volens limina Apostolorum Romae venit ad ecclesiam Christi in Dorobernia, & per consensum & concessionem Regis Edwardi dedit candem villam eidem ecclesiae Christi, chartam quoque ejusdem terrae posuit super altare Christi &c. Siwardus & Matildis uxor ejus dederunt Mersham Monachis Mersham. ecclesiae Christi Cantuar. Sancto Edwardo Rege anno Domini Mlj. per scriptum suum idem donum confirmante, & est de cibo corum. Eod' anno. Sake. Sokne & alia libertates concessae & confirmatae Libertates. per S. Edwardum. Carta ejusdem de libera Warenna. A. D. Mliij. Brihtmerus civis London dedit ecclesiae Cantuar. Messuagium & Ecclesia in Civi∣tate London. messuagium suum apud Gerscherche, & de licentia & consensu Stigandi Archiepiscopi & Godrici Decani dedit eidem ecclesiam omnium Sanctorum, testimonio Liefstani Portreve & aliorum. Willielmus Rex conquestor reddidit manerium de Haltone in Haltone. comitatu Bock. Monachis ecclesiae Christi Cantuar. antiquis & modernis temporibus à jure ipsius ecclesiae ablatum, & multa alia ut in martilagio Ita Ms. continetur. Et plenius scriptum suuminde con∣fectum testatur. Pro Deo & salute animae suae gratis hoc fecit, & sine ullo pretio. A. D. Mlxxv. Conquestor confirmavit donum fratris sui Odo∣nis Episcopi Baiocensis, & Comitis Canciae de domibus in Sand∣wico Domus in Sand∣wico. datis ecclesiae &c. Carta Regis Wmi Conquestoris ut Monachi Cantuar. omnes ter∣ras suas liberè teneant. Similis Carta Regis Hen. 1. & 2. AoD. Mlxxiij. Conquestor confirmavit Lanfranco Archiepisc. omnes consuetudines in ecclesia de Newenton antecessorum ejus, & in ecclesia sancti Martini de Doffris, & in Scapeia. Charta ejusdem de eadem in omnibus Dominicis ecclesiae Chri∣sti Cantuar. Charta ejusdem Anglicè & Latinè de libertatibus ecclesiae Charta ejusd' de libertatibus quas S. Edw. concessit eid' ecclesiae. Christi Cant. concessis. Charta Regis Regis Henrici primi de eisdem.
Charta Regis Richardi de eisdem. Karlemannus levita dedit Broke ecclesiae Christi Cantuar. & Broke. postea Hen. Rex 1mus idem manerium per chartam suam eidem ecclesiae contulit, & Hen. Rex 2dus per chartam suam idem mane∣rium confirmavit. AoD. Mevj. Rex Hen. 1. rogatus ab Anselmo Archiep. reddi∣dit Slindone. ecclesiae Christi Cant. villam quae vocatur Slindone in Suthsex. Carta Regis Hen. 1. Hen. 3. & Richardi de Geld & Danegeld. Anselmus Archiepiscopus Cantuar. reddidit monachis ecclesiae suae medietatem altaris Christi, quam in manu sua habebat post Medietas Al∣taris. mortem praedecessoris sui Lanfranci Archiepiscopi, qui eis aliam medietatem, cognita veritate quòd ad illos pertineret, in vita sua reddiderat. Similiter & manerium de Stistede eis reddidit idem Anselmus, eò quòd ad eos pertinere scitur. ede. AoD. Mcxxx. Henricus Rex primus dedit ecclesiam sancti ecclesia Sancti Martini Dovor Martini Dover monachis ecclesiae Christi Cantuar. in dedicatione ejusdem ecclesiae Cant. cum omnibus pertinen. & provenien. tam in terra quam in imari, ut inde chartatestatur. Ao Eodem Wmus Archiep. dedit octo libras annui redditus de manerio suo de Reculvere, monachis ecclesiae Christi Cant. in dotem Reculver octo libr. ipsius ecclesiae Cant.in perpetuum & hoc tempore Regis Hen. 1. quod donum S. Edmundus Archiepisc. postea confirmavit. AoD. Mcxlvj. Henricus de Rya seisivit ecclesiam Christi Cant. de manerio de Diepham per quendam cultellum super altari Diepham. Christi, presentibus Teobaldo Archiepiscopo, Waltero Priore ali∣isque multis, & acceptus fuit in fraternitatem à praedictis Archi∣episc. & Prio. Anno supradicto. Quam donationem. Hen. Rex. 2. confirmavit. Manerium de Berkesore datum per Stephanum Regem, ad inveniendum lumen ante capsam beati Anselm Archiepiscopi. Berkesore. Henricus Rex 2dus dedit & confirmavit Deo, beato Thomae, & ecclesiae S. Trinitatis Cantuar. xv libratas redditus in Berkesor, & in Hokis aisse, & Rissendona, & xxv libratas redditus in Leisdo∣na, Berkesore. Leisdone &c. & ita libere &c. sicut ego &c. Wmus Tracy dedit Doccombe tempore Regis Hen. 2di. idem do∣num comfirmantis. Doccomb.
Carta Regis Hen. 2di. de. via circa murum Cemiterii nostri. Carta ejusdem de terra nostra super montes de Hollingborne. Holling∣bourne. Carta ejusdem de libertatibus nostris liberè tenendis. Carta Regis Stephani de eisdem. AoD. Mcxcix. Richardus Rex primus, anno regni sui primo, dedit Boscum de Blean, monachis eccleslae Christi Cant. per unum Boscus de Blean. par cirotecarum, salvo tamen uno summario quem pater ejusdem regis concessit ecclesiae & canonicis S. Gregorii in eod. bosco. Duae cartae Alienorae reginae de xiij tenementis in Iudaismo Tenamenta in Cant. Cantuar. Carta ejusdem de maneriis de Terstane & Westfarlegh, cum ad∣vocationibus Terstane & alia pro Sand∣wico. ecclesiarum de Westclive & Westerham pro portu de Sandwice, quam donationem. Edwardus Rex primus per cartam suam confirmavit. AoD. Mcccxxvj. Dominus Walterus Raynold Archiepisc. de Caldecote. Torholte. licentia speciali Ed. Regis 3. dedit monachis ecclesiae Christi Cant. manerium de Caldecote juxta Cantuar. cum bosco de Torholte, & cum omnibus & singulis libertatibus, &c. Ao R. R. Ed. 3. xxvijo. Richardus Bovyton, de licentia speciali Bovyton. ejusdem regis dedit manerium suum de Bovyton, cum omnibus pertinen. in villa de Bocking in Com. Essex, Priori & Conventui ecclesiae Christi Cant. Dominus Edus Princeps filius Regis Ed. 3. dedit monachis ec∣clesiae Cant. manerium de Fawkeshall, codem rege Edwardo idem Fawkshall. donum confirmante, ad sustentationem duorum Capellanorum in eadem ecclesia celebratur. Edwardus 3. Anno Regni sui xxxviij. dedit in escambium Borle pro Sandwico. Prio. & Conventui ecclesiae Christi Cant. manerium de Borle in Comitatu Essex, pro consuetudinibus & redditibus una cum omni∣bus juribus &c. quae iidem P. & C. habuer' vel habere aliquo modo potuerunt in villa & portu de Sandwico, cum aliis redditibus in insula de scapeia, ut in carta, &c. Carta Regis Hen. 4. ne furagium capiatur ubicunque in Comitatu Canciae ad equos sustentandos in castello Dovor. Item carta ejusdem regis, de via infra murum Civitatis Cant. quae ducere solebat de Northgate usque Queningate.
Ecclesiae appropriatae ecclesiae Christi Cantuar. Hubertus Archiepiscopus dedit ecclesiam de Halstow, ad offici∣um Praecentoris, pro reparatione librorum ecclesiae Christi Halstowe. Cantuar. & postea Bonifacius Archiepiscopus eandem ecclesiam per sigillum suum confirmavit. Stephanus Archiepiscopus dedit ecclesiam de Freningham, & per sigillum suum confirmavit, ad opus Elemosinariae ecclesiae Chri∣sti Freningham. Cantuar. Anno Domini Mccxxv. Sanctus Edmundus Archiepisc. dedit ecclesiam de Fairfield Fairfield. ecclesiae Christi Cant. & per sigillum suum confirmavit Anno Pontificat. sui quarto. Gregorius Papa ix. de assensu Episcopi Norwicen. & Capituli ejusdem ecclesiae, confirmavit ecclesiam de Deipham ad opus ecclesiae Deipham. Christi Cantuar. ut patet per bullam suam inde confectam. Anno Pontificat. suiprimo. Idem Papa appropriavit ecclesiam de Sesaltre monachis ecclesiae Christi Cantuar. in sustentationem eorum, ut patet per bullam &c. Sesaltre. Anno Pontificatus sui xmo. Edwardus Rex 2dus Anno Regni sui xixno appropriavit ecclesi∣am de Esshe in Comitatu Suffolc. ad novam capellam Elemosinariae Esshe. ecclesiae Christi Cantuar. Simon Islep Archiepiscopus, de speciali confirmatione Regis Ed∣wardi 3tii. Anno ejusdem regis xxxixno. fecit appropriari ecclesias Monketon. Eastry. de Monketon & Eastry monachis ecclesiae Christi Cantuar. Idem Archiep. de speciali confirmatione & licentia ejusdem Re∣gis, Anno Regni sui xlvjo. fecit appropriari ecclesiam de Pageham Pageham. in augmentationem scolarium studentium Oxoniae in Collegio eccle∣siae Christi Cantuar. Willielmus Courtney Archiepis. de speciali licentia Regis Ricar∣di secundi, Anno regni sui nono, fecit appropriari ecclesiam de Me∣peham Mepeham. monachis ecclesiae Christi Cantuar. Ao D. Mcccxcvij. Dom. Thomas Arundell Cantuar. Ar∣chiepisc. de licentia speciali Regis Ricardi 2di. fecit appropriari Godmersham.
ecclesiam de Godmersham monachis ecclesiae Christi Cantuar. ad fa∣bricam ecclesiae Christi praedictae. Ao D. Mcccco. Idem Archiepiscopus, de licentia speciali regis Westwell. Hen. 4ti. regni vero sui Anno 2do. fecit appropriari ecclesiam de Westwell monachis ecclesiae Christi Cantuar. ad habendum vaca∣tionem ecclesiae de Aldermancherche London, ad opus ecclesiae Chri∣sti praedictae. De ecclesiis de Westerham & Westclyve vide cum maneriis de Westfarlegh & Terstane, ut supra patet. Westerham Westelyve. Here the Record ends: much sooner (I confesse) then it should. For a multitude of benefactors there were, both before and after this time that are here omitted. But (I take it) these were all or the most of the chiefe, and it would have beene an endlesse worke to have mentioned all. In which regard, I hope, it will not be expected that I should perfect the Catalogue. I passe therefore from it. And now am come to my Catalogue of the 1 Archbishops of the Church. 5. Particular. 2 Priors 3 Archdeacons Beginning with the Archbishops, let me set before you in the first place, a few things very fit to be premised. viz. 1. The Antiquity of Archbishops in generall, and the cause of their first Institution. 2. The Antiquity of our Archbishops in particular, with the number of Archbishops in England, in former time, and at this day. FOr the first (the Antiquity of Archbishops, &c.) I shall not need take much paines to search it out. For truth is, the Antiquity both of the name and office of an Archbi∣shop is already so fully laid downe and proved to my hand by the worthily admired Author of the Defence of the answer to the Admonition, and so vindicated and cleered from the aspersion of Antichristianisme (wherewith some late turbulent Innovators have beene pleased falsly to stig∣matize
them) and by his learned pen, who fetcheth and deriveth them (so venerable is their Antiquity) from before the time of the Gospell publike embracing by any Prince, or in any Kingdome, and (if I mistake him not) the Office, though not the Name, from the Apostolike times; and Bishop Bilson also, Bishop Downham, and many others, as the learned well know, have so laboured in this argu∣ment, that if I shall further proceed in the observing of the Antiquity of Archbishops, I shall but, as it were, actum agere. And therefore will it suffice that remissivè, I referre the reader to these mens Learned Labours, whom I have chosen to cite, because the vulgar, whose onely informati∣on I here intend, can more easily both purchase and peruse them, their workes like themselves speaking English. The learned, I know, can further satisfie themselves in the point from Bertherius in his Pithano, and Morinus of late, in Ecclesiasticae Exercitationes, not to mention divers others. Of the former also, he may see those men answered, who (relishing nothing but a Presbyterian-Vtopian parity in the Ministery) under the pretence of zeale for the Reformati∣on (as they terme it) of disorders in the Church-govern∣ment by Archbishops &c. kick and carpe at the same, and upon occasion which un-offered they take of the report of those, who to shew the originall of Archbishops in the Church, say that they succeeded in the places of the Archi-flamines (certaine heathen High-Priests, or Arch-Priests, which had the oversight of the manners of the Flamins, heathen Priests likewise, as Judges over them: of whom DuarenusTract. de Bene∣ficiis. , Alexander ab Alexandro Genial. Di., and our Country∣man Acts &c. Monum. Fox with others make mention) collect and conclude thus. That the ministery of the Gospell was framed by example of idolatrous and heathenish functions. Of my fore-cited Authors the Defender of the Answer to the Admonition chiefely takes these men to taske. After what manner he encountreth their arguments would be too pro∣lix here to relate, and because his larger discourse is, in my opinion well abridged and epitonized by Mr Mason:
I have chosen rather to present you with these words of his. Sed id demum (saith he De Ministerio Anglican. lib. 2. cap. 3. pag. 79.) illos pessimè habet quòd Epi∣scopi nostri atque Archiepiscopi sedes suas ad Flaminum atque Archiflaminum Ethnicorum numerum aptatas habuisse dicuntur. verum quid obsecro inde nascetur incommodi, si pulsis Idolorum cultoribus, veri Dei adoratores succedunt? Neque enim ulli loci Episcopatibus erigendis aptiores quam maxima & frequen∣tissimae Givitates. Ipsi Apostoli in nobilissimis urbibus in quibus fuerant, aliquando Flamines & Archiflamines aut sacrorum Praesides corum non dissimiles Episcopos constituerunt, &c. Thus farre Mr Mason. Some learned men (I am not ignorant) there have beene and are, which will by no meanes yeeld, that the Sees of our Bishops and Archbishops were adapted to the number and places of the Flamins and Arch-flamins, arguing very stifly against it, by name Bishop Godwin in his Treatise of the Conversion of Britannie, preceding his Catalogue of Bishops, Fol. 26. and some others. But put case it be gran∣ted that they were so, and let these Cavillers (which dista∣sting our Aristrocracy (for such is our Church governe∣ment Downings Dis∣course Con∣clus. 1. §. 6.) and desirous, as it seemeth, of an Anarchy, a Church like to Plinies Acephali, all body and no head) be allowed their so much desired premisses; yet still a non sequitur will attend on their conclusion. For were it (think they) a good collection to say that because there is now a Minister of the Gospell placed, where in the Popes time there was a massing Priest: Ergo the Ministery of the Gospell is fra∣med by the example of massing Priests? If they cannot justly say so of Ministers, neither can they of Bishops and Archbishops. For the reason is the same in both. As much to this purpose the said Author of the Defence &c. hath it Fol. 321. Agreeable whereunto is that of Bishop Hall Apology a∣gainst Brow∣nists. Sect. 46.. Christianity (saith he) came in the roome of Iudaisme, was it therefore derived from it? I leave the judicious reader to give the answer. And so enough of this, onely pray we that Anarchy ne∣ver get possession of our Stage, lest Confusion shut up the
Scene. And that maugre the malice of all turbulent Inno∣vators, our Church may still glory in this (the commenda∣tion given her by the late learned Isaac Casaubon) that she, Exercitationes. Inter vel excessu vel defectu peccantes mediam viam sequitur. And may continue to deserve that Encomium given her of divine Herbertu. The Temple. I joy deare Mother, when I view Thy perfect lineaments and hiew, Both sweet and bright. Beauty in thee takes up her place, And dates her letters from thy face, When she doth write. A fine aspect in fit aray, Neither too meane, nor yet too gay, Showes who is best. Out-landish lookes may not compare; For all they either painted are, Or else undrest. She on the Hills, which wantonly Allureth all in hope to be By her preferr'd, Hath kiss'd so long her painted Shrines, That even her face by kissing shines, For her reward. Shee in the Valley is so shye Of dressing, that her haire doth lye About her eares. While she avoides her neighbours pride, Shee wholly goes on th'other side, And nothing weares. But, dearest mother (what those misse) The meane thy praise and glory is, And long may be. Blessed be God, whose love it was, To double moate thee with his Grace, And none but thee. So much of the Antiquity of Archbishops.
The cause of their first Institution followes. And it was briefely this. As the whole Hierarchie was first invented and instituted, ut Augustae illius ac divinae Civitatis, quam ecclesiam vocamus, unitas ac tranquillitas melius conservetur. So Duarenus Desacr. eccles. Mnister. & Ec∣ficiis. lib. 1. cap 9., who there proceeds to show the further uti∣lity of the Hierarchicall order: so consequently the finall cause of ordaining an Archbishop (a principall member of that Hierarchicall body) was to promote and advance the Churches peace. This the often alleaged Author of the Defence, &c. well knowing, saith, that it is the chiefe and principall office of an Archbishop, To keepe Vnity in the Church, to compound contentions, to redresse heresies, schismes, factions, &c. as he gathereth out of Saint Cyprian, as you may read Fol. 355. And so I have done with my first Parti∣cular. ANd come now to the other (The Antiquity of our Arch∣bishops . in particular, &c.) In the world (as I read in a French Author Gualterus., a Civilian, who hath noted it out of the Provinciale omnium universi orbis Ecclesiarum, a booke so cal∣led, in which as he relateth all the Archbishoprickes in the whole world with their Suffraganes are particularly recko∣ned up) there are to the number of an hundred and thirty Archbishoprickes. For the truth of this relation (because it is a thing not so easily proved as published) sit fides penes autorem. But sure I am that We in this Kingdome acknow∣ledge onely two Archbishops to be in this our English-Orb at this day; albeit in time past, namely from the conversion of King Lucius unto Christianity foureteen hundred yeares agoe and upwards, unto the coming of Augustine (the Monk sent from Rome) into England, happening above one thousand yeares since, that is, for the space of about 400. yeares together, there were in this our Iland, three Arch∣bishops, Antiq. Brit. pag 6. Acts &c. Mon. tom. 1. pag. 96. Lamb. Perambul. pag. 62. Catal of BB. pag. 181▪ to wit of London, Yorke and Caerleon. To Caerleon the Churches of Wales were subject; Yorkes province was Scotland and the North of England; and lastly, London had Jurisdiction over the rest of the Kingdome. In which
three principall Cities of the Realme (as Fox and Lambert affirme) were before Lucius time, and in his reigne also untill his conversion, three Arch-flamins, who were by Fugatius or Faganus, and Damianus or Dimianus (teachers or Preachers sent by Eleutherius then Bishop of Rome into this Iland for the conversion of the King and people there∣of) turned into Archbishops, about the yeare of our re∣demption 180. Who, from and after that their plantation continued their Archiepiscopall seats there, untill such time as Augustine came over and was intertained of Ethelbert the Kentish King, in the time of the Saxon Heptarchy. For at that time (according to that prediction of Merlin. Dignitas Lovedoniae adornabit Doroberniam) at the prayer of the Citi∣zens of Dorobernia (as Mr Fox hath it) the Archbishoprick Tom. 1. pag. 108. of London (whose chaire stood at Saint Peters in Cornhill) was by Augustine and Ethelbert translated from thence to Canterbury. Other reasons for the translation of it are given by the Author of the Antiquitat. Brit Vbi supra.. You shall have his words. Sed Augustinus &c. But Augustine (saith he) whe∣ther for Ethelbert the Kentish King, and his kinde Hosts sake, whether because London was not Ethelberts, but Se∣berts his Nephew, whether in charity or good will to the Kentish-men for their kinde intertainment of him, or whether in regard that Kent was the prime and chiefe pro∣vince of Britanny, to the Dominion and Empire of whose King, the rest of the Kings were subject &c. But Master Lambert Vbi supra. saith flatly (if we may beleeve him) that Augu∣stine by great injury spoiled London of this dignity of the Archbishops chaire, bestowing the same upon Canterbury. Indeed it appeares, that Pope Gregory intending London for the Metropolitan Seate of Augustines Archbishopricke, sent him his Pall thither. But August. for many reasons (wherein you see Authors are divided) placed the same at Canterb. Whereof afterwards the Popes, Boniface, and Ho∣norius, in their severall letters, the one to Iustus, the other to Honorius successors of Aug. gave their expresse appro∣bations. The first thus Malmesb. de gestis Pontificum lib. 1. pag. 208.. Id ipsum praecipientes firmamus,
ut in Dorobernia civitate semper in posterum Metropolitanus totius Britanniae locus habeatur; omnesque provinciae regni An∣glorum praefati loci Metropolitanae ecclesiae subjiciantur, immu∣tilatâ & perpetua stabilitate decrevimus. The latter in these words Ibidem. Pag. 209.. Tuae ergo jurisdictioni subjici praecipimus omnes Angliae ecclesias & regiones: & in civitate Dorobernia Metropolitanus locus & honor Archiepisoopatus & caput omnium eccclesiarum Angliae semper in posterum servetur; & à nulla persona per ali∣quam malam suasionem in alium locum mutetur. Which thing, for the honour of Austin it pleased the wisdome of this Na∣tion afterwards to establish and confirm; witnesse this passage in certain letters of Kenulfus King of Mercia to Pope Leo Idem. De Ge∣stis Regum An∣glor. l. 1. pag. 31.. Nam quia beatae recordationis Augustinus, qui ver∣bum Dei (imperante beato Gregorio) Anglorum genti ministra∣bat, & gloriosissimè ecclesiis praefuit Saxoniae, in eadem civi∣tate diem obiit, & corpus illius in ecclesia beati Petri Apostolo∣rum principis (quam successor ejus Lawrentius sacravit) condi∣tum fuisset; visum est cunctis gentis nostrae sapientibus, quate∣nus in illa civitate Metropolitanus honor haberetur, ubi corpus ejus pausat, qui his partibus fidei veritatem inseruit. But enough of this matter; It is now time that I come to my Cata∣logue. Wherein I purpose, beside their names, to repeat little of what others have written of the Archbishops, un∣lesse in a brief collection of their more memorable acts and places of buriall, adding what things of note I finde omitted of others, with some pertinent observations. Augustine. 1. Anno Dom. 596 Augustine (you see) was the first Archbishop of Canter∣bury. Whose whole story is become so trite and vulgar that it needs no repetition. Wherefore let other mens copious discourse of him and his acts excuse my silence of either. Lawrence. 2. Lawrence succeeded Austin, as it was appointed by Austin 611. before his death, and sate till 616. and then died. Mellitus. 3. Mellitus succeeded him, and died in the yeare 624. Of the miraculous preservation of our city from the fury of 619.
the flame, by whose prayers and presence, you may reade Anno Dom. in Bede's eccles. Hist. lib. 2. c. 7. Iustus. 4. Whom Iustus succeeded, governed the See 10 yeares, and then died. 624. Honorius succeeded Iustus. This Archbishop is famous for his division of the Kingdome into Parishes. For I reade, 634. Division of Parishes. that about the yeare of our redemption 636. this man first began to divide England into Parishes: that so (saith my Author Antiq. Britan in ejus vita.) he might appoint particular Ministers to particu∣lar congregations. I reade, that Euaristus the first Bishop of Rome, who suffered martyrdome under Trajan the Em∣perour, about the yeare 110. did the like in Rome. And Pet. Greg. Tholos. de Be∣nefic. cap. 4. num. 5. that Dionysius, that blessed Martyr, Bishop of Rome circa annum 266. did attempt to do the like throughout the whole Christian world Id. Tholos. ubi supra.. I finde no question made of any of these three divisions of Parishes save onely of that of our Hono∣rius; which Mr Selden in his History of Tithes flatly denieth. His arguments you may finde examined and answered by his Animadversioner, to whom for brevity-sake I referre you, and come to the History of the Councell of Trent, the Author whereof delivers his opinion in the generalitie of the point in hand thus. The division of Parishes (saith he Lib. 6. pag. 498.) was first made by the people, when a certain number of inhabitants, having received the true faith, built a tem∣ple for exercise of their Religion, hired a Priest and did constitute a Church, which by the neighbours was called a Parish; and when the number was encreased, if one Church & Priest were not sufficient, those who were most remote did build another. In progresse of time, for good order and concord a custome began to have the Bishops consent also. Thus he. And so I return to our Archbishop who sate almost 20 yeares, and died in the yeare 653. Deus-dedit, or Adeodatus. 6. Him next succeeded Deus-dedit or Adeodatus. He conti∣nued Archbishop about six yeares, and dying was buried (as 655. all his predecessors were) in the Church-porch of S. Au∣gustines.
Theodorus. 7. Anno Dom. 668. Theodorus succeeded him. Amongst his other designes for the advancement of learning, he founded the school at Canterbury; wch I have on a former occasion mentioned: In his time and chiefly by his endeavors learning so flourished in this Iland, that from a Nursery of Tyrones it became a pe∣culiar seminary of Philosophy Malmesb. De Gestis Reg lib. 1. pag. 11.. He continued Archbishop two and twenty yeers, and dying anno Dom. 690. was buried within the Church of S. Austins Abbey, because the porch was full before, all his predecessors (six in number) being (as I told you) buried there. In memory of them all were composed and ingraven in marble certain verses, which Wever hath already published both in Latine and English Ancient fune∣rall Monum. pag. 248.. Brithwald. 8. Theodores next successor was Brithwald, sometime Abbat 692. of Reculver. No Archbishop continued so long in this See as he, either before or since his time. He sate 38 yeares and a half. Dying then, in the yeare 731. he was buried at S. Au∣stins with his predecessors. He held a Synod at Clift and another at a place then called Bacanceld, since Backchild and now Bapchild, an obscure village upon the rode neare Sitting bourne in Kent. Tatwyn. 9. Tatwyn succeeded him, and sate 3 yeares. died in the 732. yeare 734. and was buried at Canterbury. Nothelmus. 10. Nothelmus succeeded Tatwyn. He was one of venerable 736. Bedes Intelligencers for his Ecclesiasticall story, and dying Vide Praefat▪ Bedae. in the yeare 741. was buried also at Canterbury. Cuthbert. 11. Cuthbert was his Successor. This man was the first that obtained Church-yards for this Kingdome. For you must 742. Church-yards. know there was a law amongst the Romanes, borrowed of the Grecians, and inserted into their Twelve Tables, that none should be buried or burned within any town. Hominem mortuum in urbe nè sepelito neve urito. So that all were buri∣ed either in the fields, along the high way-side (to put
passengers in minde of their mortality) upon the top or at the feet of mountains. And this kinde of interrement by generall custome was used both of Jewes and Gentiles, as you may finde at large illustrated by Wever in his Monu∣ments. Hence was it that Augustine the first of our Archbi∣shops procured the ground, on part whereof he afterward erected his Abbey, lying without the City, for a place of sepulture for the Kings of Kent, himself and all succeed∣ing Archbishops of that See. Cicero making mention of this law, gives this reason for it. Credo (saith he) vel propter ignem, vel periculum. But Wever. Of ancient funer-Monuments pag. 7. Hospinian out of Durand, Vlpian and others, shewes the rea∣son of it more at large. It was a custome (saith he) in times of old that men and women were buried in their own pri∣vate houses or gardens; but afterwards for the noisome savour and contagious stink of the dead carcasses so inter∣red, it was inacted that all burialls should be without Towns and Cities, in some convenient place appointed for that purpose. And however that this order was observed by the Gentiles upon this reason onely, scilicet ut in urbibus mundi∣cies servaretur, et aer minus inficeretur, ex cadaverum putre∣scentium foetore; yet the true Christians, and such as by their lively faith were adopted the children of God, had a fur∣ther mystery in this their manner of interrments: for by the carriage and buriall of the dead corps without their City-walls, they did publikely confirme and witnesse, that the parties deceased were gone out of this world to be made free denizens of another City, namely Heaven, there to remain with the blessed Saints in eternall happi∣nesse. This order or custome of buriall without cities continu∣ed amongst the Christians untill the time of Gregory the Great, for as then the Monks, Friers and Priests (saith my foresaid Author) began to offer sacrifice for the souls de∣parted. So that for their more ease and greater profit, they procured first that the places of sepulture should be adjoyn∣ing unto their Churches. Upon this reason out of the said
Gregory 13. quaest. 2 c. xvij.. Cum gravia peccata non deprimunt (saith he) tunc prodest mortuis si in ecclesiis sepeliantur: quia eorum proximi quoties ad cadem sacra loca veniunt suorumque sepulturam aspi∣ciunt, recordantur & pro eis Domino prces fundunt. Ancient∣ly (saith Onuphrius Panvinius) the bodies of the dead In lib. de Rit sepeliendi mor∣tuos. were buried onely without Cities in coemiteries or sleeping places (as the word signifies) untill the resurrection. But persecution being ended, and peace given to the Christian Church, the manner grew in use to bury within Cities, at the entrance into their sacred Temples, yea and afterwards in the very Churches themselves. Now our Archbishop Cuthbert happening to be at Rome, and seeing of these bu∣rialls, obtained from the Pope a dispensation for the ma∣king of Coemiteries or Churchyards within Townes or Cities throughout England. By this time you may see when the old custome of bury∣ing without City-walls ceased, and buryingin Churches and Church-yards both here and elsewhere began, and may guesse at the cause of the frequency of burialls in Churches in former times. A thing thus tartly reproved of Baldvinus the Civilian. Posteatamen (saith he Ad LL. 12. Tabularum., having spoken before of the prohibition of such burialls) Christianorum Princi∣pum indulgentiâ res eò evasit ut multi in ipsis etiam divorum templis atque sacellis loculisque ambitiosè sepeliri vellent, quam superstitionem dicam an impudentem ambitionem Gratianus, Valentinianus & Theodosius reprimere conati sunt, edito hoc rescripto. Nemo Apostolorum vel Martyrum sedem humanis corporibus existimet esse concessam &c. So he. But enough of this. Now return we to our Archbishop, Cuthbert. Who five yeares after his translation to this See, to wit anno 747. by the counsell of Boniface Bishop of Mentz, called a Convo∣cation at Clift beside Rochester, to reforme the manifold enormities wherewith the Church of England at that time was over grown. The constitutions whereof you may reade of elsewhere. He procured of Eadbert King of Kent, that the bodies of all the Archbishops deceased, from thence∣forth
should not be buried at S. Augustines (as heretofore) Anno Dom. but at Christ-Church. And dying, his funeralls were there solemnized accordingly. Bregwyn. 12. As also were the funeralls of his next successor Bregwyn, who sate onely 3 yeares and died Anno 762. 759. Lambert. 13. Lambert succeeded Bregwyn. From Abbat of S. Austins, he was by the Monks of Christ-Church chosen for their 764. Archbishop, assuring themselves he would now be as ear∣nest a defender of their liberties, as he had been hereto∣fore an oppugner in behalf of S. Austins about the buriall of the Archbishops, for which being Abbat he had conten∣ded with Bregwyn his predecessor: but their hopes failed them; for perceiving his end to approach, he took order to be buried in S. Austins, and was (saith my Author) very honorably interred in the Chapter house there. In his time Offa King of Mercia erected a new Archbishoprick at Litchfield, and obtained of the Pope authority for Eadulfus Archbisho∣prick at Litch∣field. Bishop there to govern the Diocesses of Worcester, Leice∣ster, Sidnacester, Hereford, Helmham and Dunwich. So that Canterbury had left unto him for his Province onely these, London, Winchester, Rochester, and Sherborne. But Athelard. 14. Athelard, his Successor, prevailed with (Offa's successor) Kenulph, and Leo the third then Pope, to quash this new 793. Archbishoprick, and to educe all in statu quo prius. He sate 13 yeares, and then dying was buried in Christ-Church: (By his means King Offa became an especiall benefactor to this Church, as by his charter there appeares; which, if it be authentick, and may be credited (as I see not why to question it) discovers an errour in the computation and ac∣compt which the current of our Histories and Chronolo∣gies do make of the beginning both of Offa's reigne and this Archbishops government: wherefoe, and because it is otherwise remarkable, I have thought fit wholly to
transcribe it, as you may finde in my Appendix Scriptura 1a.) Anno Dom. 807. Wlfred. 15. As his successor Wlfred likewise was, who died in the yeare 830. In his time the Monks of his Church died all to • Liber eccles Cantuar. five•. Theologild or Fleologild. 16. After Wlfred, Theologild or Fleologild, sometimes Abbat of Canterb. was Arcbishop for the space of 3 moneths, and 83. dying was buried also in Christ-Church. One named Syred succeeded him, but being taken away before he had full possession, is not reckoned amongst the Archbishops. Celnoth. 17. Celnoth succeeded and continued Archbishop 38 yeares, died anno 870. and was buried in Christ-Church. He 832. brought Clerks into his Church in aid of those 5 monks that survived the mortality before spoken of in Wlfred Lib. supradi.. Athelred. 18. Athelred was Archbishop after Celnoth 18 yeares, and di∣ed anno 889. and was buried in the same Church. He ex∣pelled 871. those Clerks out of his Church which his predeces∣sor brought thither, and made up the number of his Monks • Lib. . again. Plegmund. 19. Plegmund succeeded him, and sate Archbishop 26 yeares, 889. and dying anno 915. was buried also in his own Church. Athelm. 20. Athelm succeeded, and sate nine yeares, died anno 924. and was buried with his predecessors. 915. Wlfhelm. 21. Wlfhelm succeeded Athelm. He continued 10 yeares, 924. and died anno 934. Odo. 22. Odo sirnamed Severus succeeded him and sate 24 yeares. Dying then he was buried on the South-side of the high 934. Altar, in a tombe built after the form of a Pyramis. Bishop Godwyn in his catalogue conceives it to be the tombe of ouchstone (such are his words) standing in the grate neare
the steps that leade up to S. Thomas Chapell. And there indeed accordingly, shall you finde a table hanging, epito∣mizing the story of his life and acts. Not without a great mistake doubtlesse. For first the modern Church is not Odo's tombe mistaken. the same that stood in Odo's dayes, or when he died: that (I think) is made plain enough before. Secondly this tombe is not built Pyramis-wise, or after the form of a Pyra∣mis. Thirdly it is cleare by Archbishop Parkers report, and by the words also of the same Bishop Godwin in his foresaid Catalogue, that this was and is the tombe of Archbishop Sudbury, who was slain by the Rebells in Ric. 2. time, whose body (they say) was intombed on the South-side of S. Dunstan's altar (Godwin addes) a little above the tombe of Bishop Stratford. Now this is the next and onely tombe above Stratfords, and S. Dunstan's altar (as shall appeare unto you) stood hard by. But hereof no more, till I come to speak of Archbishop Sudbury. Dunstan. 23. Dunstan succeeded Odo, sate 27 yeares, and then dying Anno▪ Dom. 961. was buried in Christ-Church, that is (and so it must be un∣derstood of all his predecessors said to be there buried) in the old Church, not in the modern. For his piety and mi∣racles in his life time (so they say of him) he was (like his predecessor Odo) canonized a Saint after his death; and his reliques of such high account, even in those times, that Harpsfield. Hi. eccles. Angl. in ejus vita. Archbishop Lanfranc, when he built the Church of new in the Conquerours dayes, very solemnly translated his corps from its first sepulchre into his new Church, and there of new intombed it (with the Pontificalls, wherewith, ac∣cording to the times, it was apparelled, and a plate of lead bearing an inscription to shew upon inquiry whose body it was) neare unto the high Altar on the South-side. And from thenceforth the tombe became called the altar of S. Dunstan, and the steps leading to it the steps of S. Dun∣stans altar. Whoso observes the pavement on the South∣side of the steps between Stratford and Sudburyes monu∣ments with the guilded work on the wall and pillar there,
shall easily discerne some such thing had thence, as que∣stionlesse this Altar was at the purging of the Church of such things at or shortly after the Reformation. Whilest it was standing there, such high estimation was had of this Saint and his reliques, and so beneficiall they became to the place that enjoyed them, by the offerings to his altar, that the Monks of Glastonbury (amongst whom he was brought up) in Hen. 7. time, began to boast and give out that they had them in possession, being translated thi∣ther from Canterb. (as Capgrave in the life of Dunstan af∣firms) in the yeare 1012. Hereupon these Monks built him a Shrine Harpsfield. ubi supra.. and by that and other meanes the stream of be∣nefit formerly running to Christ-Church became turned to Glastonb. This at length so troubled the Archbishop of Canterb. and his Monks, that bethinking themselves of a speedy remedie, they resolve on a scrutinie to be made in Scrutiny in S. Dunstans tombe. his Tombe or Altar; by opening thereof to see whether really his corps, his reliques, were there inclosed or not. The scrutiny is made, and the searchers finde for the Christ-Church Monks. Whereupon Warham the then Archbi∣shop forthwith directs and sends his letters to the Abbat and Monks of Glastonb. straightly charging them to desist from all other jactitation of their possession of S. Dunstan's reliques, which letters he was fain to iterate, before they would obey; so loth they were to forgo their Diana. A Record of the scrutiny is kept in in Archivis ecclesiae, a true copy whereof you shall finde in my Appendix Scriptura duo∣decima. It is a pretty elation, and worth your reading. Aethelgar. 24. Anno Dom. 988. After Dunstan succeeded Aethelgar, who continued in the See onely one yeare and three moneths. Dying then he was buried in his own Church. Siricius. 25. Him Siricius succeeded, sate foure yeares, died anno 993. 989. and was buried at Canterbury. Aluricius aliàs Alfricus. 26. Aluricius or Alfricus succeeded next, died 1006. and 993.
was buried first at Abingdon, but was afterward removed to Canterb. Anno Dom. Elphege. 27. Elphege succeeded him, and sate six yeares. He was most barbarously murthered by the Danes in the yeare 1011. at 1006. what time they both spoiled the Church and City, and ti∣thed the Monks and other people therein, whereof our Chronicles are so very full, that I forbear it further relati∣on, onely crave favour to give you the description of it out of Henry of Huntington•. Who thus sadly tells. Anno un∣decimo  . lib. 6. &c. In the eleventh yeare (saith he) when the Danes had done preying on the North-side of Thames, they besieged Canterbury the Metropolis of England, and by treachery took it. For Almar whom before Archbi∣shop Alfege had rescued from death, betrayed the same. Entring therefore they took Alfege the Archbishop, Godwyn the Bishop, Lefwyn the Abbat, and Alfword the Kings Provost, the Clerks also with the Monks, the men with the women, and so returned conquerors to their ships. But you might have seen an horrid spectacle, the face of an ancient and most beautifull City all brought to ashes, the carcasses of the citizens thick strawed in the streets, dying both soile and River black with bloud, the weeping and howling of women and children which were to be led away captive, the chieftaine of faith, and foun∣tain of doctrine of the English hurried about in fetters A fuller rela∣tion of this out of Osborne the Monk of Cant. is to be seen in my Ap∣pendix. Scri∣ptura xxxj.. Thus he. Our Archbish. Elphege being by those bloudy mis∣creants thus basely butchered, was buried first in S. Pauls Church in London, afterward conveyed to Canterb. by the command of King Knute, and interred in his own Church. He was afterward made a Saint, and had an Altar proper to him standing by that of his predecessor Dunstan, both neare unto the high altar that now is, as is cleare by these words in Archbishop Winchelseys Statutes. De redditibus verò (say the same) magno altari & duobus altaribus vicinioribus, viz. sanctorum Dunstani & Elphege &c.
Living. 28. Living succeeded Alphege, and having been Archbi∣shop Anno Dom. 1013. about 7 yeares died in the yeare 1020. Agelnoth. 29. Agelnoth was his Successor. Who when he had sate Arch∣bishop 17 yeares and upwards, in which interim of time he 1020. perfected the work of his Churches repair that had been destroyed and burnt by the Danes, as formerly I have said, died anno 1038. I reade that the Monastery of Reculver, Reculver. built by one Bassa, in the time of Egbright (the 7th King of Kent in succession after Hengist) whereof Brithwald that was afterward Archbishop was (as we reade) sometimes Abbat, was in the yeare 949. given to Christ-Church by King Edred Lib. eccles. Cantuar.. Notwithstanding which donation I finde it still continued a Monastery undissolved unto this Archbi∣shops time, but the governour of it turned from an Abbat to a Deane, as, with some further discovery of that Mona∣steries then estate and condition, and somewhat else also of Antiquaries observable, by a certain Charter of this our Archbishop concerning that Monastery, to be found in my Appendix, will appeare, pag. 261. Eadsin. 30. Eadsin succeeded Agelnoth. He continued Archbishop almost 11 yeares, and died in the yeare 1050. was buried 1038. in his own Church, and after his death made a Saint. Robert. 31. Robert sirnamed Gemeticensis succeed Eadsin. He died and 1050. was buried in the Abbey of Gemetica where he was brought up, having been Archbishop about the space of 2 yeares or scarcely so much. Stigand. 32. Stigand was his Successor. He was deposed by the Con∣querour, whom (if Spot, S. Austins Chronicler, say true) 105. with Egelsine, the then Abbat there, he incountred as a stout champion for the Kentish liberties, whereof you may reade your fill elsewhere. He lies buried at Winchester, dying 1069.
Lanfranke. 33. Stigand being thus deprived, Lanfranke was consecrate Anno Dom. 1070. Archbishop. He caused the Sees of many Bishops, that were before and untill then in countrey-villages to be re∣moved from thence into Cities, according to the Canon. Distinct. lxxx. per totum. So that a City with us (Westmin∣ster Bishops See the note of a City. excepted) hath ever since been and yet is known, by having in it a Bishop, and a Cathedrall Church. Plures igi∣tur Civitates haud numerarunt nostri Majores, quàm Episcopa∣tus, saith Sr H. Spelman Glossar. in verb. Burgus.. And not onely here, but else∣where also is this a note whereby to distinguish and discerne a City from a Town or Village, as you may learn from the Interpreter, who for instance in this point, alleadgeth that Cowell. of Cassaneus in Consuetud. Burgund. c. 15. where he averreth that within the territories of France are 104 Cities, and gi∣veth this (saith he) for his reason, because there are with∣in the same so many Bishopricks. But return we to our Archbishop. Besides his new building of the Cathedrall with the Mo∣nastery, and a Palace for himself and his Successors (where∣of before) he built also the Priory of S. Gregories without the Northgate of the City of Canterb. and by it the Hosp. called S. Iohns, as also that other of S. Nicholas at Her∣baldowne: all which he endowed with competent revenues, as hath been fully shewed already. And did many other good and pious acts, whereof (as also of the former) you may finde mention in the Antiquit. Brit. and the Catal. of Bishops, in his life and elsewhere. He contended at Windsor with Thomas Norman Archbishop of York for the primacy, and there, by Judgement before Hugo the Popes Legate, recovered it from him. So that ever since the one (that is, he of Cant.) is called Totius Angliae Primas; and the other Title of totius Anglie Primas. Angliae Primas, without any further addition. There hap∣pened afterward frequent controversies between the suc∣ceeding Archbishops of both Provinces about the Prima∣cy, and for the ones bearing up the crosse in the others Pro∣vince: all which differences Wever Of ancient funerall Mo∣num. pag. 305▪ hath concatenated in a
continued discourse, whither I referre you. This Lanfranc was the man that setled the Mannors both of the See and the Priory. .i. both of the Archbishop and the Monks in that manner as they are recorded in Doomsday-book Archbishop and Monks Mannors. Vide pro scriptu. 14▪ in Appen∣dice., which for Antiquity-sake, and as a monument which the curious that way haply may desire to see, my Appendix shall make publick. To the Prior and Monks of his Church, for their better future observance of S. Benets rule and order, from which by the remissenesse and neglect of former times, he found in them a deviation, he prescribed in wri∣ting certain ordinances, which intituled Decret' Lanfranci pro ordine sancti Benedicti, you may finde published in the latter end of Reyners Apostolatus Benedictionorum. This Archbishop having fate 19 yeares, and then dying was bu∣ried at Cant. in his own Church. But his monument not now extant; however Wever tells he found his body to be interred there by a Table inscribed which hangs upon his Tombe. Erroniously. For there is neither Tombe nor Ta∣ble of his there. Anselme. 34. Anno Dom. 1093. Anselme succeeded Lanfrank, who died in the 16 yeare of his government, and was buried first at the head of his predecessor Lanfrank, but afterward (saith Malmesbury) De . Pon∣tific. lib. 1. Dignius masoleum in Orientali porticu accepit; he was re∣moved to the East end of his Church. That (I take it) is his monument on the South-side of Beckets Chapell, and Anselmes Mo∣nument. on the same side of the Black Prince his Tombe, whereon Teobald's table hangs. But of this see more in Theobald. Almost 400 yeares after his death, by the procurement of Iohn Morton one of his Successors he was canonized a Saint. For the finding of a light before whose Tombe, King Ste∣phen Lib. Eccles. Cant. gave unto the Monks the Mannor of Berkesore neare Shepey in Kent. He built (as I have already told you from Thornes report) the Nonnery of S. Sepulchres by Canterb. The preceding story of the Churches Fabrick will further informe you of his piety. Other things I passe over as ob∣vious enough elsewhere.
Ralfe or Rodulph. 35. Ralph or Rodulph succeeded Anselme, sate eight yeares, Anno Dom. 1114. and then died, to wit anno 1122. and was buried in the mid∣dle of the body of Christ-Church in Canterb. in medio aeulae majoris ecclesiae decenter sepultus, saith Edmerus. Howbeit (saith Bishop Godwyn) I see not any monument or other signe of his sepulture there at all. But no marvell, because the modern nave or body of the Church was built long since this Archbishops time. His buriall place was in the el∣der, the former body of the Church which Archbishop Sud∣bury (as I told you) took down, and was sithence rebuilt. Besides it is hard to finde a monument, much lesse an Epi∣taph Old Epitaphs rare in Eng∣land. so ancient any where in England. That age (it seems) was not very ambitious of either. The ancient custome was to put laminam plumbeam a plate of lead with the inter∣red parties name inscribed on it, into the sepulchre with the corps Vide Mat. Paris. ad Ann. Dom. 1257. pag. 1258. Lond. Ed.. So had Archbishop Dunstan. So also Richard, Beckets immediate Successor. But Simon Islip (of the Arch∣bishops) is the first that hath an Epitaph upon his tombe in the whole Church. About his time (I take it) they first became common and frequent. Haec obiter. This our Arch∣bishop gave a penny a day out of his Mannor of Liminge in Kent to Herbaldowne Hospitall for ever, which gift his Successor Theobald renewed and confirmed Ro. Hosp. de Herbald.. William Corboyl. 36. W Corboyl succeeded Ralfe, and died in the yeare 1136. having sate almost 14 yeares, and lieth buried in his own 1122. Church: the particular place I finde not; haply it was in the old body. He is famous for the new building of this Church (whereof before) as also of S. Martins by Dover. Of which please you to heare Archdeacon Harpsfield speak. Erant in eo sacello (saith he speaking of S. Martins) antiqui∣tus St Martins by Dover. Canonici quos seclares appellant. Quorum ecclesia cum in medio oppidi, parvi illius quidem sed populosi consisteret, cano∣nicique ecclesiae sacra pensa perfunctoriè obirent, illiusque bona per lustra, libidines & luxuriam profunderent & consumerent: Guiliel. diligenter meditatus secum est, qua potissimum ratione
huic malo occurreret. Aedificat itaque novam extra muros op∣pidi Anno Dom. ecclesiam, cum caeteris domibus ad habitationem monastic is viris accommodis &c. Out of this Monastery, Richard, a successor of this Archbish. was taken and chosen to the See. Theobald. 37. Theobald succeeded William. He departed this life in the yeare 1160. when he had sate Archbishop 22 yeares. He 1138. was the first of the Catalogue that had the title of Apostolicae Sedis Legatus conferred upon him, to wit in the yeare 1138. Title of Apo∣stolice Sedi Legatus. Which title was retained untill Archbishop Cranmers time. But then the Popes authority finding its deserved ruine in our clearer and better understanding, a decree passed in the Synod (Anno 1534) that laying aside that title, they should be styled, I use now my Authours own words) Primats and Metropolitans of all England Parker. in vi∣ta Cranmer.. This our Arch∣bishop perceiving his end to approach made his Will, and gave all his goods unto the poore: and dying was buried in his own Church, in the South-part of S. Thomas Cha∣pell, in a marble Tomb joyning to the wall (saith Bishop Godwyn) and accordingly there hangs a table lately made, of him and his acts. But with what warrant give me leave A mistake a∣bout Theobalds tombe. to make question. The table I know follows Bishop God∣wyn. And sure I am that none that have written his life be∣side Godw. (before him I mean) have authorised this report of his. The particular place of his buriall hath no mention amongst them, nor yet in his Will, which I have seen too. Besides this, and the probability that it is Archbishop An∣selmes tombe (as you may see before) another unlikeli∣hood there is it should be Theobalds, and that is this. It hath no Inscription or Epitaph upon or about it, whereas his had, and it was this (as Wever sayes) Hic jacet Theobaldus Cantuar. Archiepiscopas, ob morum placa∣bilitatem atque constantiam, Hen. 2. valde gratiosus, affabi∣bilis, veridicus, prudens & amicus firmus, in omnes liberalis, & in pauperes munificus, qui suae tandem senectut is & langui∣dae vitae pertaesus anteactam vitā morti persolvit. Anno Dom. 1160. cum 22. annis sedisset. Anima ejus requiescat in pace. Amen.
Now if you will have my opinion where this Archbishop was buried: I shall tell you that I think it was in the old body of the Church, whose demolition and new erection is the very cause (as I conceive) we now misse so many of those elder monuments. Clarenbald the first Abbat of Feversham (in the yeare Lib. Eccles. Christi ant. 812. called the Kings little town of Fefresham. In partibus suburbanis Regi oppidulo Fefresham dicto, as it is in a Charter Feversham. of Kenulph King of Mercia, made to Wulfred the then Arch∣bishop received benediction of this Theobald in praesentia Re∣ginae Matildis quae praedictum monasterium de Feversham ince∣pit & terris aliisque donis ditavit: Clarenbald first having ob∣tained his and his fellows release from the Clunias, to be clearely absolved from subjection to that order, being now to live under the rule of S. Benet in Feversham Abbey: whereof in Christ-Church a record is kept to this effect, viz. that at Clarenbalds benediction by Archbishop Theo∣bald, were first read publickly literae absolutoriae Petri Abba∣tis Cluniacensis, & B. Prioris S. Mariae de Caritate, quae praedi∣ctos Clarenbaldum & Monachos qui secum venerant de Bermon∣deseia ab omni subjectione & obedientia ecclesiae Cluniacensis ab∣solvebant, nè viz. ecclesia Cluniacensis aliqd' subjectionis in eundem Clarenbald. sive in successores ejus vel aliqd' juris in Mo∣nasterio▪ de Fever. calumpniare posset in posterum. Thus the Record. Mr Cambden then (salva ejus Reverentiâ) is mista∣ken in saying that King Stephen founded this Abbey for the Monks of Clugny. The same Records (being thus fairly occasioned, let me note it by the way) furnish me with a Catalogue of the names of divers Abbats as well of that place, as of severall other Abbeys in the Diocesse that receiving benediction from the Archbishop made profession of obedience to him and his Church, which I have thought not impertinent here to insert.
Professiones. Feversham. Baxley. Clarenbald primi Abbats, Theobaldo. Lamberti. Guerrici. Richardo. Thomae. Theobaldo. Algari. Iohannis. Petri. Willielmi. Petri. Bonifacio. Dionisii. Iohannis. Walteri. Petri de Herdeso. Simonis. Oswardi. Roberti. Bonifacio. Clementis. Gilberti. St Radegund. Langdun. Combwell. Hugonis. Huberto. Richardi. Huberto. Iohannis. Henrici. Iohannis.   Richardi. Roberti.   Iohannis. Willielm. Huberto.   Henrici. Willielm. Bonifacio.   Willielmi. Rogeri.   Roberti. Waltero.     I passe from Theobald and come to his successor. Thomas Becket. 38. Anno Dom. 1161. Whose whole story our Chronicles and tradition withall have made so trite and vulgar, that lest I be checked with a Nil dictum quod &c. I forbear to relate it, onely I shall desire to say somewhat of his buriall, translation and shrine, and to shew what the quarrell was he so stoutly (stub∣bornly I should say) defended. Being most barbarously murthered, upon Tuesday the 28 of December 1170. his body was buried first in the Un∣dercroft. But the revolution of 50 yeares, having brought about his Jubilee (to wit in the yeare 1220:) and being first matriculated by the Pope a glorious Saint and Martyr; his Beckets Tran∣slation. body with great solemnity, was taken up and laid in a most sumptuous shrine at the East end of the Church, at the
charge of Stephen Langton his Successor, whereof I reade as followeth. Adveniente igitur translationis die, praesente maxi∣mâ multitudine tam divitum quam pauperum; Pandulphus Apo∣stolicae sedis Legatus, Cantuariensis & Remensis Archiepiscopi, Episcopique atque Abbates quamplurimi, cum Comitibus & Ba∣ronibus praedictam apsam, praesente Rege Henrico tertio, super humeros suos susceperunt, & in loco quo nunc honoratur cum omni gaudio collocaverunt. The solemnity of this Translation happened upon or about the 7th of Iuly. Hence (I take it) the occasion and originall of our (as we call it) Beckets Fair at Cant. begin∣ning to be holden annually on the 7th of that moneth. His Faire. For, as Sr Hen. Spelman Glossar. in verb. Feri. is of opinion, that Fairs began and came up by the flocking of Christians to the place for the solemnizing of some festivall, such either as the feast of the Churches dedication or other the like; and saith it is easie to conjecture to what Saint the place hath been com∣mended, by the Fair-day: So I am perswaded that this Fair which we hold at Canterb. annually on the 7th of Iuly (as that other on the 29th of December) first came up as a means to gather the greater multitude thither for the celebration of the Anniversary solemnities of Beckets translation, on the one, and his passion (as they used to terme it) on the other of those dayes. And (for so my author addes) as Fairs were greater, as the Church and town were of more estima∣tion: Faires. So however these our Fairs at Canterb. are now so small as not at all considerable, yet assuredly time was when they were of greater request, and might justly boast of great resort as any elsewhere: the decay of them and of the trading of our city participating of both one cause, namely the defacing of the shrine we now treat of, and the demoli∣shing Whence the decay of Can∣terbury. of such religious houses as were sometime standing in and about the City, the magazins of reputed holy reliques, the incentives unto all sorts of people in those times for their frequent visitation of them. Whence that of Mr Lam∣bert Perambula∣tion of Kent in Caterburie.. To tell the ruth (saith he) little had all these casualties of fire and flame been to the decay of this Town (speaking be∣fore
of the often firing of Canterb.) had not the dissolution and finall overthrow of the religious houses also come upon it. For where wealth is at command, how easily are buildings repair∣ed? and where opinion of great holinesse is, how soon are cities and towns advanced to great estimation and riches? And there∣fore no marvell if after wealth withdrawn, and opinion of holi∣nesse removed, the places tumbled headlong to ruine and decay. Thus he. The so seasonable application of these observations will  shrine. beplea good enough (I trust) for this digression. And in that hope I returne to our Archbishop, or rather to his Shrine. Whereof let me first give you Erasmus, then Stowe's description. Auream thecam (saith the former Peregrinatio lig. .) theca con∣tegit lignea, ea funibus sublata opes nudat inaestimabiles, vilis∣sima pars erat aurum, gemmis raris ac praegrandibus collucebant, nitebant ac fulgurabant omnia, quaedam superabant ovi anserini magnitudinem. Prior candida virga demonstrabat contact sin∣gulas gemmas, addens nomen Gallicum, pretium & authorem doni. Nam praecipui Monarchae don miserant. Thus he. It was built (saith Stow Annals n Hn. 8.) about a mans height all of stone, then upward oftimber plain, within the which was a chest of iron, containing the bones of Thomas Becket, skull and all, with the wound of his death, and the piece cut out of his skull laid in the same wound. The timber work of this shrine on the outside was covered with plates of gold, da∣masked and embossed with wires of gold, garnished with broches, images, Angels, chaines, pretious stones, and great orient pearls, the spoil of which shrine (in gold and jewells of an inestimable value) filled two great chests, one of which six or eight strong men could do no more then convey out of the Church: all which was taken to the Kings use, and the bones of St Thomas (by command∣ment of the Lord Cromwell) were then and there burned to ashes, which was in September, the yeare 1538. Hen. 8. 30. Liber comp Eccles. Christ Cant. This Shrine had a Clerk and other retainers that con∣stantly gave their attendance upon it; and need enough
in regard both of the treasure that was about it and also of the continuall offerings thereunto by such as either of visi∣tation or in pilgrimage made their approaches to it: Which offerings amounted to a great value by the yeer, as I guesse by the accompts thereof for certain yeares which I have seen, shewing that from about 200 lib. per annūm which they arose unto about 300 yeares since; within a six or eight yeares following they were grown to be more then trebled. But (by the way) when the Accomptant comes to Christs altar (the high altar) that's dispatched with a blank or a Nil: summo altari Nil. So much had that Shrine obscured this altar. The lesse marvell that the Church dedicated to Christ, gave place (as it did) to the name of St Thomas, and that the prints of their devotion in the marble stones who crept and kneeled to his Shrine remain to this day; there∣in but royallists (as I may call them) or imitators of sove∣reigne example, if we but consider with what reverence some of our Kings mention both him and his shrine. Cujus pretiosum corpus (Hen. 6. words of him to the Monks of the place) in ecclesia vestra praedicta gloriosè tumulatum extitit. In cujus ecclesia Metrop. corpus beati Thomae martyris ad quem devotionem gerimus specialem, honorificè feretratur, sayes Ed. 4. in his Charter to our City. It may not be omitted that this Saints Jubilee was kept Beckets Jubilee every fifty yeares from and after his death: because such multitudes flocked to the City to solemnize the same as is scarce credible; witnesse this record kept of one happen∣ing in the yeare 1420. which I here commend to your per∣usall, transcribed from a book of the City chamber. De anno Iubileo apud Cant. MEmorand' quòd anno ab incarnatione Domini 1420. & anno Regni illustrissimi Regis & principis Hen. 5. à con∣questu Angliae octavo, tempore Willielmi Bennet & Wmi Ickham tunc Balivorm Cant. Henrici Chichele tunc Archiepiscopi Sedis Cant. & Iohannis Woodnesberwe ad tunc Prioris ecclesiae Christi
Cant. die dominica in festo translationis sancti Thomae Martyris extitit apud Cant. annus Iubileus in ecclesia Christi Cant. qui tunc extiterat sextus annus Iubileus a translatione praedicti Tho∣mae Martyris gloriosi. Cujus quidem jubilei solemnizatio incepit ad horam duodecimam in vigilia dicti festi, & continuavit per 15 dies continuos proximò & immediatè sequentes; quo tempore idem Rex & princeps illustrissimus fuit in Francia cum suo ho∣norabili exercitu ad obsedio▪ villae Millon' quae distat à Civi∣tate Parisiensi triginta milliaria. Qui quidem verò Ballivi prae∣libati universaliter praeceperunt civibus Civitatis illius suffici∣entiam domorum ad herbigandum & ad hospitandum populum ad tunc pro salute animarum suarum adipiscnda venturum, di∣vina gratia suffragante, tam infra Civitatem praedictam, quam infra suburbia Civitatis ejusdem habentibus, quòd essent parati in lectis & aliis populo praedicto necessariis: Ac etiam praecepe∣runt universis vitellariis dictae Civitatis, viz. Tabernariis, Pandoxatoribus, Pistoribus, Carnificibus, Piscinariis, Cocis & hospitatoribus quòd ordinarent contra tempus praedictum victu∣alia populo praedicto tunc suffectura, qui quidem populus ut aesti∣mabatur ad tunc attingbant ad numerum Centum millia homi∣num & mulierum tam Angliginentium qum alieniginentium exterorum viz. Hibernicorum, Wallicorum, Scotticorum, Fran∣corum, Normannorum, Garnisientium & Gernisientium, ad ean∣dem Civitatem, pro gratia praedicta habenda ad tunc affluenti∣um, pace verò & tranquillitate inter populum praedict' opitula∣tione Dei omnipotentis suaeque gloriosissimae genetricis Dei Mariae, precibus quoque gloriosi Martyris Thomae sociorumque ejus sanctorum Curiae celestis, veniendo, morando & redeundo, toto tempore Iubilei illius habitis & optentis. Qui quidem vitel∣larii ordinrunt victualia pro populo praedicto copiosa, it a quòd la∣gena vini rubii de Vasconia tunc vendebatur ad octo denarios, & lagena vini albi ad sex denarios, & duo panes levati vendeban∣tur ad unum denarium, & omnia alia victualia, Domino dispo∣nente, de bono foro extiterunt; per quae Civitas praedicta & totus Comitatus Kanciae exinde per totam Angliam favente altissm magnum & diutinum revera optinuerunt honorem. Thomas Chirch fecit & scripsit, & ad hoc per plenam Cu∣riam
de Burgemoto, tam per Ballivos, Aldermannos, xij Iu∣ratos, cum xxxvj hominibus in numero consueto, specialiter requisitus fuerat, & in forma praedicta redegit in scriptis. Our City of Canterb. (it seems) of old pitched upon Becket our Ci∣ties Patron. this S. Thomas, for it Patron and tutelar Saint: and there∣fore caused these verses to be cut about the ring of her old common seale. Ictibus immensis Thomas qui corruit ensis, Tutor ab offensis urbis sit Canturiesis. And, which is more, borrowed a part of the City armes retained to this day (if I mistake not) from his coat, which is three Cornish choughs proper. It is observable beside, that as by meanes of his fame and the great account of his martyrdome and miracles the name of Christ▪ Church be∣came changed to S. Thomas Church; so the common seale of the Church, from the new dedication thereof by Arch∣bishop Corboyl untill then used, upon his martyrdome was changed, and on the one side of it that represented with these verses circumscribed. Est huic vita mori pro qu dum vixit amori Mors erat & memori per mortem vivit honori. This was the Churches third common seale, and was not altered afterward untill the new foundation by H. 8. So much for this Archbishop; the legend of whose mi∣racles, were it utterly lost, might easily (I think) be repai∣red from the windowes on each side of the place where his shrine sometime stood abounding altogether with the story thereof. I come now to his quarrell, which was the defence of the Clergy, and their liberties, their exemption especially from secular judgement or triall. The shadow of which priviledge we still retain; and call it Clergy. For your Clergy. better understanding whereof, and consequently of the quarrell Becket died in, my Appendix shall treat unto you of Vide in fi i. these 5 particulars. The nature nd qualitie of the priviledge, what it is, and whence it came. .
The form and manner how it is put in practice. 2. 3. 4. 5. The antiquity thereof in this land. The extent of it. The declining of it by degrees and restrained condition there∣of, with us, at this day. I may not here forget our Archbishops foundation and erection of an ancient Spittle which we have at this day in our City, and is called Eastbridge or Kingsbridg-hospi∣tall, whereof enough before in proper place. To conclude, the Monks (it seems) glorying and pri∣ding themselves in nothing more then this of Beckets Mar∣tyrdome (for so they calld'd his murther) or at leastwise conceiving their Church in no one respect so famous and renowned as in that, and not satisfied with the resemblance or representation of it in that their forenamed common seale; nor knowing better how, either to perpetuate the memory of it, or to make it more generally known abroad then thus: at or about what time that their common seal was renewed, contriving another speciall seal, ad causas, (that is, as I conceive, chiefly for matters concerning Ju∣risdiction, which, sede vacante, devolved into their hands) A Seale ad causas. did insculp it also in the same. And now to distinguish this from that their more usuall and common seale, they vary the inscription on both sides of it; that on the forepart, about the ring (containing within it the figure of the Church and Beckets Martyrdome) being this †Sigillum ec∣clesiae Christi Cantuarie ad causas: whilest that on the reverse, about the ring (within which are three smaller rings or cir∣cles having in each of them n head or face like to the pi∣cture of our Saviours) was this. Deus pater. Deus filius. Deus spiritus sanctus. An inscription probably intended to help preserve the then decaying memory of the Churches ancient name and dedication to the Trinity. This un∣doubtedly is that seale, which some, from ('tis like) the triple visage, and that Trinitarian insription in the reverse, have istaken for our Cathedralls first sele, whereof be∣fore in my 1. Particular of the Church-Survey.
Richard. 39. Richard first a Monk of this Church, afterwards Prior Anno Dom. 1171. of Dover, succeeded Becket, and dying anno 1183. his body was honourably interred in Christ-Church, in the then La∣dy-chapell: not in that which now stands, but in a more ancient one included within the old body of the Church, as is before shewed more at large. Baldewin. 40. After Richard succeeded Baldewin. He died in the holy land, whither he would needs attend the King (Ric. 1.) 1184. when he had been Archbishop even almost 7 yeares, and was buried there. Between the Monks of Cant. and him there was great debate and strife about the Colledge which he first intended and attempted to erect at Hackington by Canterb. and afterwards at Lambhith: but was crossed in both, as you may finde at large elsewhere. He first laid Wales to the Province of Cant. Reginald. 41. Reginald Fitz-joceline succeeded Baldwin, but died within fifteen dayes after his confirmation, and after his electi∣on. 1191. 49. Hubert Walter. 42. Then succeded Hubert Walter. He it was that first devised our assize of bread, our weights and measures of wine, oyl, 119. corn &c. He compassed the Tower of London with a strong wall and deep mote, so as the water inclosed the same quite round, which before that time could never be brought to passe, and performed many other great works of inestima∣ble charge: such as his ecclesiasticall revenues alone could never have inabled him to do, had not other helps from his secular offices been adjoyned. For at one time, besides that he was Archbishop, and the Popes Legate à latere, he was Lord Chancellor, Lord chief Justice, and High imme∣diate governour under King Ric. 1. of all his dominions born in Wales and England. And having been Archbishop almost 12 yeares, died at his Mannor of Tenham. And was buried Iuly 13. 1205, in the South-wall of Christ-church,
beside the Quire. His tombe is there extant at this day, and is (I take it) the most ancient one (except Anselmes) that the Church visibly affoords. From the situation where∣of, let me give you this note, that the ancientest tombes in Ancient tombs. Churches are so or alike situate, namely in or along by the Church-walls. For the honor of his Church, I may not omit his crowning there of King Iohn and Queen Isabel his last wife, anno 1201. Stephen Langton. 43 Anno Dom. 1206. Stephen Langton succeeded Hubert. He was made a Car∣dinall, and sate Archbishop 22 yeares, and dying Iuly 9. 1228. was buried in his own Church, in the Chapell of S. Michael; where you may finde his monument. The first dividing of the Bible into Chapters, in such sort as we now account them, is ascribed to him, of some Parker & Godwin. i ejus vita., but deni∣ed of other Spelman. Gloss. verb. Heptatic. Vlcombe.. This man changed the Parish Church of Ole∣combe, now called Vlcombe, into a collegiate Church. The Ordination whereof is extant in the Records of Christ-Church, where I have seen it. The head of which Church or Colledge was styled Archipresbyter, by which name one S• Benjamin, in the vacancy of the See by Archbishop Peck∣ham's death, in the yeare 1293. presents to the then Prior of Christ-Church one S• Iohn Elmestone a Priest, with desire of his admission in minorem Canonicum ecclesiae praedictae, juxta ordinationem bonae memoriae Domini Stephani quondam Cantuar' Archiepiscopi &c. as I have it from the same Re∣cords. In this Archbishops time five marks per annum was hold∣en a competency for a Vicars stipend (at Halstow, ancient∣ly called Halegestow signifying the Holy place, a Vicarage Vicars stipend being erected and indowed by Archbishop Hubert, the Vi∣cars stipend there was rated accordingly;) and thereupon that constitution, Quoniam autem de officio Vicarii, in Provin∣ciali, was agreed upon and made, for the establishing of that rate as sufficient. Indeed five marks in those dayes was as much as ten pound in these. However, it seems it was a great deale cheaper world in those dayes, and all saleable
things were then of farre lesse price then now, when foure Anno Dom. times five marks of ours, nay foure times five pounds of ours is now the ordinary, and yet (in respect to the charge∣able state of these dayes) but reasonable and moderate sti∣pend for a Curate. Would you know the reason? It is then shortly this; the greater abundance of money now then heretofore. For (as Sr Henry Savill noteth upon Tacitus) the excessive abundance of things which consist meerly on the constitution of men; draweth necessarily those things which nature requireth, to an higher rate in the market. Captâ ab Augusto Alexandriâ (saith Orosius) Roma in tantum opibus ejus crevit, ut duplo majora quam antehac rerum ve∣nalium pretia statuerentur. Thus he. And so I leave this Archbishop. Richard Wethershed. 44. Richard Wethershed succeeded Stephen Langton: who en∣joyed the honour but a little while to wit, two yeares or 1229. thereabouts, and died at S. Gemma in his return from Rome, where he was buried. S. Edmund. 45. S. Edmund succeeded him, who died anno 1242. eight yeares after his consecration, and was buried also in forrein 1234. parts. He married King Hen. 3. to Queen Eleanor at Can∣terbury in the yeare 1236. Boniface. 46. Boniface succeeded S. Edmund. He died in Savoy (his 1244. own Countrey) in the yeare 1270. somewhat more then 26 yeares after his consecration. He performed two things not unworthy of memory, he payed the debt of 22 thousand marks that he found his See indebted in. And built a good-Hospitall at Maidstone, called the new works, and indued Maidstone Hosp. with revenues valued at the suppression at 159 lib. 7s 10d. (William Courtnay his successor long after translated the same in a Colledge of secular Priests. Bishop Godwin addes a third thing, at the belief whereof I somewhat stick; and that is his perfecting and finishing that most stately Hall of the Lord Archbishops palace at Cant. with the buildings
adjoyning: unlesse it may be thus made good, to wit, by his paying the debt which his predecessors by building the same had run themselves into. And indeed in that sense he was wont to vaunt himself the builder of it. Praedecessores mei (saith he) istam aulam cum magnis expensis fecerunt, bene quidem fecerunt, sed expensas ad illam construendam nisi de pe∣cunia mutua non invenerunt, videtur quidem mihi, quòd ego illam feci, quia illorum debita persolvi Antiq. Brit. in ejus vita.. Robert Kilwardby. 47. Anno Dom. 1272. Black Friers London. Robert Kilwardby succeeded Boniface. He built the Black Friers in London, being himself of that order. Having been Archbishop about the space of six yeares he was made a Cardinall, and then resigning his Archbishoprick gat him into Italy, and died and was buried at Viterbium. Being yet Archbishop in the yeare 1277. by his kinde and gentle per∣swasion he appeased the Citizens of Canterb. eagerly bent upon revenge in a very strange way to be taken of the Monks of Christ-Church, for refusing them their aid in that imposition of finding and setting forth twelve horsemen to serve in the Kings intended warre against Lewelyn Prince of Wales, laid upon the City, whereof before in the Black Friers I have spoken. Iohn Peckham. 48. Iohn Peckham succeeding Kilwardby: and continued in the Chaire 13 yeares, and almost an half. In which time he 1278. Wingham. founded the collegiate Churchat Wingham in Kent, or ra∣ther changed the Parish-Church there into a Collegiate. The head of which Colledge was called Praepositus, a Pro∣vost. The ordination of which Praepositure, together with this our Archbishops letters for the dividing of Wingham Church into foure Parishes, dated anno 1282. are extant in the Records of Christ-Church, where I have seen them. Now Wingham it self (the mother Cuurch) Ash, Good∣nestone, and Nonington (Chapells to it) were the 4 Pa∣rishes. Overland and Richborough were Chapells to Ash, and Wimingswold a Chapell to Nonington. This Col∣ledge of secular Canons (for such the founder placed in it)
was valued at the time of the suppression at 84 lib. of yeare∣ly revenues. Collegium in Cantia Wengamense (Harpsfields words of this foundation) ejus potissimum opera constitutum est, sed seminarium ejus beneficii à Roberto decessore ejus profe∣ctum est: Qui à Gregorio Pontifice impetrabat, ut liceret eccle∣siam parochialem Wengamensem in eum usum convertere. The City of Canterb. went to suit with this Archbishop about li∣mits and liberties, of which heretofore in my survey of Westgate street. Amongst other of his labours (as I have it from Gavantus his Thesaurus sacrorum rituum) he compo∣sed an office for Trinity-Sunday, called Officium Sanctae Trinitatis. It was received by the Church of Rome, and in use about the yeare 1290. but for the difficulty and obscuri∣tie of the style was sithence abrogated. Leaving these things I come now to the place of this Peckhams tombe. Archbishops buriall. He was buried (saith Bishop Godwin) in his own Church, but in what particular place I finde not. Archbishop Parker (it seems) found it not neither, for he mentions it not. By a Record in the Church of the time of the death and place of the buriall of this Archbishop which I have seen, it appeares he was laid in parte Aquilonari, juxta locum Martyrii beati Thomae Martyris. I feare the Author of the Tables hath done him some wrong in hanging Archbi∣shop Vfford's Table upon that which (I take it) is rather Peckhams tombe then his, that namely in the corner of the Martyrdome next unto Warham, which the Table-writer up∣on (it seems) Bishop Godwin's conjecture, takes for grant∣ed to be Vffords tombe. But (as I conceive) the cost be∣stowed on that monument (however the Archiepiscopall effigies which it hath is framed of wood) being built some∣what Pyramis-like, and richly overlaid with gold, which is not yet worn off, gainsayes it to be Vffords. For I reade Antiq. Brit. in vita Vfford., that dying before he was fully Archbishop, having never received either his pall or consecration, and that in the time of that great plague which (as Walsingham reports) consumed nine parts of the men through England; his bo∣dy without any pomp or wonted solemnity was carried to
Canterb. and there secretly buried by the North-wall, be∣side the wall of Thomas Becket. But I passe to his Successor. Anno Dom. 1294. Sub-Deacon-Cardinals at Christ-Church. Robert Winchelsey. 49. Robert Winchelsey succeeded Peckham. In the Record of whose inthronization, I finde mention of three Sub-Dea∣con-Cardinalls of the Church which did assist the then Prior in that action. Such (it seems) the Church had at that time. Of the like sometimes in S. Pauls Church Lon∣don, S. Hen. Spelman's Glossary will inform you in verbo Car∣dinalis. But I come to the Archbishop, who kept possession of the Chaire about the space of 19 yeares, and died in the yeare 1313. Much might be said of his admirable liberali∣tie and charitie to the poore, but here of Archbishop Parker, and from him, Bishop Godwin and others have said enough already. And I passe over his whole life, and come to his buriall place, which is not now extant by any monument of Winchelseyes tombe. him in the Church. But certain it is he once had one there, and it stood (say those Authors) beside the Altar of S. Gre∣gory by the South-wall. This obscure description of the si∣tuation at length I came to understand thus. First I read in some Records of the Church a gift ad luminare troni qui est contra imaginem Salvatoris contra altaria Sanctorum Iohannis Evangelistae & Gregorii Papae. To shew me where these al∣tars stood, comes after to my sight the mention of Altare Sancti Iohannis Evangelistae in Australi cruce. Which laid to the former I perceive these altars stood in the South crosse-Ile of the Quire, the one under the one, the other under the other East-window thereof, more assured of it by view∣ing the opposite wall, where are tokens of something (most likely that throne) once affixed to it, but now had away. By the South-wall then of this Crosse-Ile sometime stood this Archbishops tombe. About 13 yeares after his death, Thomas then Earle of Endeavours for his Cano∣nization. Lancaster, implored his Canonization at the Popes hands, but without successe for these reasons. Scire te volumus (saith the Pope to him Liber Eccs. Cant.) quod Romana mater ecclesia non con∣svit super tanta causa praesertim praecipitanter aliquid agere,
quin potius tale negotium solempnis examinationis indagine pon∣derare, propter quod si negotium ipsum credideris promovendum, oportet quòd illud coram fratribus nostris in Consistorio per so∣lempnes personas ex parte Praelatorum Cleri & populi Anglicani vitam, merita, atque miracula ipsius Archiepiscopi attestantium specialiter destinatas solempniter proponatur, supplicatione sub∣juncta, ut inquisitio hujusmodi de vita mirabili, miraculis etiam & meritis gloriosis person idoneis committatur, ut juxta exitum inquisitionis ipsius canonizatio fieri debeat vel omitti &c. Here∣upon his immediate Successor (Walter Reynolds) and his Suffragans, anno 1326., all joyned in petition to the Pope for his Canonization, directing their letters to him for that purpose under their severall hands and seales: which it seems were never sent, for the originall is yet remaining in the Cathedrall. Vidi, inspexi. And I do not reade that he was ever canonized. Yet for his vertues, the common peo∣ple would needs esteem him a Saint. And I finde treasurers of the Church accompt divers yeares for offerings to or at his tombe. Therefore it was afterwards pulled down. In the Records both of the Cathedrall, and of the Hospitall of Herbaldowne I have seen new Statutes of his making, His Statutes. namely such as he made and gave to either, upon and after his Visitation of each place. It was he that first erected per∣petuall Vicarages in the mother Church of Reculver, and the Chapells to it (Hearne and St Nicholas) and endowed them, as I finde by an authenticall copy of the ordination of those Vicarages which hath come unto my hands. For the maintenance of the Churches liberties, and ec∣clesiasticall Jurisdiction, he mainly opposed prohibitions Prohibitions. grown frequent in his dayes, and caused the Clergies grie∣vances to be drawn into Articles: whereof see the Anti∣quitates Britannicae in his life. pag. 211. See also pag. 215. in the life of his Successor Reynolds; and if you would know what good courses have from time to time sithence been taken to restrain Prohibitions, see the same Author pag. 216. in the life of the same Reynolds. pag 286. in the life of Staf∣ford. pag. 294 in the life of Bourgchier, in which last place
you may finde this worthy question properly, by my ren∣dred Author, subjoyned. Cum itaque (saith he) omnis La∣icorum Iudicum in Praelatos quaerimonia, tum cum Romanae Cu∣riae potestas etiam Regibus ipsis terrorem incussit; sola haec fuit, qd' nisi pleraeque causae ab ecclesiastico foro ampuentur, appellati∣onibus à regia cognitione ad populum perferantur: quid nunc dicere possunt cum pralati Regiam authoritatem & divino ver∣bo sanctiùs, & sua jurisdictione multò peritiùs tueantur quam Causidici? &c. To return to our Archbishop. He married King Ed. 1. to his second wife Margaret in his Church at Cant. whose nup∣tiall feast (saith Stow) was kept in the great Hall of his Pa∣lace. Walter Reynolds. 50. Walter Reynolds succeeded Rob. Winchelsey, who when he had sate Archbishop 13 yeares and somewhat more, died and was buried in the South-wall of Christ-Church neare the Quire, where his tombe is as yet extant. At his inthro∣nization (see the state of it in those dayes) Bartholomew Lord Badlesmere tendered himself to the Earl of Glocester chiefe Steward, to serve in the office of Chamberlaine to the Archbishop, for (or in respect of) his Mannor of Hat∣field by Charing Lib. eccles. Cant.. This occasionally induced, let me set be∣fore you in this place the fees which by ancient Record in the Cathedrall appeare to have belonged to the Earle of Glocester in respect of his office of Steward and Butler to Earle of Glo∣cester. the Archbishop of Canterbury on the day of his inthroni∣zation: and they were these. Ista pertinent ad fed. Comitis Gloverniae pro officio senescal∣li, die intronizationis cujuslibet Archiepiscopi Cantuar. si tamen summonitus fuerit, & venerit ad faciendum serviti∣um suum & non aliter. Idem Comes habebit de Archiepiscopo vij robas de scarleto. Item xxx sextarios vini. Item l. libras cer ad luminare suum proprium pro toto festo. Item liberationem feni & avenae ad lxxx equos per 2. noctes tantum.
Item discos & salsaria quae assidbit coram Archiepiscopo ad pri∣mum ferculum. Item post festum pcrendinationem trium dierum cum l. equis tan∣tùm, sumptibus Archiepiscopi, ubi idem Comes eligere volu∣erit de proximis maneriis dicti Archiepiscopi ad sanguinem min uendum. Ista pertinent ad feod. ejusdem Comitis, pro Officio Pin∣cernar. die supradicto, si tamen, &c. Idem Comes habebit vij robas de scarleto. Item xx sextarios vini. Item l. libras cerae. Item liberationem feni & avenae ad lx equos per 2 noctes tantùm. Item cuppam qua serviet coram Archiep. die festi. Item omnia dolia evacuata. Item habebit sex dolia si tot potata fuerint viz. subtus barram, in crastino festi computo recepto, & licèt plura dolia si potat fuerint, sex tantùm inde habebit, & residuum Archiepiscopo remanebit. Et nota quòd in intronizatione Roberti de Kilewardby Archiepiscopi, praedict' Comes habuit primò praedicta feo∣da: & tunc habuit unum mantellum cum penula. Et postea in intronizatione I. de Peckam Archiepiscopi ha∣buit duos mantellos. Ista maneria tenet praedict. comes pro dicto officio senescalli faciend. viz. Tonebregg, cum castro & handlo cum per∣tinen. & totam leucatam. Ista maneria tenet praedict. comes pro officio Pincernar. viz. Bradestede. Vieleston. Horsmandenne. Melton & Pectes. See more of this (if you please) in Mr Lamberts Peram∣bulation of Kent in Tunbridge. To returne to our Archbishop. He gave unto his Covent (saith Bishop Godwin) the Mannor of Caldcote, and the Caldecote. Thoreholt. Wood of Thorlehot. Now the Charters of this gift I have seene in the Church Records, dated Anno 1326. In which the Archbishop gives to the Prior and Covent mane∣rium nostrum (as his words are) de Caldecotes juxta Cant. cum
bosco nostro de Toreholt: and that by consent of the King and Pope. In the Popes licence the situation and value of the thing, together with the use which the Covent meant to make of it, and for which they begged it of the Archbishop, is thus expressed. Cum tu (the Pope so writes to the Arch∣bishop) inter alia mensae tuae Archiepiscopalis Cant. bona, unum modicum receptaculum vocat' Caldecote juxta Civitatem Cant. scituat', cum quadam terra eidem adjacen' valoris decem libra∣rum vel circiter ad mensam eandem spectan' obtinere noscaris, quod uque receptaculum cum terra praedicta, iidem Prior & Capitulum ac dilecti filii monachi ecclesia tuae Cantuarien. san∣guine minuti, & ceteris laboribus futigati ibidem interdum propter loci vicinitatem recreari valeant, multum affectant per te sibi concedi, & in usus eorum perpetuos assignari, &c. In this passage give me leave to take notice of two things, to shew what they meane and were. The first is that of Sanguinis Sanguinis mi∣tio. minutio, the other is the worke or labour what it was that the Monkes employed themselves about. For the former (sanguinis minutio) it was apertio venae ad minuendum sangui∣nem. So Reyner in his Onomsticum. And was used of the Monkes partly (I suppose) to keepe their bodies under, and partly physically and for their health-sake, to evacuate cor∣rupt and bad humours contracted, some may thinke, by their unwholesome dyet, feeding most what upon fish, and course fare; and true it is, by their order they were to ab∣staine from eating flesh; yet heare what Polydor Virgil saith  . . Rer. lib. 7. cap. 2. of that matter. Item à carnibus (saith he) perpetuò se absti∣nent, nisi cum aegrotare caeperint. Vnde monachi (marke now) qui hodie continenter carnibus vescuntur, quorum numerus ubi∣que genium extra Italiam ingentissimus est, perpetuò aegrotent necesse est, nisi velint impudenter fateri se contra suas leges fa∣cere . Fras. Co. In Iopbagia. Fa∣r, & defen∣  Haius i Astro inex∣o. qio.  pag. 130. &c.. So that I conceive they did thus evacuate not so much for unwholesome as for full and high feeding, and much ease withall, a course of life contrary to that of the Primitive Monkes, who fared hardly, and not onely lived by their labour, but used it as a principall meanes of their Mortification Creccelius de Orig. & fund. Monastic. or. cap. 1..
As for the other point, their worke or labour wherein Monkes em∣ployment. they employed themselves, and were occupied, it was of divers kinds. The Ceremoniale Benedictinum thus sets them forth. Opera autem quibus se occupare debent, sunt haec: vide∣licet scribere libros, aut rubricare, velligare, pergamenum & alia necessaria praeparare, & his similia &c. No longer to di∣gresse this Caldecote Mannor sometime lay partly in the old Parke and there-away, about Cockar-barne, as they now call it for Caldcote-barne. And now returne we to our Archbishop. To the Nonnes of Davington by Feversham which my Author thinkes were Ha pfield. French-women, he gave and prescribed rules or ordinan∣ces in the French Tongue, for their more easie intellect. He amerced the President of S. Bertins, for leasing out, without his privity, the fruits of Chilham Parsonage which belonged to the Priory of Throuleigh, a Cell to S. Bertins, and one of those that in the generall suppression of Priors aliens by Hen. 5. was dissolved. And so much for this Arch∣bishop, Priors aliens. except I shall remember his appropriation of the Parsonages of Farley and Sutton to the Hospitall at Maid∣stone of his Predecessor Boniface foundation, and his like appropriation of the Parsonage of Waldershire to Langdon Abbey, unto which about the same time King Ed. 1. gave the Parsonage of Tong. Simon Mepham. 51. Anno Dom. 1327. Simon Mepham succeeded Walter Reynolds; and conti∣nued Archbishop five yeares and somewhat more, and dyed Anno 1333. at Mayfield in Sussex. His body was con∣veighed to Canterb. and laid in a Tombe of Black-Marble upon the North-side of St Anselmes Chapell: that so called at this day, for when he was buried there, it had another Sai Peters Chapell. name. The Record of the place and manner with the time of his buriall kept in the Church saith he was laid in Quadam capellâ sancti Petri nuncupata ex parte australi summi altaris. His Tombe is that whereon by error Archbishop Mephams Tombe mista∣ken. Sudburies Table now hangs.
Iohn Stratford. 52. His Successor was Iohn Stratford who having sate Arch∣bishop about 15. yeares, dyed and was buried in a Tombe 1333. of Alabaster on the South-side of the high Altar, besides the steps of St Dunstans Altar. By the Table hanging where∣on you may easily finde it. Iohn Vfford, or Offord. 53. Him succeeded Iohn Vfford or Offord. But he never re∣ceived either his Pall or Consecration. Of his buriall I have 1348. spoken before in Peckham. Thomas Bradwardin. 54. Thomas Bradwardin succeeded, but within five weekes 1348. and foure dayes after his consecration he dyed, so that he was never inthronized at all. He was buried in St Anselmes foresaid Chapell, by the South-wall. Simon Islip. 55. Simon Islip was his next Successor. Amongst many other acts of his piety, he gave unto his Covent to the use of their 1349. Elemosinary, the Churches or Parsonages of Monkton and Monkton. Eastry. Eastry; say the Writers of his life. Yet I finde these very Churches with others formerly appropriated to them for that use, to wit by Archbishop Richard, Beckets immediate Successour, as you may finde before in my Survey of the Almnery. Both relations true. For the Church Muniments informe me that these Parsonages were taken from the Church by Archbishop Baldwin; that Richards immediate Successor in and upon the quarell that was betweene him and his Monkes (whereof before) and so they continued, at least at the Archbishops dispose, untill this Simon Islip, with the Kings licence, did restore, reunite and annexe them againe unto the Church: shortly after which guift of his Vicars perpetuall were ordained and indowed to each Church; Copies of the ordination and dotation of which Vicarages I have seene in the Liegers of the Church, where they are fairely registred. But to our Archbishop againe. With his consent Buckland Parsonage was appropriated to H. the Priory of Dover, as was the Parsonage there to Bilsing∣ton
Priory. He dyed Anno 1366. after he had beene Arch∣bishop 16. yeares and upwards: and was sometime buried under a faire Tombe of Marble inlaid with Brasse in the middle, and neare the upper end of the Body of his Church, sithence removed and set betweene the two next Pillars on the North-side thereof. The times were very mortall, by the raging of the plague, when he came first to the See, as Great moaili∣ty. Note. from Walsingham, is noted by Harpesfield, with this note of his upon it. Cum verò (saith he) propter hanc hominum ani∣maliumque ceterorum pestilentim, agri passim inculti, vasti, & deserti jacerent, & possessores solitis redditibus destitueren∣tur; coacti sunt non modo de solita pensione remittere, sed etiam agros omni rustica facultate instructos colonis locare. Quod & si a laicis possessoribus, ad rem attentioribus observari fere desitum est, in praediis tamen coenobiorum, Episcoporum & collegiorum mos ille frequens, ad nostrausque tempora, maximo colonorum emolumento perduravit. Simon Langham. 56. Anno Dom. 1366. Simon Langham succeeded Islip. Who sate only two yeares, dyed Anno 1376. was first buried at Avinion (where he dyed) in the Church of the Carthsians (whose house he had foun∣ded,) but afterward at Westminster (where he had beene first a Monke, afterward Prior, and lastly Abbat) in a goodly Tombe of Alabaster. William Wittlesey. 57. William Wittlesey succeeded Langham, who having con∣tinued in the See, almost seven yeares, dyed in the yeare 1368. 1374. and was buried almost over against (his Uncle) Simon Islip, betweene two Pillars on the South side of the body of the Church, under a faire Marble Tombe inlaid with Brasse, as his Table will direct. Simon Sudbury. 58. Him next succeeded Simon Sudbury: who being barba∣rously murthered by the Rebells in Rich. 2. dayes, Anno 1375. Domini 1381. his body after all stirres ended was carried to Canterbury, and there honourably interred upon the South-side of the Altar of St Dunstan, the next above the Tombe Sudbury his Tombe mista∣ken.
of Archbishop Stratford, and is that (as in Odo I told you) whereon Odo's Table hangs. The place (I take it) or neare it where his predecessor St Elpheges Altar-Tombe some∣times stood. That as there was but little or no difference betweene them, in the condition either of their lives or deathes, they being both Archbishops of the place and both unworthily murdered (I might say martyred) by the outrage of the people, a rabble of cruell assassinats, of Danes the one, ofDomestickes the other, little better then divels incarnate both, so there might also be little or no distance in their sepulchres or resting places after death. He built the West-gate of our City together with the grea∣test part of the Wall betweene it and the Northgate, com∣monly called by the name of the Long-Wall. A great worke (saith my Author) no lesse necessary and profitable unto the City then costly and chargeable unto the builder. Leland. The Maior and Aldermen once a yeare, used to come so∣lemnely to his Tombe to pray for his soule in memory of this his good deed to their City. To remedy and remove which piece of superstition (I take it) his Epitaph (some tokens whereof are yet discernable) was torne and taken from his Tombe at or since the Reformation. Wevers Mo∣numents hath this fragment of it. Sudburiae natus Simon jacet hic tumulatus Martyrizatus nece pro republica stratus. Heu scelus infernum, crux, exitiale, nefandum Praesulis eximii corpus venerabile dandum In rabiem vulgi— William Courtney. 59. William Courtney succeeded Simon Sudbury, and having sate twelve yeares lacking one moneth, dyed Anno 1396. at 1381. Maidstone. Where he pulled downe the old worke first built by Boniface his predecessor for an Hospitall, and building it after a more stately manner translated it into a Colledge of secular Priests, which at the time of the suppression was Maidstone Col∣ledge. valued at 139l. 7s. 6d. by the yeare. This Archbishop lyeth buried (saith Bishop Godwyn) upon the South-side of Thomas
Beckets shrine, at the feet of the blacke Prince in a goodly Tombe of Alabaster. But what sayes Wever? It was the custome of old (saith he) and so it is in these dayes for men of e∣minent ranke and quality, to have Tombes erected in more places then one; for example and proofe of my speech, I finde here in this Church a Monument of Alabaster at the feete of the blacke Prince, wherein both by tradition and writing, it is affirmed that the bones of William Courtney (the sonne of Hugh Courtney, the third of that Christian name, Earle of Devonshire) Arch∣bishop of this See lyes intombed. And I finde another to the me∣mory of the same man at Maidstone here in Kent, wherein (be∣cause of the Epitaph) I rather beleeve that his body lyeth buried. Thus he. His place of burial appointed of him in his Will ex∣tant Contradiction about the place of Courtneys buriall. in Christ-Church was the Cathedrall at Exceter, where he had sometime beene a Prebendary, and where he reque∣sted the Bishop of the place to bury him. Afterwards lying on his death bed and having changed his mind in this point; and holding his body (as he then declared) unworthy of bu∣riall in his Metropolicall or any other Cathedrall or Col∣legiate Church, he wills it to be buried in the Church-yard of his Collegiate-Church at Maidstone, in loco designato Io∣hanni Boteler armigero suo (as his owne words are.) Thus you see his Will sends us to seeke his buriall place at Exceter. His after declaration on his death bed, to the Cimitery of his Collegiate Church at Maidstone. His Monument in that Church sayes he lyes there, and this in Christ-Church, that he is in none of the three but here. And that I take to be the truest. For I finde in a Lieger Book of Christ-Church, that the King (Rich. 2.) happening to be at Canterb. when he was to be buried (upon the Monkes suite, 'tis like) over∣ruled the matter, and commanded his body to bee there interred. This Archbishop upon the overture of an intended in∣vasion Clergy armed nd rated. by the French, directs his letters to the then Com∣missary of Cant. to arme the Clergy of the City and Dio∣cesse after these rates and proportions Ex Registro Courtney.. A benefice excee∣ding 100 markes to finde a man and two Archers, a be∣nefice
exceeding xll. to finde two Archers, a benefice of xxl. one Archer, and for those under xxl. to finde Loricas, coates of male and other smaller ames. Here, as from a fit occa∣sion, Archery. let us observe by the way the alteration of the times in point of martiall and military weapons. The Bow, (the long Bow) and the Bow-man, we all know, were those which did the deed, and bare away the Bell in martiall brunts in former times, the Bow then the prime weapon for offen∣sive service, and the chiefest instrument warre knew where∣with to try the mastery; the Gun, and Gun-shot being but of late (though too soone heaven knowes whilst earth rues) invented: and yet so cryed up and magnified, by Martial∣lists especially, that the Bow the whilest is quite rejected with contempt as uselesse, and doomd and deemd at best as onely fit for men of peace in way of recreation to sport withall. Now being grounded in a good opinion of Arche∣ry my selfe, and not unwilling to vindicate the under valu∣ation A worthy commendati▪ of it. of it with other men, I desire here to recommend unto my reader a worthy and judicious Elogie one com∣mendation of (Englands ancient glory.) Archery; not my owne, nor yet any meere Mercurians, one able to judge on∣ly by theoreticall speculation, but a learned disciples both of Mars and Mercury, one equally experienced in both warfares, the armed and gowned; Master Iohn Bingham I meane, in his Notes upon Aelians Tactiks, where he playes the part of a most excellent advocate for discarded Archery. The Booke is now somewhat deere and scarce, and there∣fore to save their labour and cost (of searching the origi∣nall) who can endure to see despised Archery commended according to it worth, I shall present them with a true Co∣py of that whole passage verbatim, as there it lyes, pag. 24. and so forward. It is somewhat long; for avoyding there∣fore of too great an interruption and digression here, I have given it a place in my Appendix, where you may finde it, Scriptura 15a. Craving pardon for this digression, I return to our Archbishop. He had the Bailiffes of Canterbury in question for medling
in and with ecclesiasticall matters, as the punishment of A∣dultery Medling in Church mat∣ters by Laics punished. and the like, and made them to submit sub poena in∣terdicti Civitatis. He had the Serjeants of the City also in coram, for bearing their Maces and using their authority within the precinct of his Church. But at the petition of the City they were dismissed, provided that for time to come they leave their Maces without the utter-gate when they come to the Church, or within the precinct. He had the Bailiffes of Romney also in coram, for medling in Church∣businesse, who obstinately rebelled and sought and thought to secure themselves by a prohibition, but were deceived, for the Archbishop gat it reversed, and (saith the Record) made that unadvised Towne submit. He obtained Liber Eccles. Cant. of Ric. 2. foure Faires for the Church at the foure principall feasts of peregrination in the yeare, viz. one on the Innocents-day, on Witson-Eve another, on the Eve of Beckets transla∣tion a third, and the fourth and last on Michaelmas-Eve, to hold for nine dayes next following every of them, and be kept within the site of the Priory. Thomas Arundell. 60. Thomas Arundell next succeeded after Courtney. Who sate one moneth above 17 yeares, and dyed Anno 1413. He 1396. lyeth buried (as his Table will shew) on the North-side of the body of Christ-Church, where doubtlesse he sometime had a farre better Monument then now remaines of him. For his Will appoints out his buriall thus. In Monumento meo novo quod ad hoc licès indignissimè construi & fieri feci in orato∣rio Arundels Mo∣nument. meo in navi sanctae Cant. ecclesiae, infra Cantariam meam perpetuam duorum Capellanorum ibidem ordinatam, &c. But Chantery and Monument are both gone, a bare grave-stone His Chantery. levelled with the floore, with the brasse all shamefully torne away being onely left; whereas you may know there some∣times stood a Chapell (like to that I suppose of Bishop Kemp on the North-side of the Body of Pauls) wherein both the Archbishop lay fairely intombed, and his two Chanterists did daily celebrate, which had for their stipend xl. a peece yearely out of Northfleet Parsonage: and their
dwelling or Mansion which was built for them by himself ex australi parte ecclesiae, and contained in length 80. and in breadth 60 foot measured. I suppose it yet standing, and to be one of those present buildings on the South-side of the Church-yard. The Chapell (as I learn from the report of the Chantery Priest thereof) was taken down and sold away by H. 8. his Commissioners. This Archbishop Harpsfield. Bredgare. confirmed the foundation of the Colledge of Bredgare, to which the Pa∣rish Church there was in his time converted by Robert then Parson thereof. In the yeare 1413. what yeare this Archbi∣shop died I finde Walsingham. him an Inhabitant in the Castle of Leeds in Kent, which in a decree or sentence which he gave be∣tween his Monks and the Covent of S. Gregories by Cant. da∣ted at that place, the same yeare, he calls his own Castle. . Dat' (saith he) in Castello meo de Ledes. Henry Chicheley. 61. Anno Dom. 1414. Henry Chicheley succeeded next after Thomas Arundell. He sate 29 yeares, and dying anno 1443. was laid in a very fair tombe built by himself in his life time, standing on the North-side of the Presbytery. It is the tombe which was lately repaired and beautified by the All-souls-colledge men, whose founder he was. His table will direct you to it. Lindewood dedicating his Provinciall to this Archbishop styles him Dei gratia, Cantuarien' Archiep. And no marvell Dei gratia. for 600 yeare before, his predecessor Archbishop Athelard useth the style, writing himself thus. Ego Aethilheardus, gratia Dei humilis sanctae Dorobernensis ecclesiae Archiepisco∣pus &c. The like D. H. Spel∣man. Glessar. in verb. Dei gratia. was usuall in the styles of other Arch∣bishops. And not onely Archbishops, Bishops, and Dukes, in times past used the same in their titles, but also Abbats, Pri∣ors, Earls, yea the meanest Magistrates and Legates som∣times, Earls especially which had Iura Regalia, and mitred Abbats. But Kings in the mean season disdaining and dis∣pleased at it, and challenging it as the symboll and proof of their (save under God) independent Majesty, by little and little it became either wholly omitted or else altered, as our Archbishops into providentia divina, or permissione di∣vina.
Mr Selden will instruct you more at large in this mat∣ter, if you peruse the 1. part of his titles of Honor cap. 7. § 2. Unto whom let me adde a pertinent discourse hereof. The author of it, Roverius, in his Illustrations upon the History of S. Iohns Monastery at Rheims pag. 618. Fecerant (saith he) li∣berae electiones, & Pontificiae exemptiones, ut horum temporum Abbates (speaking of the yeare 1192.) se Dei solius gratiâ constitutos censerent, atque inter dignitatis titulos hunc etiam annumerarent. Neque verò hoc primùm saeculo natus est hic sen∣sus, cum anno jam Mxxx. Gandensis Abbas S. Bavonis sic scribe∣ret. Otginae Comitissae Othelboldus gratiâ Dei Abbas, & annis plusquam centenis antè Abbas S. Galli; Christi favente gratia Harmtus Abbas, & Christi disponente providentia, aut largien∣te clementia, Crimaldus Abba. Verum ii, qui amantiores erant humilitatis religiosae, non facilè comperiuntur hoc usi sermone. Neque ehim vel Cluniacensis ullus, vel Bernardus Claraevallen∣sis, vel Gofridus Vindocinensis, vel Lupus Ferrariensis id sibi us∣quam tituli arrogarunt. Nam sive ea voce significetur Praefectu∣ram Deo soli debitam, subditamve esse, sive Monasterio benefici∣um à Deo impertitum, quòd vir talis fuerit Praefectus, sive Ab∣bati gratiam à Deo factam, quòd sit Praefectus, non potest non ali∣quid continere sensus, quam humilitatem religiosam deceat, sublimioris, cùm id de seipso Abbas profitetur, qui nec satis verè potest affirmare supremum sibi jus esse, vel sacrarum, vel tem∣poralium rerum sui Monasterii, nec satis dimissè sua in Monaste∣rium merita jactare, nec satis tutò Praefecturam, quae gravissi∣mum onus est pro divino favore habere. Itaque sapientissimi quique, & si aliis hunc titulum tribuunt, nunquam tamen sibi, dignum videlicet rati, ut de aliis sentiant, quod de se non ausint. Quamobrem suspicari licet has voces pluribus Abbatum chartis, actisque publicis non tam illorum quam pragmaticorum usu, ac instituto invectas, dum Abbates inducunt de seipsis eo loquentes modo, quo ipsi pragmatici sibi de illis sentiebant loquendum. Quanquam videri etiam possit has voces à Librariis in antiqua interdum scripta ex sui saeculi moribus intrusas. Vix enim an∣te secundam Regum Franciae stirpem, aut Reges supremam pe∣tstatem rerum civilium, aut Episcopi rerum sacrarum his
verbis expresserunt. Sanè & Episcopi, & Abbates aliqui invidiam titulo praeclarè aliquando emollierunt, aut potius sunt interpretati, dum se permissione, aut concessione Dei Episcopos, vel Abbates dixere &c. Iohn Stafford. 62. Anno Dom. 1443. Iohn Stafford succeeded. Sate almost nine yeares, and dy∣ing anno 1452. was buried in the Martyrdome, under a flat marble stone inlaid with brasse. Iohn Kemp. 63. Iohn Kemp succeeded next. He continued not in the See 1452.  Colledge. above a yeare and an half. The Parish Church of Wy in Kent where he was born, he converted into a Colledge, in which he placed secular Priests to attend divine service, and to teach the youth of their Parish. Their Governour was called a Prebendary. This Colledge at the suppression was valued at 93 lib. 2s by the yeare. It was surrendred anno 36. Hen. 8. This Archbishop, with his two next Successors were Cardinalls. Thomas Bourgchier. 64. Thomas Bourgchier succeeded Cardinall Kemp, continu∣ed Archbishop 32 yeares, and dying anno 1486. was buried 1454. upon the North-side of the high Altar in a marble tomb. He gave to his Successor by his Will 200 lib. in recompense of dilapidations. He had a Chantery. The revenues where∣of were surrendred with the Priory to the King (H. 8.) Iohn Morton. 65. Iohn Morton succeeded. Thirteen yeares he enjoyed 1487. the Archbishoprick, died the yeare 1500. He lieth buried in the Lady-chapell of the Vndercroft under a marble stone. Howbeit a goodly tombe is erected in memory of him up∣on the South-side of the Chapell. Henry Deane 66. Henry Deane succeeded, who died anno 1502. the second 1501. yeare after his translation, and was buried in the Martyr∣dome.
William Warham. 67. Anno Dom. 1504. William Warham succeeded Henry Deane. The pomp and state of whose entertainment and inthronization you may reade of at large elsewhere. He continued Archbishop 28 yeares, and died at S. Stephens neare Canterb. in the house of William Warham his kinsman, Archdeacon of Cant. and was laid in a little Chapell built by himself for the place of his buriall upon the North-side of the Martyrdome, and hath there a reasonable fair tombe, where he founded a per∣petuall Chantery of one Priest daily to say masse for his soul, but the dissolution of the Priory suppressed it, and sei∣zed the revenues thereof to the Kings use. Erasmus Peregnatio Relig. ergô. (up∣on whom this Archbishop bestowed the Parsonage of Al∣dington in Kent) so commends him for his humanity, learning, integrity and piety, that (as he concludes) nullam absoluti praesulis dotem in eo desideres. Thomas Cranmer. 68. Thomas Cranmer succeeded, being consecrated Archbi∣shop anno 1533. and suffered most unworthy death at Oxford 1533. anno 1556. He was the man designed to succeed in the Chair by his predecessor, who though he foresaw and foretold too, that a Thomas should succeed him, who (as my Au∣thor saith, slandereth I should say) per laxam & remissam vitae Harpsfield.! Warhams evill prseage of a Thomas. licentioris indulgentiam populo concessam, perque prava dogma∣ta, magis Cantuariensem, omnemque reliquam Angliae ecclesi∣am deformaret, quàm eam olim Thomas Martyr suo martyrio amplificasset; admonuitque nepotem, ut si quis fortè Thomas, eo vivo ea sede potiretur, ne ulla ratione in illius famulitium se ascribi pateretur &c. Yet to see, he pitches upon this man (a Thomas) in his choice of a successor. Waramus autē (saith the same Author) eum ipsum Thomam, de quo tam malè ominaba∣tur, quique primus ex omnibus Cantuariae Episcopis haeresim (so he slanders our religion) in eam sedem invexit, successorem sibi sortitus est. Reginald Poole 69. Reginald Poole otherwise and more vulgarly called Car∣dinall Pooole succeeded. Two yeares and almost eight 1555.
moneths he continued Archbishop, and died even the same day that Queen Mary did. His body was (and lies) intomb∣ed on the North-side of Beckets crown, where his monu∣ment is extant. He was the last Archbishop that was buried in Christ-church. Their burialls there have been ever since Buriall of the Archbishops in Christ-Church dis∣continued. discontinued; a thing the whilest to some seeming very strange, that of all the Archbishops since the Reformation, not one hath liked to be buried there, but all, as it were with one consent, declined their own Cathedrall (the anci∣ent and accustomed place of Archiepiscopall sepulture) and choosing rather an obscure buriall in some one private Parish Church or other. Matthew Parker. 70. Anno Dom. 1559. Matthew Parker succeeded Cardinall Poole in the Arch∣bishoprick, held the same 15 yeares and 5 moneths and de∣ceased anno 1575. Besides a multitude of pious acts, he be∣stowed upon the reparation of his Palace at Canterb. one thousand foure hundred pounds. He lies buried in the Cha∣pell of Lambeth house. Amongst other his works, with the help no doubt of other able Antiquaries, he wrote the lives of his predecessors, the Archbishops of Canterb. intituling his book. De Antiquitate Britannicae Ecclesiae &c. Whereof Cuiacius (having occasion to make mention of it Ad cap. qu ste. de Ap∣pellationib.) gives this commendation. Sunt multa (saith he) in eo auctore prae∣clara, nomen ejus ignoratur, & liber tantum exstat in Anglia, unde accersitur, & accersitus est magno pretio. Edmund Grindall. 71. Edmund Grindall succeeded, and sate seven yeares and 1575. almost an half, and died and was buried at Croydon. He was a very grave man, and gave to our City C. lib. to be imploy∣ed upon a stock to set the poore on work. Iohn Whitgift. 72. 1583. Hosp. and School at Croy∣don. Iohn Whitgift succeeded and continued Archbishop somewhat above 20 yeares. In which mean space he built the Hospitall and School at Croydon. After the finishing where∣of S George Paul, in his fe., the French Lieger Embassador, Boys Sisi, inquiring what works the Archbishop had published, and receiving
answer that he had written onely in defence of Church go∣vernment, but it being incidently told him that he had founded an Hospitall and a School: Profectò (saith he present∣ly) Hospitale ad sublevandum paupertatem, & Schola ad instru∣endum juventutem sunt optimi libri quos Archiepiscopus conscri∣bere potuit. He lieth buried at Croydon. Richard Bancroft. 73. Anno Dom. 1604. Richard Bancroft succeeded and sate 6 yeares or therea∣bouts, died anno 1610. A man of singular wisdome, and ve∣ry zealous in defence both of Church-liberties and disci∣pline. George Abbot. 74. George Abbot succeeded, he sate Archbishop 22 yeares. In which space of time he bestowed great summes of money in 1611 building and indowing of an Hospitall at Guilford in Surrey, the Town wherein he was born, and afterwards buried. He uilord Hosp. began also to shew himself a speciall benefactor to our City: witnesse the goodly conduit which he built for the com∣mon Conduit at Canterbury. good and service of the same. A work as of great charge to the Author, so of no lesse benefit to the City. He died in Iuly Anno Domini 1633. William Laud. 75. After whom succeeded the present Lord Archbishop his Grace, by name William Laud, by title Primate of all Eng∣land, and Metropolitan, one of the LL. of his Majesties most honourable privie Councell, and Chancellor of the Vniver∣sitie of Oxford. Of whom to speak, is not a task for my pen. I leave it to posterity hereafter, and to better abilities to set forth his constant piety, great wisdome and spotlesse justice. Howbeit, what all men take unto themselves a li∣bertie to speak of him, I shall be bold to commemorate, namely those famous works of his that so much praise him in the gate: As his care, his cost, his encouragement to the repair of what all men despaired as much to see repaired un∣till he undertook it, as ever they did to see it finished, Stow. Godwyn. when Mauritius first began to build it, S. Pauls Church in London. Another, that never to be forgotten gift of his to
the Vniversity-library of Oxford, of an innumerable multi∣tude of choice and rare Manuscripts, with his great care and cost, gathered from all parts not onely of this Kingdome, but also of the whole world. A third, the flourishing of the same Vniversitie by his meanes in a twofold way; one, in the government of it, by his late new Statutes; the other, in buildings, at S. Iohn's first, at his own proper cost and char∣ges; and by his example and furtherance, in other Col∣ledges, such buildings all and so goodly, as none did ever expect, and all do now admire to see raised. Now that Providence, which by the meanes of a most pi∣ous and prudent King sent him unto us, grant we may long enjoy him, and afterwards translate him from the cares of the Church militant here, to the joyes of that triumphant one above. If any shall desire to see the ancient form of our Archbi∣shops Inthronizati∣on of the Arch∣bishop of Cant. the form of it. Vide pro Scri∣ptura 16. in Append. inthronization, he may finde it in my Appendix, tran∣scribed from a Record of that of Archbishop Winchelseys, kept in the Church, and (as it may be supposed by the gene∣rall title of it) intended for a precedent in this kinde. And so having done with the first part of my intended Catalogue, to wit concerning the Archbishops of Canterb. I proceed to the second. viz. A Catalogue of the Priors of Christ-Church, with a brief touch of the contemporary Monks of note. VNtill the Conquerours time, I finde no mention of any Prior of Christ-Church. Henry brought hither by Archbishop Lanfrank, being the first I meet with. Afore∣time (it seems) he that held the place was called Decanus ecclesiae. So it is intimated by Archbishop Parker in the life of Agelnoth, who tells also that Celnoth the Archbishop, al∣most 200 yeares before, was first Deane of the Church. A Saxon Record of this Church makes mention of one Ae∣thelwine a Deane also in the same Archbishops time, and another Record tells of another, one Godric in Archbishops
Stigands dayes, whom the book of Doomsday makes menti∣on of. Further then thus I am not instructed in the names of those Deanes: wherefore I must passe them over and come to the Priors. Henry. 1. Anno Dom. 1080. Whereof (as I said) Henry was the first: Sometime Abbat of Cane in Normandy: from thence brought hither by Lanfrank, and made Prior of this Church. Afterwards he became Abbat of Battell in Sussex Reyner. Apost. Benedictin., and so died. Ernulphus, or Arnulphus. 2. Ernulphus or Arnulphus, first a Monk of the Church, af∣terward 1104. became Prior, succeeding Henry: then was pre∣ferred to the Abbatship of Peterborough, and lastly had the Bishoprick of Rochester given him by his Predecessor in that See, Ralfe, the Archbishop of Canterb. you may reade more of him in the Catalogue of BB. in Rochester, and in Fox his Acts and Monuments you shall finde a letter directed to him and others about Priests marriages. Conradus. 3. Conradus a Monk also of the place succeeded Ernulphus, made Prior as his Predecessor by Archbishop Anselme. Of 1108. whom, and of Henry Predecessor to them both, Edmerus maketh this mention. Res Monachorum (saith he, speaking of Anselme) posuit in dispositione suorum, constituens eis in Pri∣orem, post Henricum, Ernulphum, post Ernulphum, Conradum (ipsius loci Monachos) ad quorum nutum negotia ecclesiae cuncta referrentur. Which is all I reade of him. Elmerus or Ailmerus. 4. Elmerus or Ailmerus succeeded Conradus. He was first 1112. also a Monk, afterwards Prior of Christ-church, and continu∣ed Prior eighteen yeares, dying in the yeare 1130. He was contemporary with Edmerus and Alexander, both famous Monks of the place, great ornaments to the Church, and very deare both of them unto Archbishop Anselme. This Prior wrote divers Treatises mentioned of Pitseus, who will further inform you both of him, and those his Coaetaneans. Here by the way to do Balaeus right, let me note it once for
all, that Pitseus for these and many other like things which Pitseus Balus his Plagiary. I shall have occasion to cite him for, is but Balaeus his Plagi∣ary; yet I rather quote him then Balaeus, because his Booke is more common and easie to get. Gosfridus. 5. The next Prior after Elmerus, was Gosfridus, who (as I 1128. have it from the Continuer of Florence of Worceter) in the yeare 1128. was at the suite of David of Scots, by the con∣sent of the Archbishop (William Corboyl) chosen Abbat of the Monastery of Dunfermelin in Scotland. Vir religionis eximiae (my Authors owne words) Cantuariae Prior Gosfridus nomine, Rege Scotorum David petente, & Archiepiscopo Gu∣lielmo annuente, Abbas eligitur ad locum in Scotia qui Dunfer∣melin dicitur. Ordinatus est autem ab Episcopo ecclesiae sancti Andreae. A petition to this purpose of the same Scottish King is extant to this day amongst the Records of the Cathe∣drall, where I have seene and read it. Ieremias. 6. Ieremias (a Monke also of the place) succeeded Elmerus. 1130. Of whom I reade in the Acts and Monuments, that Arch∣bishop Theobald falling out with him for certaine causes be∣tweene them, for which the Archbishop taking stomach against him would lay the sentence of Interdiction against him: The Prior, to save himselfe, made his appeale to Pope Innocent. The Archbishop provoked the more by that, deposed him from the Priorship, and placed one Walter in his roome. Ieremias notwithstanding making his com∣plaint and appeale to Rome, obtained letters from the Pope to Henry Bishop of Winchester, being the Popes Legat; by the vertue whereof he against the heart of the Archbishop was restored, and Walter displaced. Neverthelesse, the said Ieremy, not willing there to continue with displeasure of the Archbishop, shortly after of his owne accord renounced his Priory, and Walter againe was received in his stead. Thus Master Fox. Bishop Godwyn in his Catalogue, in the life of Archbishop Theobald, writing of this matter, by mistake affirmes him to have beene Prior of Saint Austins. That he
is herein mistaken you shall plainely perceive both by Mat∣thew Paris. pag. 103. London edition. and by Archbishop Par∣ker in the life of Theobald, if you please to consult them; of whom the latter tells, that this Ieremy had given him in consideration of his surrender of the Priory 100 markes. These things happened (you see) in the time of Pope Inno∣cent the second, who dyed Anno 1143. This Prior is men∣tioned by Harpesfield in the story of the new worke of Dover by Corboyl. Walterus. 7. Walterus (as you see) was made his Successor. I finde him sirnamed Durusdens, in English Durdent, or Hard-tooth. 1143. Pitseus in his Appendix to his Catalogue of English-Wri∣ters, mentions one of the name, this very Prior in all pro∣bability; and gives him a large Enconium, for his great lear∣ning, especially in divinity, and mentions some of his works you may reade more of him in the story of the strife be∣tweene Archbishop Theobald and Sylvester the 45. Abbat of Saint Austins, about his consecration, opposed of this Prior in the yeare 1151. recorded in the Acts and Monuments, part. 1a. pag. 307. Walterus parvus. 8. Walterus (to distinguish him from his predecessor) sir∣named Parvus succeeded, whom I know onely by his name, 1151. and the time in which he lived. Wibertus. 9. And so must I say of his next successor Wibert, saving that his buriall place is lately come to my knowledge by this in∣scription 1160. in Brasse on a grave-stone in the Chapter-house. Hic jacet Wibertus quondam Prior hujus ecclesiae. Odo. 10. Odo succeeded Wibert, and was Prior in Archbishop Bec∣kets dayes. After whose death (saith Master Fox) there 1170. Acts and Mo∣num. vol. 1. pag. 307. was a great stirre between the King (Hen. 2.) and this Prior about the choice of a new Archbishop. For the King (saith my Author) seeing the Realme so oftentimes incumbred by those Popish Archbishops, and fearing least the Monkes of Canterbury
should elect such another as would follow the steps of Thomas Becket, most humbly with cap in hand, and curtesie of knee, desired Odo the Prior, that at his request, and for contentation of his minde, such a one might be elected whom he would appoint (appointing and naming a certaine Bishop, which was a good simple man after the Kings liking;) but the Prior dissemblingly answering the King againe that he neither could nor would with∣out the consent of the Covent give promise to any man: in fine, contrary to the Kings so humble request, agreed to the election of another, which was the Prior of Dover called Richard Anno 1173. who continued in that sea eleven yeares. Thus Fox. His Covent and he (as the same Author reports) fell out about his translating the reliques of Saint Dunstan. This doubt∣lesse is the man whom Pitseus mentions, and calls St Odo. A man (saith he) of approved vertue, and eminent learning. From Prior of this Church he was translated and preferred to be Abbat of Battell, saith the same Pitseus. One Sampson Dorobernensis, a man famous also for his piety and learning, was his equall in time, and companion in place, being a Monke of this Church about the yeare 1170. Benedictus. 11. Benedictus succeeded Odo. And in the yeare 1177. was a 1177. party to the composition made betweene him and his Co∣vent on the one side and the Abbat and Covent of St Austins on the other, touching the houses and ground on the South∣side of the Church-yard of Christ-Church, by the Campanile sometime standing there, exchanged by St Austins with Christ-Church for other like elsewhere, whereof before in my Survey of the precinct. See more of him you may in Pitseus, who saith that from this Priory he was translated to the Abbey of Peterborough, and therefore is knowne by the sirname of Petriburgensis, and dyed about the yeare 1200. Herlewinus. 12. Herlewinus succeeded Benedictus, and was Prior in the dayes of Pope Alex. 3. (who dyed 1181.) for I finde him di∣rect 118. his Buls to this Prior by name, commanding that the Offerings of the Church should be disposed of in restaratio∣nem
ecclesiae, &c. Extreme Age having indisposed him for government he gave over his place, and had to his Suc∣cessor Alanus. 13. This Alanus (Harpesfield saith) was first a Canon of Bene∣ventum, but English-borne, afterward Sacrist or Sexton of 1181. this Church, then Prior, and lastly made Abbat of Teux∣bury. He wrote much; the particulars of whose labours you may finde in Pitseus. Being Sexton he was very intimate with Archbishop Becket. But afterward when he was Prior he opposed himselfe against Baldwin, both in his election, and in his proceedings afterwards: by whose policy, because he could not winne him to his side, under the pretence of his preferment he at length procured his removall from this Priory to the Abbatship of Tewksbury: where he lived till the yeare 1201. and then dyed. He was doubtlesse a strict and stout prelate. For I reade . eccles.  Cant. that in the yeare 1181. when, in a Procession at Christ-Church, one St Robert Mortimer an excommunicate person for his contumacy, quia noluit juri parere, super injuria quam fecerat Cantuar. ecclesiae de quadam pastura, quam abstulit manerio eorum quod dicitur Depeham: intruded himselfe into the company: this Prior, Alan, espy∣ing of him there, informes the Archbishop, who was then present, of it, and that a second time because the Archbi∣shop would have connived at it; the Archbishops servants disswading the Prior because of the Kings displeasure. At length because the Prior saw the Archbishop would take no notice of it, he tells him that sith he will not use his autho∣rity without, he will use his owne within the Church. And accordingly being entered the Church and at masse, the Prior requires the Covent to surcease, who obeyed, and so the excommunicate to his shame was by strong hand cast out of the Church, and then they proceeded in their devo∣tions. You may see more of this Prior in the story of the troubles happening betweene Archbishop Baldwyn and the Monks of his Church recorded in the Acts and Monuments. vol. 1. pag. 308.
Honorius. 14. Roger Norris. 15. Osbertus. 16. Anno Dom. 1185. Honorius succeeded Alanus: of whom and of his next Successor Roger Norris, as also of Osbertus, or Osbernus his next Successor, you may reade in that story I last mention∣ed: where it is said that Honorius died at Rome, whither he was sent to oppose Baldwyn in his project for the Colledge at Hackington: And that Roger was made Prior in his stead: 1189. by Baldwyn who obtruded him upon the Monks, whereup∣on in their treaty for conditions of peace and composition, one article was, that this Prior should be deposed; And ac∣cordingly he was so, and at the request of the Archbishop promoted to be Abbat of Eusham, and with consent of the King and Covent Osbernus designed and made Prior, who 1190. had before taken part with the Archbishop,: but continu∣ed not long in the place; for the Monks not pleased with him, after Baldwins death, removed him again. About this time one William Stephens (or Gulielmus Stephanides) a fa∣mous Monk, lead his life in this Monastery, of whom you may reade a large Encomium in Pitseus. Gaufridus or Galfridus. 17. Gaufridus or Galfridus succeeded Osber. Letters or Bulls 1192. like to those above mentioned sent by Pope Alex. to Herlewin his predecessor, and as were also directed by Pope Vrban 3. to Honorius the Prior, I finde inscribed to this Prior by Pope Innocent 3. I meet also with certain let∣ters of his and the Covent, whereby, with consnt of Hu∣bert the Archbishop, and at the petition of M  then Custos or keeper of that house, they take the leprous Hospi∣tall of S. Iacobs neare Cant. into their custody and prote∣ction, S. Ibs. Reyner.  . pag . & 107. as I have more at large made appeare unto you in my survey of that quondam Hospitall. In this mans time the controversie between the Monks and the Suffragans of the Province, about the choice of the Archbishop was decided by the decree of Pope Innocent 3. and the same Pope by an∣other decree and letters to the Archbishop discarded secu∣lar Clerks out of the Church and Monastery. Contempo∣rary with this Prior was the famous Gervasius Dorobernensis a
Monk of this Church a great Historian and Antiquary, as Pitseus will inform you: as also of Nigellus Wireker another like Monk: and chantor of the Church, on whom my Au∣thor, from Leland bestows a most ample commendation for his piety and excellent indowments. Iobn Sittingbourne. 18. Anno Dom. 1206. Iohn (from I suppose the place of his birth) sirnamed Sittingbourne succeeded, and was Prior in the time of the Churches troubles about the election of a new Archbishop to succeed Hubert, the Story whereof is obvious, and was with his Monks, 64 in number, by King Iohn on that occasi∣on sent into banishment. Whose places he caused to be fil∣led Monks bani∣shed. with certain Monks out of S. Anstin's Abbey: But the storm at length being after 7 yeares banishment, blown over, they were called home, full restitution was made both to him and them every way, and 1000 lib. given them for recompense of all detriments as our Stories witnesse, to∣gether Matt. Paris pag 315. Lond. Editio. with a Charter of Restitution, which because our sto∣ries have it not, I have thought good to annex and adde as a Corollary to the story, and I finde it to be of this tenor, in a Lieger of the Church. Iohannes Dei gratia Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae, Dux Normanniae & Aquitanniae & Comes Andeg. Omnibus Vicecomitibus, & Forrestariis, & Ballivis suis salutem. Praecipimus volentes quòd Priorem & Monachos Cant. paci∣ficè habere permittatis omnes libertates & liberas consuetu∣dines suas in Ballivis vestris sicut habuerunt tempore incho∣atae discordiae inter nos & ipsos. Teste meipso apud Winton xx• die Iulii. This Prior afterwards, to wit in the Vacancy by the death of Richard the great, was designed to the Archbishoprick 1234. by the free election of the Chapter, but going to Rome for Fox Acts and-Mon. vol. 1. pag. 356. confirmation, though the Cardinalls designed for his exa∣mination gave testimony to the Pope of his fitnesse and suf∣ficiency: yet the Pope perswading him it was a Province (or office) of too great care and difficulty for him to ma∣nage being an aged plain man, he humbly renounced the
election, and craved licence to return home, and S. Edmund afterward filled the Chaire by the Popes provision. Rogerus de la Lee. 19. Anno Dom. 1234. Rogerus de la Lee succeeded Iohn Sittingbourne. I finde him and his Covent in the yeare 1242. enter into composi∣tion with the Abbat and Covent of S. Austins touching di∣vers matters then in difference between them, especially maritime rights and customes at Ministre and Sandwich, a copy whereof you may finde in my Appendix Scriptura 17. Nicholaus de Sandwico. 20. Nicholas of Sandwich succeeded: but I finde nothing 1244. of him more; Unlesse that be (as its like enough to be) his Epitaph or Inscription, which I lately holp to discover, being in somewhat a strange and unwonted character, after the old fashion, cut into the stone at the foot of a buttresse, on the South-side of Beckets-chapell, a little within the Coemitery Gate, and, if read, runnes thus. Respice: care: mere: rogo: defuncti: miserere: Sandwicensis: vivens: frater: memor: en: sis: Qui: nunc: in Limo: :e: strictè: jacet: ymo: Dic: Pater: hinc: &: Ave: Deus: hunc: & :protegat: a: ve: Omni: ne: baratri: penas: sibi: sentiat: atri: Set: celi: solio: requiescat: in: agmne: pio: Omnis: orans: ita: letetur: perpete: vita; Amen. That is as like to be either his predecessors or successors Epitaph, which on the contrary side of the Chapell is in the like character and manner cut into the wall, the briefest one shall see, being no more but Hic requiescit Rogerus. Hard by which; on a Buttresse is a Sub-Priors Epitaph, sometime legible, but now obscured for the most part by the foundation of the little Chapell put up between that and the next buttresse to it. Rogerus de Sancto Elphego. 21. Roger. de S. Elpheg. was the next Prior. I finde him a 1258.
benefactor to the Chapell now the Deanes; for in severall windows of it, you may reade Rogerus de Sancto Elphego, de∣dit hanc fenestram. Adam Chillenden. 22. Adam Chillenden is said to be the next Successor in the Priory. With the Abbat of S. Austins, the Prior of S. Gre∣gories 1263. and others, he was by the Kings writ anno 1269. 53. Hen. 3. declared quit and free from tallage with the City, under this form, as I finde in Thorne. Tallage. Anno Domini Mcclxixo. fuit declaratum quòd Abbas non de∣bet talliari in Civitate sub tali forma. Rogerus Abbas san∣cti Aug. Cant. Prior ecclesiae Christi Cant. & Prior sancti Gregorii, & magister Hamo Doge perquisiverunt breve Domini Regis direct' Baronibus de scaccario quòd Viceco∣mes Kanc' venire faceret 6. de discretioribus hominibus villae Cant. & 6. tam milites quam alios liberos & legales homines de vicineto ejusdem villae per quos rei veritas me∣lius sciri poterit ad certificandum eosdem Barones si prae∣dicti Abbas &c. & eorum predecessores unquam talliari consueverunt ratione tenementorum quae habent in Cant. vel non. Et postea venit inquisitio per Rogerum de North∣wood, Ricardum de Pontefracto milites & alios qui dixe∣runt super sacramentum suum quòd praedicti Abbas & Pri∣ores nunquam talliari consueverunt cum Burgensibus ejus∣dem villae ratione tenementorum suorum praedictorum. Di∣xerunt etiam quòd antecessores praedicti Hamonis Doge ratione mercandisarum suarum quas fecerunt in eadem Ci∣vitate talliari consueverunt, sed ipse non quianullas exer∣cuit mercandisas & ideo concessum est quòd praedicti Abbas et Priores ab hujusm' tallag' sint quieti. Vnde H. Rex Vicec. Cantii sic. Constat nobis per inquisitionem quam nuper fieri fecimus quòd Abbas & alii superiùs nominati nunquam consueverunt talliari ratione tenementorum suorum quae habent in eadem villa, quando cives ejusdem Civitatis tal∣liati fuerunt. Ideo tibi praecipimus quòd de demanda quam facis per summonitionem scaccarii nostri praedictis Abbati et Prioribus de tall' ratione tenementorum suorum quae habent
ibidem pacem habere permittas: Et averia sua seu catalla si quae capta fuerint occasione praedicta eis deliberari facia &c. I have no more to say of this Prior, except I should mention his election to the Archbishoprick, the passages and effect whereof I had rather you should acquaint your self withall (gentle Reader) from the Acts and Monum. vol. 1. pag. 439. Thomas Ringemer. 23. Thomas Ringemer succeeded. In his time certain of the 1270. Monks of his Covent, leaving the Monastery, dispersed and seated themselves abroad in the rurall and countrey pos∣sessions of their house, and appropriating to themselves, and converting to their private use the fruits of the same, spent their daies in worldly pleasures and delights, contrary to the canons and rules of monastick discipline. Whom this Prior, an honest & pious man, called home, & provided that for time to come, the possessions of the Monastery should be commended to the care and managing of trustie laicks, and not of the Monks. Herein he had to friend the then Archbishop Iohn Peckham, who took his part, and affoorded him his help and furtherance in the businesse. Notwith∣standing, he found the Monks very reluctant and averse to reformation, who being impatient of an unwonted re∣straint, complotted to displace the one (the Prior) and with their calumnious aspersions sought the others infamy. Of certain (saith my Author) this Archbishop and Robert Harpsfield. his next Successor, inacted many decrees very usefull and conducing to the regulating of the Monks and keeping them within the compasse of monastick discipline. And whereas (saith he) 30 of the due and ancient number of the Monks was decreased and wanting, the same Robert redu∣ced them to their full number. But this Thomas, our Prior, betook himself to the Cistertian disciple at Beaulieu, and af∣terwards becoming more rigid to himself turned Anchoret. Peter Ikham a Kentishman, and (as my author thinks) a Canterb. man born, a famous Historian and Antiquary, was
contemporary with this Prior, of whom see more (if you please) in Pits. Henricus de Eastry. 24. Hen. de Eastry succeeded Tho. Ringemer, and continued Anno Dom. 1285. Prior 37 yeares. A fair time, in which I finde Record of ma∣ny worthy acts done both in and about the Church and Mo∣nastery, and also in their Demesnes abroad, which therefore I may justly intitle to this Prior: whereof I may not forget the repair of the Quire and Chapter-house which cost 839 lib. 7s8d. and the Novum clocarium longum versus North in the yeare 1317. a Steeple sometime standing on the North∣side of the Church sithence either with age decayed, or by some alterations or new buildings defaced. He built also a new Grange at Berton, where in his time to wit anno 1302. Berton. I finde the Church had a Goal or Prison. For (as the Story Liber eccles. Cant. goes) one of Christ-Church Berton that yeare killing an∣other there, and being by the Churches Officers imprison∣ed in the Gaol there: the Bailiffs of the City go to Berton, and by strong hand take the prisoner thence, and commit him to the Town Gaol: but after treaty and sight of the Church Charters of Infangthes &c. they restore him; who at the next assises at Maidstone was tried, convicted, con∣demned, and hanged at the Church-gallowes at Holling∣borne. To return to our Prior. I finde b. eccles. Cantuar. that in his time the Church was plentifully furnished with Vines, as at Colton, Berton, S. Martins, Chertham, Brooke and Hollingbourne, all Mannors of the same. They had to all or most of their Mannors a domestick Chapell, to each of them almost, a Vines. new one of his making, and a Bertary. The totall of the charge of his 37 yeares works is recorded to be 2184 lib. 18s. 8d. In his time a suit or at least a complaint or presentment was brought by the City against him and the Chapter, for building fourescore shops toward Burgate, and for stopping up the way between Queningate, and Northgate. But in the one, the latter, they defended themselves by the Charter
of Hen. (whereof before:) And for the other, by the Jury it was found that although they had made shops opening to Burgate, yet upon their own soile, and without prejudice to the City, because the Church did not demand nor had any stallage for them. In the list of the Churches family in this Priors time, a Notary makes one of the company. The Pri∣or Notarie. (I take it) for the time being alwayes had one, and used him (among other imployments) chiefly as his Amanuen∣sis or Scribe for the dispatch of such busines as was brought before him by delegation from the See of Rome. For thus I finde him petitioning the Pope for his authoritie to create Notaries, as it is in a Lieger of the Church. Significat sanctitati vestrae Prior ecclesiae Christi Cant. quòd per sedem Apostolicam frequenter committuntur eidem Priori Causae & negotia audienda & discutienda, ac etiam Delegatorum sententiae exequendae: propter quae necessari∣um est sibi usus & officium Tabellion' & quia in Civitate & Dioc. Cant. rarissimè haberi potest copia tabellionum: supplicat sanctitati vestrae Prior praedictus quòd placeat vo∣bis gratiosè concedere sibi potestatem faciendi duos Tabel∣liones. But the present Prior Henry, in the yeare 1306. makes it his suit to an Imperiall Count Palatine, who by a priviledge annexed to his dignity, hath power to make notaries, to authorise him by letters of deputation to create three. Whereunto he condiscended: whose letters or licence to∣gether with the Instrument or faculty of a Notariship by vertue thereof granted I purpose in my Appendix to tender Vide pro Scri∣ptura † 16. in Appendice. to their perusall who would know the course of that age in this point of creating Notaries. They even as little differ in tenor as in time, with those of Mr. Seldens setting out in his Titles of Honor. par. 2. c. 1. §. 44. But (by the way) this way of creating Notaries is so long since disused and left, and that originally for this reason viz. Eo quòd Regnum An∣gliae ab omni subjectione imperiali sit liberrimum, as it is in Ed. 2. constitution or writ made for the future discarding that course of creating Notaries, and directed and sent to
the Archbishop of Cant. and the Maior of London, whereof you may reade more at large in the same Author, both in the quoted place, and also Part. 1. c. 2. §. 5. And indeed Notaries were scarce and rare in this Kingdome long before Ed. 2. time, as you may finde by those 2 Legatine Consti∣tutions of Otho: Cap. Quanto. and Cap. Quoniam tabellio∣num. in the preface to each. And for that cause, and for supply of that defect, it was thought requisite, for the cre∣dit of publick Instruments to invent and have recourse to authentick seales. Whence those two Legatine Constitutions; Authentick Seales. the one commanding them to be frequently used, the other forbidding them to be at all misused. Ever since which time the publick instruments of Bishops and other Ordinaries have been justified, by such authentick seales: and such of them as going out under the Bishops seale (for, as one saith the certificate of any Ordinary under a Bi∣shop Finch. Of law lib. 4 pag. 138. is of no credit nor will be received in the Kings Courts) use hath bin made of at the common law; for their seales sake, have been of faith and reputed authentick. How true then their affirmation is which say that Eccle∣siasticall Courts are no Courts of Record comes fitly Cos of Re∣cord. here in place to be inquired. Bishops I know for cer∣tain (saith one) certifying Bastardy, Bigamy, Excommuni∣cation, the Vacancy or Plenarty of a Church, a marriage, a Divorce, a spirituall intrusion, or whether a man be professed in any religion, with other such like are credited without further inquiry or controlment. Besides a Testament shewed under the seale of the Ordinary is not traversable. Thus Dr Cowell in his Interpreter, in verb. Record. Where he cites many authorities for proof hereof out of common law and lawyers books: whither I referre you, and return to our Prior. Who in the yeare 1285. entered into composition with the then Abbat of S. Austins touching a certain kay  Kay at dwich. and house built by him or the preceding Prior at Fordwich, to the great distast of the Abbat, whereof more hereafter in my Appendix, where I will give you the full relation of it from Thorne. viz. pag. 275.
In his time, namely anno 1296. the Priory was a while in great distresse and worthily, for denying the King a subsidy, by example of the Archbishop (Robert Winchelsey) who made like deniall of payment thereof: Vnde (saith my Author Reyner, in Append. ad A∣postolat. Bee∣dict. pag. 62.) omnia temporalia ejus confiscata sunt, & quod hor∣rendum est quicquid habebant Monachi ibidem infra portas suae ecclesiae, seisita sunt, ita quòd non haberent ad quod manus appo∣nerent, pro vitae necessariis nisi quod vicini eorum Religiosi, & alii mittebant eis intuitu charitatis, & hoc tam diu duravit, do∣nec Prior & Capitulum necessitate compulsi redemptionem fece∣runt &c. I will conclude my discourse of this Prior with what I finde written by Archbishop Parker of him and his stout and faithfull discharge of his duty in maintenance of such rights, and putting into practice such power of Jurisdiction as in the vacancy of the See (by Walter Reynods death) de∣volved and appertained unto him and the Chapter. Erat eo tempore (saith he Antiq. Britan. pag. 217.). Prior Cantuariensis quidam Henricus, vir ut existimari convenit, minus rerum usu, quàm jure ipso pru∣dens, juriumque Cantuarien. Ecclesiae vacante sede quòd ab ante∣cessoribus suis neglecta videbantur, explorator sedulus atque sa∣gax, tum in gerendis ecclesiae rebus assiduus atque solers. Hic paucis mensibus omnem illam intermediam Iurisdictionem ante intermissam plenè exercuit atque renovavit. De Clericis ad ec∣clesiastica benesicia praesentatis & patronorum Iure diligenter in∣quisivit, electiones confirmavit, intestatorum bona administran∣da commisit, provocantium appellationes recepit, testamenta actis insinuavit, ab executoribus & administratoribus rationes exegit, inter quos maximè Episcoporum defunctorum testamentorum ex∣ecutores, aut bonorum administratores interpellavit. Ita ut Io∣hannis Peckam (ut in ejus vita diximus) testamentum exequen∣tes ad rationes reddendas coegit. Ad haec visitavit, procuratio∣nes percepit, Synodum celebravit, Clerum ex mandato Regio ad Parliamentum citavit, contumaces & in suam jurisdictionem committentes poenis coercuit, beneficia vacantium sedium contu∣lit, ad haec capas choreales, annulos & sigilla à singulis Cant. provinciae Suffraganeis Cant. eccl. vendicavit, omniaque ad
Archiepiscopalem Iurisdictionem per singulas species tam exqui∣sitè exercuit, ut nihil fuerit praetermissum praeter Episcoporum consecrationem, quam cum sua authoritate per agere non poterat, Episcopo Londinensi mandavit & injunxit, ut is suffraganeis Cantuariae in Christi ecclesia die quodam statuto congregatis Me∣neuensem & Bangorens' Episcopos tunc electos & sua authorita∣te confirmatos consecraret. Quibus sic consecratis in testimoni∣um & fidem consecrationis literas conventus sigillo sigillatus de∣dit &c. Richard Oxinden. 25. Richard Oxinden succeeded Hen. Who is the first of all Anno Dom. 1322. the Priors (except Wibert) that hath any memoriall of his buriall in the Church: and that you shall finde to be in S. Michaels Chapell upon a plate of brasse fastened to and upon East-wall, bearing this inscription Hic requiescit in gratia & Misericordia Dei Richardus Oxinden, quondam Prior hujus Ecclesiae, qui ob. Aug. 4. 1338. Iohannes de Teneth (Thanetensis Pits. calls him) a man fa∣mous for his piety and learning, was a Monk of this place contemporary with this our Prior, and Chantor of the Chantor. Church (an office of great account in those dayes:) you may finde him a witnesse to Henry the preceding Priors Letters or facultie of Notariship before mentioned. Robert Hathbrand. 26. Robert Hathbrand succeeded R. Oxinden, and having been Prior 32. yeares died, and was buried in the same Chapell 1338. with his predecessor, where he hath the like memoriall thus inscribed. Hic requiescit in gratia & misericordia Dei Dominus Ro∣bertus Hathbrand quondam Prior hujus Ecclesiae, qui obiit xvij. die Aug. Anno Domini Mccclxx. Cujus animae pro∣pitietur Deus, Amen. In his time the Monastery being visited with the Pesti∣lence then raging generally throughout the Kingdome, Appledoor mer∣shes inned. the whole Covent almost died of it. Appledore mershes were inned in his time, to wit anno 1349. which cost the Church 350. lib Lib. Eccles. Cantuar..
1370. Richard Gillingham. 27. 1376. Stephen Mongeham. 28. Of these two, besides their names and times in which they lived, as yet I finde not what to say. Iohn Finch. 29. Anno Dom. 1377. Of this Priors acts, or what he did living, I have seen no Monument but that of him dead you may finde in the Martyrdome, where he lies interred under this broken Epitaph. Hic jacet Iohannes Fynch de Winchelsey quondam Prior hujus ecclesiae qui obiit 9. die Ianuarii—edificia constructa & plura alia collata bona—cujus animae— I have seen a Bull of Pope Vrban 6. to this Prior de mitra, 1378. tunica, Dalmatica, cirothecis, cum annulo. To these the Pa∣storall staffe and Sandalls were added and granted to his Successor, and the succeeding Priors for ever, to be used by them in the absence onely of the Archbishop. From this time (I take it) and because these were badges of Episco∣pall power and state, they and their Successors were (and were called) Lord-Priors. Stephen Birchynton was a Monk of Lord Prior. this Church in those dayes. Pits. calls him Steph. Bricking∣ton, and saith he wrote the lives of the Archbishops of Cant. all untill Courtney, and a Catal. of the Bishops of Ely. Thomas Chillenden. 30. 1390. Thomas Chillenden (whom Archbishop Parker by mistake calls Henry Chllenden, and so doth Bishop Godwyn from him) succeeded Iohn Fynch. Concerning this worthy Pre∣late I have (as occasion was offered) spoken much already in my Survey of the Church, unto which he was a match∣lesse benefactor, and deserves eternall memory for it: wherefore I will be sparing of much further discourse of him or his acts. He was a man well beloved of Archbishop Courtney, but more deare unto his Successor Arundell (who made him his Commissary of Canterb.) and lies hard beside him in the Nave or body of the Church, a stately pile and Body of Christ-Church ne built, chiefly of his raising, as I have at large shewed you before: and what saith his Epitaph?
Hic jacet Dominus Thomas Chyllindenne quondam Prior hu∣jus ecclesiae, Decretorum Doctor egregius, qui navem isti∣us ecclesiae caeteraque diversaaedificia, quamplurima quoque opera laudabilia de novo fieri fecit. Pretiosa in super—ec∣clesiastica, multaque privilegia insignia huic ecclesiae ac∣quisivit, qui postquam Prioratum hujus ecclesiae Annis vi∣ginti. 25. septimanis; & quinque diebus nobiliter rexisset, tandem in die assumptionis beatae Mariae Virginis diem su∣um clausit extremum. Anno Domini 1411. Cujus animae propitietur Deus. Amen. William Gillingham, a Monk of this Church was Coaeta∣neous with this Prior: of whom you shall finde great com∣mendation given by Pits. Iohn Woodnesborough. 31 Iohn Woodnesborough succeeded Tho. Chillenden. See this Anno Dom. 1411. mans courtesie to the City by what here follows, taken from the Records of the Church. Memorandum quòd xijo die Iulii Anno R. R. Hen 5. Angl, Aid lent to the City by the Prior. tertio, Dominus Iohannes Prior ecclesiae Christi Cant. ad in∣stantiam & specialem rogatum Wmi Lane & Wmi Mason Ballivorum Civitatis Cant. fact. per Ioannem Browne Plo∣mer dictae Civitatis Civem & armigerum ac plumbarium praefatae ecclesiae permisit servientes suos cum villanis egre∣di cum armis & aliis instrumentis defensivis ad augendum numerum & populum Civitatis. Quandam vigiliam in Civitate observatam progente Francorum qui reverte∣bantur à Domino Rege de Suthampton versus partes pro∣prias postquam acceperant à Domino Rege quòd ad partes hujusmodi disponeret transmeare. Et pro parte dictorum Ballivorum & civium Civitatis per oraculum viv vocis dicti Iohannis Browne nuncii sive procuratoris eorundem, Dompno Stephano de Sancto Laurentio Cellerario, ac Wil∣lielmo Molush tunc Custodi ac capellano praefati Domini Prioris, sub fidelitate eorum est infallibiliter repromissum, Quòd nusquam pro isto facto in hominibus nostris aliquid juris vel clamei pro consimilibus negotiis aliquid in poste∣rum super nos aut homines nostros futuris temporibus ven∣dicabunt,
& sub hac conditione Dominus Prior supra dictus de familiaribus suis ipsis accommodavit xvj.  cum omni apparatu honesto ac xxiiij. architenentes ad de∣corem & laudem civium praedictorum. Hoc idem fecerunt penes Abbatem S. Augustini die & anno supradictis à quo ix. lanc' & xxiiij. architenen' ex praescripto habuerunt. This man continued Prior about 17 yeers, and then dy∣ing was laid next above his predecessor Chillenden, in the body of the Church, with this Epitaph. Est nece substratus Ion Woodnesbergh tumulatus, Hujus erat gratus Prior ecclesiae numeratus; Quem colie ornatus hic tantus ubique novatus, Per loca plura datus sit sumptus testificatus: Auctor erat morum, probitatis, laudis honorum, Largus cunctorum, cunctis dator ille laborum, Quique Prioratum rexit sub schemate gratum. Annos hunc plenos per septenos quoque denos: Quadrigentenis Mil. ejus bis quoque denis Annis septenis Domini nondum sibi plenis. —cum tibi Chiste—agone Quem precibus pone radiantis forte corone. Iohn Langdon a famous Monk of the place was contempo∣rary with this Prior, of whom see further in Pits. William Molush. 32. William Molush succeeded Woodnesb: The tower now called Dunstan steeple, built for the most part by Arch∣bishop 1427. Chichely being finished, this Prior in the yeare 1430. Godwin. furnished it with a goodly bell remaining there till this day, and knowne by the name of bell Dunstan, as the steeple also is from thence. The Diameter of that bell at the low∣est brim (saith my Author) is two yards and somewhat more. He also the year following bestowed on the Church-Brewhouse a great cauldron of the weight of vm•l. iiiic. iii. quart', as I finde noted in a book of the Church.
Iohn Salesbury. 33. This Prior lyeth buried at the upper end of the body of the Church with this Epitaph 1437. Preteriens flere discas, & dic miserere, Et ne subsannes, quia victus morte Iohannes, Membris extensis jacet hic Sarisburiensis: Sic non evades, vindice morte cades. Hic prior ecclesiae Doctor{que} fuit Theoriae: Wulstani festo feria quarta memor esto Mille quater centum x. v. dant documentum Sint animae merces, lux, decor & requies. Amen. Iohn Elham. 34. He lyes next above his predecessour Woodnesborough, un∣der a faire stone with this Epitaph. 1440. Hic requiescit Dominus Thomas Elham quondam Prior hujus ecclesiae, Qui cum Ann. 2. mens. 11. & 4. dieb. honorificè vixisset, 20, Febru. 1440. obdormivit in Domino. Thomas Goldstone. 35. This man in behalfe of himselfe and his Covent appealed 1448. to the then Comissary of Cant. for Justice against a certaine foule mouthed abusive fellow, who (as he stands charged upon record) anno 1452. had called them Whoresons and farting Monks. He lyeth buried in the Lady-Chapell, but the brasse is almost all torne from his monument. Iohn Stone a most pious Monk of the place was contemporary with this Prior, of whom see Pits. 1468. Iohn Oxney. 36. 1471. William Petham 37. VVilliam Selling. 38. Being a Monke of this Church, with leave of the Chapter he gat him over into Italie, studied at Bononie, and became a 1472. great Scholar. But of his affection to antiquities he gather∣ed together where ever he came in Italy all the ancient Au∣thors, both Greek and Latine, he could get, and brought
them over into England and to Cant. Not long after his re∣turne, Harpsfield. by the common vote and suffrage of the Monks, he was chosen for their Prior. Shortly after his death by a fire which happened in the Monastery in the night time by the carelesnesse of some drunken servants, those brave Books Priorie fired. (which Lambert by error saith were brought over by a Monk of Saint Austins) amongst which were Tullies books de Repub∣lica so much desired, and many other of great price, were brought to ashes. Hen. 7. taking notice of his worth, sent him Embassdour to the Pope. He died anno 1494. and lyeth buried in the Martyrdome with this Epitaph, which Wever hath curtaild. Hic jacet reverendus pater Wilhelmus Selling hujus sacro∣sanctae ecclesiae Prior, ac sacrae Paginae. professor, qui post∣quam hanc ecclesiam per ann. 22. mens. 5. & 24. d. optimè gubernasset migravit ad Dominum, die viz. passionis san∣cti Thom Martyris, Anno 1494. Doctor Theologus Selling Greca etque Latina Lingua predoctus hic Prior almus obit Omnis virtutis speculum, exemplar Monachorum, Religionis honor, mitis imago Dei. Adde quod ingenii rivorum tanta cucurrit Copia cunctorum quantula rara virum. Regius orator cujus facundia mulsit Romanos Gallos Orbis & ampla loca. Hujus presidio res ista domestica rata est, Et redimita annis plurimis egregie. Pervigil hic Pastor damna atque incommoda cuncta A grege commisso fortiter expulerat. Dum brevi tumulo latet hoc, tota Anglia famam Predicat, & tanto lugeat orba patre. Huc iter omnis habens, stet, perlegat & memor ejus Oret ut ascendat spiritus alta poli. Thomas Goldstone. 39. Thomas Goldstone succeeded Selling. He was a man also 1495. Harpsfield. which had his Princes favour. For Hen. 7. sent him Embas∣sadour
to Charles the French King. He is in nothing more famous then for his much building, and repairing of and a∣bout the Church, as (for instance) the new building of the Tower or Lantorne of the steeple now commonly called Bell-Harry-steeple, as also of the Church-gate (stately piles both) and many other like pious works, which are easie of discovery by the three gold stones, the two first letters of his name and sirname, the Miter and Pastorall-staffe set up in many places about the Church and Monastery. He continued his government almost 25. yeares, and dying anno 1517. was laid by his immediate predecessor in the Martyrdome, with this Epitaph, which Wever also hath curtaild. Hic jacet reverendus pater Thomas Goldstone hujus sacro∣sanctae ecclesiae Prior, ac sacraepaginae professor, qui post∣quam hanc ecclesiam per annos 24. 8. mens. & dies 16. optime gubernasset, migravit ad Dominum, 16. Septemb. Anno Dom. 1517. Cujus animae, &c. Tangite vos Citharam plangentes carmine, mole Hic jacet occulta Religionis honos. Occubuit Doctor Thomas Goldston vocitatus Moles quem presens saxea magna tenet. Arripit hunc patrem mors pervigilemque Priorem Sic rapitur quoque lux istius ecclesiae. Grex sibi commissus monachorum plangat eundem Omissum Patrem, qui sibi fautor erat. Largus in expensis fieri dat plura novata Istius ecclesiam vestibus ornat idem. Sic fuit ad Regni laudem canit Anglia largus Totus & is mitis pauperibus fuerat O vos spectantes hujus jam funera patris, Nunc estis memores fundite quaeso preces. Requiescat in sancta Pace. Amen. Thomas Goldwell. 40. Thomas Goldwell succeeded Tho: Goldstone, and was the last Prior of the Church of Cant. governing the same untill 1517.
the yeare 1540. at what time this Priory was dissolved, and the Prior and Monks ejected and displaced by Hen. 8. who, in lieu of them, placed a Deane and twelve Prebendaries. The names of the Deanes it shall not be amisse here to set downe. 1. Nicholas Wotton, Dr. of Law. 2. Thomas Godwyn, Dr. of Divinitie. 3. Richard Rogers, Suffragan of Dover. 4. Thomas Nevill, Dr. of Divinitie. 5. Charles Fotherby, Batchelor of Divinitie. 6. Iohn Boys, Dr. of Divinitie. 7. Isaac Bargrave, Dr. of Divinitie. At the time of which new foundation of the Church by The Cathe∣dralls fourth and last seale. Hen. 8. the common seale thereof was againe changed and new made. The inscription in the circumference whereof was this, on the one side. Sigill. ecclesie Cathed. et Metrop'x. Cant. noviter erecte per regem Hen. 8. On the o∣ther side: Ego sum via. veritas. et vita. anno incarnati. Chri∣sti. 1540. Which was the Churches fourth and last com∣mon seale, and continueth still in use, being not so large as the former, which former was much larger then the next precedent, which was also farre greater then the first, which first was much both of the same size and character with that leaden seale to St. Augustines bull or charter lately set out St. Astins common eales. by St. Hen. Spelman in his Councells pag. 122. And now ha∣ving so sit an occasion, it will not be thought impertinent, I hope, if I present you with the inscriptions on the common seales of that Abbey. Whereof I finde onely two. The one, the smaller of the two, a very old one, representing on the one side both the names and pourtraicts of the blessed Apo∣stles Peter & Paul, with this inscription in the circumference. † Hoc sigillum factum est anno primo Henrici Regis Anglorum. And on the other side, the effigies of an Archbishop in his pontificall habit (St. Augustine probably meant by it) with this inscription in the circumference † Sigill. ecclesie sancti Augustini Cantuarie Anglorum Apostoli. The other com∣mon
seale, the larger of the two, and of more curious work then the former, representeth on the one side a Church, and in the midddest of it, both the name and effigies of St. Austin. together with the Abbies armes Being a Crosse argent in a field sable. and some other embellishments, with this inscription in the circumfe∣rence. Anglia quae domino fidet sociatur amore Hoc Augustino debetur patris honore. On the other side, a Church also with the figures of both those Apostles Peter and Paul, this with a sword, the other with a key in his hand, and underneath, (if I mistake not) the Christening or baptizing of King Ethelbert, by Austin, with this circumscription in the ing. Sigillum monasterii beatorum Apostolorum Petri et Pauli sociorum Augustini Anglo∣rum Apostoli Cantuar. But I will no longer digresse. For a Corollary to this Catalogue, I pray my Reader to take notice that this Prior, was a Lord-Prior, a spirituall Ba∣ron of the Parliament, and the Priory whilest it had ex∣istence, possessed of great revenewes, being valued at the suppression (but not to the worth) at 2489l. 4s. 9d. The forme of electing and installing this Prior, transcribed from the Church-records, he may finde in mine Appendix. Vide p.  Scri∣ptura 19. in Appendice. And so this Catal. also being ended, I proceed to the third. A Catalogue of the Arch-deacons of Canterbury. FOr your better understanding the originall of this Originall of the Archdea∣conry. Archdeaconry, take here, by way of preface or introdu∣ction to the ensuing catalogue, the words of Archbishop Parker Antiq. Britan, in vita Lan∣franci. touching the same. Extra Civitatem Cantuariae (saith he) in parte orientali erat ecclesia sancti Martini, ubi sedes E∣piscopi erat, qui domi, vel in Comitatu semper manebat, & vi∣ces Archiepisc. (qui Regis curiam frequentabat) per omnia gere∣bat. Monachos ecclesiae Christi (ac ipse Monachus) in obsequi∣um accipiebat: solennitates in ecclesia Metropoli celebrabat, qui∣bus peractis ad suaredieba. Hic & Prior ecclesiae Christi (quem Decanum vocabant) in Synodis pari ornatu considebant. Atque
hic mos usque ad tempora Normannorum perduravit, ejusque Epi∣scopii praesul extremus fuit Godwinus. Quo mortuo anno scili∣cet 1065. Lanfrancus Episcopum Ecclesiae beati Martini sub∣stituere renuit, dicens quòd in una Civitate duo Episcopi esse non deberent, cum revera in Civitate Episc. non fuit, sed extra ci∣vitatem. Is igitur loco Episcopi quendam Clericum suum Ar∣chidiaconum ordinavit, cujus rei ante mortem eum poenituit. Thus he. Let me further enlarge this matter unto you out of a Record of Christ-Church, which is somewhat more copious in the relation of it then the former, and is thus intituled. Nota à quo tempore incepit primo ecclesiae Cantuariensis esse Ar∣chidiaconus. And then follows. Memorandum qd' à tempo∣re beati Augustini primi Archiepisc. Cant. usque ad tempus bo∣nae memoriae Lanfranci Archiepiscopi, per Ccclxij annos nul∣lus fuit Archidiaconus in Civitate vel Dioc. Cant. Sed à tem∣pore beati Theodori Archiepisc. qui sextus erat à beato Augu∣stino usque ad tempus praed' Lanfranci fuit in ecclesia Sancti Martini in Suburbio Cant. quidam Episcopus authoritate Vita∣liani Bishop of S. Martin. Papae à Sancto Theodoro ordinatus, qui in tota Civitate & Dicc. Cant. vices Episcopi gerebat, in ordinibus celebrandis, ec∣clesiis consecrandis & puris confirmandis, & aliis officiis ponti∣ficalibus exequendis ipso absente. Idem etiam Episcopus omni∣modam jurisdictionem in Civitate & Dioc. Cant. sede plena, au∣thoritate Archiepisc. ipso absente & sede vacante in tota Provin∣cia authoritate Capiuli exercebat per Cccxlix. annos usque ad tempus Lanfranci praedict. Postmodum tempore Lanfranci Ar∣chiepiscopi praefatus Episcopus in fata decessit. Sed idem Ar∣chiepisc. alium substituere non decrevit, sed postmodum concessit cuidam clerico suo, nomine Valerio, totam Iurisdictionem in Ci∣vitate Cant. tantum, exceptis & ecclesiis de patronatu Archi∣episc. & causis matrimonial. de quibus se nihil intromittet. Et incepit idem Clericus tunc primò vocari Archidiaconus Cant. Contulit etiam eidem clerico domicilium extra Northgate juxta Monasterium Sancti Gregorii in quo continuò residebat usque ad tempus bonae memoriae Stephani Archiepiscopi per Clix. annos. By the premisses it seems cleare that Lanfranc erected
the Archdeaconry (and instituted the first Archdeacon) of Canterb. yet I read that Almar (or Almarus) the man so much (and if guilty, worthily) condemned in our Stories for betraying the City of Canterb. (besieged by the Danes) into their hands, in the reigne of King Ethelred, anno 1011. was Archdeacon of the Church of Canterb. so was likewise afterwards one Haimo, who, because of the troubled state of his countrey infested by the Danes, for a time, forsook his countrey, and gat him over into France, where he kept untill the times were more quiet and tolerable here at home, and then returning, was welcomed with this digni∣ty. Harpsfield mentions both. But beside, long before ei∣ther of these, I finde in two Saxon manuscripts in Christ-Church, the one a Codicill, or Libell dated anno 805. the other, the Record or memoriall of a Synod two yeares before, holden at Clofeshoaf (Cliff beside Rochester) one Wlfraed to subscribe with the Archbishop of Canterb. and others of his Church, thus. Wlfraed Archidiaconus. The same Records make mention of the names of other Archdeacons after∣wards, as Anno Dom. 844. Beornoth. 853. Aethelweald. 864. Ealstan. 866. Sigefreth. Eod. Liaving. 890. Werbeald. Let me adde that in the yeare 1075. (if we follow Harps∣fields account, which questionlesse is the truer, for Lanfranc was not yet Archbishop, when Parker saith Godwyn died) eleven yeares before Godwyn's time, to the Instrument or Record of the Councell holden at London De primatu eccle∣siae Cantuar. & regulis ecclesiarum, next unto the Archbi∣shops and BB. is this inscription. Ego Anschitillus sanctae Dorobernensis ecclesiae Archidiaconus subscripsi. How is it true then, that Lanfrank founded the Archdeaconry, and made the first Archdeacon of Canterb.? I answer and conceive
for truth that there was a setled Archdeaconry before Lan∣franks dayes: but he that was Archdeacon of the Church, was withall Bishop of S. Martin: that is, beside that of an Archdeacon, was indued with the title, power and office of a Bishop, or (as I take it rather) of a Chorepisc. whereby the might and did vices gerere Archiepisc. and supply his absence in many things, wherein a bare Archdeacon, by his office, by law, cannot meddle. Now Lanfrank finding the case thus to stand, and well knowing that Chorepiscopi (both in name and office) were abolished abroad, because of their pride, usurpation, and no very good ground of institution at first, and (as his own reason is) not liking to have two Bi∣shops to one City; Godwyn the Incumbent of that dignity dying in his time, (as he was a man that much changed the face ofthings in our Church affairs) he changed the Chore∣piscopall Archdeacon into a simple Archd. that is stript him of his Chorepiscopall title and power, restraining the succeed∣ing Archdeacons power within the limits onely of an Arch∣deacons office. Et ita mihi videtur, pace alterius meliùs me sentientis semper salva. Now to my Catalogue. Before Lanfranks erection or change rather of the Arch∣deaconry, twelve are all the Bishops or Archdeacons, whose names I meet with. viz. 1. Wlfred. 2. Beornoth. 3. Aethelweald. 4. Ealstan. 5. Sigefreth. 6. Liaving. 7. Werbeald. 8. Almar. 9. Haimo. 10. Edsin. 11. Aschitillus. 12. Godwyn. Whereof the first (Wlfred) I take it within few yeares af∣ter that his subscription before remembred, became Arch∣bishop of Cant. In the yeare 807. Wlfred being a Monk of Christ-church in Cant. was made Archbishop of Cant. saith Godwyn. Likely to be this Wlfred. For he was alwayes a Monk of Christ-Church that was Bishop of S. Martin. So Parker ubi supra.
Of the 6 next, I have nothing to say, unlesse I should note that in subscribing to a Charter of King Etheldreds, Beornoths name is set before divers Dukes. Of Almar, if you would know more, consult the Story of the Danish siege and surprisall of our City anno 1011. related by Roger Hoveden and others. Eor Haimo, let Balaeus and Pits. be your further infor∣mers. As for Edsin, I read in the Records of Christ-Church that anno 1035. Kanutus Rex dedit Eadsino Episcopo Sancti Martini, quae ecclesia sita est extra Doroberniam in Oriente, A∣puldre, Palstre & Witricham ad opus ecclesiae Christi Dorober∣niae, liberè sicut Adesham. Whether this were the man that in the yeare 1038. was made Archbishop of Cant. I am un∣certain. Haply it was. If so, the Catalogue of B B. will fur∣ther inform you of him. Of the other two Anschitillus and Godwyn, I have said what I know. Wherefore I passe now to Lanfranks first Archdeacon. Archbishop Parker names him not, nor yet Archd. Harpsfield: but the Church Record (as you may see before) doth; and calls him Valerius, adding that he was Lanfranks Clerk. How long this man held the place I finde not, but he was the last of that (the eleventh) Century. Those of the next were the 9 next following. 1. William. 2. Ichn. 3. Ascelinus. 4. Helewisus. 5. Walter. 6. Roger. 7. Thomas Becket. 8. Geffrey Ridell. 9. Herbert. Whereof William was the first. For in the yeare 1101. in the Enquiry whether Maud, daughter of Malcolme King of Scots and Margaret his Queen, being to be married to Hen∣ry 1. were a Nonne, or had taken on her the veile and vow of a Nonne, or not, related by Edmerus, mention is made of  Hist. Novorum lib 3. pag. 57. one William Archdeacon of Cant. who together with Hum∣bald
the Archdeacon of Sar. was sent by Archbishop An∣selme to Wilton to inquire out the truth of the matter there, it being the place of her education. He is again afterward, to wit anno 1108. mentioned by the same Author pag. 96. as used and sent by Anselme, on his behalfe, to invest and put into possession of the Bishoprick of Rochester, Ralfe Gun∣dulph's next successour upon whom Anselme had bestowed the same. And that is all I reade of him, saving a letter of the same Anselme directed to him and others about Priests marriages, mentioned in the Acts and Monuments. His next Successor (and he with whom Harpsfield begins his Catalogue) was one Iohn nephew unto Ralfe the Arch∣bishop, who gave him this Archdeaconry with great and un∣wonted solemnity, as Edmerus relates it Hist. memorat. li. 5. pag. 114., who saith that Radulphus Archiepisc. consilio & petitione Episcoporum, proxi∣mè supra nominatorum (to wit Richard of London, Roger of Salisbury, Herbert of Norwich, Ralph of Chichester, Iohn of Bath, and Hervey of Ely) dedit (concedentibus & approbantibus Monachis Cantuariensibus) Archidiaconatum ipsius ecclesiae Iohanni nepoti suo. Quae donatio facta est in Capitulo, praesente fratrum conventu, copiosa Clericorum ac Laicorum multitudine, pro hoc ipso in medium adducta, facta prius, coram omnibus, ab eodem Iohanne, tactis Evangeliis, sacramento, quo se fidelita∣tem ecclesiae ipsi, per omnia & in omnibus exhibiturum, dum vi∣veret, repromisit. In the yeare 1119. this man was sent by the Archbishop to the Councell then holden at Remes, there to withstand the consecration of Thurstan the elect of Yorke at the hands of the Pope, who had beene rejected of Ralph the Archbishop of Cant. for refusing to make profession of sub∣jection to his See. How he behaved himselfe in that Pro∣vince, and what was the issue thereof, I leave it to Edmerus pag. 125., and the Catal. of B B. to informe you. The same man af∣terward, to wit in the yeare 1125. succeeded Ernulph in the Bishoprick of Rochester, which he injoyed till his death which happened anno 1137. Ascelinus or Asketinus succeeded Iohn, both first in the Archdeaconry of Canterb: and afterward (as I take it) in
the Bishoprick of Rochester. For upon the death of Iohn, Asce∣linus (saith the Catal. of B B.) succeeded, and died anno 1147. Likely to be this Archdeacon. Helewisus or Helvinus succeeded. He was sent by Arch∣bishop Corboyl together with the B B. of St. Davids and Ro∣chester, . to put the Monks of Dover in possession of their new Monastery built for them by that Archbishop, in the yeare 1134. which is all I reade of him. Walter succeeded him. He was afterward, to wit in the yeare 1147. elected Bishop of Rochester, and was the first that   . ever was made Bishop there by the Monks election. The Archbishop of Cant. was wont aforetime to nominate to this Bishoprick whom pleased him. Theobald the Archbishop bestowed this priviledge upon them, by whose command they chose this Walter, who was the Archbishops brother for their Bishop. Which Bishoprick he held 35. years, and dyed in the yeare 1182. He was succeeded in the Archdeaconry by Roger, pre∣ferred thereunto by Theobald the Archbishop (as were his immediate Predecessor and Successors:) By whose means he became afterwards Archbishop of York. Reade more of him (if you please) in the Catal. of BB. in York: where one thing is chiefly remarkable, viz. that whereas in his life Lex  time he had procured of Pope Alex. this priviledge, that if any Clergy man died in his Province, and delivered not his goods away by hand before his death, the Archbish. should have the disposition of them; it pleased God that the same measure he met unto other, he should be served withall himself. He left behinde him (or had at least wise what time he sickned) 11000 lib. in silver, and 300 lib. of gold, beside an infinite deale of plate, and sumptuous houshold∣stuffe. All this (though he had bestowed it to the use of the poore and other good purposes) the King notwithstanding seized upon, and converted it to his own use, saying it was no reason that his Will should stand for good, that had dis∣annulled the testaments of so many other. Being Archdeacon (as he was one that savoured not the
Monks of his time Godwin.) he proved very troublesome and offen∣sive to them of Christ-Church, by intruding himself amongst them, and into their Chapters and assemblies, as one of the society. Being no Monk, but a secular, the Monks could not brook his doings: but addressing themselves to the Archbishop for remedy, they procured of him the follow∣ing letters. Theobaldus Dei gratia Cant. Archiepisc. Angliae Primas. W. Priori & Conventui ejusdem ecclesiae, Salutem. Cum grande conversationis monasticae detrimentum esse dino∣scitur, contra usum ecclesiarum, & contra statuta regulae Monachorum capitulo clericos quasi de Iure admisceri: ic∣circo ne quis clericorum sive Cant. Archidiaconus sive ali∣us vestrrum quoquo modo habeat capitulum prohibemus. Si verò vobis Archidiaconus vester necessarius fuerit, & eum vocaveritis, tunc demum non differat, & ad vos ve∣nire, & vobis, si opus est, pro viribus auxiliari. Quotiens autem ipse à vobis accersitus vel Archiepiscopum comita∣tus sive in coena Domini, sive aliis opportunis temporibus in vestrum venerit Capitulum, more praedecessorum suorum Archidiaconorum, Asketini scilicet, Willielmi, & Hele∣wisi qui nos praecesserunt semper in suppeditaneo sedis Ar∣chiepiscopi sedeat, nec occasione hac vel alia in Capitulo vestro juris quippiam se habere arbitretur &c. Of this Archdeacon you may see more in Richard Arch∣bishop of Canterb. in the Catalogue afore cited. Thomas Becket succeeded Roger. But he that so favoured him as to bring him to this dignity, Archbishop Theobald, prevailed so farre with the King for his further advance∣ment, as that, after the accession of other preferments, at length Theobald dying, this man was selected by the King for his Successor. His story is obvious, wherefore I will not repeat it, and the rather because I have my self delivered many things of him before in proper place. Geffrey Ridell succeeded Becket: and was as the 3 former, of Theobalds preferring and putting in. He continued Archdeacon untill Archbishop Beckets time, whose story
mentions him as an enemy to him and his proceedings, as taking part with the King in his quarell with Becket, who therefore excommunicated him as you may reade in Rog. Hoveden, who will tell you more of this matter. This Archd. afterward was consecrate Bishop of Ely, to wit. anno 1174. The often-cited Catal. in Ely will let you know more of him. Herbert succeeded him, in the time of Richard the Arch∣bishop, Beckets immediate Successor. Who ('tis said) made Ma. Paris. three Archdeacons to his Diocesse, which usually had but one before. Their names were Savaricus, Nicolaus and He∣rebertus. But this held not long, the 3 being in the same Archbishops time reduced to one again, namely this Her∣bert. To whom the Archbishop made a personall Grant of Iurisdiction much like that whereabout the Archbishop of York and the Archdeacon of Richemond differed about the same time; for appeasing of which difference issued out that Decretall Epistle of Innocent. 3. Cap. Cum venissent. de Institutionibus. Our present Archdeacons Grant, which for Antiquity-sake I insert, was this here following. Richardus Dei gratia Cant. Archiepisc. totius Angliae Pri∣mas & Apostolicae sedis Legatus. Vniversis Christi fideli∣bus Personall Grant of Ju∣risdiction. ad quos praesentes literae pervenerint, salutem. Cum di∣lectus filius Herbertus Archidiaconus noster plura ad Ar∣chidiaconatum suum de Iure debere pertinere vendicaret, de quibus nobis non constabat, Intuitu probitatis suae & since∣ra affectione quam circa personam ipsius gerimus, haec el personaliter concessimus, sine omni praejudicio Cant. eccle∣siae & Successorum nostrorum. Institutiones viz. & Desti∣tutiones Decanorum, praehabito consilio nostro. Custodiam vacantium ecclesiarum ad nostram donationem non perti∣nentium, & omnes fructus dum vacaverint inde proveni∣entes liberè & absolutè. Placita etiam ecclesiastica & omnia emolumenta inde provenientia tam de Dominiis nostris quam Monachorum ecclesiae Cant. in Archidiaconatu Cant. constitutis. Omnia etiam emolumenta de placitis Archi∣diaconatus
sui ubicunque agitentur. Ita tamen quòd si mo∣dum circa homines Episcopor. vel Monachorum excesserit, nobis excessus correctionem reservavimus. Cognitionem etiam de causis matrimonior. cum accusantur usque ad desi∣nitivum calculum, & si dirimendum fuerit matrimonium, id nobis reservavimus. Institutiones etiam personarum in ecclesiis vacan' quae ad nostram specialiter non pertineant donationem: cum extra provinciam fuerimus: cum autem praesentes fuerimus & persona aliqua instituenda prius ob∣lata fuerit Archidiacono, dummodo hoc non fuerit procura∣tum, cum eam ad nos introduxerit, honorem ei in facto suo conservabimus. Omnes autem per nos instituti tam in ec∣clesiis de dominio nostro & Monachorum, quam in aliis, per Archidiaconum vel ejus Officialem introducentur in corporalem possessionem ecclesiarum in quibus fuerint insti∣tuti. Haec autem omnia praescripta sub praesentis scripti & sigilli nostri testimonio duximus redigenda, ut sicut ea prae∣fato Archidiacono nostro sunt à nobis personaliter concessa, ita ejus personae illibata conserventur. His testibus M10 Ge∣rardo Walerano Archid. Baiocen. M10 Petro Blesen &c. Thus much of the Archdeacons of the 12t. I come now to them of the next Century, whose names and order were as followeth. 1. Robert. 2. Hen. de Castil. 3. Hen. de Stanford. 4. Simon Langton. 5. Stephan. de Vicenna. 6. Stephan. de monte Luelli. 7. Hugo de mortuo mari. 8. Willielmus Middleton. 9. Robertus de Gernemutha. 10. Richardus de Ferrings. 11. Iohannes de Longtona. For the first, Robert: I reade that of Archdeacon of Can∣terb. he was made Bishop of Salisbury, succeeding Hubert that was translated thence to Canterb: in the yeare 1193. The second Hen. de Castilion succeeded Robert, and was Archdeacon in Hubert the Archbishops time: as I finde by divers of his subscriptions to charters and other evidences
of St. Radigund's Abbey by Dover, made by Hubert and o∣thers. In the yeare of our Lord 1202. this man being Arch∣deacon, there happened a great controversie between King Iohn and the Monks of St. Augustines touching the right of the patronage of the Church of Feversham. They were so Feversham. stiffe and stout on both sides in the carriage of the businesse, that through the violence that was used by the one to out the other of possession, the Churches prophanation ensued, whereupon this our Archdeacon challenging right to the custodie of the Church during the vacancy thereof, inter∣poseth himselfe, excommunicates the Monks for holding the Church by force, overthrows the altars as thereby pro∣faned, and then interdicts the Church. The Monks streight∣way appeale to the Pope. He sends out his commission for the full understanding of the matter: But (saith Lambert Perambul. of Kent, in Fever∣sham.) the Monks (being now better advised) took a shorter way, and sending presents to the King, they both obtained at his hands restitution of their right, and also wan him to become their good Lord and Patron. Notwithstanding, the Arch∣deacon and they proceeded on in suite at Rome, about the custodie and fruitss of their vacant Churches: this and Mil∣ton especially. In which suite issued out that Decretal Epistle of Innocent 3. Bonae memoriae. de Appellatio. directed to the B B. of Rochester and London. I finde also amongst the re∣cords of Christ-church a long scrowle of witnesses depositi∣ons taken as well on the one part as the other, but what was the issue or finall end of the controversie I know not, but do guesse (by a like course afterward taken with a succeeding Archdeacon upon this quarell renewed) he had compositi∣on given him by the Monks, and thereby some share and part with them of the profits of their vacant Churches yeelded to him for a peace. The matter which they strove for, was in those dayes of moment and very considerable, but the case is now altered by Stat. which gives the Suc∣cessour  8. . 8. 11. the fruits in the vacancie, and so hath cut off such brabbles. I have nothing more to say of this Archdeacon, but that you may finde him a witnesse to Queene Alianor's
Charter made to the Monks of Christ-Church, acquitting them of the Cities walling and inditching in Ric. 1. time. I come now to the third Archdeacon of this Century, which was Hen. de Stanford or Sandford (for I finde him writ∣ten either way, and Harpsfield writes him Stafford) elected afterwards to the Bishoprick of Rochester, and consecrate anno 1227. Being Archdeacon, he tooke a resignation of Blean Church, by the title of vices gerens Domini Stephani Cantuariensis, which was Archbishop Langton. He was co∣executor with the Prior of Christ-Church, of the Lady Ag∣nes  Lib. Hosp. d: Estbridg. Cliffords Will: See more of him in the Catalogue of B B. in Rochester. Ibidem. This Archdeacon being so preferred: Stephen Langton who was then Archbishop, having to his brother one Simon Langton (one that was not onely out of meanes, but also out of favour both with the King and Pope, the latter, by means of the former giving him the repulse for the Archbishoprick Matt. Paris. of Yorke, to which he was elected by the Chapter there) conferred the Archdeaconry upon him, the yeare before he died. In favour of whom (carne & sanguine revelante, saith a Record in Christ-Church) he much amended the Arch∣deaconry. For with the consent and confirmation of the Chapter, he annexed and united to it, not only the Churches (or Personages) of Tenham and Hackington, but also the Tenham. . whole Jurisdiction over the Diocesse, with an exception onely and reservation of some causes and Churches. Et quia (saith the Record in Christ-Church) dictus Archidiaconatus exilis erat in possess, concessit eidem Simoni totam Iurisdictio∣nem Diocesanam in Decanatibus ruralibus, exceptis causis ma∣trimonialibus & ecclesiis quae sunt in maneriis Archiepiscopatus & Monachorum, de quibus se nihil intromittebat. But you may see (if you please) in my Appendix, the double Instrument of the conveyance of both one and the other Vide pro Scri∣ptur. 20. & 2. in Appendice.. To compleate and make this grant absolute: whereas Baldwyn and Hubert his predecessors, upon the controversie between them and the Monkes about the Chapels of Ha∣kington and Lambhith, upon displeasure taken against the
Archdeacon (it is like) for opposing them and their project in behalfe of the Monks, had exempted certaine Churches: this Stephen, with the Monkes consent, by a speciall Char∣ter, reverseth and revokes that exemption, and subjects againe the Churches to the Archdeacons Jurisdiction in such manner as by the tenor of the Charter copied in my Appendix Scriptura 22. may and will appeare. And then be∣gan Achidiaconal Iurisdiction enlarged. the Archdeaconry to be enlarged, this Archdeacon being the first that ever had a reall or perpetuall grant made to him and his Successors of the Archidiaconal Iurisdiction, whose predecessors never had other then a personall, such as was that (before set forth) made to Herbert, or the like. These things happening in December Anno Domini 1227. In the moneth of February next following, the same Arch∣deacon makes a double Charter to the Monkes, whether in consideration of their passing their consent to the uniting the two foresaid Churches of Hakynton and Tenham to the Archdeaconry, or wherefore else to me appeares not; by the one, conveying to them, with consent of his brother the Archbishop, omnes decimas de Eylwarton majores & mi∣nores Titery of Yel∣verton. sitas infra limites parochiae de stanes Capella de Tenham: which at this day passe by and under the name of dominicall or demeasne-tithes. i. Tithes of the demeasnesse of that Mannor, which is now called Yelverton. By the other, be∣coming ingaged for himself and his Successors that nothing should be done in the Church or Chapell of Hakynton, then there built or to be built, to the prejudice of the Church of Canterbury, a thing which the late stirre betweene Arch∣bishop Baldwyn and the Monkes made them fearefull of, and therefore cautions, wary and carefull to prevent: and Archdeacons House. the rather because the Archdeacon had now seated himselfe there. For whereas from Lanfrancs untill his time the Archdeacons dwelling was neare Saint Gregories Record. eccles. Cant. hard by the Court there; it was in this Simons time removed, and the place given to the Monkes of Christ-Church, (haply in consideration of their consent to the Archbishops fore-noted indultums or grants made to this Archdeacon) who
kept it, as to the propriety of it at least wise, untill the 25. Ed. 3. and was the same (I take it) which they then exchan∣ged with the Canons of the place for other the like of theirs: in the deed whereof I finde it thus described, viz. Placiam suam cum pertinen. jacen. inter Curiam. S. Gregorii versus South, venellam de Baggeb' vers. North, ortum de Forgehagh vers. East, & ortum quondam Iohannis le Gerdeler versus West. The Archdeacon then removing thence, he setled and seated himselfe (as I said) at Hakynton, where his usuall residence continued untill that of late dayes the man∣sion house was alienated. Of late dayes, I say, for I reade that not onely Archbishop Arundell in Hen. 5. time dyed at the Archdeacon of Canterbury his mansion house at Hakyn∣ton, but that of late in Hen. 8. dayes Archbishop Warham did likewise. But now it is gone, and the Archdeacon, quatenus Archdeacon, left houselesse. I returne to our present Archdeacon Simon, who in the vacancy of the See by Archbishop Edmunds death which stood Peter Lambard the Monkes Officiall, for that time of the vacancy, challenging to himselfe in right of his Arch∣deaconry all the Iurisdiction both Provinciall and Diocesan. But at length after some alterations hinc inde, all conten∣tions betweene the Chapter and him in that behalfe were friendly ended by a personall composition, a Copy whereof (that you may see the then state of this Archdeaconry) I suppose in my Appendix to set forth. This man, before he was Archdeacon tooke part (against King Iohn) with Lewis Vale pro Scrip∣tura 23. in Ap∣pendce. Matth. Paris. the French Dolphin, who made him his Chancellor, for whose establishment here he was very active, as you may finde more at large in Matthew Paris and others. The Pope, by his letters consulted with this Simon about Ralfe Nevill the Bishop of Chichester and Chancellor of England, whom the Monkes of Christ-Church, to gratifie the King who much respected him, had (as the Canonists phrase it) postu∣lated for their Archbishop in the vacancy by the death of Richard the great, whose relation of the man so wrought the Pope against him, that he was put by it and Edmund
promoted to the place. Shortly this Archdeacon founded the Hospitall of Poore Priests in Canterb. whereof enough already in proper place, and died about the yeare 1248. ha∣ving been Archdeacon 21 yeares, upon whom Matthew Pa∣ris bestowes this Epitaph. Sub eodem quoque annali curriculo, obiit Magister Simon de Langetuna, frater praeclarae memoriae Stephani Cantuari∣ensis 1248. Archiepiscopi, ecclesiae Cantuariensis Archidiaconus. Qui si ecclesiae suae, videlicet Cantuariensis, persecutor & perturbator fuisset, non est mirandum, quin imò Regnum Francorum, Regnum & Anglorum, quandoque cùm ex multiplici bello vexaretur, sicut sufficienter in loco suo prae∣dictum est, movit, commovit & perturbavit &c. See more (if you please) of this man in Pitseus. Stephanus de Vicenna succeeded Simon Langton. So the processe of the suit between his Successor Richard de Fer∣rings and the Chapter about title of Jurisdiction in the va∣cancy of the See informs me, which gives a Catalogue of the Archdeacons, and the order of their succession from Simon Langton down to that Richard. He held the place till his death, which by the computation of that processe was about x. yeares. But I am perswaded that one Stephanus de monte Luelli ought to have a share with him of that time allotted to him for his incumbency in that dignity, which that process omit∣ting this Stephen reckons between the former Stephen and Hugh Mortimer. For in the yeer 1257. in the time of Archbi∣shop Boniface, I finde in a Lieger of S. Radigund's Abbey by Dover the subscription of this Stephanus de monte Luelli, by the expresse title of Archdeacon of Canterb. as (with others) a witnesse to some Instruments or Charters made to that Abbey by the Archbishop. At what time I finde that Hugh Mortimer was the Archbishops Officiall. To whom I passe. This Hugh Mortimer was first (as I said Officiall of Cant. Electus Cantuar. (saith Florilegus) naves ascensurus jussit ne∣mora 1245. Archiepiscopatus abscidi & vendi, & quasdam tallias &
collectas in terris suis fieri, & constituit quendam suum Officia∣lem natione Pictaviensem, Magistrum Hugonem de Mortimer, qui diligenter mandata sua exequebatur. He continued Offi∣ciall very long, it seems. For in the yeare 1270. I finde a decision of his (as Officiall) of a controversie, wherein the Monks of Horton Priory in Kent were interessed, recorded in the Lieger of that house. It seems he was also Chancel∣lor or Vicar generall to the Archbishop. For in the yeare 1258. he sends his Mandatum ad inducendum to the Arch∣deacons Officiall, for the inducting of the Abbat of S. Ra∣degund into the Parsonage of Alcham, in this form. Magister Hugo de Mortuo mari Dilecto sibi officiali Archidi∣acon' Cant. salutem in Domino. De mandato Domini mei Archiepiscopi Cant. vobis mando specialiter, Quatenus Abbatem sanctae Radigundis nomine suo & conventus sui in possessionem ecclesiae de Alcham mittatis corporalem, & tueamini inductum contradictores & rebelles per censu∣ram ecclesiasticam compescendo. Dat' die Martis prox. an∣te festum. S Nicolai Anno Domini 1258. Afterwards to wit about the yeare 1271. he became Archdeacon, which place he held about 14 yeares. In which time, to wit in the vacancy of the Archbishoprick by the death of Boniface, I finde him Liber Hosp. Pauper. . Cantuar. play the Diocesan, in appro∣priating (authoritate ordinaria, as his words are) to the Hospi∣tall of Poore Priests in Cant. the Parish Church of S. Margaret in Cant. with consent of the Patr. the Abbat of S. Austins. His challenging of this and the like power in the time of the vacancy, begat a quarell between him and the Monks of Christ-Church, the like to that between his predecessor Simon Langton and them, both in the nature and end of it. Postmodum verò (saith the often cited Record of Christ-Church) vacante sede per mortem bonae memoriae Bonifacii Ca∣pitulum Cant.  Iurisdictionem Provincialem &  supra exercebat per fratrem Galfridum de Rome∣nal officialem suum. Postea verò Mr Hugo de Mortuo mari tunc Archidiaconus Cant. ratione talis qualis possessionis Simonis praedecessris sui vendicabat hujusmodi jurisdictionem ad ipsum
& Archidiaconatum pertinere. Tandem inter Capitulum & praedictum Hugonem personalis compositio intervenit, & ad vi∣tam ipsius Hugonis tantummodo duratura, prout patet per teno∣rem ejusdem. This composition is much like that which you shall finde copied in my Appendix, made to Simon Langton. William Middleton succeeded Hugh Mortimer, and held the place 2 yeares and upwards. And in the yeare 1278. was removed thence to the Bishoprick of Norwich. Where, in the Catal. of BB. you may reade somewhat more of him. Robertus de Gernemutha (or of Yarmouth whom Fox calls Gernemine, succeeded William Middleton, and like his pre∣decessor continued Archdeacon upward of two yeares. This man renewed the old quarell for Jurisdiction in the vacancy twice set on foot before, as you may see in Simon and Hugo: appealing the Monks to the Pope about it. Du∣ring the dependance of which appeale in the Court of Rome, this Archdeacon died. This suit happened in the vacancy by Robert Kilwardbyes remove or translation Post∣modum (saith the old Record again) vacante sede Cant. per translationem Domini Roberti de Kylewardby Archiepiscopi in Episcopum Portuensem Capitulum Cantuar. omnimodam hujus∣modi Iurisdictionem ut supra exercuit per Magistrum Ricardum de Stradford Officialem suum. Sed postea Magister Robertus Gernemuta Archidiaconus Cant. occasione talis qualis possessi∣onis praedictorum Simonis & Hugonis praedecessorum suorum ven∣dicabat omnimodam hujusmodi Iurisdictionem ad ipsum & Ar∣chidiaconatum suum pertinere, & super hoc ad sedem Apostoli∣cam (at dicitur) appellavit, & praedictum Capitulum in Curia Romana traxit in causam, ut patet per processum inde habitum, inter Capitulum & dictum Robertum. Sed pendente causa in Cu∣ria praedicta Robertus ibi diem suum clausit extremum. Ricardus de Ferrings succeeded in the Archdeaconry and held it fifteen yeares untill he was removed thence to the Archbishoprick of Dublin in Ireland vacant by the death of one Ottoninus (so Parker from Matt. of Westminster) and con∣ferred on him by the Provision of Pope Boniface 8. but he died by the way in his return from Rome; where, being
Archdeacon, he revived the suit then dormant by the death of his predecessor, which suit was hotly prosecuted for a while, but to little purpose. Postmodum vero (the Ca∣thedrall Record again) vacante sede Cant. per mortem bonae memoriae Iohannis Archiepisc. Capitulum Cant. omnimod. hu∣jusmodi Iurisdictio. ut supra exercuit per Magistrum Iohan∣nem de Selveston officialem suum. Sed Magister Richardus de Ferrings tunc Archidiaconus Cant. litem sopitam per mortem dicti Roberti praedecessoris sui in Curia Romana resuscitavit, & usque ad examinationem testium est prosecutum, & dati sunt Iu∣dices de consensu partium ad examinandum testes, viz. Mt Roge∣rus de Rowle Archidiacons Bedforden. M• Philippus de Barton, & Mt Iohannes de Excestre qui bullam remissionis ut dicitur receperunt, sed nihil ad rem inde factum est, nec etiam termi∣natum. Iohn Langton (or Iohannes De Langtona) succeeded Ri∣chard in the yeare 1299. which thing came thus to passe Godwin. Ca∣tal. of BB. in Ely.. This Iohn, being Chancellor of England, first constituted anno 1293. and a second time anno 1307. was by a part of the Covent of Ely, chosen for their Bishop and he endeavoured mainly to have his election confirmed: but being disap∣pointed of that Bishoprick, the Pope, Boniface 8. (to whom from the Archbishop who had disannulled his election he appealed, but in vain) preferring another to that Bishoprick, in way of recompense of his labour and cost, made him Archdeacon of Canterb. in the place of his predecessor Fer∣rings. This Iohn afterwards, to wit in the yeare 1305. was made Bishop of Chichester, being consecrated by Archbi∣shop Winchelsey on the 10th of the Kal. of Octob. anno praed' Anno 1305. (saith a book of Christ-Church) 10. Kal. Octob. Robertus Winchelsey Archiep. consecravit in ecclesia Cant. Do∣minum Iohannem de Langtone Archidiaconum Cant. in Epi∣scopum Cicestrensem. Harpsfield reports, that between him and both the Archbishop and Monks arose certain contro∣versies about (the old quarell) Iurisdiction in the Sees va∣cancy. But I suppose he mistakes him in this for his pre∣decessor Ferrings. See more of him in the Ctel. of BB.
in Ely and Chichester, as also in Harpsfield, Cent. 13. Thus have I briefly run over the 11 Archdeacons of this 13th Century. A greater number (if you mark) then Harps∣field reckons upon: who of these names onely Simon, Hen∣ry, William, Richard and Iohn. He addes Robert Winchelsey, but erroniously. Indeed he was Archdeacon of Essex, but of Cant. never that I can finde. Now let us on to those of the next Century. viz. 1. Simon de Fever sham. 2. Bernardus de Eyci. 3. Gutterdus Labredus. 4. Simon Convenius. 5. Iohannes Brutonius. 6. Raymundus. 7. Hugo de Engolisma. 8. Robert Stratford. 9. Petrus Rogerius. 10. Henricus Wakefield. 11. Willielmus. 12. Audomarus de Rupy. 13. Willielmus Packington. 14. Adam de Mottrum. 15. Ricardus Clifford. Harpsfield begins this Century with Bernardus, ranking him next Successor to Iohn Langton. But I finde one be∣tween them, namely Simon de Feversham: to whom Arch∣bishop Winchelsey gave the Archdeaconry vacant by Lang∣ton's remove to the Bishoprick of Chichester. For the last cited Record goes on thus. Et eodem die dedit Magistro Si∣moni de Feversham Archidiaconatum Cantuar. Which is all I reade of him, saving the testimony given him by Pitseus De illust. Angl. Scriptor. ate 14. pag. 505.. Of Bernard, I read that in the yeare 1313. when the See of Cant. was void by Archbishop Winchelseyes death, this man was Archdeacon, and that he suffered the Chapters then Officiall quietly to hold and exercise all manner of Ju∣risdiction belonging to the See. Postmodum verò (saith that old Record of Christ-Church) vacante sede Cant. per mor∣tem bonae memoriae Roberti de Winchelsey Archiepiscopi, Capi∣tulum Cant. omnimodam hujusmodi jurisdictionem ut supra ex∣crcuit per Magistrum Rogerum de Rowell Officialem suum, sine aliqua appellatione vel contradictione. Erat tunc temporis Ar∣chidiaconus Cant. M• Bernardus Eyci filius Dom. Aimeney de la Berto.
For the next three. I finde they did successively hold the Archdeaconry in the time of Walter Reynolds the Arch∣bishop, and that is all: saving that the Records of the Ca∣thedrall have a Bull of Pope Iohn xxij. thus intituled Bulla re∣vocationis collationis Archidiaconatus Cant. fact' magistro Iohan∣ni de Bruiton per Archiepisc. ut conferatur Raymundo sanctae Mariae in Cosmedin Diac. Card. per Iohannem Papam: From which Raymund I passe unto (I take it) his next Successor, Hugo de Engolisma. Both in the yeare 1327. and 1330. I have seene Records that style him Archdeacon of Canter∣bury Lib. Hosp. Pauper. sacerd. adding that one Petrus de Matre was his Proctor and Vicar generall. To him Nicholas Trivet dedicated his Hi∣story. Robert Stratford (I take it) succeeded next. For I finde him Archdeacon in his brother Iohn Stratford the Archbi∣shops time. He was Chancellor of England first constituted 11. Ed. 3. and againe afterwards 14. ejusd. How this came to passe you may learne in the Catalogue of BB. in Chiche∣ster, to the which Bishopricke he was preferred, succeeding therein his predecessor in the Archdeaconry, Iohn Langton. I have seene In Archivis Consistorii Cant. a plea of his consisting of many articles, and containing in the first place an enumeration or particular of all the rights and priviledges of his Archdeaconry; after which followes a suggestion of certaine grievances offered to him and it by the then Commissary of Canterbury put up against him to his brother the Archbishop, with what suc∣cesse I know not, for I cannot finde the issue. Petrus Rogerius sanctae Mariae novae Diaconus Cardinalis, in the yeare 1356. was Archdeacon of Canterbury, and Strat∣fords Lib. Hosp. Pauper. sad. next Successor (I take it:) whose absence was supplyed by one Hugo Pelegrinus, who thus writes himselfe. Hugo Pe∣logrinus Thesaurarius Lichfield Apostolicae sedis in Anglia Nun∣tius, Reverendi patris in Christo Domini Petri Rogerii sanctae Mariae novae Diaconi Cardinalis Archidiaconi Cantuar. Vica∣rius in spiritualibus generalis. In the Vacancy of the See by the death of William Wit∣tlesey, Anno 1374. one Henry of Wakefield was made Arch∣deacon
by the then Prior and Covent of Christ-Church Lib. eccle Cantuar., who sware them Canonicall obedience vacatione durante. In the yeare 1379. 2. Rich. 2. Fox Acts and Mo∣num. Par. 1. pag. 562. ex bundello brevium Regis de Anno 2. Rich. 2. par. 1. mentioneth two Archdea∣cons of Canterbury. Thus the one. Lord William of the holy Church of Rome Cardinall, a stranger doth hold the Archdeaconry of Canterbury, and is not resident, the true value of all the yearely fruits, rents and profits, is worth seven hundred florens. Thus the other. Lord Andomar de Rupy is Archdeacon of Canterbury, to the which Archdeacon belong the Church of Lymin with∣in the same Dioces, worth by yeare after taxation of the tenth xxl. The Church of Tenham worth by yeare after the said taxation, Cxxxl. vj•. viijd. The Church of Ha∣kington neere Canterbury, worth by yeare twenty markes. The Church of Saint Clement in Sandwich, worth by yeare after the taxation aforesaid, eight markes. The Church of Saint Mary in Sandwich, worth by yeare eight pounds, of the which the said Archdeacon receiveth onely sixe markes. The profits of all which premisses S. William Latimer Knight hath received, together with the profits arising out of the Iurisdiction of the Archdeaconry, worth by yeere xxl. Afterwards, to wit, in the yeare 1381. one William of Packington, or (as Pitseus writes him) Pachenton, had the Archdeaconry conferred upon him by the then Prior and Covent Lib. eccles. Cant. in the vacancy by Sudburies death: his Proctor making and taking the accustomed oath of obedience to the Prior and Covent; and that he will not attempt any thing to the prejudice of the Church of Canterbury, and will faithfully execute such mandates as he should receive from the Prior and Chapter. Pitseus will further acquaint you with this man, and his great worth, and good parts, if you consult him. In Archbishop Courtneys time (Sudburies next Successor) one Adam de Mottrum was Archdeacon, and withall the
Archbishops Chancellor, as I finde by Courtneys Will extant in Christ-Church, wherein he is a legatary. He was succeeded by Richard Clifford, who was Arch∣deacon in Archbishop Arundels dayes. Harpesfield tells of Hist. ecs. Angl. Saecul. 15. cap. 14. pag. 634. a controversie that happened to arise betweene the Arch∣bishop and him about matter of Jurisdiction. Ricardo (saith he) controversia quaedam, de exercenda Iurisdictione, cum A∣rundellio intercessit, quae certa transactione, mutuo ipsorum con∣sensu composita est. The composition here spoken of is ex∣tant (for I have seene both prototype and copy) in the Church Records. The Lieger of the Consistory hath also a transcript of it. He was afterward consecrate Bishop of Worcester, to wit Anno 1401. and translated thence to London Anno 1407. See more of him there in Bishop Godwins Ca∣talogue who speakes very honourably of him. I finde his name and picture drawne and set up in the West-Window of the Chapterhouse of Christ-Church, as in likelihood, a be∣nefactor to the worke, it being new built in his time, as you may finde elsewhere. For that was the way by which the religious men used to expresse their thankfulnesse to their benefactors, namely, by representing their effigies, and setting up their names, their coats also that had any, in some part of that building, which by their bounty they had holpe to advance; some∣times adding withall their gift and largesse, what and how much it was: as for instance in that particular, in the Cloy∣ster, hard by the doore of the Chapter-house, about the shield of a coate representing the effigies of a Monke in his habit, one that about the same time with this Archdeacon, was a benefactor to that worke, I read as followeth▪^ Frater Iohannes Schepene, cum adjutorio amicorum suorum, contribuit ad fabricam claustri C. lib. cujus animae propitietur Deus. Amen. I have done with the Archdeacons of this (14th) Century, and come now to them of the next, by name.
1. Robertus Hall. 2. Iohannes Wakering. 3. Thomas Rumnoth. 4. Willielmus Chichley. 5. Prosper de Columna. 6. Thomas Chichley. 7. Thomas Wittembourne. 8. Iohannes Bourgchier. 9. Hugo Pentwin. The first of these (Hall) was (as Harpesfield sayes) Arch∣bishop Arundells Vicar generall. The second Wakering, was keeper of the Privy Seale (saith Sir Henry Spelman) to Hen. 4. Regi ab archivis sive scriniis, saith Harpsfield, and in the yeare 1416. he was ele∣cted and consecrate Bishop of Norwich. Godwyn writes very honourably of him, as you may see in his Catalogue in Nor∣wich. The third Rumnoth Harpsfield ubi supra., questioned and called before him Iohn Bishop of Saint Assaph, as not legally holding his Bishopricke, being never inducted or put into possession by his predecessor Robert, as the manner was, and of right he should have beene, it being one of the rights of the Arch∣deacon to induct all B B. of the Province into the possession of their Sees. The fourth, William Chicheley Idem Harpsf. ubi supra., being Archbishop Chi∣cheleys neare Kinsman, was by him made Archdeacon, what time he was with the King in the French expedition. This William being a Notary of the Apostolike See, and dying in the Court of Rome: Pope Martin 5. bestowed the Arch∣deaconry upon his nephew Prosper de Columna, a Boy under foureteene yeares of age, and richly provided for before by the Pope his Uncle, but not to the content of the Popes avaritions minde; who so prevailed with the King, that his nephew being an alien, and so incapable of the dignity by the lawes of the Realme, he was by Royall indulgence indenized and made capable of the same, but so as the Pope should by his Bull, conceptis verbis, give way to the Patron freely to conferre it afterward, as it should fall voyde, and that this indulgence should not be drawne into example.
This Archdeacon after a few yeares was made a Cardinall. The sixt, Thomas Chicheley, had the Archdeaconry after∣ward conferred upon him by the same Archbishop Hen. Chi∣cheley, his neare Kinsman also. In an examplification of his (which I have seene) belonging to S. Iohns Hospitall with∣out Northgate, I finde him style himselfe thus. Thomas Chi∣cheley, decretorum Doctor, Archidiaconus Cant. & Domini Papae Prothonotarius. In the yeare 1463. hee was Provost of Win∣gham Colledge in Kent  Liber testam. pen, registr. Domin . Cant. The seventh and ninth I know onely by their names. For as yet I finde nothing at all written of them. The eight, Iohn Bourgchier, was (I take it) brother or neare Kinsman to the Archbishop Thomas Bourgchier. He dyed in the year 1495. and was buried in the Lady Chapell of Christ-Church, where you may finde his Monument. I have tran∣scribed the Inscription or Epitaph upon it before in the Survey of the Church Monuments. The Windowes of this Chapell where hee lyes are very full of the Bourgchiers armes. Thus much very briefly of the Archdeacons of the 15th Cent. I come now to those of the next, by name. 1. William Warham. 2. Edmund Cranmer. 3. Nicholas Harpsfield. 4. Edmund Guest. 5. Edmund Freake. 6. William Redman. 7. Charles Fotherby. The first, William Warham, was Archbishop Warhams Kinsman, in whose house Antiq. Brit in ejus vita. then situate at Hakington, the Archbishop dyed. He was withall Provost of Wingham. For the cause (its like) of his conscience, by Cession, as the Ca∣nonists phrase it, he left both it, and the Archdeaconry, and by the privity and consent of the then Archbishop (Thomas Cranmer) had a stipend or pension of 60l. per annum, allowed him during his life, out of the Archdeaconry, and 20l. per annum out of his Prepositure of Wingham Ex R Cranm., By his Successor in both, Edmund Cranmer, Archbishop
Cranmers brother, who continued Archdeacon afterward untill Queene Maries dayes, and was then deprived of it, his Prebend also, and Parsonage of Ickham, which were all taken from him in the yeare 1554. for being a married Clerke, and the first given to Nicholas Harpsfield Doctor of Law, the second to Robert Collens Batchelor of Law and Commissary of Canterbury, and the third to one Robert Marsh.  Lib. eccls. Cant. Concerning Harpsfield, Fox, a Protestant, and Pitseus, a Papist, give their severall censures: but cleerely ex diame∣tro contrary, and so full (I feare) of partiality, and by their reflexion upon the cause of religion, so prejudicate, that I leave it to the moderate to give a temper to them both, not desirous to interpose my judgement, but wishing onely he may be censured with truth and indifferency. He was with∣all a Prebendary of Canterbury whom Doctor Moulin, after many other, doth succeed. Being a prisoner, he wrote the Ecclesiasticall story of England, and other Bookes whereof see a Catalogue in Pitseus. Harpsfield in the beginning of Queene Elizabeths reigne, being deprived, Edmund Guest succeeded in the Archdea∣conry, and shortly after, to wit Anno 1559. was consecrate Bishop of Rochester, and translated thence to Salisbury Anno 1571. Where you may see more of him in the Catalogue of B B. His next Successor was Edmund Freake, both in the Arch∣deaconry, and also in the Bishopricke of Rochester, with which latter he held the Archdeaconry in Commendam, un∣till he was afterward removed to Norwich, and from thence to Worceter. The fore-cited Catalogue will tell you more of him. William Redman succeeded in the Archdeaconry, but in the yeare 1594. was removed to the Bishopricke of Norwich. Consult the often cited Catalogue in Norwich, if you would know more of him. Charles Fotherby upon Redmans remove to Norwich was made Archdeacon, and afterwards Deane of Canterbury:
both which with other spirituall livings besides, he held till his death, which happened Anno Domini 1616. He lyeth buried in the Lady Chapell in Christ-Church; and, Bourg∣chier excepted, who lyes buried in the same Chapell, is the onely Archdeacon of Canterbury, that by any Monument or Record appeares to have beene buried in Christ-Church. He was (you see) the last of that Century; as the modern Arch∣deacon, the reverend Dr Kingsley, is the first of the next, and makes the 59th Archdeacon. But manum de tabella. And here let me close this discourse of the Archdeacons with a touch of that Praerogative anciently belonging to them, of putting the Suffragan-Bishops after their consecration or translation to a Bishoprick, in possession of the same, (which we vulgarly call induction or installation) together with such rights and fees as were usually paid unto the Archdeacon in respect thereof. Their private Leiger called (from the sable cover) the blacke booke sets forth the matter at large, but affecting brevity, I have chosen rather to represent it in Archdeacon Harpsfields more compendious way. Est qui∣dem (saith he Histor. eccles. Saecul. 13. pag. 450.) Cantuariensis ceterorum in Anglia Archidiacono∣rum antesignanus, habetque & hoc etiam saeculo habuit id praero∣gativae, ut designatos & initiatos Episcopos, quasi in praesenti rerum omnium possessione constituat. Ad quam possessionem tra∣dendam, solebat ipse proficisci ad Episcopum in possessione locan∣dum. Quibus temporibus equum Episcopi, & penulum ad suos usus, & viginti praetereà aureos 10 marcas, saith Parker. Antiq. Britan. pag. 28. ad sumptus accipiebat. Moris praetereà erat, ut ex argenteo aut de aurato quodam poculo Episco∣pus ei in mensa praebiberet, acceptúmque poculum ad Archidia∣coni commodum cederet. Posterioribus, & nostris praesertim tem∣poribus, Archidiaconi possessionem hanc tradendi provinciam, aliis per literas mandantes, ipsi non proficiscebantur, viginti illos aureos solummodò sibi decerpentes. Thus he. And so both this Catalogue, and my whole taske for the Cathedrall is absolved.
Parochial Churches. I Come in the next place, according to my method, to speake of the parochiall Churches in and about the City. Give me leave, before I treate of them in severall (as I mean to doe) to premise a few things touching them in generall. It is but of a very few of them, that I know or have found the certaine either time or Author of their foundation. But as I shall shew you that some of them have beene erected since the Conquest: so I conceive (and am verily perswaded) none of them (except Saint Martins) doe much, if at all, exceed the same in age, and that for many inducements. One that before it our Churches were generally built and made of Wood, and it is a thing noted of the Normans, that upon their Income they builded their Churches of stone Stow. Daniell.. Another is that the Saints whose names some of our Churches doe carry will not beare any much greater age, as Saint Alphege, St Dunstan, St Edmund the King and Martyr. A third reason I have, and I take it from a Deed or Char∣ter of Coenulf King of Mercia, and Cuthred his brother, King of Kent, made to the Abbesse and her Nonnes of Li∣minge,  In Archivis . Cant. and dated Anno Domini 804. granting them a cer∣taine parcell of Land in our City, appertaining (saith the Charter or Land-boc) to a Church situate in the West part of the same, built in honour of Saint Mary. Now no such Church is, or since the Conquest (that I ever found) was standing in that part of our City. Whence I inferre, that the face and condition of our City hath suffered an utter change since those dayes; and because we read that the Danes made havocke both of people and place in King Etheldreds dayes, slaying the most part of the one, and burning and spoiling all the other (not sparing the Cathedrall it selfe) I thinke we may justly charge upon that all-wasting deluge the utter subversion of such Churches as then were in our City, and consequently may not imagin any of our modern Churches (except as is before excepted) so ancient as to preced, but
contrariwise to succeed and follow the same. The Deed or Charter, because it may give content to some sort of Rea∣ders, and indeed historically glanceth at the misery that our Countrey suffered by the frequent invasion of the Danes, as I conceive of it from the end for which this land was given by it to the Nonnes, being (Ad necessitatis refu∣gium) I here subjoyne. ✚ Dispensante ac gubernante Domino Deo omnipotente, Ego Coenulph Rex Maerciorum, & Cuthred frater meus Rex Cantuariorum Anno Dominicae incarnationis Dccciiij. concessimus venerabili Abbatissae Selethrythae & suae fa∣miliae ad ecclesiam sanctae Mariae semper virginis quae sita est in loco qui dicitur Limming, ubi pausat corpus beatae Eadburgae, aliquantulum terrae partem in Civitate Doro∣bernia ad necessitatis refugium: hoc est, vj. jugera pertinen∣tia ad ecclesiam quae sita est in honore beatae Mariae in Oc∣cidentali parte civitatis, & quorum Fortè terminos. termini sic cingere vi∣dentur. Ab oriente fluvius Stur. Ab occidente & ab au∣stromurus Civitatis. A statu ecclesiae protenditur in Aqui∣lonem emissione virgarum circiter ut fertur quindecim. Si quis autem hanc nostram donationem infringere vel minu∣ere temptaverit sciat se rationem redditurum in die Iudi∣dicii, nisi ante digna satisfactione Deo & hominibus emen∣dare voluerit. Et haec testium nomina quae inferius scri∣pta sunt. ✚ Ego Coenulfus Rex Merciorum hanc donationem meam cum signo crucis Christi confirmo. ✚ Ego Cuthredus Rex Cant. sig. crucis confirmo. ✚ Ego Aethelheardus gratia Dei archiep' consensi & sub. ✚ Ego Aldulf Episc' consensi & subscripsi. ✚ Ego Daeneberht Episc' con. & sub. Now of all the present Churches in and about our City, I finde onely two that were not of the patronage of some Abbey or other religious house, in or neare neighbouring to the City; and they were S. Martin without, and S. Al∣phege
within the walls of the City, both appertaining to the See of Canterb. Of S. Martin I have spoken enough already, on a former occasion. Leaving that then I will make to (the other) S. Aelphege, where I meet with the following S. Aelphege. monuments. In the Chancell. In Maidstone natus jacet hic Ion Piers vocitatus Iohn Piers. Ecclesiae Rector Alphegi martyris almi. Cujus protector sit Deus omnipotens. Qui legis haec omnia prome pro seque labora, Sic tibi prosicies & amicus tu mihi fies. Cum ser is à tergo sator es impavidus ergo. Hic jacet Magister Iohannes Parmenter quondam Rector istius Iohn Parmenter. ecclesiae qui obiit XXo die mensis Octob. Anno Domini M. D. j. cu∣jus &c. This John was Commissary of Canterbury, in his time, and Parson of Adisham in Kent. Here lieth Sr Robert Provest Parson of S. Alpheys, which died Robert Provest. the 22th day of Ianuary, Anno Dom. 1487. Mercy Ihu'. Es testis Christe quod non jacet hic lapis iste Iohn Lovelych. Corpus ut ornetur set spiritus ut memoretur. Hic jacet Mr Iohannes Lovelych bacallarius in Legibus quon∣dam rector istius ecclesiae, qui obiit 6 die Sept. Anno Dom. 1438. Cujus &c. This man was in his time Register of the Arch∣bishops Consistory at Cant. Here lieth Richard Stuppeny bachelor of both lawes, who had by his wife Catherine 2 sonnes and 4 daughters, and departed this Richard Stup∣peny. life the sixteenth day of Novemb. 1596. Lo here a view of thine estate is set before thine eye: For as thou art even such was he who here in grave doth lie. If vertuous life or faithfull friend could ought prevailed have, Then should not he who here lieth dead have layed here in grave. But death will not intreated be, it taketh hold on all: So that as all men come from earth, so to the earth they shall. Yet this the comfort is of them which now to Christ pertain, That dying they do die to live with Christ for ay to reigne.
This Richard Stuppeny was in his time a Proctor of Can∣terbury. In the South-Chancell. Here lieth Henry Gosborne cetezen and Alderman of the towne Henry Gosborne. of Canturbury, and fower yeares at sundry times Mayre of the same Cety the which deceased the 22th day of April, the yeare of our Lord 1522. on whose sowle &c. This worthy Patriot by his will gave twenty marks (a In Regist. Con∣sistor. Cant. large legacy in those dayes) towards the repairing of the City-walls, at such places as the Abbat of S. Augustine, and the Maior of the City should assigne. It appeares by and up∣on his monument that he had 2. wives, and by them 25. children, whereof ten were sonnes. Robert Gosborne his bro∣ther Robert Gosborne lieth hard beside him. In the same Chancell. Richardus Engeham de magna Cherte reliquit hanc lucem 7. die Feb. Anno Dom. 1568. cujus animae &c. Richard Ex∣gham. Qui tumulos cernis cur non mortalia spernis? Tali namque domo clauditur omnis homo. In the body. Pray for the sawlys of Iohn Caxton and of Ione And Isabel that to this Church great good hath done Iohn Caxto and Ioane h wife. In making new in the Chancell Of Dexkys and Setys as well An Antiphon the which did bye With a table of the Martyrdome of St Alphye For thing much which did pay And departed out of this life of October the 12. day. And Isbel his second wiff Passed to blisse where is no strife The xijt day to tell the trowth Of the same moneth as our Lord knoweth In the yeare of our Lord God a thousand fower hundred fower∣score and five. Hic jacet Iohannes Colfol quondam clericus parochialis istius Iohn Colsell.
ecclesiae qui obiit 28. die mens. Maii A. D. 1500. & anno gratiae, cujus animae &c. Hic jacet Nicolaus Reve quondam Civis & Wexchandler Nicholas Reve. Cantuar. qui obiit 28. die mens. Decemb. 1431. cujus &c. On the second Piller from the West end Gaude Prude Thoma Per quem sit ist a columpna. Thomas Prude. With his coat of armes engraven (as the rest) in brasse. He lived in Ed. 4. dayes, and by his Will In Registro mmorato. appoints to be buried by Christ-church porch, and therein gives as much as will build a pillar in this Church, and 5 marks to Christ-Church works anno 1468. In the West-window. Orate pro animabus Edmundi Staplegate & Ellenorae at Pytte Edmund Sta∣plegate and El∣lenor his wife. uxoris ejus. This man who took his name from his place of habitation which was Staplegate in this Parish, was in his time namely in Ed. 3. dayes diverstimes one of the Bayliffs of our City: of whom see more in Stablegate. In the West-wall, without. O ye good people that here go this way: Agnes Halke. Of your charite to have in remembrance: For the sowle of Agnes Halke to pray Sometime here of acquaintance. In this Churchyard so was her chance First after the hallowing of the same. Afore all other here to begin the dance Which to all creatures is the loth game. The Tuisday next before Pentecost The yeare of our Lord M. Dc. and two Whose soule Ihu' pardon that of might is most. Having now done with S. Aelphege, let us on and survey the rest. Whereof three, to wit, S. George, S. Mary Bred∣man, and S. Peter anciently were as they still are of the
patronage of Christ-church, as were likewise whilest they stood, two other, viz. S. Michael of Burgate, and S. Mary of Queningate: all which 5, together with S. Sepulchres, were confirmed to it by Bulls of Pope Alex. 3. and divers suc∣ceeding Popes, and every one of them anciently paid in to it Liber eccles. Cant. a severall annuall pension, as S. George, 5s. S. Mary Bredman, 6d. S. Peter. 6s. 8d. S. Michael, 2s. and S. Sepulchres, 12d. But let us on to the rest: whereof six, viz. S. Mary Magdalen, S. Andrew, S. Mary Castle, S. Mildred, All Saints and S. Paul belonged to S. Austins, and whilest it stood, also S. Iohns, and sometime S. Margaret. Three viz. S. Dunstan, Holy Crosse of Westgate, and S. Mary of Northgate, to S. Gregories. One viz. S. Mary Bredin, and whilest it stood St Edmund of Ridingate to the Nonnes of S. Sepulchres: and one also, to wit S. Margaret to the Hospitall of Poore Priests of later time, as formerly to S. Austins. I will begin with those be∣longing to the Cathedrall. And of them first with S. Georges: in the Chancell whereof you may reade upon a grave-stone the following Epitaph St George. Hic requiescit Dominus Iohannes Lovell quondam Rector Iohn Lovell. Istius ecclesiae, qui obiit 24. die mensis Aprilis Anno Domini 1438. Cujus &c. Which one is the onely monument of any antiquity that I finde there. I passe therefore hence to S. Mary Bredman. St Mary Bred∣man. Sirnamed (I take it) to distinguish it from other Maries in and about the City; and so sirnamed, I conceive, and so have said before, because of the Bread-market kept beside it, as it is (we see) to this day. It was (as I have elsewhere also noted) anciently in Latine called Ecclesia S. Mariae Piscariorum, and in English, S. Mary Fishmanschurch, from a fish market thereby. Bt yet more anciently and before all this Ecclesia S. Mariae de Andresgate lb. . Can., from that place hard by it where the 4 wayes meet at S. Andrews-Church, of old called Andresgate, to say, Andrews-gate. Whence the Inne, now the Checquer, an house from great antiquity belonging to Christ-Church, in the elder Rentalls thereof stands
described to be situate by Andresgate. But enter we the Church, and we shall there finde some ancient monu∣ments, as In the Chancell. Orate pro Thoma Alcock quondam Rectore istius ecclesiae qui Thomas Alcock. obiit in die sanctae Crucis Anno Domini 1500. Cujus animam salvet passio Christi. Orate pro anima Domini Roberti Richmond olim hujus eccle∣sia Rectoris, qui obiit anno Domini 1524. decimo octavo die lulii. Robert Rich∣mond. In the Body. Here lieth William Megg sometime Alderman of this city which deceased the first day of Ianuary Anno Domini 1519. On William Megg. whose sowle &c. St Peter. Whence Wever hath taken these monuments. Thomas Ikham & Ione sa femme gisoint icy Thomas Ikham and Ioan his wife. William Ikham. Dieu de salmes eit mercy. —1400. Hic jacet Willielmus Ikham quondam civis & Balivus Civi∣tat. Cantuar. qui obiit—Iulii—1424. Orate pro anima Wilhelmi Septvans militis & Elisabethe ux. ejus. William Sept∣vans. He mentioneth another; of one Iohn Biggs but imper∣fectly. Iohn Bigg and Constance his wife. I balk his, and set it out of new: from the Win∣dowes Orate pro bono statu Iohannis Bigg armigeri ac Aldermanni Civitatis Cant. & Constantiae consortis suae, qui me vitrari fece∣runt, Anno Domini 1473. In the next window. Et specialiter pro bono stat Willielmi Bygg—Civitatis Cant. & Iohannae consortis suae, & pro animabus parentum ac William Bygg and Ioane his wife. benefactorum eorum qui hoc lumen—Anno Dom. 1468. This William Bigg was he (I take it) that with Iohn Coppyn of Whitstable, built our Market Crosse at the Bulstake: and gave x lib. towards the new building of St Georges-gate, whereof before.
In the Chancell. Hic jacet Dominus Iohannes Colley quondam Rector istius ec∣clesiae, Iohn Colley. qui obiit 22. die mensis Feb. Anno Domini 14 8. Cujus &c. This man (it seems) built the Chancell-window, for in the foot thereof is or lately was legible. Per Iehan Collay qui estoit Person icy. In the body. Hic jacet Magister Iohannes Syre quondam Rector ecclesiae Iohn Syre. Sancti Petri Cant. qui obiit in festo Sancti Pauli ad vincula, An∣no Dom. 1436. cujus &c. As a thing worthy a monument, a Memorandum at least, let me acquaint you that anno 25. Ed. 3. the Parsonage house of this Church was given to Thomas the then Rector, by one Richard Langdon of Canterbury, with licence of the King Lib. Eccles. Cant.. S• Michael of Burgate and her Chapell S. Mary of Quenin∣gate are both down and gone: and so farre from yeelding any monument of others, that they rather stand in need of one for themselves, least they be quite forgotten, both name and place. Having done with the Churches, by right of Patronage, belonging to Christ-church, let us proceed to those of S. Au∣stins. Out of all which the Abbey anciently had and recei∣ved certain annuall pensions Thorne In vitis Abbat. S. Augustini., to wit out of St Mildreds 10s. St Mary Castle 12d. St Iohn 6d. St Margaret 3•. All Saints 12d. St Andrew 12d. St Mary Magdalen 12d. and S. Paul 3•. Which together with the like in other Churches of their patro∣nage in the Diocesse, Robert the Abbat and his Covent anno Domini 1242. in consideration of a valuable recompense another way did release and relinquish. St Mary Magdalen. Hic jacet Iohanna filia Iohannis Hache quondam uxoris Henri∣ci  Hach. Lynde de Cant. quae obiit 21. die Novemb. Anno Domini 1417.
Hic jacet Christoferus Alcock Draper qui obiit 3. d e mens. Chriser Alcock Septemb. Anno Domini 1492. Here lyeth buried the body of Sybell Orchard Widow, late the Sybell Orchard. wife of Mr. Libby Orchard late of Mounckton Court, in the Isle of Thanet deceased, which Sybell dyed the 12. day of March, Anno Domini 1586. One Richard Wekys of this Parish, a Butcher, in the yeare 1471. by his Will was a great benefactor to this Church, as In Regist. Cons. Cant. if you search the office you may finde by his Will there. The Steeple of this Church was new built in the yeare 1503. towards which at that time (as I finde by his Will) one Sir In Rgist Dom. Archid. Cant Harry Ramsey of S• George gave sixe seames of lime. Con∣cerning the stopping up the Chancell-Window of this Church, I finde that in the yeare 1511. a presentment of the matter was made to Archbishop Warham in a visitation of his in these words: viz. That Iohn Fish hath joyned his house to the Church by a dormant to the hurt of the Church, and the light of the Church is stopped by it. Fish being called into question for it, compounds with the Church Wardens, who the yeare following judicially appeare and acknowledge it. Ex Registro Warham. At a visitation holden Anno 1560. it was by the sworne Officers of this Church presented as followeth, viz. That there doth belong to the Parsonage house a piece of ground called Maudelen crost, which is and hath beene wrongfully detained by Mr Hyde Auditor of Christ-Church, to the great impoveri∣shing of the said Parsonage In Archvis Cs Cant.. By other Records Lib. Came Civis. I finde this ground to lye in the Parish of St Martin, that it was North∣ward bounded with the street, and Southward with certaine Lands of St Austins, and that the Parson of this Church paid for it 4s per annum to the Hosp. of St Iacob, as I finde in a Chantery-Booke. St Andrew. Of your charity pray for the soule of Edward Bolney Esquire Edward Bolney. which deceased the second day of Ianuary in the yeare of our Lord
God 1517. whose soule, &c. you shall finde him in the Cata∣logue of our Maiors. Here lyeth buried the body of Stephen White Citizen of this City and the first Ironmonger that ever was dwelling in the City Stephen White. of Canterbury who deceased the 28•h. of May Anno Domini 1592. &c. In the Windowes. Orate pro anima Domini Willielmi Mellrose rectoris ecclesiae William Mellrose. sanctae Mariae de Bredman. By it is his Device, being W. M. with a Rose over head. Orate pro anima fratris Iohannis Fanting Rectoris sanctae Iohn Fanting. Mariae de Bredyn. With his Picture, and Det mater Christi Fanting Iohn gaudia coeli. These haply were benefactors to this Church about the same time that one Thomas Petyt of this Parish was, who in yeare 1498. by his Will In Regist. Dom. Archid. Cant., gave five markes to the making of a new Steeple, and a new Roofe to this Church, like as did one Ion Swan In od. Regist. another Parishioner there at the same time, and an Alderman sometime Maior of the City, viz. lxvjs. viijd. facturae novae testudinis & campanilis ibidem, cum conti∣gerit de novo fieri, as his Will expresseth it. It was presented to Archbishop Warham at his visitation holden Anno 1511. Quod Maior & Communitas Civitatis Cantuar subtrahunt deci∣mas & oblationes ratione opellarum fori piscari in dicta parochia scit. debitas ecclesiae supradicte. But the Chamberlaine of the City appearing and in the Townes behalfe denying the presentment to be true, it doth not appeare that the matter proceeded any further Ex Registro Watham.. Here was sometime a Chantery for William Butler. St Mary Castle. So sirnamed for distinction sake, from the other Maries of the City. This Church hath lyne long desolate: and the Chancellonely (to the repaire whereof one Roger Ridley An.
1470. by his Will gave 4l.) is left standing of it. Time was it was as absolute a Parish Church as any about the City, and in time of Popery, no doubt for it Tutelar Saints sake fared well and flourished, the change of the times in that point being very probably a maine cause of the Churches decay and desolation. For offerings, altarages and the like profits whereof the living did mainely consist, and whereby the incumbent consequently chiefly subsist, being (as the Re∣formation would) withdrawne, there was not otherwise a competency for him to subsist by, which made it be deser∣ted. St Austins Abbey, before the dissolution, having the patronage, both of it and St Iohns, another Parish Church not farre distant from it now in a manner forgotten, this lat∣ter, with the consent of the Patron, was by the Prior and Covent of Christ-Church, in a vacancy, Anno 1349. united to the former Lib. eccles. Cant.. Both which united Churches and Parishes since their desolation tacitely devolved to St Mildreds, and have beene reckoned of that Parish, untill now very lately this of St Mary Castle is begun to be divorced againe from it by having a particular incumbent presented & inducted in∣to it. A word or two more of St Iohns and I leave them both. It seemes the Parish was of small extent, and so the living was according, poore and meane. For Records Lier . doe call it Eccles sancti Iohannis dicti pauperis. The Church stood much about the upper end of that Lane leading from Castle-street, which at this day we call, the back-lane, but was from thence anciently called St Iohns Lane Renta vl. eccles. Cant.. It being come into private hands is (they say) and hath been of a long time pro∣faned into a Maulthouse, or the like. Saint Lawrence booke makes mention of some portions of Tithes belonging to this Church: thus. Item praedict' Hospitale percipit totam deci∣mam de 4 acris terrae in Marketfield, & Rector sancti Iohannis Canta. percipit de 2 acris, 8 garb. & de aliis 2 acris, 7 garb. in toto 1 copp. Item praeddict. Hosp. percipit duas partes decimae de 6 acris terrae capit. ad stonestreet vers. South & parvam semi∣tam vers. North. Et Rector sancti Iohannis Cant. percipit terti∣am partim decimae. One Henry Plaice was found dead in Cant. Anno 5. Ed. 3.
by a fall from a ladder as he was in tyling St Iohns Church in Cant. say the Crowne rolles. The Parishes of St Andrew, St Mary Magdalen, and for a while S• Paul which before the Dissolution buried at St Au∣gustines, since the Churchyard there was withdrawne, in lieu thereof, I take it (this St Mary Castle Church being of that Abbies patronage) had this Churchyard assigned them for the buriall of their dead there; a priviledge wherein St Mary Bredmans Parish did and doth (but by what right, that being of the patronage of Christ-Church, I know not) com∣municate with the rest, but all or some part of the benefit arising by the burialls there went and goeth to the poore of Mayners Spitle, who in respect thereof anciently kept it in repaire, and for default thereof An. 1560. were presented Ex Archivis Cons. Cant. from St Andrewes. Since which time the case is altered, each Parish keeping their part of the enclosure. St Mildred. This Church, and a great part of the City (as Stow hath it in his Summary) was burnt in the yeare 1246. In the Windowes. Orate pro anima Richardi Atwood. In a very ancient Cha∣racter. Richard Atwood A family of this name anciently dwelt in this Pa∣rish, being housed in Stour-street, where one Thomas Atwood that lived in Hen. 8. dayes, dwelt and (being foure severall times Maior of the City) kept his Maioralty. The same man here built the South-side Chancell or Chapell, for a peculiar place of Sepulture for himselfe and his family, di∣ves of whom lye there interred, under faire grave-stones, sometimes inlaid with brasse, all not worne but shamefully torne away, even founders and all: who yet hath a remem∣brance left of him in the glasse, viz. Orate pro animabus Thomae Wood armigeri custodis contra Thomos Wood and Margaret his wife. roular. Hospitii reverendissimi paris in Christo Domini
—Maioris hujus Civitatis, qui in honore Iesu hanc capellam fieri fecit, & Margaretae uxoris ejus filiae Io∣hannis Moyle armigeri. Orate pro eis. In the Windowes. Magister Iohannes Boold— Iohn Boold. Dominus Iohannes Mawny— Iohn Mawny. Orate pro animabus Roberti Bennet & Crist— Robert Bennet. Orate pro animabus Iohannis Boys:— Ioh Boys. Orate pro animabus Iohannis Pocat, & Iohannis Pocot silii ej us∣dem. Iohn Pocat. One Iohn Stulp (it seemes) as a benefactor, had a great Iohn Stulp. hand in making divers new pewes in this Church, as ap∣peares by his name upon them. At this place Lambert Perambul. of Kent. in Cant. saith, there was long since an Ab∣bey. (S• Mildreds, saith he, in the South-siae of the City long since (but not lately) an Abbay.) But surely he is mistaken, and that hence, as I conceive. In the siege, surprisall and sacking of our City by the Danes in the dayes of King Ethel∣dred, amongst other personages of note that are storied to have beene lead captive by them, one Lefwine (whom some call Lfrune) the Abbesse of St Mildred, is named for one. Now this happening to be done at Canterbury, and she styled an Abbesse, and that of St Mildred Canterbury, as in Harps∣field, Mr Lambert, it seemes, finding in Canterbury a Parish Church of that name, supposed it had sometimes been that Abbey whereof Lefwine or Leofrune in the Deanes time was Abbesse, whereas indeed she was Abbesse of S• Mildreds minster in the Ile of Thanet, and the last Abbesse of the same. So Thorne and from him Reyner in his Apostolatus Be∣nedictiorum e will both tell you. Tract. 1. Sect. 1. pag. 62. All Saints. This Church affoords no ancient Monument with an In∣scription or Epitaph. Yet I finde some men of good note
buried there. Amongst the rest one Roger Brent sometimes oger Brent. an Alderman and thrice Maior of Canterbury who by his Will In Regist. Cos. Cant. dated Anno 1486. gave unto the City his Messuage called Stone-Hall in this parish, the house (I take it) wherein Mr Delme lately dwelt. This Churches Cimitery was acquired and laid to it but of late dayes as it were. For in Hen. 3. dayes, and (long after that) in Ed. 3. dayes too, it was in private hands, as I finde by severall Deeds of those times, and did anciently belong to Estbridge Hospitall, in part at least Lib. Ho. de Estbridge.. St Paul. In the Chancell-Windowes-foote is this remembrance Hamon Doge. of Mr Hamon Doge, in an ancient Character or letter. Ma∣gister Hamo Doge. He was a man of note in his time, lived in Hen. 3. reigne, was the Archdeacon of Canterbury his Offici∣all and the last Parson of this Church. For which Thorne Lib. S. Rade∣gundis. is my Author, who saith, that Anno quo supra (which was 1268) ordinatio vicariae sancti Pauli facta fuit per magistrum Hu∣gonem de mortuo mari per assensum Domini R. Abbatis, & ma∣gistri Hamonis Doge ultimi Rectoris ibidem. Fifteene yeares he had and held the Aldermanry of Westgate, and then passed it over to the Abbey of St Austins, who infeoffed one Nicholas Doge with it Ex Arcbivis terris London. 4. & 9. Ed. 1.. The same Hamon founded the Chartery in this parish, whereof I have formerly informed you. In other of the Windowes. Orate pro Ricardo Wavere. Richard wavere. Orate pro anima Iohannis Stace, & Constanciae uxoris ejus. Iohn Stace. Orate pro animabus Iohannis Gale & Christine uxoris. Iohn Gale. Orate pro animabus Georgii Wyndbourne genero & Katheri∣nae George Wynd∣bourne. uxoris suae, qui quidem G. obiit. 5o. die Ap. Ao. Dom. 1531. quorum &c. Orate pro animabus Richardi Berne & Iohanna uxoris ejus. Richard Bee.
Orate pro animabus Thomae Pollard. & Io.— Thomas Pollard. Against a Pillar. Sub isto marmore tumulatur corpus Magistri Edmundi Ho∣vynden quondam vicarii hujus ecclesiae, qui obiit 23. die Iulii Edmund Ho∣vynden. 1497. Cujus &c. By the South-wall. Epitaphium Iohannis Twyne armigeri qui obiit 24. Novemb. Iohn Twyne. 1581. Clauditur hoc tumulo Iohannes ille Tuuynus, Qui docu puros verba latina loqui. Quique urbem hanc rexit Praetor turbante Viato Rem populi & Regni seditione vafra. Huic Deus in Christi mundato sanguine donet Leta resurgenti Lector idemque tibi. Vivit Dominus. Of these, Richard Berne, by his VVill In Regist. D. Archid. Cant. dated anno 1461. full of pious and charitable legacies, gave x lib. towards the repair of this Church at that time in great want thereof. Item lego (saith he) ecclesiae Sancti Pauli pro reparatione operum ejusdem ecclesiae locis maximè indigentibus x lib. deliberandas per executores meos septimatim sicut denarii praedicti expendi possint in operibus praedictis. Because of some ancient and late differences between the City and St Austins, touching the extent of the Cities Franchise or libertie hereaway, to help cleare the doubt, my Appendix shall give you a copy of an ancient compositi∣on, whereby this difference was in part composed between Vide pro Scri∣ptura 24. in Appendice. them. And there also you may finde a copy of the ordina∣tion of this Churches Vicarage. And now having done with the Churches in and about our City of St Austins patronage, I come to those next be∣longing to St Gregories. viz. Northgate, Westgate and St Dun∣stans.
St Mary Northgate. Hic jacet Galfridus Holman armiger qui obiit 24. die mensis Gefferey ol∣man. Ianuarii. Anno Dom. 1478. Cujus &c. Hic jacet Walterus Garrade nuper Vicarius istius ecclesiae, qui Walter Garrade. obiit 26. die mensis Augusti Anno Dom. 1498. cujus &c. Upon a plate set in the North-wall. All ye that stand upon my corse Remember that late Ralf Browne I was. Ralfe Browne. Alderman and Mayre of this Cite. Iesu upon my soule have pite. For the time that this man lived in, see my Catalogue of the Maiors. Archbishop Stratford in the yeare 1346. with consent of the Prior and Covent of St Gregories, Patrons of this Church, erecting a Vicarage here, endowed the same in such manner, as by the ordination or composition thereof ex∣tant in my Appendix shall be fully shewed. Scriptura 26. Holy crosse of Westgate. Hic jacet Stephanus Mathew quondam parmarius istius villae Stephen Ma∣thew. qui obiit 5. die Ianuar. Anno Dom. 1442. cujus animae &c. Hic jacet Dominus Willielmus Hall Capellanus. cujus &c. William Hall. Hic jacet Robertus Colt quondam pandoxator istius villae qui Robert Colt. obiit 6. die Decemb. Anno Dom. 1444. & Deonisia uxor ejus quae obiit—quorum animabus &c. Hic jacet Willielmus Colkyn qui obiit 3. die Aug. Anno Dom. William Colkyn. 1440. cujus &c. Of your charity pray for the soules of Iohn Nayler and Robert Iohn Nayler. Robert Nayler. Nayler his sonne late Aldermen of the City of Cant. which Ro∣bert died the 25. day of Decemb. Anno Dom. 1545. On whose soule &c. you may finde the father in the Catalogue of Maiors.
Orate pro animabus Thomae Ramsey & Margaretae uxoris ejus, qui obiit 3. die mensis Maii Anno Dim. 1495. Thomas Ramsey Hic jacet Iohannes Cornwell dier & Iohanna ac Alicia uxores Iohn Cornwell. ejus, qui quidem Iohannes obiit 30. die mens. Decemb. Anno Dom. 1492. quorum &c. Of your charitie pray for the soule of Margaret Colpholl the wife of Thomas Colpholl, which Marg. died the first day of March Margaret Col∣pholl. Anno Dom. 1533. on whose &c. Hic jacet Iacobus Hope Gentleman qui obiit 12. die Decemb. Anno Dom. 1458. cujus &c. Iames Hope. Hic jacet Christiana Crane quae obiit 22. die mens. Ianuar. Anno Dom. 1445. cujus &c. Christian Crane. Of your charitie pray for the soule of Iohn Barber and Ione his Iohn Barber. wife which Iohn deceased the Xth day of Aprill in the yeare of our Lord God. 1533. Hic—Thomas Lynd primus Maior Cant. & Constantiaux∣or Thomas Lynd. ejus—Feb. 12. Anno Dom.— Of your charitie pray for the soule of William Charnell first Chantery Priest of Ihesus. which deceased the 10th day of Decem. Anno Dom. 1516. This monument reduceth to my memory (what I have often met withall) the Fraternitie of Ihesus masse (as they called it) kept of old in this Church. For your better un∣derstanding whereof, you may please to know that in our Forefathers dayes there was a Priest named Iesus Masse-Priest Chantery book. maintained within the said Church by the brothers of the said brotherhood with the help and devotion of the Pa∣rishioners there, which bought and purchased divers lands and tenements to maintain the same, that is to say, one messuage and 66 acres of land and mershlying in Ash, 6 te∣nements in this Parish, 4 little tenements in S Dunstans, and  in Harbledowne, at the valuation of them by H. 8. Com∣missioners for visiting of Chanteries and the like, found
worth together 11 lib. 7s. 8d. per annum. Out of this the Priest had for his stipend or wages by the yeare with the charges of wax and wine 7 lib. And the Parish Clerk for ringing to the said masse at 6. of the clock in the morning, and for helping to sing the masse had yearely 6s. 8d. The names of such as were admitted to be of the Fraterntie were entered in a bead-roll, and like as those that of old had their names entred in the Diptycks, were specially and par∣ticularly mentioned and recomended to our Saviours mer∣cy by the Priest at Masse. In Ed. 6. time, this and all such Fraternities were dissolved. As a cause or token at least of this Churches name of Ho∣ly Crosse, there was sometime over the porch or entrance into the Church a Crucifix or representation of our Savi∣ours crucifixion. Richard Marley's Will In Regist. Cons. Ct. tells me so, who tells me so, who therein appoints to be buried in this Church-yard before the Crucifix of our Lord, as nigh the coming in of the North-dore there as conveniently can be. And wills his Executors to see gilt well and workmanly the Crucifix of our Lord with the Mary and Iohn standing upon the porch of the said North-doore; as his Will hath it, da∣ted 1521. The Crucifix is gone, and the Kings armes set up in place of it. The Vicarage of this Church was erected and indowed by the same Archbishop that Northgate-Vicarage was. If the ordination thereof come to my hands, I shall impart it Vid pro Scri∣ptura 27. in Appendice. to you in my Appendix. Some of the Vicars of the place lie interred in the Chancell: as Nicholas Chilton, who died anno 1400. Robert Raynhull, who died anno 1416. Patricius Gerard, who died anno 1458. And hard by them one Clement Harding, bachelor of Clement Har∣ding. law, with these lines upon his monument. Multorum causas defendere quique solebat Hanc mortis causam evadere non potuit Doctus & indoctus moritur, sic respice finem Vt bene discedas quisquis es ista legens.
St Dunstan. In a side Chapell or Chancell here belonging to the Ro∣pers - Chantery book. (and n wherein anciently two chaplains were of that fa∣mily maintained to sing for the soules of such of the family as were dead and for the prosperity of their heires living, and had given and allowed to each of them 8 lib. per annum for their salary or wages, beside a little tenement, next the mansion place of the Ropers, for their habitation) you may finde these monuments. Hic jacet Edmundus Roper qui obiit 11. die Decemb. Anno Dom. 1433. cujus &c. Pray for the soule of Iohn Roper Esquire, sometime generall Iohn Roper and ane his wife. Attourney to our Sovereigne Lord King Hen. 8. and Prygnatory of the bench of our said Sovereigne Lord, and for the soule of Iane his wife, daughter of St Iohn Hyneux Knight chief Iudge of England, which Iohn died the 7th day of Aprill in the yeare of the incarnation of Ihu' Christ 1524. on whose soules and all his ante∣cessors soules Ihu' have mercy, Amen. Hic jacet venerabilis vir Gulielmus Roper armiger filius & heres quondam Iohannis Roper armigeri & Margaretae uxor. William Roper and Margaret his wife. ejusdem Gul. filia quondam Thomae Mori militis summi olim Angliae Cancellarii Graecis Latinisque literis doctissima, qui qui∣dem Gul. patri suo in officio prothonotariatus supremae curiae ban∣ci Regii successit, in quo cum annis 54. fideliter ministrasset idem officium filio suo primogenito Thomae reliquit. Fuit is Gul. domi forisque munificens, mitis, misericors, incarceratorum, op∣pressorum & pauperum baculus. Genuit ex Margareta uxore (quam unicam habuit) filios duos & filias tres, ex iis vidit in vi∣ta sua nepotes, et pronepotes, uxorem in virili aetate amisit, vidu∣atus uxore castissimè vixit annis 33. Tandem completis in pace diebus decessit in senectute bona ab omnibus desideratus, die quar∣to mensis Ian. Anno Christi Salvatoris 1577. aetatis verò suae 82. There are other monuments of the Ropers, but out of my survey, being not of any Antiquity.
On the North-side, and West-end of this Church, is a little forlorne Chapell, founded by one Henry (sirnamed) Lib. Hosp. Pauperum Sa∣cerdot. Cant. of Canterbury, the Kings Chaplaine (as he writes himselfe) in the yeare 1330. and dedicated to the Holy-Trinity, toge∣ther with a perpetuall Chantery committed to the care and over-sight of the Hospitall of Poore-Priests in Cant. who be∣ing to reape the profit, were to finde the Chaplaine and un∣dergoe all burthens. Archbishop Reynolds, in the yeare 1322. erected and en∣dowed the Vicarage here. For the first ordination whereof and its augmentation afterwards see my Appendix Scriptur. 28. & 29. And now let us passe to the Churches sometime appertaining to the Nonnery. viz. S. Mary Bredin, and (whilest it was in being) S. Edmund of Ridingate. St Mary Bredin. Hic expectat resurrectionem mortuorum corpus Iohannis Hales Iohn Hales. filii Iohannis Hales secundarii Baronis de scaccario Domini Regis, qui Iohannes Hales filius obiit quarto die Maii Anno Domini 1532. Humphrey Hales also and Iames Hales, others of the fami∣ly, Humphry Hales. Iames Hales. lye beside him. Their seate was the Dungeon, a Mannor continuing to the succession to this day. More anciently it was the Chiches: of which family one of the first, and most famous was Thomas Chich, that lived in Hen. 3. dayes: whose name effigies and Coate, being argent, 3 Lions rampant, azure; you shall finde set up in the West-Window, as the Coate also is in stone in one Corner of the Chancell of this Church. William, the sonne of Hamon, the sonne of Vitalis one of them which came in with the Conqueror, built this Church, as his father Hamon did that whither we are going Lib. Hosp. S. Lawrentii., St Edmund of Ridingate. A Church so quite desolate, as the place is no where to be
found. And therefore, and because I have made it the sub∣ject of my Survey on a former occasion, I will spare all fur∣ther discourse of it in this place, and come to St Margaret, a Church sometime, by right of patronage, belonging to St Austins, but in the yeare 1271. given to the Hospitall of Poore Priests, as I have at large set forth in my Survey of that Spittle. St Margaret. In the Chancell. Hic jacet Iohannes Winter bis Maior Civitatis Cant. qui obiit decimo die Novembris 1470. cujus animae propitietur Deus A∣men, Iohn Winter. qui lampadem ante summum altare presentis. ecclesiae in perpetuam memoriam sanctissimi corporis Domini nostri Iesu Christi illuminari constituit. About which he takes order by his Will In Regist. Dom. Archid. Cant.. Quod firma sive proficuum proveniens de duobus tene∣ment' cum pertinen' apud yrencrosse in dicta parochia annui va∣loris 16s solvantur custodibus bonorum ejusdem ecclesiae annuatim in perpetuum ad sustentationem unius lampadis ardere coram sum∣mo altare in summa cancella dictae ecclesiae, ac ad acquictandum cimiterium ejusdem ecclesiae de 3s provenien' annuatim de eodem cimiterio versus Prior. & Conventum ecclesiae Christi Cant. & residuum dict. 16s fideliter expendatur circa reparationem dicto∣rum 2 tenementorum, as his Will runnes: whose words I have proposed because they give occasion of some further perti∣nent discourse: as first about our Church-yard which it seemes was anciently in whole or in part Christ-Church land, and indeed I have in the Records there met with an ancient Deed, that bounding out an house out of which was given to the Monkes a rent, layes it Eastward to St Marga∣rets Church: Christ-Church afterwards parting with her in∣terest, was (it seemes) considered with 3s a yeare for it. An∣other thing is the Iron-crosse there spoken of. Some that would speake or write it short called it Tierne-crouch, or Ti∣erne-crosse. Tierne-crosse. It stood and that within memory of man, at the meeting of the foure-streets in this parish, whereof one leads
to the Castle, another to Bridewell Hosp. a third to Ridingate, and the last up the City to the Cathedrall. It gave name to the whole quadrangle there, and the houses thereaway are in ancient Deeds Lib. Hosp. Paup. Sacerd. described to be situate apud Tierne, or apud Tierne-crouch. So is that corner house there stone-built most: what, out of which issueth a certaine yearely rent to Christ-Church Rental. eccles. Cant.. So where you see the two houses of this Iohn Winters guift, being those very two which of late Al∣derman Watson (who purchased them from the Crowne to which they escheated of old because given to superstitious uses) by his Will freely gave unto the City to the use of poore people; But let us on. Here lyeth the body of Leonard Cotton Gent. who was Sheriff Leonard Cotton. of the City of Cant. in the yeare of our Lord 1563. in the time of Thomas Giles Mayor, and was afterward himselfe Mayor of the same City in the yeare of our Lord 1579. and departed this life in the yeare of God the 24th of Aprill 1605. being of the age of 80. yeares. I have remembred him before in Maynards-Spittle. Pray for the soules of Thomas Fort and Elizabeth his Wife. On Thomas Fort. whose soules, &c. Hic jacet Iohonnes Hosbrand & Iohanna ac Iohannauxores e∣jus, Iohn Hosbrand. qui quidem Iohannes obiit 1o die Octob. Anno Domini 1452. quorum animabus &c. Richard Prat lyeth buried here Sometime of Cant. Citizen and Draper Richard Prat▪ And Alice his wife, &c. you shall finde him in the Ca∣talogue of Maiors. Here are no other ancient Monuments now extant. Some Iohn Broker. more have beene, but the brasse is gone. Haply amongst those, one was for Iohn Broker of this Parish, in his time an Alderman, and twice Maior of our City, who by his Will In Regist. Cons. Cant.
dated Anno 1521. appoints to lye before St Iohns Altar. To understand him, I must tell you that, as this Church hath a double, or either-side Ile and Chancell, so the one. i. the South Chancell or Chapell was dedicate to St Iohn, and the other to our Lady: each of which had it proper Altar now removed, the Officialls Court taking up the place of our Ladies, a tribunall-seate first erected and setled there in the yeare of our Lord 1560 Lib. act. pens Regist. Domini Cant.. I have the rather made mention of this Iohn Broker because of his liberality to the City, to the Maior and Communalty whereof and their Successors for ever he gave two houses, the one in Saint Mary Castle-Parish, the other at the Waterlocke in this Parish. For which excuse me if I thinke him memorable. On the North-side of this Church our City hath her Fish-market, and long hath had of my knowledge from good record, about 100 yeares: but anciently all or some part of the ground was the Parsons of this Church. Sciant &c. (saith a Deed in the Leiger of Poore-Priests Hosp. as ancient as a∣bout the first of Hen. 3. reigne) quòd ego Rogerus filius Henrici de Northamtona & Christiana silia Andreae Flandrensis concessi∣mus & confirmavimus illam donationem & concessionem quam Alexander de Glovernia fecit Deo & ecclesiae beatae Margaretae & Iohanni Rectori ejusdem ecclesiae ac successoribus suis de qua∣dam terra juxta praedictam ecclesiam ex parte Boreali ante domum Iohannis Turre inter regiam stratam & venellam ante domum quae fuit quondam Iohannis Pikenot & extenditur versus pistrinum Durandi vinetarii, &c. I fall not upon this, any way inten∣ding to disturbe the quiet of our Cities Title to this peece of ground, nor so much regarding the thing given, as it bounds, and of them chiefly, what it calls venella ante domum quae fuit quondam Iohannis Pikenot. Here then fixing a while, let me tell you first, that this venella was a Lane which some∣time lead by the backe-side of the now fish-market streight on till you come into the High-street, opening into the same, much-what over against the now Checquer-gate. And was then called Pikenot-alley, you may see from whence, namely Pikenot-alley. from one Pikenot in his time a man of note, living or dwelling
by it: It being a very common practice with our Ancestors to call their lanes by their names, who were knowne, and e∣minent men, and either dwelt in them or at one end of them. Hence (to begin with that) Canterbury-lane tooke Canterbury-lane. name first from a family of Canterburies somtime dwelling in or neer the same. The name of a lane hard by it in that Parish which we call Shepeshunklane, but should call Sepesonke∣lane, Sepesonklane. had a like originall, namely from one of that name an in habitant there. A lane in St Peters Parish over against the Church called of old Pocockslane tooke name from the Pocockslane. like occasion. So did also that lane in St Margarets which we at this day call Hawkes-lane, but was anciently knowne by the name of Willardslane. As likewise did a lane sometime in St Mildreds-Parish, now lost, opening at the one end into Willardslane. Stour-street, at the other against the Chapell-Church-yard, to this day remembred by the name of Ballock-lane. For the Ballock-lane. same cause was that lane in St Andrews Parish which we call Angell-lane, anciently called Sunwineslane, afterward Sul∣cockslane, Sunwineslane. Salcockslane. Clements-lane. after that Clements-lane. Hence lastly, another lane sometime in St Peters Parish, now lost, opening against the blacke-Friers gate there, was called Cokins-lane: and whether the lane late at the one end opening into the middle Cokyns-lane. of Castle-street, and into Stour-street at the other, in Saint Warelane. Mildreds Parish, by name (as usually called) Ware-lane, which the late Mr Thomas Cranmer bought of the City, did take it name from hence or not, from one Ware, I meane, that had his habitation by it, though it be uncertaine, yet is not un∣likely that it did. But enough of these things. One word more of the Fish-market. Certaine old verses made in com∣mendation of some Cities of this Kingdome singular in affording some one commodity or other, commend of Can∣terbury for her Fish, wherewith indeed, by reason of the Seas vicinity, as Malmesbury hath long since observed, her market is so well supplyed, as none that know the place will thinke the Poet flattered her. The verses are these.
Testis est London ratibus, Wintonia Baccho. Herefordeque grege. Worcestria fruge redundans. Batha lacu. Sarumque feris. Cantuaria pisce, &c. Having now done with the Churches, a word or two of Tithes how paid in Can∣terbury. their indowments in generall, I meane in Tithes. The cu∣stome and manner of payment whereof at this day, whether prediall or personall is not in kinde, but by and according to the rents of houses, viz. after the rate of xd. in the noble, quarterly payable. This I say is the present generall custome of tithing throughout our City, one Parish (St Andrew) onely excepted, where, but why I know not, the custome is, to pay somewhat more, viz. xd. ob in the noble. How long this custome hath beene in force with us I finde not, but by Re∣cords in the Archbishops Registry to be found Copied in mine Appendix, it will appeare that anciently our Clergy Vide pro Scrip∣tur. 29. & 30. in Appendice. of this City were at like passe for their Tithes and offerings with their brethren the Clergy of London: and did pertake with them of their custome, which how long afterward it did continue, or when or wherefore it ceased and was chan∣ged and abated into the present manner of Tithing; and whether or no, parsonall Tithes were then paid beside (as Parsonall Tithes. Linwoods opinion is they ought to be, this being, according to him, a prediall Tith) I no where finde. But I perswade my self that parsonall Tithes were likewise paid, and that be∣cause that almost every testator as well of City or Countrey gave satisfaction more or lesse by his Wil to the Parish Priest, for his Tithes forgotten or neligently paid; wch I conceive could not easily happen in this certaine kinde of payment. Yet I rather then otherwise suppose these privy parsonall Tithes seldome or never drawne from the parishioner by any legall compulsory way, or by any course taken for their recovery in foro exteriori, but by other meanes in those times as prevalent; one, the calling the parishioner to accompt for them in, foro conscientiae, at the time of confession and shrift (one cause haply of their name of privy Tithes;) another, the Privy Tithes.
much affrighting danger to incurre the greater curse pro∣nounced, and (which confirmes me much in my perswasion of the usuall payment of them) in every Parish Church in Towne and Countrey untill the Reformation foure times in the yeare declared against all with-holders of such Tithes, as elsewhere may bee found Reliques of Rome. fol. 243.: the cause haply that every man was so carefull not to dye in the Priests debt for them. Hitherto, and enough of the Churches, both Cathedrall and Parochial in and about our City. Ecclesiasticall government of the City. HAving now runne through the description of the whole City, with all parts, and members of the same, let us in the next place take notice of the policy whether spirituall or temporall, whereby the same is governed, beginning with the spirituall, or ecclesiasticall. According to the Aristocraticall forme of Church govern∣ment used in this Realme Dowings Dis∣course. Conclus. 1. §. 6., our City in spiritualibus, is sub∣ject to the Ordinary of the place, which is the Archbishop of Canterbury for the time being, immediately; but medi∣ately, and under him, in a subordinate way, partly to the Archdeacon, partly to the Commissary; and, in quibusdam, to the Deane rurall of the place. Of the Archbishops and Archdeacons elsewhere enough: somewhat I have thought fit to speake in this place of the remaining other two. And first of the Commissary, a subordinate officer anciently rela∣ting and retaining to the See of Canterbury. But before I fall upon his originall, give me leave to premise a few things touching our ecclesiasticall Judges in genernall, and their Consistoriall forme of Iudicature, which (by the consent of our learned Antiquaries) began under the Norman-conque∣rour, it being of a different condition aforetime. For un∣till then Daniell Hist. in Will. 1. the Bishop, and the Alderman were the absolute Judges to determine all businesses in every Shire, and the Bishops in many cases shared in the benefit of mulcts with
the King. But the Conqueror confined the Clergy within the province of their owne ecclesiasticall Jurisdiction, to deale onely in businesse concerning rule of soules, according to the Canons and Lawes Episcopall. Further and better to il∣lustrate this matter, well worthy your knowledge (courte∣ous Reader) I must let you know, that it was the Law Ian Angl. . . pag. 130. Fox. Acts and Mou. vol. 1. pag. 1017 of King Edgar (a Saxon) Ex omni eomitatu bis quotannis Conven∣tus agitor, cui quidem illius Dioecesis Episcopus & Senator inter∣sunto, quorum alter Iura divina, humana alter populum edoceto. A Law by King Canutus the Dane, reinforced thus Spelman. Glossar. in Vrbo Aldermannus. Fox ubisupra.. Habea∣tur ter in Anno Burgesmotus (i. Civitatis Conventus) & Shire∣motus (i. pagi vel comitatus Conventus) bis, nisi saepius opus sit; & intersit Episcopus & Aldermannus, & doceant ibi Dei rctum & saeculi, uterque scilicet pro suo munere. Hence that of Mr Selden, speaking of the Iurisdiction that belonged to the Saxon. Ealdormen, or Earles. The scyregemot (saith he Titles of Ho∣nor. par. 2. cap. 5. §. 5.) which was a Court kept twice every yeare, as the Sheriffes turne is at this day, was held by the Bishop of the Diocesse and the Ealder∣man (in shires that had Ealdormen) and by the Bishops and Sheriffes, in such as were committed to the Sheriffe that were im∣mediate to the King. And so both the ecclesiasticall and tempo∣rall Lawes were together given in charge to the Countrey. Thus he. Hence also that of S. H. Spelman, speaking of the Sax∣on-Count or Earle. Praesidebat autem (saith he Gloss. in Verb. Comes.) foro comitatus non solus, sed adjunctus Episcopo: hic ut jus divinum, ille ut humanum diceret, alterque alteri auxilio esset & consilio: prae∣sertim Episcopus Comiti, nam in hunc illi animadvertere saepe licuit, & errantem cohibere. Idem igitur utrique territorium, & jurisdictionis terminus. As also hence that of him in ano∣ther place: Aderant (saith he Gloss. in Ver∣bis Gemotum & Hundred.) scilicet Hundredo (which was kept and held once a moneth) Thani (the same which sithence are called Barons) ipsique Iudices ecclesiastici, cum partis illius Clero. In hundredo enim non minus quam in comi∣tatu unatunc agebantur, quae adforum pertinent ecclesiasticum, & quae ad seculare, donec Gulielmus Conquestor divisis Iurisdi∣ctionibus, hanc ab illa separavit. In English even the same with that of Mr Selden in another place then any of those
out of him above-cited. In the Saxon-times (saith he Hist. of Titb. cap. 14. §. 1. vid. Fox. Acts and Monum. vol. 1. pag. 193.) all jurisdiction of ecclesiasticall causes was exercised joyntly by the Bishop of the Diocesse, and the Shrife or Alderman of the Shire∣gemot, or Hundred or County Court, where they both sate; the one to give Godes right, the other for pupulds right, that is the one to judge according to the Lawes of the Kingdome, the other to direct according to divinity. But at the Norman conquest, this kinde of holding ecclesiasticall pleas in the Hundred or County Court was taken away. Thus he. The Law or edict ordaining or commanding this separation of the two Courts you may finde elsewhere Ian. Angl. lib. 2. pag. 76. Hist. of Tithes. cap. 14. §. 1.: with the repetition whereof, because it hath at severall times beene published, and for brevity sake, I will not trouble you. In those dayes one way and manner of triall and determination of causes was by a kinde of deci∣sory oath of the party. A autem (as is observed by the fore∣named learned Knight Concil. Tom. 1. pag. 336.) idest, jusiurandum sive sacramentum, appellabant Saxones nostri, litium illud dirimendi genus, quo ex consacramentalium (uti vocant.) assertione, de litigatis cognosce∣bant & judicabant, &c. The same observation hath Mr Lam∣bert in his Perambulation. In Eareth. An example whereof they severally set forth. I my selfe have met with the like amongst the Records of our Cathcdrall, of the yeare 844. containing in it (if you will pardon the barbarous false la∣tine, the fault of that ages ignorance) many observable pas∣sages, which you shall finde in my Appendix Scriptura 32. But let me goe on where I left. Since that edict of the Con∣queror, as I finde by searching and turning over ancient mo∣niments, Ecclesiasticall Iurisdiction was a while exercised chiefly and for the most part, for Clergy-mens causes espe∣cially in Synods or Chapters, the Bishop using in person to preside over the one, as the Archdeacon over the other. Afterward upon the revivall of the civil, and promulgation of the canon-law, sufficiently repleate with light and dire∣ctions for deciding of doubts, and determination of causes without need either of Synods or Chapters, they began by little and little to decline, or at least not to be of such ordi∣nary use for the hearing and ending of causes, such especially
as were ouely civill and not criminall, as before; and then as a more easie and speedy way of dispatch the Consistoriall forme of Iudicature which wee now retaine, exercised by Officialls, Chancellors, Commissaries and the like ecclesiasticall Judges, came into request, of whom, in this nation, untill about Pope Alex. 3. dayes, no mention at all, in any Record with us extant at this day is (I take it) to be found. I deny not the antiquity of Ecclesiecdici, or Church-lawyers. I Ecclsiecdici. would not be so mistaken. For I grant (as behoves me) an existence of them many hundreds of yeares before, where∣of the late learned Sr Thomas Ridley in his view of the Civill and ecclesiasticall law Pag. 104., worthily vindicating their chal∣lenged antiquity, hath made very satisfactory proofe. Whom in their Office I conceive not much unlike (if not the same that were) the Periodeutai mentioned by Iustinian in his Con∣stitution Omnem. 42. de Episc. & Cler. Of whom see Gotho∣freds notes there: as also Cujacius there, and upon the Title of the Pandects, de excus. tutor. lib. 6. §. 1. and Iustellus, in his Notes upon the Codex canonum Ecclesiae universae. pag. 216. who all agree that these Periodeutai were certaine circuitores sive visitatores qui veluti episcoporum vicarii Regiones Civitati∣bus subjectas visitant ac circumeunt, nullam{que} propriam sedem ha∣bent. And I grant that such Church-Lawyers were ever after of use, as Assistants (or Assessors) to Bishops, for their helpe and direction in debating and deciding controversies accor∣ding to the formes and formalities of Law (hence our Arch∣bishop had his Auditores Causarum:) but came not, I con∣ceive, to that perfection of authority, here in England at least, untill about the time I told you. Synods then thus (as I said) declining, and their authority being transferred upon Officialls and the like: our Commis∣sariship of Canterb. did not presently take beginning, but the Archbishops Officiall partly, and partly the Archdeacon did for a time use and exercise the Jurisdiction throughout the City and Diocesse, whilest as yet there was no Commis∣sary at Cant. Afterwards the increase of causes in the Ar∣ches Court at London requiring the Officialls constant resi∣sidence
and attendance there, who before (like the Periodeu∣tai) was ambulatory, and followed the Archbishop, leaving the Deane of the Arches to dispatch causes there as his de∣puty in his absence; and complaint being made Ex Lib. eccles. Christi Cant. (and it, as one amongst many other grievances by some propounded and put up) to Archbishop Peckham, to wit the non-Residence of the Officiall, he was by a Statute Ms. pems. of Archbishop Winchel∣sey, Peckhams next Successor, injoyned to residence; and about the same time, and upon that occasion (as I con∣ceive) and the Archbishops more constant residence at Lambhith, a Commissariship was established in and for the Commissary of Cant. his originall. City and Diocesse of Cant. and a perpetuall or setled Com∣missary appointed to attend the same: the first (I take it) that by Patent or Commission held the place, being one Mr Martin, in his time Parson of Ickam in Kent, and thus his Patent or Commission runnes. Frater I. Archiepisc. &c. Magistro Martino &c. Salutem. Quia quocunque auctoritas nostra se protendit ad incumbentia ncbis onera exequenda simul & semel personaliter adesse nequi∣vimus, illos nonnunquam in partem solicitudinis accepimus de quorum fide & industria plenam in Domino fiduciam reportamus. Hinc est quòd de tuae circumspectionis & fidei plenitudine consi∣dentes, officium Commissar. Cant. tibi cum omnibus Iuribus & Iurisdictionibus ad ipsum officium qualitercunque spectan' com∣mittimus per praesentes, ut tam prudenter quam fideliter in om∣nibus liberè authoritate nostra exercere valeas officium memora∣tum, & ad te tanquam nostrum in nostra Diocesi Commissarium generalem in his quae ad ipsum pertinent officium recurratur. In cujus &c. Dat' apud Mortlake, 3. Non. Maii Anno Dom. 1282. Consecrationis nostrae quarto. I shall spare recitall of the succeeding Commissaries names, and their Patents or Commissions, not because I want instruction to do either, but for brevity sake. For which cause, though I might instance in many parti∣cular favours which severall Archbishops graciously incli∣ned to the advancement of their Episcopall Consistory, have been pleased to grant unto their Commissaries, ren∣dring
it a Court of good credit, yet I forbear the mention of them all: and the rather because being mostly upon Re∣cord in the Registry, they are already publick, and obvious to all mens scrutiny. But yet one thing which antedates those Records, and concernes the Court, at least is not im∣pertinent to our present discourse of the originall thereof, I crave leave to particularize, and it is this, viz. A course taken upon and anon after the erection of the Commissari∣ship, for the inlargement and bettering of the same, by the Archbishops revoking and calling the Jurisdiction, which divers Rectors or Parsons of exempt Churches within the Diocesse exercised, from and out of their quasi possession (Iura etenim incorporalia non possidentur, sed quasi possiden∣tur Lih 3. §. qui us ctus. F. de vi & viar. & Inst. de In∣terdict, in princ.) and conferring or transferring it upon the Commissa∣ry: whereof I finde the following Record in Christ-Church. Revocatio Iurisdictionis ecclesiarum exemptarum. VVAlter. permissione divina Cant. Archiep. totius Angliae Primas. Dilecto filio Commiss. nostro Cant. salutē, gra∣tiā & benedictionem. Quia tam de Iure communi quam de consue∣tudine in nostra Civitate & Diocesi omnis Iurisdictio spiritualis ad nos authoritate Diocesana dinoscitur pertinere, jurisdictionem omnimodam quam rectores ecclesiarum sanctorum Martini & Elphegi Cant. & de Reculver, Monketon, Adesham, Ickham, Eastry, Dale, Godmersham, Saltwood, Westwell, Charing, Woodchurch, Wittresham, Northfleet et Pageham, necnon de Maidestan, & de Bocton subtus le Blen nostrae Dioecesis, ex nostra conniventia in parochiis ecclesiarum suarum singulariter exer∣cuerunt, in derogationem Iuris nostri & ecclesiae nostrae, certis ex causis ad nos jamdudum revocavimus, ipsam jurisdictionem per nostros officiales seu Commissarios exercendam fore decernentes. Vobis committimus & mandamus quatenus omnimoda jur is di∣ctione in parochiis ecclesiarum praedict & earum qualibet ac ca∣pellarum dependentium ab eisdem & subditis earundem, de cetero utamini vice nostra prout Commissarii Cant. seu alii quicunque uti consueverunt in eisdem temporibus. retroactis. Contradictores
& rebelles per censuras ecclesiasticas compescendo. In cujus Rei testimonium Sigillum nostrum praesentibus est appensum. Dat' apud Lambeth 15. Kal. April. Anno Dom. 1317. Now onely a word or two to shew how it came to passe that the Records of the Consistory fall so much short of the originall of the Court, as indeed they do, beginning not untill about the yeare 1396. above 100 yeares after the ere∣ction of the Commissariship, and then leaving the Commissa∣ry, I shall proceed to speak somewhat of the Deane. The cause I cannot impute to the injurie of time consu∣ming the Records, because Records of greater antiquity are daily seen, and frequently and generally extant. As I cannot impute it to that, so neither will I ascribe it to the sloth or negligence of the Registers in times past, which I cannot, in charitie, presume upon no better warrant then conjecture; although the meannesse of their places and the moveablenesse of the Court in those and latter times would readily help to support that surmise. To these causes (I say) I will not attribute the cause of our Courts disabili∣tie to produce the Records of those elder times. Because (after a hint received from some well versed in Antiquity) spending some time about perusing our Chronicles which make mention of the rebellious insurrection made by Wat Tyler and Iack Straw, happening in the reigne of Ric. 2. and in the yeare of our Lord 1381. by and upon this perusall of the story, I found that they and their complices bare an especiall hatred and spite to Lawyers, insomuch that not onely they wasted and consumed with fire the Lawyers houses then situate neare Temple-barre London; but also being at, Canterb. and having received kinde welcome and intertainment of the Townsmen there (all the people be∣ing . of their assent) upon their departure, taking their way to Rochester, they sent their people to the villages about, and in their going they beat down and robbed the houses of Advocates and Procurers of the Kings Court and of the Archbishop, bearing him much malice for imprisoning their Priest, Iohn Ball, a seditious malecontent and hypocri∣ticall
Preacher. What should kindle in them this fire of en∣vy to Lawyers, is easily apprehended if the drift of this their seditious rising be but considered. For like the Stoicks of old, whose hearts were set upon a communitie; whence that of Seneca. Homines quietissimè viverent si haec duo Pronomina de medio tollerentur, meum & tuum) a parity and communitie was the thing projected, and the effecting of a plebetan li∣bertie their aime, whereunto they well knew (as who knows it not) that laws and Lawyers were notorious enemies and obstacles: in as much as meum and tuum cannot stand with community, for Si teneant omnes omnia, nemo suum. Therefore saith one, speaking of this Ball, he perswaded or counselled them to kill and murder (amongst others) all Lawyers, Iusticers, and all manner Iudges, Magistrates and men in authoritie &c. Herewithall, what writings or Re∣cords soever they could fasten on where they came (as an∣other obstacle to their projects thriving, which they were to remove) they concluded to set on fire. Hence was it that at Cambridge, the rabble of them there, breaking up the chests and forcing the places where the Records of the Vni∣versitie were kept, without regard had, or difference made of any writings, whether Charters, Bulls, Letters patents, Statutes or other monuments whatsoever, in the Market place, some, other elsewhere they committed to the flame. Now to bring this home to my present purpose, which is to shew what is become of our Records of the Consistory of Canterb. before those now extant. Having by this Story found how Lawyers and law-records were maliced by these all-wasting rebells, and considering (by comparing of the times) that our Registry takes its beginning not till awhile some few yeares after this rebellion, (it not being able pre∣sently to gather breath again) and that it was and is the Archbishops Registry whom they maliced even to the death: I cannot but perswade my self, and in mine opinion more then conjecturall it is, that those elder Records and their Registry bare a share with the rest of the Records and
Lawyers houses wch suffered the violence of those Rebells. I passe now from our Cōmissary wth an hearty wish that the following Distichon (wch George Sandys Relation. lib. 1. pag. 6. tells me is set over the court of Justice at Zant may be ever verifi'd of his Consi∣story. Hic locus odit, amat, punit, conservat, honorat, Nequitiam, pacem, crimina, jura, probos.Thus Englished. This place doth hate, love, punish, keep, requite, Voluptuous riot, peace, crimes, lawes, th'upright. Having done with the Commissary, it remains that I speak Deane of Can∣terury. somewhat of the Dean, an ecclesiasticall officer set to over∣see a certain number of Parishes, amongst wch are those of our City, & a necessary member in the ecclesiasticall or spi∣rituall government of the same. We call him a Rurall Deane. Now rurall Deanes (to speak of them first in the gene∣rall) are the same with Archipresbyteri vicani or rurales, and their names are often confounded, but more frequently occurreth the name of Archipresbyter, and is more used amongst the Canonists, then that of Decanus. Wherefore I am minded to expound this of Deane by that of Arch-priest (an Ecclesiasticall degree, by the order of the Decretalls following next unto an Archdeacon, and following rather then preceding, because that albeit the Arch-priest be, then the Arch-deacon (if he be but a Deacon and not a Priest) ma∣jor ordine, yet is the Arch-deacon then the Arch-priest major dignitate Gl. in c. 1. de ic. Archipresb. verb. subesse.. Of Arch-priests there is a double kinde. Duarenus shall bring you acquainted with them. Sunt autem (saith he De sacr. ec∣cles. Minist. & Benefic. lib. 1. c. 8) Archipresbyterorum duo genera, quorum urbani quidam dicun∣tur, alii vicani. Vrbani dicuntur qui in urbe & in majori eccle∣sia officio suo funguntur. Cum enim Episcopus propter absentiam fortè, vel occupationes suas non possit omnia Episcopi munia, vel solus, vel una cum presbyteris obire, sed cur as suas cum eis partiri necesse habeat: utilius visum est ex presbyteris unum caeteris praeponere, qui ea quae ad presbyterorum officium pertinent, par∣tim ipse exequatur, partim aliis facienda praescribat, quàm om∣nibus simul presbyteris id committere, ne contentio aliqua inter
ipsos ex communione administrationis oriretur. Et Archipre∣sbyteri vicani nullam in urbe potestatem, nullum ministerium ha∣bent, sed in majoribus celebrioribusque pagis constituuntur. Ac singulis, praeter ecclesiae propriae curationem, certarum ecclesia∣rum, certorumque presbyterorum, qui videlicet per minores titu∣los habitant, inspectio observatioque committitur &c. Thus he; who in the next Chapter to that above cited proceeds to shew and set forth the originall of these Arch-priests or Deanes rurall, and how they first sprang up, and is perswaded (as he tells us) that upon the abolishing and antiquating of the Chorepiscopi, these Deanes or Arch-priests succeeded in their stead. Where in St Hen. Spelman concurring with him in opinion, delivers the same very succinctly thus. Chore∣piscoporum munus (saith her) cum nomine sensim antiquatum Glossar. in verb. Chorepi∣scopus. abolevit (nec pridem) ecclesia: subinductis verò in eorum vi∣cem (qui Episcopis liberiùs cedunt, & humiliori jure contenti sunt) Archipresbyteris, alias Decanis ruralibus, & Plebanis. So have you both the definition and originall of Rurall Deanes. To speak now more purposedly of their use and office in this kingdome especially. Decani rurales (saith Lindwood) sunt Decani temporales ad aliquod ministerium sub Episcopo vel  constituti &c. From this place in Lindwood, De Constitut cap 1. verb. De∣canos rurales. Dr Cowell tells us that Deanes rurall are certain persons that have certain Jurisdiction Ecclesiasticall over other Mini∣sters and Parishes neare adjoyning, assigned unto them by the Bishop and Archdeacon being placed and displaced by them Interpreter. in verb. Dene.. Would you know upon what ground, and for what intent first instituted? briefly this, the assistance of the Bi∣shop, or Archdeacon, or both. Cum enim (saith one Rover. Illust Histor. Monst. S. Joann R∣maens pag. 629.) ad presbyteros rure degentes extendere se continuò non posset Epi∣scoporum, aut Archidiaconorum vigilantia, collocati fuere per intervalla, in quibusdam quasi excubiis Presbyterorum aliqui Decani, vel Archipresbyteri vocitati, ut Caeterorum Presbytero∣rum, ac plebis moribus vice Episcopi aut Archidiaconi invigila∣rent. Their Jurisdiction for ought that I can finde is not so certain, nor particularly laid down any where as it can be
said to be of this or that form, or to be thus or thus boun∣ded out: and therefore, as they are generally a motive and removeable ad nutum constituentis, so is it arbitrary to the Superiour that ordains them, I suppose, with decency and order, what charge or businesse they shall undergo. Yet these particulars of their office I meet with. First that by custome warranted by law Vide Sum. Syl∣vestr. in verb. Archipresbyter., many of them have a kinde of Jurisdiction to visit their Deanrie, and to inquire of crimes and defamations happening in the same, especially by the Clergy, and to take cognizance thereof, correcting, for the smaller offences, by themselves, and for the rest referring them to the Superiour, the Bishop namely or Archdeacon at the next Synode, Chapter, or visitation, reporting unto them what they finde, (like as did the Irenarchae and Appa∣ritores of old, their Notaria to the Magistrate;) whence they are termed testes Synodales Lindwood. ubi supra.. But are by law flatly forbidden not onely to take to ferme Episcopall Jurisdiction Cap. quoniam. Ne praelati vic suas &c., but al∣so to meddle in arduous or weighty causes such as matrimo∣ny and the like In Const. O∣thon. c. cum non solum. de Indi∣ciis., as being by common intendment not qua∣lified with skill enough to handle them: and those of Cant. Diocesse by an ancient Injunction of the Archdeacon, were forbidden Probat of Wills. Moreover I finde that these Ru∣rall Deanes had each of them their seale, and were appoint∣ed so to have by the Legatine constitution of Otho. Quoni∣am tabellionum, which will have it authenticall: and such seale to have onely cut and graved in it the name of Office, sine nomine proprio, saith the glosse, because upon the expi∣ration of their office it was presently to be resigned and sur∣rendred up into the hands of him from whom they derived their office (so runs the Constitution.) The use which they made of these seales was this among other. Citations being often, atleast in causes of moment and against the Clergy of their Deanry, directed, committed and intrusted to their execution, they (as a part of their office) either executed the same themselves, or else they caused them to be execu∣ted by their apparitors, servants, beadles or messengers (for such they had aswell as the Bishop himself or other
Ordinaries had theirs) and then returned the same citations, together with a certificate of the manner and forme of their execution thereof under their seale. These things will ap∣peare to any that shall have recourse to the places quoted Const. Otho. Tanto callidi∣tatis. c. excussis. &c. quidam ruralium de u∣dic. &c. Item contra. de censib. in Provinciali. in the margent. Those particularly of Canterbury Diocesse, were Receivers of the Peter-pence or Romescot in their severall Deanries, had many times purgations committed by the Commissary to their dispatch, for the ease and benefit of the subject, and their wisdome and fidelity was intrusted for the taking of them: a thing warranted (if not required) by the Provinciall Constitution. Item licet. de purgatio. canon. Be∣sides they were Poenitentiaries and Confessors for the Clergy of their severall Deanries. They convocated the Clergy to vi∣sitations and to the choice of Clerks of the Convocation. Vp∣on the vacancy of any Church in their Deanry it was usuall with them of old to have the custody of it, that is to col∣lect the fruits and get the cure supplyed, in the name and stead of the Archdeaconry during the Churches Widow∣hood or vacancy; and to that end the one had the Church∣doore Key delivered him, which upon his induction of the new Incumbent, to put him in possession of the Church, he used to deliver him, according to the manner of giving corporall possession in those elder times observed, spring∣ing haply from those lawes in the Digests. l. quaratione. §. 9. Item si quis. D. de acquir. rer. dom. l. clavibus. 74. de contra. empt. These and many other things brought them in such pro∣fit as that some of them were unwilling to depose their of∣fice and deliver up their seale Io. de Atho. in Const. quonian tabellionum. Verb. & sine molestia.. The choice and ordinati∣on of them is not hitherto quite worne out of use amongst us, but their office in any of the premisses, is either quite obsolete, or at least much diminished. Hence that of St H. Spelm. Ruralium Decanorum genus (saith he Gloss. in Verb. Decani.) hinc ab Episcopo, illin ab Archid' vel exhaustum omninò est, vel pristino spendore denudatum. The Authors and projecters of the intended Reformation of the lawes ecclesiasticall of this Realme, meant to indue them with no meane power, as is plainely seene by
the fifth Chapter of the Title, De ecclesia & ministris ejus, illorumque officiis, running thus. De Archipresbiteris sive Decanis ruralibus. cap. 5. DEcanatus quilibet Archipresbiterum rusticanum habeat, vel ab episcopo, vel ecclesiae Ordinario praeficiendum. Munus autem ejus erit annuum. Hic tanquam in specula presbiteris, diaconis, gardianis, & aedituis, ut singuli quae ad eorum munus attinent praestent, perpetuò invigilabit. De Idololatris, & haere∣ticis, de Symoniacis, de lenonibus & meretricibus, de adulteris & fornicatoribus, de his qui duas uxores simul habent atque ma∣ritos duos, de magis & veneficis, de calumniatoribus & blasphe∣mis, de Sodomiticis & ebriosis, de ultimarum voluntatum cor∣ruptelis & perjuriis, de injunctionum aut nostrarum aut Episcopi violatoribus, inquirat. Et vocandi ad se, examinandi horum scelerum suspectos authoritatem habeat. Omnem accusationis ortum, sive per famam publicam, sive deferentium testimonio pro∣batum, vel suspectum, Episcopo aut ejus loci ordinario infra de∣cem dies in scriptis prodet. Qui autem venire ad eum recusave∣rit, per apparitorem vocatus tanquam contumax Episcopi volun∣tatem omnibus ejus Decanatus ecclesiis, sibi per literas significa∣tam, quanta poterit celeritate subinde exponi curabit: alioqui subibit supplicium contemptus. Officii sui sexto quolibet mense Episcopum aut loci ordinarium certiorem faciet, quot infra ejus decanatum conciones co temporis spatio fuerint habitae. By this intended Constitution you see much of the pristine authority of Rurall Deanes, was meant to be annexed to them and their office. But this as the rest of those laws ne∣ver came in force. So that of the quality, use and office of our Rurall Deanes, all the face that surviveth, or can be ga∣thered from any expresse law or Constitution made touch∣ing them since the reformation, is represented and exhibi∣ted unto us by part of an English Canon made and published in Anno Dom. 1571. runneth thus. When the visitation is fini∣shed, the Archdeacon shall signifie unto the Bishop, whom he hath found in every Deanry so furnished with learning and judgement,
that they may be thought worthy to instruct the people in Sermons, and to rule and govern others. Of these the Bishop may choose some, whom he will have rurall Deanes This under the title of Archdeacons.. Hitherto and enough of Rurall Deanes in generall: onely let me tell you, that I suppose they were more in request when Ecclesiasticall Courts were moveable, and kept from Deanry to Deanry (for which see the Constitution Excussis. De judiciis in Pro∣vincial.) and when Rurall Chapters, whereof there were foure more principall in the yeare, each quarter one, were in use (for which see the Constitution Quia Incontinentiae. De Constitutio. in text. & glos. in verb. capitulis ruralibus) which rurall Chapters are not hitherto so exolete and dis∣used, but that our Archdeacon of Canterb. every yeare hold∣eth one, namely about Michaelmas, annually, throughout the whole Archdeaconry, which he therefore calleth Gene∣rale; then which one, though now he do not, yet did he for∣merly hold more, as is probable, because by the old Compo∣sition made between the Archbishop and him, his Apparitors 1396. are in expresse words assigned him, pro capitulis celebrandis, and for no other purpose. Now a word or two of our particular Deane, to whom I finde that former times have had recourse for his assistance in many things. The Threasurer of Christ-Church Liber ejusd. ecce. in the yeare 1257. being unpaid divers rents due by the Church tenents in Canterb. hires the Deanes cryer for 12d. at foure severall times to denounce or publish throughout the City all such retainers of rents excommunicated: and makes it parcell of his demands in his Accompt for that yeare, viz. Preconi Decani Cant. 12d. ut denuntiaret detentores reddituum excommunicatos per totam Civitatem &c. His seale being au∣thenticall, he had a hand in many Exemplifications, in some joyning with other, in other, alone by himself. Of which I have seen of each sort not a few. Wherein, especially in those of the elder sort, he writes and styles himself Decanus Christi civitatis Cant. For the same cause, I suppose, that our spirituall Courts were and are to this day called Curiae Christianitatis (Courts Christian) originally so called (as
Mr Selden In Notisad Eadmerum. pag 208. & 209. notes upon the term frequent with Eadmerus and other writers of that age using it to denotate Episco∣pall authoritie and Jurisdiction) because in the primitive age of the Church, and in the Edicts of ancient Emperours. Bishops were specially and chiefly understood by the gene∣rall name of Christians. Generali Christianorum nomine (saith he) in edictis Imperatorum veterum Episcopos speciatim desig∣nart volunt Iuris consulti nonnulli, ad l. 11. Christianos. C. de Episcopali audientia. Hinc apud nos Fora sacra quibus jure nempe communi subnixis aut Episcopi praesunt, aut ii qui eo no∣mine Episcopos, utpote quos provocare licet, suspiciunt, Curiae Curiae Chrisia∣nitatis. Christianitatis etiamnum vocitantur. Primò Christianitatis vo∣cabulum, legem Christianam seu venerationem Christianam & Christianum cultum generatim sonabat, uti videre est in C. tit. de Apostolatis. l. 4. & C. Theodos. tit. de spectaculis l. 5. C. Eod. tit. de Decurtonibus. l. 112. C. Eod. tit. de Iudaeis, Coeli∣colis l. 19. alibi item. Sed postea Functio atque Iurisdictio illa quae in gerenda Christianae religionis seu Christianitatis aut poli∣tiae Ecclesiasticae cura potissimum exercentur, Christianitas eti∣am signater dicta sunt; atque inde sacra Fora, Fora Christia∣nitatis vocitata. Thus he. And hitherto of the Ecclesiasti∣call government of the City. I proceed to the temporall. But by the way let me referre you for further understanding of that style or title of Decanus Christianitatis, and of the qua∣lity, antiquity, and use of Rurall Deanes to Roverius his Illu∣strations upon the History of S. Iohns Monastery at Rheimes. pag. 628. 629. How our City was governed in temporalibus, before the time of the Bailiffes is somewhat obscure. Yet questionlesse it alwayes had a speciall and distinct Magistrate to preside over it, whom I finde styled, either the Praefect, the Port∣reeve, . . . or the Provost, names differing more in sound then in sense and signification. For the first of which, in the yeare 780. in certaine Charters of Christ-Church bearing date at Canterbury, mention is made of one Ale hujus Civitatis Praefectus, as in one, Regis Praefectus in Doniâ, as in another of them, who having purchased Burn, con∣sisting
of foure plough-lands, of his Master the Kentish King Egbert, for two thousand shillings, gave it all to the Monkes of that Church, ad mensam, that is, for their main∣tenance in food dyet. For the second, Portreve or Port∣greve, in the yeare 956. to a Deed of the sale of a parcell of Land in Canterbury to one Ethelstane, by two Knights Ethelsi and Wlfsi, is the subscription (amongst other witnesses) of one Hlothewig Portgerefa, on this wise, viz. After King Ed∣gar, Queene Eadgive (who writes herselfe, in Cantia etiam Guberbnator) and some others, it followes. . By the way these  here mentioned as wit∣nesses in the last place, and which I meete with in two other like Charters of Christ-Church about the same age were (I take it) of the nature of those Fraternities, Gilds, or Gild∣scips which Mr Lambert in his explication of Saxon words, in verb. Contubernalis, and more at large St Hen. Spelman in his Glossary, in verb. Geldum, severally expound. I proceed. In the Danish massacre here under King Etheldred, happening Anno 1011. Alfword (as Huntington) Elfrig (as Hoveden) Alfred (as Thorne calls him) Praepositus Regis (the City-Go∣vernor, I take it) was one of the personages of quality then taken prisoners. Afterwards Doomsday-booke records the name of another like Praepositus, Brumannus by name, in these words. Quidam Praepositus Brumannus nomine T. R. E. Id  R Edwardi i.  Regis Willielmi. cepit consuetudines de extraneis mercatoribus in terra S. Trinita∣tis, & sancti Augustini, qui postea T. R. W. ante Archiepisco∣pum Lanfrancum & Episcopum Bajocen. recognovit se injustè ac∣cepisse &c. (as it is before p. 4.) Thus before the Conquest. In succeeding times it seemes the City was the Archbi∣shops, especially Lanfranks, and his immediate successor Anselmes, the former holding it as it were in see ferme, the latter, freely, ex solido, in the nature of what the Lumbards call an Alodium. Hence that of Mr Lambert Prambulati∣on o Kent in Canterbury.. The Bishops (saith he) were never absolute owners thereof till the time of King William Rufus, who (as the Annals of S. Augustine say)
dedit civitatem Cantuariae Anselmo ex solido, quam Lanfran∣cus tenuerat ex beneficio. Hence also that of Eadmerus Hist. Novor. lib. 1. pag 18., who then lived. Praecepit itaque Rex, ut sine dilatione ac diminutione investiretur de omnibus, ad Archiepiscopatum pertinentibus in∣tus & extra, atque ut civitas Cantuaria quam Lanfrancus suo tempore in beneficio à Rege tenebat, & Abathia sancti Albani quam non solum Lanfrancus, sed & antecesseres ejus habuisse noscuntur in alodium ecclesiae Christi Cantuariensis, proredemp∣tione animae suae, perpetuo jure, transirent. Neverthelesse the City still had a Portreve to superintend and rule over it. For in the same Archbishop Anselmes time, one Calveal, by the name and title of Portgreva, is mentioned as a witnesse to an exchange of houses betweene the Church, and the City; the Deed whereof, for the old English-sake, and because withall a good evidence of that ages plainnesse and simpli∣city, as much (it seemes) affecting the Imperatorian Brevity, as ours abhorres it (an age truely then in which men were never more extraordinarily cautious, and yet never more ordinarily cousened) it shall not be amisse here verbatim to insert. . Which in our moderne English may be thus rendred. This is the Exchange betweene the Family. at Christ-Church, and the Knights at Canterbury of the society of Merchants. The society of Merchants give up (or put over) into the hands of the family eight houses within Burgate with (the liberties of) sace and socne, as they themselves enjoy them. And the family give up (or put over) into their hands on the other side nine houses,
two without Readingate. In one of them dwelleth Aelfric, and Bruman in the other. The (other) seven within Newingate. In them dwell Siward Entfert, and Brihtric, and Goldwine, and Hereword, and Willelm, and Wulfgeve, and Alfwine, with (the liberties of) sace and socne as the family enjoyes them. Thereun∣to is witnesse Anselme Archbishop, and the family at Christ-Church, and Calveal Portreve, and the chiefest men of the soci∣ety. To shew (or manifest) this, the family hath one writing (or part) and the society another. Not long after, the single was changed into a double Portreeve, Bailiffe, or Provost; yet not elective by the vote and suffrage of the Citizens untill Hen. 3. time, who in the eighteenth yeare of his reigne, by his Charter granting the Towne to the Citizens in Fee-ferme, infranchised them with licence and power yearely to choose them Bailiffes of Bailisses of Can∣terbuy. their owne. From and after which time, the City continued a Bailiffe-Towne, that is, was governed by Bailiffes, untill the change thereof into a Maioralty by Hen. 6. in the 26th Maiors. yeare of his reigne, in which estate it now stands. My past endeavors cannot as yet furnish me with a compleat nomen∣clature of all the Bailiffes: if my future shall, I shall willing∣ly impart them. But of the Maiors this, so neere as I ca is a true list or Catalogue according to their severall Succes∣sions. Maiors. How often. What yeare. 1 Iohn Lynde. 1 1449 He lyeth buried in Westgate-Church. If you look back, you may finde his monument or epitaph there. 2 William Bennet. 1 1450 He was divers times before, one of the Bailiffes of the City, unto which at his death he became a benefactor. For by his Will In Regit. Dom. Archid. Cant. he gave unto the City his Tenements beside Iury-lane in Saint Mary Bredmans Parish. Those two stone∣houses
(I take it) they are, the one the Tigre, the other the White-horse standing by that Lane, very ancient both, and known to belong unto the City at this day. He gave also to the Wardens of S Andrews Church in Cant. where he was a Parishioner, 4s 4d. per annum, to keep and maintain the clock there, for ever. His other good deeds have their deserved mention elsewhere. 3. Gervase Clifton. 1. 1451. 4. Roger Ridley. 1. 1452. He gave by his Will In Regist Dom. Archid. Cantuar. five marks to the paving of the Bul∣stake, and as much to the new building of S. Georges-gate, and 4 lib. also towards repairing of the Chancell of S. Mary Castell Church in Canterbury. 5. Iohn Mulling. 1. 1453. 6. Iohn Mulling. 2. 1454. 7. Iohn Winter. 1. 1455. He lies buried in S. Margarets Church, where if you look you shall finde by his Epitaph what were his works of piety. He was in his former dayes one of the Bailiffs of the City, viz. anno 25. H. 6. the very last yeare of the Bailiffs govern∣ment thereof. 8. William Bennington. 1. 1456. 9. Richard Pratt. 1. 1457. What he was, may be further known by his Epitaph for∣merly taken and set forth in S. Margarets Church, where he lies interred. 10. Philip Belknap. 1. 1458. He dwelt (they say) at the Mote, but died within the yeare, and William Bold supplied the place. 11. Roger Ridley. 2. 1459. 12. William Bigg. 1. 1460. He it was that with one Iohn Coppyn of Whitstable built our present Mercat-crosse at the Bulstake, as the Inscription upon it will shew you. By his will In ed. Regist. he gave 10 lib. towards the work of S. Georges-gate. He was a benefactor also to the
window-work of S. Peters Church, as is before remembred. 13. Iohn Freningham Esq•. 1. 1461. His Will In eod. Regist. shews him to be a man of much piety. For thereby he gave twenty Nobles to S. Mary Magdalens Church, 20 lib. to Christ-Church, 20 nobles to the Prior of Christ-Church for overseeing his will, 20 lib. to the repair∣ing of S. Michaels-gate, or paving of the Bulstake, and 20 no∣bles to the amending of foul wayes in and neare Canterbury. This yeare the City was made a County per se, and that upon these (very valuable) considerations. Nos (saith the King, Ed. 4.) Civitatem nostram praedict. unam de antiquissi∣mis Canterburie one of the an∣cientest Cities of England. Angliae Civitatibus existentem in loco ejusdem regni eminen∣tiori in prospectu omnium tam in idem regnum peregrinantium vel aliter à partibus exeris venientium, quam per idem transe∣untium sitam existere considerantes, sedemque ejusdem Regni Metropolem in eadem existere, in cujus ecclesia Metropolitica cor∣pus beati Thomae Martyris ad quem devotionem gerimus speci∣alem honoricè feretratur, necnon ossa carissimi consanguinei nostri ac praenobilis principis Edwardi nuper principis Walliae re∣quiescunt humata. In superque fidelitates & obsequia laudabilia, Citizens commended. ac probitatem, industriam & srenuitatem Maiorum & civium Civitatis nostrae praedict. quibus se nobis inclique recordationis atque memoriae progenitoribus nostris Regibus Angliae hucusque gratos in omnibus & paratos exhibuerunt, & praecipuè sidelitates & obsequia laudabilia obis jam nuper per Cives Civitatis prae∣dict' ad sumptus, custas, expensas, labores, pericula, & grava∣mina Maiorum & Civium nostrorum praedict' plura & non mo∣dica exhibita meritò contemplantes &c. As it is in the Charter. The very same yeare 16 lib. 13s. 4d. part of the 60 lib. per an∣num, untill then paid as fee-ferme to the King by the City, was fist abated, and by the Kings Charter for ever after re∣mitted to the City. The reasons and inducements were these. Quia Nos (saith the same Ed.) ex gravi & lamentabili querela eorundem nunc Maioris & Civium nostrorum Civitatis praedictae accipientes quòd eadem Civitas nostra ac inhabitantes
eandem in tantam paupertatem tam ob grandem & onerosam so∣lutionem praedictae firmae sive feodi firmae ejusdem civitatis lx lib. nobis & progenitoribus nostris solus', ac grandes & onerosas cu∣stas & expensas suas in resistentia inimicorum nostrorum Reg∣num nostrum Angliae in partibus ejusdem Regni eidem Civitati vicinis quampluries invadere nitentium quàm ob alia onera ei∣dem Civitati necessariò incumbentia ac paucitatem inhabitanti∣um ibidem in tantum depauperantur & vastantur, quòd ipsos inha∣bitantes Civitatem illam necessariò oportebit, quod absit, omnino relinquere desolatam, nisi eis per nos in hac parte gratiosius suc∣curratur &c. as it is in the same Charter. 14. Thomas Foster. 1. 1462. 15. William Sellow. 1. 1463. 16. Hamon Beale. 1. 1464. He was a benefactor to S. Pancrace Chapell, as may be seen before, and beside gave 40•. to the Friers Minors or Gray F F. in Cant. where by his Will In Regi praedict. he appoints to have his body interred (in medio navis ecclesiae fratrum minorum, such are his own words) and to have a tombe of 3 foot high, at his Executors charges, set over him and Isabell his wife, anno 1492. 17. Iohn Harndell alias Hearn∣hill. 1. 1465. 18. William Bigg. 2. 1466. 19. Iohn Freningham. Esq. 2. 1467. 20. Roger Ridley. 3. 1468. 21. Nicholas Faunt. 1. 1469. He was hanged (as tradition gives) at the Bulstake in Cant. for aiding Bastard Falconbridge; and the liberties of the City were seized into the Kings hands, so that the City was without a Maior for some good space. 22. Roger Brent, Esq. 1. 1470. 23. Foger Brent, Esq. 2. 1471. See more of him in All-Saints Church. 24. Iohn Bygg, Esq. 1. 1372.
25. Iohn Bygg, Esq. 2. 1473. 26. Iohn Bygg, Esq. 3. 1474. See further of him in S. Peters Church, to the window∣work whereof he was a benefactor, as there is to be seen. 27. Iohn Whiteloke. 1. 1475. 28. Roger Brent. 3. 1476. 29. Thomas Atwood, Esq. 1. 1477. See more of him in S. Mildreds. 30. Hamon Beale. 2. 1478. 31. Thomas Atwood, Esq. 2. 1479. 32. Thomas Atwood, Esq. 3. 1480. 33. Richard Carpinter. 1. 1481. 34. Nichol. Sheldwich, Esq. 1. 1482. 35. Nichol. Sheldwich, Esq. 2. 1483. 36. William Sellow. 2. 1484. 37. Iohn Whiteloke. 2. 1485. 38. Thomas Atwood, Esq. 4. 1486. 39. Stephen Barret. 1. 1487. 40. Iohn Ingram. 1. 1488. 41. Iohn Crispe. 1. 1489. 42. Iohn Carlile. 1. 1490. 43. Iohn Swan. 1. 1491. See more of him in S. Andrewes. 44. Thomas Propchant. 1. 1492. 45. Edward Bolney. 1. 1493. 46. Edward Bolney. 2. 1494. See more of him in S. Andrewes. 47. Thomas Atwood, Esq. 5. 1495. 48. Stephen Barret. 2. 1496. 49. Henry Gosborne. 1. 1497. See concerning him in St Elpheges Church. 50. Thomas Sayer. 1. This yeare being 13. H. 7. by his Charter called Nova ordi∣natio (inter alia) the number of Aldermen till then but 6. was increased to 12. and the number of the common councell abated from 36. to 24. both which continue to this day. 1498. 51. Iohn Plumpton. 1. 1499. 52. Thomas Atwood sonne of Thomas Atwood. 1. 1500.
53. Iohn Huet. 1. 1501. 54. Henry Gosborne. 2. 1502. 55. Thomas Sayer. 2. 1503. 56. Thomas Atwood. 2. 1504. 57. William Crampe. 1. 1505. 58. Henry Gosborne. 3. 1506. 59. Rafe Browne. 1. 1507. See concerning him in Northgate Church. 60. Iohn Nayler. 1. 1508. 61. William Crampe. 2. 1509. 62. Iohn Huet. 2. 1510. He dyed in the time of his Maioralty, and Ralph Browne supplyed. 63. Roger Clarke. 1. 1511. By his Will In Registro praed. he appoints to bee buried betweene the Church-gate and the Church-doore of St Peter in Canterbury Anno 1542. It seemes then one of the Altar-tombes there at this day was erected for him. 64. Thomas Atwood. 3. 1512. 65. Iohn Broker. 1. 1513. See concerning him before in St Margarets-Church. 66. Thomas Wainflet. 1. 1514. He dyed and Iohn Foukes served out the yeare. 67. Iohn Nayler. 2. 1515. See concerning him before in Westgate-Church. 68. Henry Gosborne. 4. 1516. 69. Thomas Foukes. 2. 1517. 70. William Rutland. 1. 1518. 71. Iohn Broker. 2. 1519. 72. Iohn Brigges. 1. 1520. One of the name, Anno 36. Ed. 3. gave unto the City, a parcell of Land called le Gravelpet in Winchepefield in paro∣chia sanctae Mariae de Castro, inter quandam semitam ducentem de Wincheape ad Dodindale versus South, &c. as the Deed or Charter expresseth it Lib. Testam. pertinen. ad cameram Civi∣tatis..
73. Roger Clarke. 2. 1521. 74. William Note or Nutt. 1. 1522. 75. Thomas Beale, sonne of Hamon, Beale. 1. 1523. 76. Iohn Brigges. 2. 1524. 77. Iohn Alcocke. 1. 1525. 78. Roger Clarke. 3. 1526. 79. Iacob Whitlaffe. 1. 1527. 80. William Rutland. 2. He willed his body to be buri∣ed by his Wife in St Pancra∣ces Chapell at St Augustines, and gave twenty nobles for the buying in of vijl. x•. par∣cell of the Cities Fee-ferme, which was yearely paid (so runnes his Will) unto the heires of Mr Iohn Lucus. 1528. 81. Robert Lewes. 1. 1529. 82. Thomas Atwood. 4. 1530. 83. Iohn Alcocke. 2. 1531. 84. Thomas Beale. 2. 1532. 85. William Note or Nutt. 2. 1533. 86. Iohn Brigges. 3. 1534. 87. Iohn Alcocke. 3. 1535. 88. Robert Lewes. 2. 1536. 89. Rogert Clarke. 4. 1537. 90. Iohn Starke. 1. 1538. 91. Thomas Beale. 3. 1539. 92. Robert Lewes. 3. 1540. 93. William Coppin. 1. 1541. 94. Thomas Gower. 1. 1542. 95. Iohn Freeman. 1. 1543. 96. Iohn Alcocke, son of Iohn 1. 1544. 97. Iohn French. 1. 1545. 98. Thomas Batherst. 1. 1546. 99. George Webb. 1. 1547. 100. George Rand. 1. 1548. 101. Iohn Freeman. 2. 1549. 102. Robert Lewes. 4. 1550. 103. William Coppin. 2. 1551. 104. George Webb. 2. 1552. 105. Iohn Twyne. 1. 1553. See concerning him before in St Pauls.
106. Thomas French. 2. 1554. 107. Edward Carpenter. 1. 1555. 108. Iohn Fuller. 1. 1556. 109. George May. 1. 1557. 110. Stephen Seare. 1. 1558. 111. Iohn Fuller. 2. 1559. 112. Henry Alday. 1. 1560. 113. Richard Furner. 1. 1561. 114. Richard Raiston. 1. 1562. 115. Thomas Percy. 1. 1563. 116. Thomas Giles. 1. 1564. 117. George May. 2. 1565. 118. William Fisher. 1. 1566. 119. Iames Nethersole. 1. 1567. 120. Peter Kelsham. 1. 1568. 121. Iohn Seamor. 1. 1569. 122. Iames Drayton. 1. 1570. 123. Anthony Webb, sonne of George Webb. 1. 1571. 124. Iames Nethersole. 2. 1572. He was, for forgery, displaced, and William Fisher chosen in his roome, who served out the yeare. 125. Simon Broome. 1. 1573. 126. Iohn Rose. 1. 1574. See concerning him before where I have spoken of our River. 127. Peter Kelsham. 2. 1575. 128. Simon Broome. 2. 1576. 129. Thomas Limitary. 1. 1577. 130. Clement Bassocke. 1. 1578. 131. Iames Nethersole. 3. 1579. 132. Leonard Cotton. 1. 1580. See concerning him before both in the Hospitall called Maynards Spittle, and in St Margarets Church. 133. Richard Gaunt. 1. 1581.
134. Iohn Nutt. 1. 1582. 135. Iose Rose. 2. 1583. 136. Ralfe Bawden. 1. 1584. 137. Iohn Easday. 1. 1585. See concerning him before where I treate of our City-Wall. 138. Gilbert Penny. 1. 1586. 139. Simon Broome. 3. 1587. 140. Adrian Nicholle. 1. 1588. A fatall yeare to the May-pole at Dundgel-hill, as of us corruptly called. 141. Bartholmew Broome. 1. 1589. 142. Edward Nether sole, sonne of Iames. 1. 1590. 143. Christopher Leeds. 1. 1591. 144. Marke Berry. 1. 1592. 145. Thomas Long. 1. 1593. A great plague this yeare. 146. William Amy. 1. 1594. 147. Thomas Hovenden. 1. 1595. 148. Iames Fringeham. 1. 1596. 149. William Clarke. 1. 1597. 150. Charles Whetenhall. 1. 1598. 151. Robert Wynne. 1. 1599. 152. Warham Iennet. 1. 1600. 153. Simon Broome. 4. 1601. 154. Richard Gaunt. 2. 1602. 155. Ralfe Bawden. 2. 1603. 156. Edward Nethersole. 2. 1604. 157. Marke Berry. 2. 1605. 158. Thomas Hovenden. 2. 1606. 159. Thomas Paramor. 1. 1607. He obtained the Sword for the City, not without great expense to the same. 160. William Watmer. 1. 1608.
161. George Clagget. 1. 1609. 162. Thomas Hawks. 1. 1610. 163. Ioseph Calfe. 1. 1611. 164. Thomas Fetherstone. 1. 1612. 165. George Elven. 1. 1613. 166. Iohn Pierce. 1. 1614. 167. Iohn Watson. 1. 1615. 168. Marke Berry. 3. 1616. 169. Thomas Hovenden. 3. 1617. 170. Avery Sabin. 1. 1618. 171. Henry Vanver. 1. 1619. 172. Ralfe Hawkins. 1. 1620. 173. Iohn Hunt. 1. 1621. 174. George Clagget. 2. 1622. 175. Richard Lockley. 1. 1623. 176. Iames Maste. 1. 1624. 177. William Whiting. 1. 1625. 178. Iohn Stanley. 1. 1626. 179. Iohn Fusser. 1. 1627. 180. Iohn Roberts. 1. 1628. 181. William Watmer. 2. 1629. 182. Avery Sabin. 2. 1630. 183. Iohn Meryam. 1. 1631. 184. George Clagget. 3. 1632. 185. Iohn Leed. 1. 1633. 186. Walter Southwell. 1. 1634. 187. Iames Nicholson. 1. 1635. 188. William Bridge. 1. 1636. 189. Iohn Terry. 1. 1637. 190. Iames Master. 2. 1638. 191. Iohn Stanley. 2. 1639. Hitherto of the Temporall Government of our City, the concluding Chapter of the present discourse or Survey thereof.
AN APPENDIX, CONTAINING SVCH Authenticall Instruments, escripts and writings as are quoted and cited in the precedent worke. King Offa's Charter of the donation of certaine Scriptura 1. Lands to Christ-Church. EGo Off a Rex Anglorum Dccxc. Anno dominicae in∣carnationis, † nostri autem regni Dei gratiâ concessi xxxviij. cogitans de salute animae meae, & de statu regionis Merciorum perveni ad Lundoniam Civi∣tatem Tempus. Donor. ad conloquium venerabilis viri Aethelheardi Archiepiscopi, & locutus sum cum eo quid pro salute animae meae, & totius gentis Mercior. deo omnipotenti darem. Inter haec po∣stulavit à me venerabilis Archiepiscopus Aethelheard ut darem sibi aliquod supplementum ad ecclesiam sancti Salvatoris in urbe Doroberniae; dicens cum omnibus Episcopis nostrae regionis esse inonestum non ditari matrem ecclesiarum à siliabus & filiis suis re∣gibus quos fonte baptismatis regeneravit. Ego verò concessi pe∣titi illius & omnium episcoporum nostrorum, & dedi illi xC. Dom. tributaria terrae bipertita in duobus locis. lx. in loco qui dicitur o
Linga hoese & Geddingas circa rivulum qui dicitur Fisces burna, & xxx. in aquilonali ripa fluminis Tamis, ubi appellatur Twi∣canham, ut habeat lx. ad emendationem ecclesiae sancti Salva∣toris. xxx verò in Twicanhamme ad indumentum fratrum qui serviunt Deo in illa sancta ecclesia. Hanc elemosinam humilis & devotus ego Off a Rex Anglorum pro pignore Christianae fidei toti∣us gentis nostrae offero Deo omnipotenti, ad suam sanctam eccle∣siam, ut mei memoria & meae carissimae gentis ibi celebretur & Deo commendetur. Erat autem in conventu nostro celeberrimus dies Pentecostes, & conventus famulorum Dei quorum nomina scripta sunt hic. Aethelheard Archiep. Ceolwulf Episc. Vnwona Episc. Hathored Episc. Ceolmund Episc. Ealhheard Episc. Elfhum Episc. Cyneberht Episc. Dunferth Episc. Wermund E∣pisc. Weohthun Episc. Omnes isti una mecum clamaverunt ad Do∣minum in die sancto in ecclesia sancti Pauli. Spiritus Domini qui hodie replevit orbem terrarum, & omnia continet, & sci∣entiam Solemnis Ap . Im habet vocis all' & omnes sancti Dei Apostoli qui ab illo spiritu repleti sunt, tribuat Ita Ms. benedictionem sempiternaem consentientibus & defntibus hanc largitatem, & condem∣net & excommunicet & in hoc saeculo & in futuro eum qui aufe∣rat vel minimam partem hujus doni ab ecclesia sancti Salvatoris quae sita est in urbe Cantewariorum. Et respondit omnis chorus, Testes. Amen. Ad confirmandum verò hoc largitatis donum in testes aderant & subscripserunt & confirmaverunt donum Salvatori nostre. Ego Off a Rex Merciorum cum benedictione omnium Episcopo∣rum inpono signum sanctae ✚ ad confirmationem hujus doni, mihi donanti ad redemptionem. Et minuenti ad aeternam condempna∣tionem, & sine ullo remedio in inferno ad aeternae poenae cruciatum. ✚ Ego Eogferth Rex consensi & subscripsi, & promisi hoc donum semper firmare & angere. ✚ Ego Aethelheard Archiepiscopus signum sanctae crucis inpono. Et in nomine sanct. Salvatoris conscribo.
✚ Ego Colwulf Epis. Cons. ✚ Ego Vnwona Epis. Cons. ✚ Ego Hathored Episc. ✚ Ego Ceolmund Epis. ✚ Ego Ealheard Epis. ✚ Ego Elfhun Epis. ✚ Ego Cyneberht Epis. ✚ Ego Deneferth Epis. ✚ Ego Wermund Epis. ✚ Ego Ealhmund Abb. ✚ Ego Vtel Abb. ✚ Ego Fothred Abb. ✚ Bronda Princ. ✚ Bynna Princ. ✚ Esne Princ. ✚ Heurdbriht Princ. ✚ Ethelmund Princ. ✚ Eadgar Princ. ✚ Wigga Princ. ✚ Cydda Princ. ✚ Cudberht Princ. ✚ Ceolmund Princ. ✚ Vbba Princ. ✚ Eobing Princ. The Foundation of Herbaldowne-Chantery. Scriptura 2•. THomas permissione divina Cant. Archiepisc. totius Angliae Primas & Apostolicae sedis Legatus. Dilectis in Christo fi∣liis Priori & Priorissae ac fratribus & sororibus Hospitalis nostri de Herbaldowne. Salutem, gratiam & benedictionem. Scrutato registro bonae memoriae Domini Willielmi Wittlesey praedecessoris nostri dotationem sive ordinationem perpetuae cantariae in Hospi∣tali nostro praedicto, reperimus in eodem, tenorem qui sequitur continentem. Vniversis sanctae matris ecclesiae filiis presentes literas inspecturis. Willielmus permissione divina Cant. Archi∣episc. totius Angliae Primas & Apostolicae sedis legatus. Salu∣tem in Domino sempiternam. Cum Custos quilibet hospitalis nostri de Estbrigge in Cantuaria qui pro tempore fuerit suis sump∣tibus & expensis invenire teneatur sacerdotem idoneum qui jugi∣ter divina celebret coram pauperibus alterius hospitalis nostri de Herbaldowne in ecclesia sancti Nicholai ibidem, & eorum con∣fessiones audiat, esque diebus & noctibus prout oportebit eccle∣siastica ministrèt sacramenta. Sitque in praesenti & erit verisi∣militer in futurum plurimum difficile stipendiarios reperire ido∣neos sacerdotes, qui inter dictos pauperes taliter conversari vo∣luerint, praesertim cum ipsorum pauperum nonnulli lepra sint
infecti, ac pro infectis hujusmodi ipsum hospitale principaliter Hospitale pro Leprosis prin∣cipaliter fun∣datum. sit fundatum, nisi for san mansionem ab eis separatam habuerint & vicinam, cantariamque non mobilem sed perpetuam obtineant ac ad victum eorundem Capellanorum dotatam competenter. Nos praemissa debito considerationis intuitu pensantes, curaeque ani∣marum dictorum pauperam & hosp. praedict. utilitati providere volentes, quandam perpetuam Cantariam unius Capellani ut praemittitur divina apud Herbaldowne celebraturi fundamus, do∣tamus, & ut subscribitur ordinamus. Habebit siquidem sacerdos hujusmodi ipsius cantariae perpetuus in partem dotis ejusdem unam mansionem sufficientem & honestam aedificatam ex opposito portae dicti Hospitalis de Herbaldowne cum praediis & gardinis adjacen∣tibus, & quodam columbari ibidem jam conferend. dicto Hosp. de Estbrigge per Dominum Willielmum Attewelle Capellanum de Regis licentia jam obtenta ut inter benefactores habeatur utri∣usque hospitalis supradicti, necnon quandam aream praefato hospitali nostro de Herbaldowne contiguam vocat' Claveringe where, before, pag. 86 speaking of th Hosp. I sid the ∣ry Priest   against the Hosp I fide I w mstaken.  the Accompt of the  indowment, gi ven to the Com∣missioners abo the times of the suppression,   had his dwel∣ling , t Clavering.: Claveringe habebit etiam sacerdos istius Cantariae de fratribus & sororibus hosp. de Herbaldowne duas marcas de claro per equales portiones annuatim in perpetuum. Reputabitur insuper & erit sacerdos ipse absque nostro aut successorum nostrorum novo onere unus de nu∣mero pauperum in eodem hosp. nostro de Herbaldowne requisito propter ipsius conversationem, celebrationes & orationes quas quasi continuè faciet coram eis & inter eos, tantum percipiens & taliter sicut eorum unus incedens si voluerit vestitus pro reveren∣tia sui ordinis ut sacerdos secularis. Habebit in super quinque marcas liberi & securi redditus in denariis tempore Domini Tho∣mae Eltone jam custodis dicti nostri hosp. de Eastbrigge eid' hosp. adquisitas apud Herne quas solvent quidam Thomas de Cot he∣redes & assignati ejus pro terris & tenementis  per factum in hac parte sufficiens de solvendo, ac etiam duas marcas cum dimid. annuatim de custode quocunque ipsius hosp. nostri de Eastbrigge pro tempore eidem Capellano persolvend. ad quatuor anni terminos usualiter principales quas custos ipse cum lteriori summa annis singulis de certis terris redditibus & pasturis libere habere poterit quas dictus Dominus Thomas custos etiam suae
custodiae tempore adquisivit de Domino Thoma de Ros milite apud Dominus Thomas de Ros. Hothe. Super quibus terris & pasturis, libere distringere sacer∣dos ipse valeat pro omni tempore ipsarum duarum marcarum & dimidiae post unumquemque terminum supradictum per mensem, si postea in solutione ejusdem sit cessatum. Et sic dos ipsius Canta∣ria undecim marcas cum dimidia vel circiter verisimiliter inpo∣sterum valebit annuatim. Ad ipsam autem Cantariam quotiens eam vacare contigerit, Custos dicti Hosp. de Eastbridge qui pro tempore fuerit sacerdotes idoneos qui in ea residere voluerint, & quotidie coram ipsis pauperibus, cessante impedimento legitimo juxta Canonum exigentiam celebrare divina, aut per alium fa∣cere celebrari & animarum curam gerere corundem ut est dictum, ad quae omnia & singula sacerdotes hujusmodi teneri volumus & arctari nobis & successoribus nostris praesentabit. Ad sumptus autem reparationis domorum praefatae mansionis & columbaris ac exhibitionem panis, vini & luminariorum honestorum pro cele∣brationibus missarum praedictarum necessariorum tenebitur sacer∣dos ipse ratione praedictae dotis suae. Si autem sacerdos idoneus haberi non poterit qui ipsam cantariam habere velit, & ad cele∣brationes & curam praedict. ac alia praedicta oner a arctari nolue∣rit ut est dictum, extunc Custos memorati Hosp. de Estbrigge qui pro tempore fuerit possessiones dictae dotis superius descriptas in∣grediatur & teneat, ac de dictis celebrationibus & cur a disponat sicuti prius tenebatur & prout melius videbitur sibi expedire. In quorum omnium testimonium has literas nostras fieri fecimus pa∣entes sigillo nostro consignatas. Dat' apud Croydone iiij10. Non. Feb. Anno Domini Mccclxxj•. & nostrae translationis quarto. Nos igitur Thomas permissione divina Cant. Archiepiscopus, totius Angliae Primas & Apostolicae sedis Legatus praedictus, prae∣dictam dotationem sive ordinationem ratam habentes pariter & acceptam similiter approbando & quantum in nobis est confir∣mantes: Vobis Con' & divi' firmiter injungendo manda∣mus quatenus Dominum Iohannem Bray Capellanum praedictae Cantariae modernum tantum unum de numero pauperum in hospi∣tali praedicto admittatis tantum & taliter sicut alicui alteri pau∣peri ejusdem in quibuscunque pecuniarum summis seu aliis vitae
necessariis effectualiter ministrantes. Dat. in Palatio nostro Can∣tuar. xviij0. die mensis Maii. Anno Dom. Mccccij0. & nostrae translationis Anno sexto. Rather then my Reader should swallow an error in the Herbal∣downe. Etymologie of this name (of Looke for a discourse of the originall of this name at the end of this Instrument. The names o∣riginall exa∣mined. Herbaldowne) I have thought fit here (though out of proper place) to recommend unto him some notions concerning the same (which very lately came into my thoughts) to supply their omission in my dis∣course of the place. So it is then, that Mr Lambard in his Perambulation of Kent, writing of this place, intitles his discourse thereof thus. Herbaldowne by Canterbury, in Saxon , that is, the Hill where the Army was betrayed. Hence a man would thinke, (as no question but the infe∣rence is made by some) that Mr Lambard met with that Saxon name of the place in some ancient Record or Monu∣ment of the Saxons times. And indeed if he did not, he was to blame thus in a manner, to affirme as much. Per∣emptorily to deny that he did, I will not presume; but shall here propose to the consideration of my Reader such probable presumptions to the contrary; and that the place tooke and gain'd the present name of Herbaldowne, from other grounds long since the Saxons times, as, I thinke, may give just cause of suspition that Mr Lambard never had war∣rant for that name from any kinde of Saxon antiquity what∣soever. I have collected them chiefly from the ancient Re∣cords and Evidences of the Hospitall there, whereof Arch∣bishop Lanfranc, in the Conquerors time, was the undoubted Founder, which I thinke the best and fittest Judges to try and determine this matter. But for entry into this discourse, let me intreate you in the first place, to observe with me, that as this name of  hath no ground in Story (no Chronicle of ours that ever I saw recording any such occurrence as the betraying of an Army, either there, or any where else thereabouts:) so Mr Lambard is silent in the instancing or specifying of any such matter for the illustration of the
name. Next if we consult Edmerus, who lived a Monk of Canterbury in Hen. 1. time, and Records the erection of the Hospitall there by Lanfranc, and the situation of it Vide pag. 82., we shall find him make no mention of the name of Herbaldowne, or of any other proper name it then had; not likely to have escap'd his pen, but that also it escap'd his knowledge. Now examine we the Hospitall Records. The eldest whereof that I have seene (and I thinke I have not left any unsearched) have no mention at all neither, of that name, untill Hen. 2. time. A Charter there of H. 1. concerning Assarts For Assarts, what they sig∣nifie, see Sr Hen. Spelmans Glossary in Verb. Assatum. (grub∣bing up of wood, I take it) which you shall have anone, calls it Hospitale de bosco de Blen. Another Charter there of a sixe penny quit-rent out of a house in Canterbury, seeming, both by the style and Charter to be made not long after the former, gives it no other denomination then of, Hospitale de Sancto Nicolao A name which neither Edmerus nor the former Charter men∣tions: and therefore I question whe∣ther the Church so cal∣led were then in being or not.. True it is that a following Charterthere, viz. of xx markes per annum, given to the Hospitall (not by Hen. 3. as before it is mistaken Pag. 84., but) by Hen. 2. payable out of the Fee-ferme of Canterbury and continued to this day, makes expresse mention of the name of Herbaldowne, in these words: Leprosis de Herbaldona xx marcatas redditus singulis annis habendas de redditu meo Cantuaria, donec eas assignem alibi suscipiendas vel in ecclesiis vel in aliis redditibus &c. And another Charter In lib. Hosp. de Esthridge, Cantuar. much of that age, made by Archbishop Theobald, granting to the Church of St Nicho∣las there, and to the Priest officiating in the same, the Tithes of Westgate-Court (or Manor) makes like mention of the name. Cleerely then so old it is: and that it should be much elder, I would be glad that any could shew me as sa∣tisfactory reasons, as, I thinke I can them, that it is not. Not to repeate these already premised; I must acquaint you that the quondam extent and continent of Blen-wood (or of the Forest of Blen, as I have seene it called in some old Deeds) cujus  pars benè magna in agros ac pascua compla∣natur, as Twine Derebus Al∣bonic. lib. . pag. 101. hath it: was much larger then of late and at this day. By that Charter of Hen. 1. concerning Assarts, it may plainely, and without any straining or inferrement,
be inferred that it then extended to the place of the Hospi∣talls situation: and therefore doth the Deed call it (as the best description, and most intelligible and proper for it at that time) Hospitale de bosco de Blen, (that is, the Hospitall of (or within) Blen-wood) without any other proper name. But (to come now to the originall and ground of the name of Harbaldowne) not long afterwards, to wit, in the interim of time betweene this Charter, and those afore-mentioned of Hen. 2. time, I conceive the place, by grubbing or roo∣ting up the wood there, was disforested, manured; and from Wood-land converted to herbage, or tillage. Aswell the Hospitals denomination in that Charter of Hen. 1. calling it (as I said) Hospitale de bosco de Blen; as the Grant it selfe, being to give the Hospitallers liberty to ridd away 8. perches of wood, on all sides (or round about) the Hospitall, plainly inferres that the place was woody then. For you better satisfaction, see here the Charter it selfe recited verbatim. H. Rex Angl. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. & Vicecomiti & omni∣bus Baronibus & Ministris & fidelibus suis de Chent, Francis & Anglis, Sal. Sciatis me dedisse & concessisse, pro Dei amore, & anima patris & matris meae & Matildis regine & Willielmi filii mei, & pro redemptione pecca∣torum meorum, in acremento Hospitalis de bosco de Blen. x perticatas terre de bosco ad exsartandum & excolendum undique circa hospitale. Et volo & firmiter praecipio ut habitantes in loco illo habeant meam firmam pacem, ne ali∣quis eis injuriam vel contumeliam faciat. T. Wmo. Elemo∣sinario Capellano meo, & Pagano filio Iohannis, & Gaufido filio Pagani, & Pagano Per. apud Odestoc. Which Charter having taken effect: and, as the Hospi∣tall, so also the Hill (or Downe) thereaway, it seemes, then or soone after cleered of the wood upon it, and manured, it then first in all probability, to distinguish it from the neigh∣bouring Hilles and Downes as yet wilde and woddy, tooke the name (or began to be called by the name) of Herbal∣downe,
that is, either the Pasture-downe or the downe of her∣bage (or tillage) like as Wirtsberge, a City in Germany, so called (saith Verstegan Restitution of decayed in∣telligence. pag. 238.) from the abundance of warts or herbes which grew about the hill-sides by that towne, is in Latine called Herbipolis: or (to instance in an example neerer home) as that Bocton neere Lenham in Kent, for di∣stinction sake from the other three Boctons in that County, hath this addition, of Malherb, from a kinde of bad herbage proper to the place, as I am told. And now the place thus beginning to be so called; to the Hospitals name, of Saint Nicholas this, of Herbaldowne, was added, as in the stead, and for the supply of that former addition, and cognisance of Blen-wood, so likewise as a fuller description to the Hospitals place of situation. Ita mihi videtur &c. or to say with lear∣ned, but modest Covaruvias Pa. 1. Relect. in Cap. Alma Mater &c. Tom. 1. pag 411. §. 11. in a like doubtfull case. His rationibus animum induxi meum, ut hanc opinionem in hac quae∣stione probarem, facillimè admissurus cujuslibet saniorem sen∣tentiam, & quae his probationibus exclusis, fortioribus & melio∣ribus constet. Etenim in re dubia nequaquam decet semel concep∣tis opinionibus ita contumaci animo adhaerere, ut doctissimorum virorum judicia recusare nitamur. This (I say) is mine opini∣on in this matter, but with submission to better judge∣ments, being very willing that other men should take or leave it as they please, and shall see cause. Assuring them by the way, that I have not taken this paines, so much to dis∣cover M Lambards errour, as to certifie my Reader of what a large and vast extent and continent Blen-wood. (or the Fo∣rest of Blen) hath sometime beene, and how neere it hath come unto our City. Give me leave to conclude this dis∣course with the words of the aforenamed Mr Twine In libro, & loco superis ci∣tato. (some∣time an Alderman and Maior of our City) concerning this Blen-Wood. Quid referam (saith he) sylvam Blenam Cantua∣riae vicinam, magnitudinis non contemnendae, si quae alia senta atque frondosa, cujus hodiè pars benè magna in agros ac pascua complanatur, in qua patrum nostrorum memoriâ apri venatione , ut non ineptam sanè ad ursos quoqug gendos, quae modò vulpium ac taxonum lustra opacat, arbitre &c.
Fenestrae in superiori parte ecclesiae Christi Cant. incipientes a parte septentrionali. Fenestra prima. Scriptura 3•. 1 MOses cum Rubo. In Medio. Angelus cum Maria. Rubus non consumitur, tua nec comburitur in carne virginitas. 2 Gedeon cum vellere & conca. Vellus coelestirore maduit, dum puellae venter intumuit. 3 Misericordia & veritas. In medio Maria & Elizabeth. Plaude puer puero, virgo vetulae, quia vero Obviat hic pietas: veteri dat lex nova metas. 4 Iustitia & Pax. Applaudit Regi previsor gratia legi. Oscula Iustitiae dat pax; cognata Mariae. 5 Nabugodonosor & lapis cum statua. Puer in praesepio. Vt Regi visus lapis est de monte recisus Sic gravis absque viro virgo parit ordine miro. 6 In medio Maria. 7 Moses cum virga. In medio. Angelus & Pastores. Vt contra morem dedit arida virgula florem Sic virgo puerum, verso parit ordine rerum. 8 David. Gaudebunt campi & omnia quae in eis sunt. 9 Abacuc. Operuit coelos gloria ejus &c. Fenestra secunda. 1 IN medio tres Reges equitantes. Balaam. Orietur stella ex Iacob, & exurget homo de Israel. Isaia & Ieremia.
Ambulabunt gentes in lumine tuo &c. 2 In medio. Herodes & Magi. Christus & Gentes. Qui sequuntur me non ambulabunt in tenebris. Stella Magos duxit, & eos ab Herode reduxit Sic Sathanam gentes fugiunt, te Christe sequentes. 3 Pharaoh & Moses, cum populo exiens ab Egipto. Exit ab erumna populus ducente columnâ Stella Magos duxit. Lux Christus utrisque reluxit. 4 In medio. Maria cum puero. Magi & Pastores. Ioseph & fra∣tres sui cum Egiptiis. Ad te longinquos Ioseph trahis atque propinquos. Sic Deus in cunis Iudaeos gentibus unis. 5 Rex Solomon, & Regina Saba. Hiis donis donat Regina domum Solomonis. Sic Reges Domino dant munera tres, tria, trino. 6 Admoniti sunt Magi ne Herodem adeant: Propheta & Rex Ieroboam immolans. Vt via mutetur redeundo Propheta monetur Sic tres egerunt qui Christo dona tulerunt. 7 Subversio Sodomae & Loth fugiens. Vt Loth salvetur ne respiciat prohibetur. Sic vitant revehi per Herodis regna Sabei. 8 Oblatio pueri in templo, & Simeon. Melchisedech offerens panem & vinum pro Abraham. Sacrum quod cernis sacris fuit umbra modernis. Vmbra fugit. Quare? quia Christus sistitur arae. 9 Oblatio Samuel. Natura geminum triplex oblatio trinum Significat Dominum Samuel puer, amphora vinum. 10 Fuga Domini in Egiptum. Fuga David & Doeg.
Hunc Saul infestat: Saul Herodis typus extat. Iste typus Christi, cujus fuga consonat isti. 11 Elias Iesabel & Achab. Vt trucis insidias Iesabel declinat Elias Sic Deus Herodem, terrore remotus eodem. 12 Occisio Innocentum. Occisio sacerdotum Domini sub Saul. Non cecidit David, pro quo Saul hos jugulavit Sic non est caesus cum caesis transfuga Iesus. 13 Occisio Tribus Benjamin in Gabaon. Ecce Rachel nati fratrum gladiis jugulati His sunt signati pueri sub Herode necati. Fenestra tertia. 1 IEsus sedet in medio Doctorum. Moses & Iethro cum po∣pulo. Sic Moses audit Iethro vir sanctus obaudit Gentiles verbis humiles sunt forma superbis. 2 Daniel in medio seniorum. Mirantur pueri seniores voce doceri Sic responsa Dei sensum stupent Pharisei. 3 Baptizatur Dominus. Noah in archa. Fluxu cuncta vago submergens prima vorag Omnia purgavit: Baptisma significavit. 4 Submersio Pharaonis & transitus populi. Vnda maris rubri spatio divisa salubri Quae mentem mundam facit à vitio notat undam. 5 Temptatio gulae & vanae gloriae. Eva capiens fructum.
Qui temptat Iesum movet Evam mortis ad esum Eva gulae cedit, sed non ita Iesus obedit. 6 Eva comedit. Victor es hic Sathana: movet Evam gloria vana Sed quo vicisti te vicit gratia Christi. 7 Tentatio cupiditatis. Adam & Eva comedunt. David & Goliah. Quo Sathan hos subicit Sathanam sapientia vicit Vt Goliam David, Sathanam Christus superavit. Fenestra quarta. 1 VOcatio Nathanael jacentis sub ficu. Adam & Eva cum foliis. Populus sub lege. Vidit in hiis Christus sub ficu Nathanaelem. Lex tegit hanc plebem, quasi ficus Nathanaelem. 2 Christus mutavit aquam in vinum. Sex hydriae. Sex aetates mundi. Sex aetates hominum. Hydria metretas capiens est quaelibet aetas, Primum signorum Deus hic prodendo suorum. Lympha dat historiam, vinum notat allegoriam In vinum morum convertit aquam vitiorum. 3 Piscatore Apostolorum. S. Petrus cum eccles. de Iud. Palus cum ecclesia de genti∣bus. Verbum rete ratis Petri domus haec pietatis Pisces Iudaei, qui rete ferant Pharisei Illa secunda ratis, domus haec est plena beatis Retia scismaticus, & quivis scindit iniquus. 4 In medio Iesus legit in Synagoga. Esdras legit legem populo. Stu• Gregor. ordinans lectores. Quod promulgavit Moses, legem reparavit Esdras amissam; Christus renovavit omissam. Quod Christus legit, quasi pro lectoribus egit. Exemplo cujus sacer est gradus ordinis hujus. 5 Sermo Domini in monte. Doctores Ec∣clesiae. Moses sus∣cipit legem. Hii montem scandunt Scripturae dum sacra pandunt. Christus sublimis docet hos sed vulgus in imis Ex hinc inde datur in monte quod inde notatur Christum novisse debemus utramque dedisse.
6 Christus descendens de monte mundat leprosum. Paulus baptizat populum. Heliseus. Naaman & Iordanis. Carne Deus tectus quasi vallis ad ima provectus Mundat leprosum genus humanum vitiosum: Quē lavat ecce Deus quē mundat & hic Heliseus Est genus humanum Christi baptismate sanum. Fenestra quinta. 1 IEsus ejicit Demonium. Angelus ligavit De∣monium. Imperat immundis Deus hic equis furibundis Hiis virtus Christi dominatur ut Angelus isti. 2 Maria unxit pedes Chr. Drusiana vestit & pascit egenos. Curam languenti, victum qui praebet egenti Seque reum plangit, Christi vestigia tangit. Illa quod ungendo facit haec sua distribuendo Dum quod de pleno superest largitur egeno. 3 Marta & Maria cum Iesu. Petrus in navi. Iohannes legit. Equoris unda ferit hunc; ille silentia querit; Sic requies orat dum mundi cura laborat. 4 Leah & Rachel cum Iacob. Lyah gerit curam carnis; Rachelque figuram Mentis, cura gravis est haec, est altera suavis. 5 Iesus & Apostoli colli∣gunt spicas. Mola fu∣mus & Apostoli facien∣tes panes. Quod terit alterna Mola lex vetus atque moderna Passio, crux Christi fermentans cibus iste. Petrus & Paulus cum populis. Arguit iste reos, humiles alit hic Phariseos▪ Sic apice tritae panis sunt verbaque vitae. 6 Iesus cum Samaritana Synagoga & Moses cum quinque libris. Ecclesia de gentibus ad Iohannem. Potum quesisti fidei cum Christe sitisti E qua viri cui sex Synogoga librique sui sex. delicta notat hydria fonte relicta Ad te de gente Deus ecclesia veniente. 7 Samaritana adduxit populum ad Iesum. Rebecca dat potum ser∣vo Abraham. Iacob obviat Rachaeli. Fons servus minans pecus hydria virgo propinans Lex Christo gentes mulierque fide redolentes. Iacob lassatus Rachel obvia grex adaquatus Sunt Deus & turbae mulier quas duxit ab urbe.
Fenestra sexta. 1 IEsus loquens cum Apostolis. Gentes audiunt. Pharisei con∣temnunt. Sollicitae gentes stant verba Dei sitientes Haec sunt verba Dei quae contemnant Pharisei. 2 Seminator & voluores. Pharisei recedentes à Iesu. Pharisei tentantes Iesum. Semen rore carens expers rationis & arens Hii sunt qui credunt, tentantes sicque recedunt. Semen sermo Dei, via lex secus hanc Pharisei Et tu Christi sator insidiator. 3 Semen cecidit inter spinas. Divites hujus mundi cum pecunia. Isti spinosi locupletes delioiosi Nil fructus referunt quoniam terrestria querunt. 4 Semen cecidit in terram bonam. Iob. Daniel. Noah. Verba prius seruit Deus his fructus sibi crevit In tellure bond, triplex sua cuique corona. 5 Iesus & mulier commiscens sata tria. Tres filii Noae cum Ecclesia. Virgines Continen∣tes. Conjugati. Parte, Noae nati, mihi quisque sua dominati. Vna sides natis ex his tribus est Deitatis. Personae trinae tria sunt sata mista farinae Fermentata sata tria tres fructus operata. 6 Piscatores. Hinc Pisces boni, inde mali. Isti in vitam aeternam. Hii qui jactantur in levam qui reprobantur Pars sunt à Domino maledicta cremanda camino Vase reservantur pisces quibus assimulantur Hii quos addixit vitae Deus & benedixit. 7 Messes. Seges reponitur in horreum. Zizania in ignem. Iusti in vitam aeternam. Re∣probi in ignem aeter. Cum sudore sata messoris in horrea lata Sunt hic vexati sed Christo glorificati. Hic cremat ex messe quod inutile judicat esse Sic pravos digne punit judex Deus igne. 8 De quinque panibus & duob. piscibus satiavit multa millia hominum. Dus Sacerdos. Rex. Hii panes legem, pisces dantem sacra Regem Signant quassatos à plebe nec adnihilatos.
Synagoga cum Mose & libris. Ecclesia cum Iohanne. Quae populos saturant panes piscesque figurant Quod Testamenta duo nobis dant alimenta. Fenestra septima. 1 CVravit Iesus filiam viduae. Ecclesia de gentibus cum Iesu. Petrus orat & animalia dimit∣tuntur in linthea. Natam cum curat matris prece; matre figurat Christo credentes primos, nataque sequentes. Fide viventes signant animalia gentes; Quos mundat sacri submersio trina lavacri. 2 Curavit Iesus hominem ad piscinam. Moses cum quin∣que libris. Baptizat Domi∣nus. Lex tibi piscina concordat sunt quia quina Ostia piscinae, seu partes lex tibi quinae. Sanat ut aegrotum piscinae motio lotum Sic cruce signatos mundat baptisma renatos. 3 Transfigurationem Domini. Angeli vestiunt mortuos re∣surgentes. Angeli adducunt justos ad Deum. Spes transformati capitis, spes vivificati Clares in indutis membris à morte solutis. Cum transformares te Christe, quid insinuares Veste decorati declarant clarificati. 4 Petrus piscatur & invenit staterem. Dominus ascendit in Hier. Dominus crucifigitur. Hunc ascendentē mox mortis adesse videntē Tempora; te Christe piscis praenunciat iste. Ludibrium turbae Deus est ejectus ab urbe. 5 Statuit Iesus parvulum in medio Discipulorum. Mo∣nachi lavant pedes paupe∣rum. Reges inclinant do∣ctrinae Petri & Pauli. Hoc informantur exemplo qui monachantur Ne dedignentur peregrinis si famulentur. Sic incurvati pueris sunt assimulati Reges cum gente Paulo Petroque docente. 6 Pastor reportat ovem. Christus pendet in cruce. Christus spoliat infern ū  
Fenestra octava. 1 DOminus remittit debita servo poscenti. Vt prece submissa sunt huic commissa remissa Parcet poscenti seu parcit Deus egenti. Petrus & Paulus absolvunt poenitentem, & Dominus sibi credentes. Servus per∣cutit conservum. Paulus lapidatur. Stephanus lapi∣datur. Cur plus ignoscit Dominus minus ille poposcit Conservum servus populus te Paule protervus Regi conservo repetenti debita servo Assimulare Deus Martyr nequam Pharisaeus Tradidit eum tortoribus. Mittuntur impii in ig∣nem. Iudaei perimun∣tur. Caeditur affligens, captivatur crucifigens Hunc punit Dominus flagris, hos igne caminus. Fenestra nona. HOmo quidam descendebat de Hier. in Ierico & incidit in latrones. Perforat hasta latus, occidit ad mala natus. Creatur Adam. Forma∣tur Eva, comedunt fructum, ejiciuntur de Paradiso. Ex Adae costa prodiit formata virago. Ex Christi latere processit sancta propage. Fructum decerpens mulier suadens mala serpens Immemor authoris vir perdit culmen honoris Virgultum. fructus. mulier. vir. vipera. luctus Plantatur. rapitur. dat. gustat. fallit. initur. Poena reos tangit, vir sudat, foemina plangit. Pectore portatur serpens, tellure ribatur. Sacerdos & Levita vident vulneratum & pertran∣seunt. Vulneribus plenum neuter miseratus egenum.
Moses & Aaron cum Phara∣one. Sribitur tau. Educitur populus. Adorat vitulum. Datur lex. Elevatur Ser∣pens. Pro populo Moyses coram Pharaone laborat. Exangetque preces, signorum luce coronat. Cui color est rubeus siccum mare transit Hebraeus Angelico ductu patet in medio via fluctu. In ligno serpens positum notat in cruce Christū Qui videt hunc vivit, vivet qui crèdit in istū. Cernens quod speciem Deitatis dum teret aurum Frangit scripta tenens Moyses in pulvere taurū. Samaritanus ducit vul∣neratum in stabulum cum jumento. Ancilla accusat Petrum. Dominus cru∣cifigitur. sepelitur. Resur∣git. Loquitur Angelus ad Marias. Qui caput est nostrum capitur: qui regibus ostrum Prebet, nudatur: qui solvit vincla ligatur. In signo pendens. In ligno brachia tendens. In signo lignum superasti Christe malignum Christum lege rei, livor condemnat Hebraei Carne flagellatum, rapit, attrahit ante Pilatum Solem justitiae tres, orto sole, Maria Quaerunt lugentes, ex ejus morte trementes. Fenestra decima. Suscitat Iesus puellam in Domo. Abigael occurrit David & mu∣tat propositum. Con∣stantinus jacens & ma∣tres cum pueris. Quae jacet in cella surgens de morte puella Signat peccatum meditantis corde creatum Rex David arma gerit, dum Nabal perdere quaerit Obviat Abigael mulier David, arma refrenat. Et nebulam vultus hilari sermone serenat. Rex soboles Helenae, Romanae rector habenae Vult mundare cutem quaerendo cruce salutem. Nec scelus exercet, slet, humet, dictata coercet. Dominus suscitat puerum extra portam. Rex Solo∣mon adorat Idola & de∣flet peccatum. Poeniten∣tia Theophili. Qui jacet in morte puer extra limina portae De foris abstractum peccati denotat actum. Errat foemineo Solomon deceptus amore: Errorum redimit mens sancto tacta dolore. Dum lacrimando gemit Theophilus acta redemit Invenies veniam dulcem rogando Mariam.
Dominus suscitat Laza∣rum. Angelus alloqui∣tur Ionam sub hedera ante Ninevem. Poeni∣tentia Mariae Egipticae. Mens mala mors intus; malus actus mors foris: usus Tumba, puella, puer, Lazarus ista notant. Pingitur hic Ninevejam pene peracta perire Veste fidus Zosimas nudam tegit Mariam. Mittit Dominus duos Disci∣pul. propter asinam & Pul∣lum. Sp. sanctus in specie columbae inter Deum & ho∣menum. Imperat adduci pullum cum matre Magister Paruit huic operae succinctus uterque minister, Signacius simplex quod sit dilectio duplex Ala Deum dextra fratrem docet ala sinistra, Iesus stans inter Petrum & Paulum. Genti quae servit petris Petrum, petra mittit. Escas divinas Iudeis Paule propinas. Adducunt discipuli Asi∣num & Pullum. Petrus adducit ecclesiam de Iu∣deis. Paulus adducit ecclesiam de gentib. Quae duo solvuntur duo sunt animalia bruta Ducitur ad Christum pullus materque soluta. De populo fusco Petri sermone corusco Extrahit ecclesiam veram reserando Sophiam Sic radio fidei caeci radiantur Hebraei Per Pauli verba fructum sterilis dedit herba Dum plebs gentilis per eum sit mente sidelis Gentilis populus venit ad Christum quasi pullus. Occurrunt pueri Domino sedenti super Asinam Vestibus ornari patitur Salvator asellam Qui super astra sedet, nec habet frenum ne{que} sellam, Isaias dicit. Ecce Rex tuus sedens super asinam. Qui sedet in coelo ferri dignatur asello. David ex ore infantum, &c. Sancti sanctorum laus ore sonat puerorum. Fenestra undecima. IN medio coena Domini David gestans se in manibus suis. Manna fluit populo de coelo. Quid manibus David se gestans significavit Te manibus gestans das Christe tuis manifestans Manna fluit saturans populum de plebe figurans De mensâ Iesu dare se coenantibus esum.
Lavat Iesus pedes Apo∣stolorum. Abraham Angelorum Laban camelorum Obsequio lavacri notaet hospes in hospite sacri Quos mundas sacro mundasti Christe lavacro. Cum Laban hos curat, typice te Christe figurat Cura camelorum mandatum Discipulorum. Proditio Iesu. Venditio Ioseph. Ioab osculatur Abner & occidit Fraus Iudae Christum, fraus fratrum vendidit istum Hii Iudae, Christi Ioseph tu forma fuisti. Foedera dum fingit Ioab in funera stringit Ferrum, Iudaicum praesignans foedus iniquum. Vapulatio Iesu. Iob per∣cussus ulcere. Heli∣zeus & pueri irriden∣tes. Christi testatur plagas Iob dum cruciatur Vt sum Iudeae, iocus pueris Helisee. Fenestra duodecima. CHristus portat crucem. Isaac ligna. Mulier colligit duo ligna. Ligna puer gestat, crucis typum manifestat. Fert crucis in signum duplex muliercula lignum. Christus suspenditur de ligno. Serpens aeneus ele∣vatur in columna: Vacca comburitur Mors est exanguis dum cernitur aereus anguis Sic Deus in ligno nos salvat ab hoste maligno Vt Moyses jussit vitulam rufam rogus ussit Sic tua Christe caro crucis igne crematur amaro. Dominus deponitur de ligno. Abel occiditur. Heliseus ex∣pandit se super puerum Nos à morte Deus revocavit & hunc Heliseus. Signa Abel Christi pia funera funere tristi. Moses scribit Thau in fron∣tibus in porta de sanguine agni. Dominus in sepulcro. Samson dormit cum amica sua. Ionas in ventre ceti. Frontibus infixum Thau praecinuit crucifixum Vt Samson typice causa dormivit amicae. Ecolesiae causa Christi caro marmore clausa. Dum jacet absorptus Ionas Sol triplicat ortus Sic Deus arctatur tumulo triduoque moratur. Dominus ligans Diabolum. Spoliavit infernum. Da∣vid eripuit Oves. & Sam∣son tulit portas. Salvat ovem David; sic Christum significavit. Est Samson fortis qui rupit vincula mortis. Instar Samsonis, frangit Deus ossa Leonis. Dum Sathanā stravit, Chrtus Regulū jugulavit
Surgit Dominus de sepul∣cro. Ionas ejicitur de pisce. David emissus per fenestram. Redditur ut salvus, quem ceti clauserat alvus: Sic redit illesus, à mortis carcere Iesus. Hinc abit illesus David: sic invida Iesus Agmina conturbat, ut victa morte resurgat. Angelus alloquitur Mariam ad Sepulcrum. Ioseph ex∣trahitur è carcere. Et Leo suscitat filium. Ad vitam Christum Deus ut leo suscitat istum. Te signat Christe Ioseph; te mors; locus iste. To these verses in the Windowes let me adde foure other legible of late on the Wall in the North-Ile of the Quire, in the foote almost of the painted peece there, and containe a briefe dialogue betweene Saint Anselm sometime Archbishop here, and an Heretike, about the Virgin▪ conception of our blessed Lady, written (it there appeares) Anno Domini 1477. Haereticus. Nunquam natura mutavit sic suajura, Vt virgo pareret, in virginitate careret. Anselmus. Lumine solari nescit vitrum violari; Nec vitrum sole, nec virgo puerpera prole,
The Articles betweene the Prior of S. Gregories of Canterbury Scriptura 4ta. and the Covent of the same Church on the one party, and the Maior and Communalty of the City of Cant. of the other party, by the mediation of Thomas, Prior of Christ-Church of Cant. Iohn Hales one of the Barons of the Exchequer of our Saveraigne Lord the King, Christopher Hales generall Attorney of our said Soveraigne Lord the King, and Tho∣mas Wood Esquire, by the consent of the most reverend Father in God William Lord Archbishop of Canterbury. FIrst it is agreed and determined that the said Monastery 1. as it is enclosed at this present date with the new houses and tenantries which beene built next adjoyning unto the same Monastery, as well on and by the South part of the said Church-gate, as on and by the North-part of the Court-gate of the said Church, be fully and intirely to all intents of and within the liberties and franchises of the said Citie of Cant. And that the tenants inhabiting in the same tenements shall at all times doe and owe their obedience unto the Maior of the said City, and to the Aldermen and other Officers of the said City and of the Ward of North∣gate for the time being and shall be contributory to every charge within the same City in like wise as all the other in∣habitants of the same City and shall be. And that the said Mayor and Aldermen of the said City and Ward and their Successors shall execute their Office within the said Mona∣stery as they should doe in any other part of the said City, except in the causes and articles following. Item it is agreed for the quietnesse of the said Prior and 2. Covent and their Successors that no person shall be ar∣rested by his body within the said monastery for any perso∣nall action to be attempted by way of plaint before the Mayor of the said City, but in forme following, that is to say, if any plaint be entred and affirmed against the said
Prior or his successors or any person inhabiting or abiding within the said Monastery in such manner that the processe and execution according to the same plaint cannot be had and done upon the said Prior, his successors, or any such foresaid Person there inhabiting or abiding within the said Monastery, that then if the said Prior, his successors or other person inhabiting or abiding within the said Mona∣stery, having knowledge by the said Maior or by any of his Officers thereof by monition to be given by the time of two dayes before the time prefixed for the appearance, he at the time of that monition being within the said Mona∣stery or elsewhere within the liberties of the same City: If then the said Prior, the next Court-day after the said sum∣mons or knowledge so given put in pledges of right accor∣ding to the custome of the said City to answer to the said plaints so taken and affirmed, that then no manner of arrest nor attachment of any of the said bodies shall not be put in execution within the said Monastery against the said Prior his Successors or any such person inhabiting or abiding within the same. And it is condiscended agreed and deter∣mined by this composition that every such monition or warning hereafter to be given against the Priors or any o∣ther person spirituall or temporall inhabiting or resident within the same Monastery shall be good and effectuall to be given to the party to be sued or to any religious man of the same Monastery then being a Priest. Item it is agreed that all the manuell and necessary ser∣vants of the said Prior and Covent that hereafter shall be 3. inhabiting within any of the said tenantries shall not here∣after be impanelled, summoned, amerced ne distreyned for any mercements for any manner of Jury that shalbe sued betweene party and party.
Foundation of the Vicarage of Cosmus-Bleane. Scriptura 5ta. VNiversis sanctae matris ecclesiae filiis praesentes literas in∣specturis Simon permissione divina Cant. Archiepiscopus totius Angliae Primas & Apostolicae sedis Legatus Salutem in Causae funda∣tionis. Domino. Quia tam ex fama publica quam ex inquisitione ex officio nostro in hac parte capta evidenter comperimus ecclesiam parochialem sanctorum Cosmae & Damiani in la Bleen nostrae Dioc. Hospitali nostro sancti Thomae Martyris de Estbrigge in Civitate Cantuar. ab abtiquo fuisse & esse appropriatam, unita pariter & annexam, per unum milliare & amplius ab ipsis Civi∣tate & Hospitali notoriè distantem, sacerdotemque qui curae ani∣marum parochianorum ecclesiae praedictae hactenus intendebat seu intendere solebat in dicto Hosp. per dies & noctes quasi continuò fuisse commorantem, cum alibi pro sacerdote hujusmodi hospi∣tium sive habitatio minimè extiterat ordinat', quodque vix in ecclesia praefata singulis ebdomadis sacerdos praedictus propter di∣ctorum locorum distantiam per dies duos missam celebravit, ac parochiani ecclesiae praedictae nonnulli infirmati sacerdotem hujus∣modi diebus & noctibus inquirendo in loco ut praemittitur sic distanti quam plurimum fuerant fatigati, & saepius in infirmi∣tatibus subitis proper praefati sacerdotis absentiam multiplicem neque confessi neque communicati lamentabiliter decesserunt, ac alii in infirmitatibus hujusmodi remanserunt periculose & multi∣pliciter desolati. Nos itaque praemissa pericula mentis nostrae intuitu debite ponderantes, eisque quantum cum Deo poterimus ex nostri officii debito mederi cupientes, de voluntate & assensu Dilecti nobis in Christo Domini Thomae Newe de Wolton custodis sive magistri Hosp. antedicti, intervenientibus etiam authori∣tate & assensu dilectorum filiorum Prioris & Capituli ecclesiae nostrae Christi Cant. de consilio Iurisperitorum nobis assistentium, volentes dei cultum, animarumque profectum parochianorum ec∣clesiae praedictae, Domino disponente, salubriter augmentare, statuimus, ordinamus & disponimus, ut de cetero sit in dicta Dotatio Vi∣caiae. ecclesia perpetuus Vicarius habens infra ejusdem paroch man∣sionem
quom praefatus Dominus Thomas Newe Custos erexit pro eodem. Habebit etiam idem Vicarius decimas ac oblationes sub∣scriptas ad valorem annuum decem librarum & ultra ut commu∣niter creditur se extendtes, pro victu suo & oneribus infra∣scriptis supportandis, ejus quoque Vicarii praesentatio in vacati∣onibus ipsius Vicariae singulis ad Custodem ipsius Hosp. inperpe∣tuum pertinebit. Habebit etiam ipse Vicarius in partem summae praedictae pro dote sua omnes decimas praediales apud Natyngdon Dcimae apud Natingdon. dicto Hosp. debitas ab antiquo, quae quinque marcas aut circiter de claro valebunt annuatim, nec non omnes decimas praediales per totam parochiam dictae ecclesiae sanctor. Cosmae & Damiani praeterquam de terris & praediis dominicalibus omnibus & singu∣lis praedicti. Hosp. jam cultis & colendis infra parochiam ante∣dictam & preter omnimodas decimas praediales & alias quas∣cunque provenient' ex terris subscriptis & animalibus in eisdem depascendis & eorum fetuum super terras hujusmodi emittend▪ quae terrae sic exceptae sunt & jacent ex australi parte cujusdam cursus aquae currentis in ipsa parochia quae vocatur Vischman∣nysbourne in quadam valle infra dictam parochiam inter ecclesiam Fishmannes∣bourne. praedictam sanctor. Cosmae & Damiani in le Bleen & Curiam, dicti Hosp. apud le Hothe dictae nostrae Dioc. scituat. Ita quod Vicarius ille de decimis praedialibus nec aliis cujuscunque generis fuerint ex illa parte australi dicti cursus aquae infra parochiam praedict. qualitercunque provenien. nihil penitus vendicare po∣terit vel debebit. Habebit insuper dictus Vicarius in complemen∣tum summae decem librarum praedictarum omnes decimas vitu∣lorum, agnorum, aucarum, lini, lanae, lactis, lacticinii, casei, foeni, herbagii, silvae ceduae, aliarumque rerum omnium decima∣bilium infra dictam parochiam, decimis de terris & praediis do∣minicalibus & possessionibus quibuscunque provenientibus ac de animalibus dicti Hosp. & ipsorum foetibus in ipsa parochia ubi∣cunque depascendis & emittendis, cujuscunque generis fuerint, decimis quoque animalium hominum aliorum quorumcunque super ipsas terras dominicales & super terras aliorum ex parte australi cursus aquae praedict' foetus emittentium, & ex quibus ipse Vicarius nihil omnino percipiet duntaxat exceptis. Habebit itaque omnes oblationes in dicta parochiali ecclesia sanctor. Cosmae
& Damani & ejus parochia extra Curiam dicti Hosp. apud la Hoth ubicunque faciendas & quia tanta commoda ipse Vicarius infra dictam parochiam quasi Rector loci optinebit, subscripta onera de emolumentis & proficuis praedictis dictus Vicarius qui fuerit pro tempore futuris temporibus supportabit, viz. Cancel∣lum On Vic. dictae ecclesiae sanctorum Cosmae & Damiani construet & reparabit suis sumptibus & expensis quotiens & quando oporte∣bit. Et volumus quod si in ea parte per Custodem praefati hosp. debite monitus infra tempus congruum per ipsum Custodem limi∣tandum reparationes & constructiones hujusmodi fieri non fecerit competenter, licebit extunc eidem Custodi qui pro tempore fuerit de dictis oblationibus & decimis partem rationabilem & non ex∣cessivam liberè capere & levare, cum qua reparationes aut con∣structiones ipsas poterit fieri facere competenter, & si sic partem rationabilem ceperit & levaverit ipse Custos, Vicarius ille pro reparationibus aut constructionibus tunc necessariis excusatus habeatur penitus ne fraus aut malitia locum habeat in hac parte. Sustentabit etiam Vicarius hujusmodi qui ibidem pro tempore fuerit suis sumptibus competentem mansionem pro ipso vicario in dicta parochia jam constructam. Orabuntque singuli qui ibi∣dem erunt Vicarii in singulis suis missis pro nostra salute dum vixerimus, & pro anima nostra cum ab hac luce migraverimus, ac pro salute Domini Thomae Newe dum vixerit, & pro ejus anima cum ab hac luce migraverit, necnon pro anima bonae me∣moriae Domini Simonis de Islep dudum Cant. Archiepisc. prae∣decessoris nostri, quia cum ejus bonis in maiori parte ipsa mansio ut accepimus erecta extitit & constructa, & pro animabus Do∣mini Thomae de Ros qui multas possessiones suae hereditatis dedit Dominus Thomas de Ros. & Bea∣trix ejus uxor. Dominus Eu∣stacius de Dapschecourt & uxor. dicto hospitali in partem dotis unius Cantariae perpetuae pro salute animae suae & Beatricis consortis suae ac etiam Domini Eustacii de Dapschecourt & consortis ejus, de quorum bonis multa pieta∣tis opera facta sunt in dicto Hosp. sancti Thomae martyris. Inve∣niet in super dictus Vicarius qui fuerit pro tempore vinum & panem ac luminar' in praefata ecclesia pro celebrantibus necessa∣ria, & suis sumptibus ea exhiberi faciet competenter, & subibit omnia alia onera praedictae ecclesiae imposterum imponenda quae ad decimas solvendas taxata non existunt eaque agnoscat debite &
persolvat. Artabitur etiam ad residentiam continuam infra pa∣rochiam praefatae ecclesiae faciendam, sicut ad residentiam con∣tinuam alii ecclesiarum Vicarii per constitutionem sunt artati. Obedietque custodi praefati hosp. qui fuerit pro tempore in licitis & honestis. Reservamus insuper nobis & Successoribus nostris Archiepisc. Cant. potestatem corrigendi, augmentandi & di∣minuendi nostram ordinationem praedictam quotiens nobis vel eis videbitur expediens & opportunum. In cujus Rei testimonium sigillum nostrum fecimus hiis apponi. Dat' apud Otteforde tertio Non. Augusti Anno Domini Millesimo CCCmo. septuagesimo quinto, & nostrae translationis anno primo. The Foundation of Eastbridge-Chantery. Scriptura 6•a. SAnctae matris ecclesiae filiis universis ad quos praesentes literae pervenerint Simon permissione divina Cantuar. Archie∣piscopus &c. salutem in Domino sempiternam. Quia per inspe∣ctionem cujusdam patentis literae bonae memoriae Domini Simonis de Islep nuper Cant. Archiepisc. praedecessoris nostri ejus sigillo Causae funda∣tionis. consignatae comperimus evidenter quod ipse ex certis causis una perpetuam cantariam in hospitali nostro apud Estbrig' in Civitate Cant. ad honorem Dei cultusque divini, & pro salute animarum quorundam benefactorum ipsius hosp. & omnium fidelium defun∣ctorum devotè & legitimè ordinavit, ejusque Cantariae sacer∣dotem qui fuerit pro tempore annuatim percipere voluit ad certos anni terminos in ordinatione eadem expressos de custode ejusdem hospitalis in perpetuum decem marcas ex valore antiquarum & novarum possessionum eidem hospitali adquisitarum capiendas & etiam persolvendas, prout in dicta ordinationis litera plenius ex∣pressatur. Sacerdotem quoque ipsius Cantariae per literas ordi∣nationis praedictas artavit ad residentiam continuam in dicta Ci∣vitate aut eius suburbio faciendam, ita quod se ab ipsis Civitate aut suburbio per spatium unius diei minimè absentaret nisi de Custodis dicti Hosp. aut tenentis ejus locum licentia speciali petita pariter & obtenta, quam ex causis licitis necessariis & honestis dare poterit dictus Custos aut locum ejus tenens quotiens ubi &
quamdiu sibi videbitur expedire, dum tamen idem capellanus in absentia sua hujusmodi per alium Capellanum idoneum faciat di∣vina celebrari, quodque pauperibus & peregrinis ad ipsum hosp. confluentibus & in ipso infirmitatis sacramenta & sacramentalia quae si praesens fuerit per se vel per alium ministrabit & debite fa∣ciat ministrari. Volumus itaque & etiam ordinamus quod sacer∣dos ipsius Cantariae qui est & erit inposterum mansionem habeat Mansio Can∣taristae. infra septa dicti hosp. inter Infirmariam & magnam portam ejus∣dem hosp. jam ei assignatam, cum una camera supra ipsam portam aedificata, suis sumptibus continuè in statu debito conservandam. Verum post ipsam ordinationem Dominus noster excellentissimus Dominus Edwardus Rex Angliae & Franciae illustris qui nunc est quoddam messuagium suum in Civitate Cant. situm, la Chaunge vulgariter nuncupatum, in magna parte tempore donationis ejusdem infrascript' collapsum ex pia donatione sua Domino Thomae Newe de Wolton nunc magistro praedicti Hosp. ad terminum vitae suae donavit, ita quod post mortem suam ipsum messuagium Successori∣bus ipsius magistris, viz. Hosp. praedicti remaneret in perpetuum, in auxilium sustentationis unius capellani perpetui divina celebranti in Hosp. praedicto, pro salubri statu ipsius Domini Regis dum vixit, & anima carissimae matris suae Isabellae defunctae, & anima ipsi∣us Domini Regis cum ab hac luce migraverit, anima etiam Domini Dominus Io∣hannes at Lee. Iohannis at Lee qui in parte dotavit dictam Cantariam, ac anima∣bus omnium fidelium defunctorum, prout in carta dicti Domini nostri Regis plenè vidimus contineri, Ac per inquisitionem & in∣formationem fidedignorum accepimus quod dictum messuagium per praefatum Dominum nostrum Regem collatum ut praemittitur, per executores dicti praedecessoris nostri & cum bonis ejus caritativè est taliter reparatum & constructum quod verus valor ejus in certo redditu ad septem marcas ascendit, & in futurum ascendit annu∣atim ut speratur. Quodque difficile sit in presenti honestum repe∣rire sacerdotem, qui pro salario decem marcarum ad tam continu∣am residentiam & cotidianas celebrationes voluerit ut praemittitur onerari. Devotionemque dicti Domini nostri Regis quoad augmen∣tum dictae dotis hactenus frustratum esse comperimus: Ordinamus Augmenta  dotis. & statuimus addendo ordinationi praedicti praedecessoris nostri, de
consens dicti Domini Thomae Custodis praefati Hosp. & exècu∣toris praedecessoris nostri praedicti quod dos dictae Cantariae decem marcarum per quinque marcas & dimidiam de septem marcis red∣ditus messuagii sive tenementi praedicti per Dominum Regem dati ut praemittitur percipiendas per sacerdotem praedictum qui fuerit pro tempore equis portionibus, ad quatuor anni terminos, ad quos dictae decem marcae in ordinatione dicti praedecessoris nostri sunt sol vendae augmentetur, & eandem Cantariam cum dictis quinque marcis & dimidia tenore praesentium augmentamus, cum potestate per dictum Capellanum distringendi in dicto messuagio seu tene∣mento vocat' la Chaunge per Dominum nostrum Regem dato ut praefertur, quotiens per aliquem terminorum praedict' in ordinati∣one praedicta contentorum pars debita ipsius redditus quinque mar∣carum & dimidiae in parte vel in toto per dies quindecim eidem capellano non fuerit persoluta. Et quia praesentatio Cantariae de Cantaria de Bourne. Bourne hospitali praedicto unitae prout in ordinatione primae Canta∣riae praedictae per praedecessorem nostrum facta plenius continetur, ad Bartholomeum de Bourne seu ejus heredes at assignatos ante unionem praedictam pertinebat: statuimus, ordinamus, & prop∣terea declaramus quod praesentatio dictae Cantariae cum vacaverit, nobis seu successoribus nostris, aut sede ecclesiae Cant. vacante, Pri∣ori & Capitulo ejusdem ecclesiae facienda, ad praefatum Bartholo∣maeum, heredes' ut assignatos suos, collatioque ejusdem ad nos & Successores nostros cum eam vacare contigerit alternis vicibus per∣tinebunt, & quod collatio dictae Cantariae in prima vacati' ejusdem ad nos vel Successores nostros pertieat, quia assignatus dicti Bar∣tholomei ad ipsam Cantariam tunc vacantem capallanum praesen∣tavit eandem occupantem in praesenti. Iurabit quilibet Capellanus ejusdem Cantariae in admissione sua seu collatione sibi facienda, ordinationes dictae Cantariae & singula contenta in eisdem fideliter observare, alioquin ejus admissio, collatio & institutio nullius pe∣nitus sint momenti. In quorum omnium testimonium sigillum no∣strum fecimus hiis apponi. Dat' apud Wingham xv. Kalen. No∣vembris. Anno Domini Mccclxxvto. & translationis nostrae anno primo.
The grant of Poore Priests Hospitall with the Scriptura 7ma. Lands and appertenances to it, by the late Queene, to the Citie. ELizabetha Dei gratia Angliae, Franciae & Hiberniae Regina fidei defensor &c. Omnibus ad quos praesentes literae pervene∣rint Salutem. Cum Blasius Winter clericus Magister hospitalis pauperum Sacerdotum in Comitatu Civitatis Cantuar. necnon Ed. Freake Roffen' Episcopus Archidiaconus Cantuarien. verus & indubitatus Patronus dicti Hospitalis in Iure Archidiaconatus prae∣dicti & Mattheus Cant. Archiepiscopus totius Angliae Primas & Metropolitanus Ordinarius ejusdem Hospitalis per scriptum suum gerens datum quarto decimo die Maii anno Regni nostri decimo septimo ob diversas causas eosdem moventes in praedicto scripto S sum reddi∣tio Hospit. mentionat' & expressas, dederunt, concesserunt & confirmaverunt nobis heredibus & successoribus nostris in perpetuum totum Hospi∣tale pauperum Sacerdotum infra Civitatem Cant. praedictum, & advocationem ejusdem Hosp. necnon omnia & singula domos, aedi∣ficia, structuras, gardi', pomar', terras arabil', glebas, tene∣menta, prata, pasturas, mariscos, boscos, subboscos, redditus, re∣versiones, servitia, portiones, pensiones, annuales redditus, decimas bladorum, granorum & feni, advocationem & advocationes eccle∣siae & ecclesiarum, vicariae & vicariarum quarumcunque & rever∣sionem & reversiones omnium & singulorum praemissorum, ac omnia & singulaproficua, franches', emolumenta & hereditamenta quaecunque dicto Hosp. spectantia & pertinentia, vel ut pars, par∣cella vel mmbrum ejusdem hosp. nunc vel antehac accept', usitat', cogni' seu reputat', tam infra Civitatem praedictam quam infra Comitatum Kaenc. Habend' nobis, heredibus & Successoribus nostris ad solum opus & usum nostrum heredum & Successorum nostrorum in perpetuum, ea tamen intentione & siducia qd nos, heredes & Successores nostri ad humilem supplicationem & petitio∣nem Maioris & Communitatis dictae Civitatis nostrae Cantuar∣otum dictum Hosp. & omnia & singula alia praemiss cum su
pertinenis praefatis Maiori & Communitati & Successoribus suis per literas nostras patentes sub magno sigillo nostro Angliae debito modo fiend' & sigilland' dare & concedere dignaremur Tenend. praedictum Hosp. & omnia & singula caetera praemissa cum per∣tinen' de nobis & Successoribus nostris ut de manerio nostro de East-Greenwich in dicto comitatu nostro Kanc' in libero socagio per fide∣litatem tantum & non in capite, prout per praedictum scriptum nobis heredibus & Successoribus nostris per praedictos Magistrum, Episcopum, & Archiepiscopum inde confectum & sigillatum, quod quidem scriptum Decanus & Capitulum ecclesiae Cathedralis & Metropoliticae Christi Cant. per eorum scriptum sub eorum com∣muni sigillo sigillatum gerens dat' decimo sexto die Maii anno regni nostri supradicto consirmaverunt, & in omnibus ratisicave∣runt & aepprobaverunt, quod quidem scriptum——& irrotulat' in Curia Cancellariae nostrae prout per eadem manifestè liquet & apparet. Ratione cujus nos modò seisiti sumus de toto prae∣dicto Hosp. ac de omnibus & singulis praemissis supradictis cum suis pertinentiis in Dominico nostro ut de feodo ut in Iure coron nostrae ad intentionem & fiduciam praedict' in nobis reposit. Sciatis igitur quod nos tam ad humilem petitionem dictorum Maioris & Concessio e∣jusd. Civitati. Communitatis quam in performando & perimplendo intentionem & fiduciam praedict' in nobis reposit' per praedict' Magistrum, E∣piscopum & Archiepisc. confirmat' per praedict' Decanum & Ca∣pitulum in script' praedict' ut praefertur express' & mentionat', de gratia nostra speciali, ac ex certa scientiâ & mero motu nostris dedimus, concessimus & consirmavimus, ac per presentes, pro nobis, heredibus & Successoribus nostris damus, concedimus & confirmamus praefatis Maiori & communitati & successoribus suis in perpetuum totum praedictum hospitale pauperum Sacerdotum, & advocationem ejusdem, necnon omnia & singula domos, edificia, structuras, gardina, pomaria, terras arabiles & pasturas, terras glebales, tenementa, prata, pascua, pasturas, mariscos, boscos, sub∣boscos, edditus, servitia, portiones, pensiones, annuales redditus, decimas bladorum, granorum & feni, advocationem & advoca∣tiones ecclesiae & ecclesiarum, Vicariae & vicariarum quarumcun∣que & reversionem & reversiones omnium & singulorum prae∣missorum,
ac omnia & singula proficua, libertates, franches', emo∣lumenta & hereditamentae quaecunque dicto Hosp. spectantia, per∣tinentia, vel ut pars, parcella vel membrum ejusdem Hosp. nunc vel antehac accept', usitat', cognit' seu reputat'——nobis, heredibus & Successoribus nostris per praedictum scriptum supe∣rius recitatum ut praefertur dat' & concess', tam infra Civitatem praedictam quam infra Comitatum Kanc. Habend. tenend. & gau∣dend. praedictum Hosp. necnon omnia & singula praemissa cum omnibus & singulis suis pertinentiis prfatis Maiori & Communi∣tati & Successoribus suis in perpetuum. Tenend. de nobis heredibus & Successoribus nostris ut de manerio nostro de East Greenwich in dicto Comitatu nostro Kanc' in libero & communi socagio per fide∣litatem tantum & non in Capite. Et ulterius de ampliori gratia nostra dedimus & concessimus ac per praesentes damus & concedi∣mus praefatis Maiori & Communitati omnia exitus, redditus, re∣ventiones & proficua praedicti Hospitalis & ceterorum omnium & singulorum praemissorum per praesentes concessorum cum pertinent'  dicto quartodecimo die Mati ultimò praeteriti hucusque provenien' sive crescen' Habend. eisdem Maiori & Communitati ex dono nostro absque computo su aliquo alio proinde nobis heredibus vel successoribus nostris quoquo modo reddend' vel faciend. Et ulterius volumus & per praesentes concedimus praefatis Maiori & Commu∣nitati & successoribus suis quod nos heredes & Successores nostri in perpetuum annuatim & de tempore in tempus exonerabimus, acquietabimus & indempnes conservabimus tam eosdem Maiorem & Communitatem & successores suos quam totum praedictum ho∣spitale & caetera praemissa, cum omnibus & singulis suis pertinen. superius per praesentes praeconcessa de omnibus & omnimodis cor∣rodiis, redditibus, feodis, annuitatibus & denariorum summis ac oneribus quibuscunque per nos antehac quoquo modo factis seu con∣cessis de praemissis praeconcessis, seu de eisdem aliquo modo exeun' seu solvend. vel superinde onerat' seu onerand. praeterqua de ser∣vitiis per praesentes nobis heredibus & Successoribus nostris reser∣vatis. Et ulterius volumus ac per praesentes pro nobis, heredibus ac Successoribus nostris concedimus praefatis Maiori & Communi∣tati & Successoribus suis quod hae literae nostrae patentes & irrotu∣lament'
earundem erunt firmae, validae, bonae, sufficientes & effi∣caces in leges erga nos, heredes & successores nostros tam in omni∣bus curiis nostris quam alibi infra regnum nostrum Angliae absque aliquibus confirmationibus licentiis vel tolerationibus de nobis, heredibus vel successoribus nostris inposterum per praedictos Maio∣rem & Communitatem vel successores suos procurand. vel obtinen. non obstan' male nominand. vel malè recitand. vel non recitand. praedicta Hosp. domos, aedificia, structuras gardina, pomaria, terras arabiles & pasturas, terras glebales, tenementa, prata, pascua, pasturas, mariscos, boscos, subboscos, redditus, reversiones, servi∣tia, decimas bladorum, granorum & feni, advocationes, pensiones, portiones, ac caetera omnia & singula praemissa vel alicujus inde parcellae, aut non obstan' male recitan' vel non recitand. aliquarum dimiss' seu concess' praemissrum seu alicujus inde parcellae de recordo sive non de recordo existen', vel non obstan' aliquibus aliiis defe∣ctibus in non nominando alicujus villae, hamletti, parochiae aut Com' in quibus praemissa vel aliqua inde parcella jacent vel existunt, aut in non nominando vel male nominando praemissorum five alicujus inde parcellae in natura, genere, specie, seu qualitate sua. Volentes etiam & per praesentes firmiter injungendo praecipientes tam The∣saurar. Camerar. Cancellar. & Baronibus curiae scaccarii nostri praedicti quam omnibus receptoribus, auditoribus & aliis officiariis & ministris nostris, heredum & successorum nostrorum quibus∣cunque pro tempore existen' quod ipsi & eorum quilibet super solam demonstrationem harum literarum nostrarum paten' vel irrotula∣ment' earund' absque aliquo alio brevi seu warranto à nobis heredi∣bus vel successoribus nostris quoquo modo impetran' seu prosequen' plenam, integram, debitamque allocationem & exoner ationem ma∣nifestam de omnibus & omnimodis——corrodiis, redditi∣bus, feodis, annuitatibus, denariorum summis & oneribus quibus∣cunque de praemissis exeun' seu solvend. vel superinde onerat' seu oneran' praefatis Maiori & Communitati & successoribus suis fa∣cient & de tempore in tempus fieri causabunt. Et hae literae nostrae patentes & irrotulamet' earundem erunt annuatim & de tempore in tempus tam dict' Thesaurar. Camerar. & Baronibus dictae Curiae scaccarii nostri, quam omnibus, receptoribus, auditoribus, & aliis
officiariis & ministris nostris heredum & successorum nostrorum quibuscunque pro tempore existentibus sufficiens warrantum & exoneratio in hac parte. Volumus & jam & per praesentes con∣cedimus praefatis Maiori & Communitati, quod ipsi habeant has literas nostras patentes sub magno sigillo nostro Angliae debito modo fact' & sigillat' absque fine seu feodomagno vel parvo nobis in hanaperio nostro seu alibi ad usum nostrum proinde quoquo modo reddend. solvend. vel faciend. eo quod expressa mentio de vero valore anuo aut de aliquo alio valore vel certitudine prae∣missorum seu eorum alicujus, aut de aliquibus aliis donis sive concessionibus per nos vel alios progenitores nostros praefatis Ma∣iori & Communitati antehac in praesentibus minimè facta existit aut aliquo actu, statuto, ordinatione, sive provisione, aut aliqua aliare, causa, vel materia quacunque in aliquo non obstante. In cujus Rei testimonium has literas nostras fieri fecimus patentes. Teste mepsa apud Westm' quinto die Iulii, anno regni nostri deci∣mo septimo. Per breve de privato sigillo & de dat. praedict. Authoritate Parliamenti. Lutley. The indorsement. IN the yeare of our Lord God 1575. and in the seven∣teenth yeare of Queene Elizabeth within written, this bountifull and worthy gift by our said Soveraigne Lady Queene Eliz. to the Maior and Communalty of the City of Canterb. of the hosp. within mentioned, and the lands and tenements to the same, to the use of the poore, was of the Charge of the Citizens by sesse to fifty pound and more procured and obtained by Iohn Rose then Maior of the said City and Richard Gaunt then Sherife of the same suters and soliciters in and about he procuring thereof of the proper money and charge of the said Iohn Rose first disbursed till the full accomplishment and obteining the same, after he againe was payed the same as it was collected and gathered.
It is likewise indorsed upon these letters patents, that these lands and the whole revenewes thereof were inten∣ded by her Matie to be to the use of the poore of Canterb. An act of Parliament for paving the streets. Scriptura viijua, EDwardus Dei gratia Rex Angliae & Franciae & Dominus Hibernia Omnibus ad quos praesentes literae perverint salu∣tem. Inspeximus quandam petitionem nobis in Parliamento no∣stro apud Westm' sexto decimo die Ianuarii ultimo praeterito sum∣movit' & tento per Communitates Regni nostri Angliae in eodem Parliamento existen', ex parte Maioris & Communitatis Civi∣tatis Cantuar. exhibitum in haec verba. To the right wise and discreet Commons in this present Parliament assembled. Shewne unto your wisdomes the Maior and communalty Canterbury one of the eldest cities of Eng∣land. of the city of Canterbury, forasmuch as the same citie is one of the eldest Cities of this Realme, and therein is the prin∣cipall See of the spirituall estate of the same realme, and which citie also is most in sight of all strangers of the parts beyond the sea resorting into this said Realme and depar∣ting out of the same, and because of the glorious Seints that there lie shrined is greatly named throughout Christi∣andome unto which citie also is great repaire of much of the people of this Realme as well of estates as other in way of pilgrimage to visite the said Saints. And it is so that the same Citie is oftentimes full fowle, noyous, and uneasie to all the Inhabitants of the same, as to all other persons re∣sorting thereunto, whereof oftentimes is spoken much disworship in diverse places aswell beyond the Sea as on this side the sea which cannot be remedied in any wise but if the said citie might be paved whereunto the more partie of the Inhabitants of the same Citie having Burgeses houses or tenements in the same be well willed and agreeable, so that there might authority be had to compell other such persons as have burgeses houses lands or tenements therein to be contributory to doe the same. Please it therefore your
wisdomes the premisses considered, and that the Maior and Communalty have no lands nor tenements nor other yearely revenewes in common whereof they may make or sustaine any such payment, to pray the King our Sovereigne Lord that he by the advise and assent of the Lords spirituall and temporall of this his Realme in this present Parliament assembled and by authority of the same Parliament to or∣daine, establish and enact that all and every person and per∣sons being seised of meses or tenements within or adjoy∣ning to the principall streat of the said City which begin∣neth at the gate called Westgate sett in the West part of the Westgate. said City and extendeth from thence Eastward unto a gate called Newingate sett in the East part of the said Citie, and in or adjoyning to another streat of the said Citie which Newingate. beginneth at a place called Burgate sett in the East part of Burgate. the same Citie, and extendeth from thence West-ward unto a place of the same city called the Bulstake where the Bullstake. other market of the same City is usually kept, or in or ad∣joyning to another streat extending West-ward from the same place call'd the Bulstake unto the gate of the house of the Black-friers of the same citie, or in or adjoyning to an∣other street of the same City extending from the same Black-Friers∣gate. place called the Bulstake Southward unto the church of St Andrew in the same city, and from the Church Southward unto another place of the same Citie being in the parish of St Margrett in the said Citie called the Iron-Crosse into The Iron-Crosse. which streats and places commonly is more resort aswell of strangers as of other than to any other streat or place with∣in the said Citie; by reasonable premunition to the same person or persons, or to the inhabitants or occupiers of the same Burgeses meses or tenements by the Maior, Sheriffe and Chamberlyns of the same city for the time being or by two of them or by any of their Ministers or servants to be made, as oftentimes as shall need or reasonably require hereafter make or do to be made, repaire or do to be re∣paired sufficient and sufficiently pavement before all and every the said Burgeses meses or tenements sett lying or
adjoyning in or to any of the said streats or places, imme∣diately from the said Burgeses meses or tenements and e∣very parcell thereof unto the middest of the streat afore them and every of them, and unto such place or places of the streat afore them and every of them as shall be thought fit to the Maior, Aldermen, Sheriffe, Burgesses and Cham∣berlyns of the same City for the time being or to the more part of them in number the canell place afore the said Bur∣geses meses or tenants or afore any of them to be made. And if any person or persons having any burgeses meses or tenements sett lying or adjoyning in or to any of the said streats or places above rehearsed after such premunition to them or to any of them made, make not or do to be made, repaire nor do to be repaired the said Canell or such pave∣ments sufficiently after the manner and forme above re∣hearsed within six moneths nex after such premunition to them or to any of them to be made: Then the Mayor, Sheriff and the Chamberlyns of the said City for the time being, or two of them have full power and authority to make or do to be made, repaire or do to be repaired as the cause and time of necessity shall require, the said pavement sufficiently in forme afore-said before the said Burgeses meses and tenements and every of them which shall happen not to be made or repaired sufficiently in the manner afore∣rehersed within other six moneths the said first six moneths next ensuing. And that it shall be lawfull to the said Maior, Sheriff and Chamberlyns of the said City for the time be∣ing and to every of them to take sufficient distresse within every place of the said city of the goods and chattells of such person or persons as shall happen hereafter to be found in default of making or repairing of such pavement, or of the goods and chattells of the Iuhabitants or occupiers of the same Burgeses meses or tenements afore which such default shall happen to be fond, to the value of such rea∣sonable costs and expenses as shall happen to be due to the said Mayor, Sheriffe or Chamberlyns of the said citie for the time being or any of them in making or repairing of
the said pavement, and the said distresse to doe praise by the oathes of fower, three or two honest persons of the same City, and it sell, and the money thereof coming re∣taine to him or them that shall happen to make or do to be made, or repaire or do to be repaired the said pavement for the costs or expences by them or any of them donne in ma∣king or repairing of the same pavement. And the surplu∣sage of the money coming of the said goods or cattells so sold; if any be over the said costs and expences, be de∣livered to him or them that were owners of the said goods and cattells so taken and praised afore the time of the said taking. And also that every person and persons having any rent in fee-simple, fee-tayle, terme of life or terme of years, so the terme exceed ten yeares going out of any of the said Burgeses meses or tenements, sett lying or adjoyning in or to the said streats or places or in or to any of them be contributors and contributory, chargeable and charged by dewe premunition to them and every of them in manner and forme afore rehearsed. Caetera desunt. Composition between the Parson of St Margaret Scriptura ixna. and the Hospitall of Poor Priests. HEc est compositio facta inter Rectorem ecclesiae sanctae Mar∣garetae Cantuar. & hospitale pauperum sacerdotum, quod Capellanus qui in Capella pauperum sacerdotum Cantuariae quae Iura Rectoris. infra limites parochiae sanctae Margaretae est constituta pro tem∣pore ministrabit, inspectis sacrosanctis jurabit, quod nullas ob∣lationes, nullas decimas, nullas obventiones ad ecclesiam beatae Margaretae Iure parochiali pertinentes, in praejudicium ipsius ecclesiae ex certa scientia recipiet, & si forte receperit ignoraner, eas cum omni integritate Rectori psius ecclesiae restituet. Omnes vero servientes in dicto hospitale sive mares sive feminae à Re∣ctore dictae ecclesiae sanctae Margaretae sacramenta spiritualia reci∣pient
sicut parochiani, & in festivitatibus in quibus oblatio debe∣tur ecclesiis, ad praedictam ecclesiam venient sicut alii parochiani facturi. Idem etiam tam in laicis quam in clericis peregrinis si in dicto Hospitali moram faciant undecunque sint observabitur: Ita quod si aliquem ex talibus personis peregrinis in dicto Hospitali infirmari contigerit, spiritualia à praedicto Rectore recipiet, & ecclesiam sanctae Margaretae si ipsum in dicto Hosp. mori conti∣gerit prosua respiciet facultate. Capellani verò & clerici degentes Iura Capella∣norum. ibidem ab eo qui in spiritualibus à Rectore ecclesiae beatae Marga∣retae cum sacramento ut dictum eis praeficitur praedicta recipiant sacramenta & liberam habebunt potestatem ubi voluerint eli∣gendi sepulturam. Habebunt etiam potestatem sine calumpnia recipiendi annalia sive tricennialia ex devotione fidelium qui non sunt parochiani ecclesiae sanctae Margaretae, vel etiamsi sint pa∣rochiani, dum tamen non procurent hoc fieri in praejudicium ma∣tricis ecclesiae; quod si fuerit ab eis procuratum, & super hoc convinci potuerint, plena restituent quicquid taliter perceperunt. Insuper pro orto quem habent in Binnewitht unam libram cymini solvent annuatim pro decimis praedicto Rectori, & in festo sanctae Hortus in Binnewiht. Margaretae, super altare ipsius ecclesiae matricis in signum Iuris parochialis pro loco in quo habitant duos cereos trium librarum offerri faciant vel decem et octo denarios. Si verò contigerit quod aliquis separatim ab eis domum in Binewith sitam inhabitaverit, erit parochianus sanctae Margaretae sicut antea fuit. Item de te∣nemento Domini Abbatis & conventus sancti Augustini nullum sibi tenementum perquirent nisi de eorum voluntate, & si aliqd' tenementum alterius Domini in praedicta parochia quocunque titulo perquisierint, salvum erit matrici ecclesiae jus quod in eo prius habuerat. Item si forte aliquo tempore in praedicto Hosp. Capellanus non praefuerit, sed laicus procurator: idem ad con∣simile sacramentum tactis sacrosanctis se astringet scilicet ad observationem praemissorum. In diebus verò dominicis & aliis festivitatibus in quibus ex consuetudine oblationes fiunt gene∣rales in ecclesiis, non celebrabunt missam in dicto Hosp. donec Tempus missae celebrandae in Hospitali. Evangelium in ecclesiabeatae Margaretae sit perlectum sive missa consummata, nisi de licentia hoc fiat ecclesiae memoratae Rectoris, & his diebus parochianos sanctae Margaretae non admittent nisi
cum missa in ecclesia sanctae Margaretae fuerit expleta. Campa∣nas Campanae Hospitali pro∣hibitae. verò in praedicto loco non habebunt. Et si qua partium prae∣dictarum contra formam hic scriptam venire praesumpserit, u∣nam marcam nomine poenae totiens solvet Abbati sancti Augu∣stini aena trans∣gressoris. & Archidiacono Cantuariae vel cui viderint secundum Do∣minum libere conferendam, quotiens contravenerit, compositi∣one nihilominus firmum robur optinente. In cujus Rei testimoni∣um tam Abbas sancti Augustini quam Archidiaconus Cantuar. huic compositioni sigilla sua apponi fecerunt. Composition between Christ-Church and St Augustines, Scriptura xma. about lands lying by the Campanile of Christ-Church. RIchardus Dei gratia Cantuar. Archiepiscopus totius Angliae Primas & Apostolicae sedis Legatus Vniversis sanctae matris ecclesiae filiis ad quos praesentes literae pervenerint eternam in Do∣mino Salutem. Ad omnium volumus noticiam pervenire quali∣ter dilecti filii nostri Benedictus Prior & Conventus ecclesiae Christi Cantuar. cum Rogero electo monasterii sancti Augustini & Conventus ejusdem loci quasdam terras suas pro quibusdam terris ad idem monasterium pertinentibus commutaverunt. Prae∣fatus siquidem Electus & Conventus sancti Augustini quasdam terras habuerunt ex parte meridiana cimiterii nostri juxta Cam∣panile nostrum in Cantuar. scilicet terras Gervasii de Cornhelle unde solebant haber annuatim vs & xd terram Willielmi Furba∣toris unde habebant ijs terram Willielmi filii Ricardi unde habe∣bant viij de quibus reddebant ad firmam Domini Regis annuatim xxd. unde monachi nostri eos acquietabant erga Regem, terram etiam Baldwini presbiteri & Davidis de Chert fratris ejus unde habebant ijs terram Philippi Parmentarii unde habebant xxd ter∣ram quae fuit Everwaker unde habebant xvijd. Terram quae fuit Mudekyn & Sedegos quae reddebat eis xxd. Summa quorum red∣dituum est xxs & xd. & terram in qua quaedam Capella constructa Causa finalis hujus Compo∣sitionis. fuerat. Quoniam vero hae praedictae terrae nobis & ecclesiae nostrae periculosae fuerunt propter crebra incendia: Idcirco praedictus
Rogerus Electus & conventus praenominati Monasterii ad preces Domini nostri Henrici Regis Angliae & nostras concesserunt & dederunt & assignaverunt in escambium nobis & ecclesiae nostrae has terras liberas & quietas ab omni questione & querela, salvo quidem jure illorum qui praenominatas terras de Monasterio sancti Augustini tenebant. Nos autem pro jam dictis terris concessi∣mus dedimus & assignavimus in concambium eidem Electo & Conventui ad electionem ipsorum quasdam de terris nostris libe∣ras & quietas ab omni questione & querela, salvo quidem jure illorum qui terras illas de nobis tenere solebant, scilicet terram Roberti filii Richardi Flatbold, &c. ut in Compositione plenius poterit apparere: as Thorne cuts it off, and that because (as he addes) Vbi situantur non invenitur scriptum. Summa quo∣rum reddituum est xxijs ijd. Cumque volumus hanc commuta∣tionem & escambium hincinde sic de utriusque partis consensu factum firmiter & inviolabiliter observari ipsam commutatio∣nem praesentis scripti nostri patrocinio confirmamus & sigilli no∣stri munimine roboramus. Facta est autem haec commutatio anno Incarnationis Dominicae Millesimo Centesimo septuagesimo sep∣timo, Regnante illustrissimo Anglorum Rege Henrico secundo. Concerning the Schoole at Canterbury. Scriptura xja. ACta & processus super statuscolar: ecclesiae sancti Martini juxta Cant. coram m10 Roberto de Mallingg generali Com∣missario Cant. primò viva voce, & post per specialem commis∣sionem Domini W. Archiepiscopi Anno Domini 1321. inter ma∣gistrum Radulphum de Waltham Rectorem scolarum Civitatis Cant. & m•um Robertum de Henney Rectorem ecclesiae sancti Mar∣tini juxta Cant. Commissio. VVAlterus permissione divina Cantuar. Archiepiscopus totius Angliae Primas dilecto filio Commissario nostro Cantuar. Salutem, gratiam & benedictionem, Cum nuper tibi
praecepimus viva voce ut in negotio tangente m•m Radulfum rectorem scolar' grammaticalium Civitatis nostrae Cantuar. & magistrum Robertum, Rectorem ecclesiae sancti Martini juxta Cant. ac ejusdem loci Rectorem scolarum, ex officio, authoritate nostra procederes, & inquisita veritate idem negotium debito fine terminares, dictum negotium de quo miramur adhuc coram te pendet indecisum. Quocirca tibi committimus & mandamus quatenus ulterius in dicto negotio authoritate praedicta procedas, & finem sententiando, previa ratione, celeritate qua poteris, imponere non omittas. Dat' Cantuariae tertio Non. Ianuarii Anno Domini Millesimo trecentesimo vicesimo primo. Inquifitio. DOminus Richardus rector ecclesiae de Monketon. Dominus Galfridus Vicar. ecclesiae de Chyleha. Dominus Stephanus de Wyks. Dominus Nich. capellanus sancti Sepulchri. Dominus Theob. Vicar. ecclesiae S. Pauli. Dominus Simon Rector eccles. S. Mariae de Castro. Dominus Thomas Rector eccles. S. Petri. Dominus Iohannes Rector eccles. omnium sanctor. Dominus Iohannes Rector eccles. S. Mich. Magister Robertus de Honynton. Alexander de Elemosinaria. Iohannes le Taillour. Simon at Fermerye. Iohannes de Stablegate. Iohannes de Strode. Robertus de sancto Martino. Iurati dicunt quod non debent esse plures gramatici in Schola sancti Martini nisi xiij. & hoc se dicunt scire ex relatu bonorum & fide dignorum ab antiquo & dicunt quod sem∣per consuevit Rector Scholarum Cant. Scholas sancti Martini per se vel suos propter numerum scolar. visitare. Dicunt etiam quod quando hostiarius vel submonitor
scolar. Cant. propter numerum scolarium scolas sancti Martini visitavit, scholares sancti Martini absconde∣runt se usque ad numerum xiij. & hoc se dicunt scire ex relatu fidedignorum ab antiquo. De aliis scholaribus in scholis sancti Martini alphabetum, psalterium & cantum addiscentibus non est certus numerus limitatus, ut di∣cunt. Sententia diffinitiva. IN Dei nomine Amen. Cum nuper inter mrum Radulphum, Rectorem scolarum Civitatis Cant. ad collationem venerabi∣lis patris Domini W. dei gratia Cant. Archiepisc. totius Angliae Primatis spectantium, & mrum Robertum de Henny, Rectorem ecclesiae sancti Martini juxta Cant. & ejusdem loci scolar. Recto∣rem ad dictam ecclesiam sancti Martini de patronatu ejusdem existentem pertinentium, super eo quod idem magister Radul∣phus praetendebat dictum mrum scolarum S. Martini habere debe∣ret in scolis suis xiij. scolares in gramatica erudiendos duntaxat. Idemque magist' scolarum S. Martini omnes indistinctè ad scolas suas confluentes in praejudicium scolarum Civitatis praedictae & contra consuetudinem admittere, & in suis scolis tenere & do∣cere in grammatica praesumpsit, orta fuisset materia questionis; tandem dictus venerabilis pater utriusque loci Patronus & Dio∣cesanus, nobis Commissario suo Cant. generali tam vivae vocis oraculo, quam subsequenter literatoriè hujusmodi questionem seu negotium per viam inquisitionis ex officio commisit fine debito terminandum. Nos igitur Commissarius praedictus magistros utriusque sclarum praedict. & Rectoem ecclesiae S. Martini prae∣dict. coram nobis fecimus evocari, & super dicto negotio viros fidedignos clericos specialiter juratos inquiri fecimus diligenter. Qua inquisitione facta puplicata & dictis magistis & Rectori copia decreta, nihil dicto contra inquisitionem vel probato, set ad audiendum pronuntiationem nostram die eisdem praefixo. Quia Nos Commssarius antedictus inve quod magister Scola∣rum S. Martini xiij. scolares duntaxat in gramatica per ipsum scolarum magistrum quicunque fuerit docendos habere & tenere
ac docere debet ex consuetudine ab antiquo, illam consuetudinem, authoritate, nobis in hac parte commissa decerminus observan∣dam. Inhibentes magistro scolarum S. Martini ne plures scolares ultra numerum praedict. in suis scolis in gramatica docendos ad∣mittat de cetero, nec consuetudinem praedictam infringere prae∣sumat quoquo modo. Ab ista sententia praedictus magister Robertus appellavit ad sedem Apostolicam, & pro tuitione Curiae Cant. Vnde Officialis Cur. Cant. inhibuit Commissario, &c. OFficialis Curiae Cantuar. discreto viro magistro Roberto de Mallingg Commissario Cantuar. generali Salutem in autore salutis. Ex parte m•i Roberti de Henney Rectoris ecclesiae sancti Martini Cant. nobis extitit intimatum, quod cum ipse ac prae∣cessores seu praedecessores sui Rectores in ecclesia praedicta omnes & singuli, temporibus suis, à tempore cujus contrarii memoria hominum non existit fuerint, & adhuc sit idem magister Rober∣tus de Henney nomine suo & ecclesiae suae praed' in possessione ve quasi Iuris habendi scolas grammaticales in dicta ecclesia S. Mar∣tini seu infra septa ejusdem, magistrosque ad informandum & instruendum in arte gramaticali quoscunque illuc ea de causa ac∣cedentes ibi praeficiendi seu deputandi, & eos libere admittendi, informandi & instruendi in arte gram' praedicta. Ex parte m• Roberti de Henney in possessione vel quasi Iuris hujusmodi ut prae∣mittitur existentis, ac metuentis ex quibusdam causis probabi∣libus & veresimilibus conjecturis grave sibi & ecclesiae suae prae∣dictae circa praemissa praejudicium posse generari in futurum, ne quis circa praemissa vel eorum aliquid quicquam in ipsius vel ec∣clesiae suae praedictae praejudicium attemptaret seu faceret aliqua∣liter adtemptari, ad sedem Apostolicam, & pro tuitione Curiae Cant. extitit ut asseritur palam & publice ac legitime provoca∣tum. Set vos ad instantiam seu procurationem cujusdam Radulfi magistrum scolarum Cant. se praetendentis, provocatione prae∣dicta quae vos veresimiliter non latebat non obstante, post &
contra eam, pradictum mrum Robertum de Henney, q̄uo minus pos∣sessione sua hujusmodi libere gaudere potuit, contra justitiam m∣lestastis, inquietastis ac multipliciter perturbastis, ac tresdecim scolares duntaxat in dictis scolis ecclesiae sancti Martini & non plu∣res admitti debere minus veraciter pretendentes, cuidam magistro Iohanni le Bucwell mro scolarum hujusmodi per dictum m•um Ro∣bertum de Henney praefecto seu deputato, ne ultra 13. scolares hu∣jusmodi inibi admitteret seu haberet inhibuistis minus juste in ip∣sius mri Roberti de Henney & ecclesiae suae praedictae praejudicium, dampnum non modicum & gravamen. Vnde ex parte ejusdem mri Roberti sentientis se & ecclesiam suam praedictam ex hiis & eorum quolibet per vos indebitè praegravari, ad dictas sedem & Curiam extitit ut asseritur legitimè appellatum. Quare vobis inhibemus, & per vos omnibus & singulis quibus jus exigit inhiberi volumus & mandamus ut pendente in Curia Cant. hujusmodi tuitoriae ap∣pellationis negotio quicquam hac occasione in dictae partis appellantis praejudicium attemptetis vel attemptent, faciatis aut faciant aliqua∣liter attemptari, quo minus liberam habeat appellationis suae prose∣cutionem prout justum fuerit. Citetis etiam seu citari faciatis per∣emptorie dictum Radulfum partem ut praemittitur appellatam quod compareat coram nobis vel nostro Commissario in ecclesia beatae Maria de Aldermarichurche London sexto die Iuridico post fe∣stum sancti Martini yemalis in dicto tuitoriae appellationis negotio processurum, facturum & recepturum quod justitia suadebit. De die vero receptionis praesentium, & quod in praemissis feceritis nos vel nostrum Commissarium dictis die & loco certificetis per lteras vestras patentes harum seriem continentes. Dat. London' xij. Ka∣len. Novemb. Anno Domini 1323.
Sed quia pars appellans appellationem suam praefatae Curiae Cantuar. suggestam, sufficienter prout debuit non probavit, pars appellata dimissa fuit ab examine dictae Curiae Cant. per literam subscriptam. THomas de Themnstr' Curiae Cantuar. examinator generalis Domini Officialis ejusdem Curiae in ipsius & Domini Decani ecclesiae beatae Mariae de Arcubus London Commissarii sui generalis absentiâ Commissarius, discreto viro magistro Roberto de Mallingg Commissario Cant. generali Salutem in authore Salutis. Cum nos in tuitoriae appellationis negotio quod in dicta Curia vertebatur, in∣ter mrum Robertum de Henney Rectorem ecclesiae S. Martini partem ut suggeritur appellantem ex parte una, & Mrum Radulfum mrum scolarum Cant. partem appellatam ex altera legitimè procedentes, dictam partem appellatam eo quod pars appellans praedictam appel∣lationem suam praefatae Curiae in hac parte suggestam, prout debuit, non probavit, ab examine dictae Curiae duxerimus dimittendum. Tenore praesentium vobis intimamus quod inhibitione quacunque sub dat' London' xii. Kalen. No. Anno Domini Millesimo trecen∣tesimo vicesimo tertio à Curia Cant. in hac parte impetrata, & vo∣bis directa non obstante, libere poteritis exequi quod est vestrum. Dat' London. xiijtio. Kalen. Aprilis Anno Domini supradicto. Scrutinie in Dunstans Tombe. Scrutinium factum circa feretrum beatissimi patris Dun∣stani Scriptura xija. Archiepiscopi, ex mandato Reverendissimi patris ac Dni Domini Willielmi Warham Cantuar. Archiepisc. & Domini Thomae Goldston sacrae paginae professoris, ejusdemque ecclesiae Prioris dignissimi Anno Domini 1508. die 22do Aprilis. VIcesimo die Aprilis Anno Domini 1508. quo die tunc accidebat coena Domini▪ ex mandato ipsius Domini Archiepisc. &
Prioris, deputati sunt tres vel quatuor de confratribus ad ejusmodi opus aptiores & ferventiores, ut in vespere, post quam fores ecclesiae essent clausae, ne laici hujusmodi negotio adessent, ad scrutinium faciendum circa feretrum sancti Dunstani, ut ipsi explorarent qua via faciliori possent ejus sacrae reliquiae videri: ea ratione ut omni ambiguitate & scrupulo semotis, oculata fide rei veritas probare∣tur. Hii quidem fratres in ipsa noctis tempestate non tam diligen∣ter quam prudenter ad id quidem perduxerunt opus, ut antelucnum oculis perspicere potuerunt arcam quandam plumbeam ubi sacrae ejus reliquiae recondebantur. Quae quidem arca deposita fuit & im∣mersa Situs Feretri. in opere lapideo feretri ex parte australi summi altaris sci∣tuati. Ea siquidem arca intus erat lignea exterius, interiusque plumbo undique cooperta & clavis omni in loco affixa, adeo ut in∣ter clavum & clavum non erat spatium relictum latitudinis huma∣nae palmae. Erat quoque haec arca longitudinis juxta longitudinem operis lapidei ipsius feretri, viz septem pedum, latitudinis autem circiter pedis cum dimidio. Eraque in omni sua parte ferreis li∣gamentis circumducta tutissimis adeo ut vix possit discerni via possibilis illam aperiendi. Confisi tamen in divino auxilio & sancti Patroni suffragio, instituit Dominus Archiepisc. cum Priore ut quidam confratres in sequenti nocte, laicis semotis, iterum opus aggrederentur. Quod & factum est. Sex enim de confratribus per Priorem ad hoc deputati una cum ope aliorum quos convocarunt ingenti sudore hanc arcam qu est maximi ponderis fecerunt supra opus lapideum sublevari. Id cum fecissent, tandem cum magna difficultate satagentes aneriorem partem arcae aperierunt quod pro∣fecto facere nequivissent nisi partem asseris quo in superiori parte arca claudebatur effringerent. Eo sane confracto licuit videre in∣terius ab uno fine arcae usque in aelium finem. Ibi verò patebat aspe∣ctui cista quaedam plumbea: quae quidem cista facta est non ex pla∣no plumbo, sed arte quadam pulcherime fabricata & plicata. Ea vero aperta, reperta est etiam & alia cista plumbea quasi tabefacta: quae putatur esse illa in qua ossa sancti Dunstani cum primum sepe∣liebatur recondebantur. Intra has duas cistas plumbeas cum aperi∣rentur Quidrepertum primò reperta est quaedam parva lamina plumbijacens supra pectus corporis. In qua quidem lamina continebatur haec scriptura.
Hic requiescit Sanctus Dunstanus Archiepiscopus. Et scribi∣tur hic titulus literis Romanis. Deinde repertus est pannus quidam lineus nitidus valde atque integer superpositus corpori sancti Dunstani. Quo sublevato, apparuit illud sanctissimum organum spiritus sancti indutum pontificalibus vetustate pro magna parte consumptis. Porro apparuit ibidem testa capitis quae & tangebatur & osculabatur tam à Domino Archiepiscopo qui valde mane in crastino sequenti viz. in vigilia Paschae aderat, quam à Priore ceterisque quamplurimis de conventu monachorum. Cujus quidem testae partem à reliquo divisam Dominus Archiepiscopus tradidit Priori ea ratione ut decenter adornaretur, ut inter reliquias eccle∣siae venerandam reponeretur. Denique videbantur & alia ossa diver∣sa tam de brachiis quam de costis, ac etiam nonnullae massae de carne ejusdem patroni nostri. Quae revera omnia odore redolebant sua∣vissimo. Ad istud non tam jocundum quam desideratissimum spe∣ctaculum affuere prope omnes de conventu. Ad hoc etiam invitati Testes. sunt per Dominum Archiepiscopum hi capellani de familia sua, viz. Prior Dovoriae Episcopus Suffraganeus ejus, nomine Iohan∣nes Thornton Doctor sacrae theologiae. mr Cuthbertus Tunstall, Doctor legum, Cancellarius ejusdem Domini Archiepiscopi. Mr Thomas Wellys, Doctor theologiae, Mr Robertus Wekys. M• An∣dreas in artibus mag. Magr. Iohannes Pers bacalarius in legibus. Hi verò vocati sunt ad videndum & testimonium per∣bibendum erum quae superius scripta sunt. Erant interea ad id ipsum advocati per Dominum Archiepiscopum tres notarii publici, puta mr Iohannes Baret scriba actorum praerogativae ecclesiae Cant. Mr Iohannes Colman scriba Consistorii Cant. & Mr Willielmus Potkyn scriba Iurisdictionis immediatae. Eos notarios Dominus Archiepiscopus requisivit ut singulis quae superius scripta sunt de scrutinio facto circa reliquias sancti Dunstani diligenter per eos inspis & consideratis, instrumentam publicum de eisdem confi∣cerent, idque complere super depositione testium praedictorum pol∣liciti sunt. Haec cum peracta fuissent, tunc ad mandatum Domini Archiepiscopi arca superius dicta iterum clausa est firmissimis tam opere ligneo quam plumbeo clavis quamplurimis affixa tuissimis. Idque factum est in praedicta vigilia Paschae. Nec fores ecclesiae
antea aperiebantur, quam confratres nostri id operis explevissent. A Grant or Demise of part of the demeasnesse of Re∣culver Monastery made by Archbishop Agel∣noth Scriptura xiija. to two of his Ministers. IN nomine Domini nostri Ihu Christi. Ego Aegelnothus pec∣cator, Servus servorum Dei, & minister ecclesiae Christi, An∣glorum quoque licet indignus Archiepiscopus. Notum volo esse ☧ omnibus nostrae mortalitatis Successoribus, quod quandam terram dominicam sanctae Mariae Raculfensis Monasterii, L. scilicet agros in praestariam annuo duobus ministris meis, Alfwoldo & Aedredo, ex consensu fratris nostri Givehardi Decani ejusdem ecclesiae sanctae matris Dei, ut illam terram habeant non longius quam ipsi placu∣erit Givehardus Dcanus. Decano, vel ejus Successori. Quamdiu vero eam tenuerint, singulis annis dent in ipso monasterio Deo famulantibus rectam de∣cimam frugum & omnium pecorum quae in ipsa terra nutriunt, & pro censu L. denarios, & de subjectis pascuis j. pensam caseorum & si quid fracturae contigerit. Vbi verò eidem fratri nostro De∣cano vel ejus successori visum fuerit ut illam terram possint fructi∣ficare dominicatui suo, recedant ab ea, absque querela & contra∣dictione, quia Dominica est sanctae Mariae, nec eam sibi vel poste∣ris suis ullo modo possint defendere. Quod si praesumpserint, & ipsi & fautores sui iram Dei & excommunicationem omnium Dei fidelium incurrant, & legem patriae Domino suo solvant. Hujus praestariae traditionis testes sunt fratres ejusdem Monasterii, & quidam milites mei qui subter sunt ordinatè descripti. Ego Givehardus subscripsi. Ego Fresnotus subannotavi.mon' Ego Tancrad' recognovi.mon' Ego Milo assignavi.mon' Ego Siward contestificavi.miles Ego Godri testis fui.miles Ego Wlfi.miles Ego Wlsige.miles Ego Radwine.miles. Ego Ordnoth.miles. Ego Alfric.miles. hog. Ego Osward.miles. Ego Aelfhelm.miles. Ego Lefsona.miles. Ego Aelfric.miles. quatm' Ego Sibriht.miles. Ego Aelwine.miles.
Ego Haimericus presbiter jubente Domino Agel∣notho Archiepiscopo hanc cartulam conscripsi die Nativitatis sancti Iohannis Baptistae. The Kentish manors, in the Conquerors time, belonging Scriptura xiiija. both to the Archbishop and Monkes of Canterbury, and recorded in the Booke of Doomsday. De maneriis Archiepiscopatus. De Stursaete. STursaete est manerium Archiepiscopi, & in Id est Tem∣pore Ed. Re∣gis. T. E. R. se de∣fendebat pro vii. sullinges, & nunc similiter, & est appretiatum hoc quod est in dominio xl. lib. Et nunc habet Archiep. xx. & v. burgenses, qui reddunt x. sol. de gablo, & ex his supradictis vij. sullin' habet Godefridus dapifer unum sulline de Archiepiscopo Tenitune, & est appretiatum C. sol. Adhuc autem & Vitalis habet inde unum jugum terrae de Ar∣chiep. & est appretiatum xxs. Hamo vero tenet inde similiter di∣midium sulling' quod tenuit Alric Bigge à 'pore Archiepiscopi in T. E. R. & est appretiatum C•. Rodbertus de Hardes tenet inde unum jugum terrae ex isdem sull' & est appretiatum xxxs. & ex his vij. sullin' habet Archiep. unum sull' apud sanctum Martinum; & de eodem sullino habet Radulfus Camerarius in feodo medietatem de Archiepiscopo & valet iiijl. & dominium valet vijl. Et in Canterberi sunt vij. burgenses, qui reddunt huic manerio viijs. & iiij. denarios de gablo. Et inibi sunt iterum xxx. & ij. masurae & unum molendinum quae tenent clerici sancti Gregorii ad eorum ecclesiam Ibique ma∣nent xij. burgenses qui reddunt eis xxxv•. & molen linum red∣dit vs. Adhuc etiam tenet Aegelwardus iij. juga in  unde
reddidit T. E. R. & adhuc reddit altari sanctae Trinitatis xijs. & est appretiatum xls. Albold vero tenet de supradictis sull' unum jugum Wic, & est de terra monachorum sanctae Trinitatis, quod est appretiatum xxxs. Hic finitur hundredus de Stursaete. In Fordwic habet Archiepiscopus vij. mansuras terrae quae mo∣do non faciunt servitium ad mare ut in T. E. R. De Wingeham. Wingeham est proprium manerium Archiepiscopi & in T. E. R. se defendebat pro xl. sull' & nunc pro xxx. & v. & valet Cl. hoc quod Archiepiscopus habet inde. Et ex isdem sull' habet Willielmus de Archis unum sull' Fleotes ab Archiepiscopo in feodo & valet vjl. Et Vitalis habet j. sull' & valet xlvs. Wibertus & Arnoldus habent iij. sull' q' valent xijl. Et Heringod habet inde j. sull' decem agros minus & valet xls. Et Godefridus Archibalistarius habet inde j. sull' & dimid' & valet Cs. De Burne. Burnes est proprium manerium Archiep. & in T. E. R. se de∣fendebat pro vj. sull' & nunc similiter, & est appretiatum xxxl. & est in Handret de Berham. De Petham. Peteham est proprium manerium Archiep, & in T. E. R. se defendebat pro vij. sull', & nunc similiter, & est appretiatum xxl. Et ex istis sull' habet Godefridus Dapifer dimid. sull' quod per∣tinet. ad vestimea monachorum, id est Suurtling. Et Nigellus habet unum sull' & unum jugum terrae quae est ap∣pretiata xls. Hoc est in hundredo de Peteham.
De Aldintune. In hundredo de Bilicholt habet Archiepiscopus unum maneri∣um, Aldintune, & in T. E. R. se defendebat pro xxj. sull', & nunc pro xx. & valet Cl. & vij. Et ex his habet Will' de Archis unum manerium stutinges quod Aelfere tenuit de Archiep. & tunc defendebat se proj. sull' & di∣mid', & nunc pro uno, & valet xl. Item ex supradictis sull' de Aldintune habet Archiep. dimid. jugum & dimid. virgam in Limines & valet xijl. & tam' qui tenet reddit xvl. de firma. In Rumene sunt xxv. burgenses qui pertinent ad Aldintune. De Limminge. In Limwarlethe in hundret de Noniberge habet Archiepisc. in suo dominio unum manerium Limminges quod T. E. R. se defendebat pro vij. sull' & nunc similiter. Rodbertus filius Watsonis habet ex his ij. sull' in feodo. Et Rodbertus de Hardes dimid. sull'. Et Osbertus Pasfora dimidium jugum. Et in maresco de Rumene jacet unum sull' Aelmesland, de elemosina monachorum sanctae Trinitatis, & non est de supra∣dictis sull'. Et de isto sull' habet Will' Folet unum jugum, id est, Sturtune. Et de eodem sull' habet supradictus Rodbertus tria juga. i. Ordgareswice, & Cassetvisle & Eadruneland. De Raculf. Raculf est manerium Archiepiscopi & in T. E. R. se defen∣debat pro viij. sull' & est appretiatum xl. & ij. lib. & v. sol. tres minutes minus. De Northewode. Nordewode est manerum Archiepiscopi & in T. E. R. se d∣fendebat pro xiij. sull', & nunc similiter, & est appretiatum Ll. vs.
Et ex iis sull' habet Vitalis de Canturberie unum sull' & unum jugum, & in Tanet sull' & dimid. & etiam in Macebroc habet xij. agros & di' sull' ab Archiepiscopo. Et Ezilamerth & tota haec terra est appretiata xiiijl. & vs. & vjd. Haec maneria habet Archiepisc. in hundret de ipso Raculf. De Boctune, Boctuna est manerium Archiepiscopi & in T. E. R. se defen∣debat pro v. sull' & di' & nunc similiter, & fuit appretiatum in T. E. R. xl. Et Archiepiscopus habet inde Cs. & xv. & iij. denarios de gablo. Nunc autem valet xxl. Sed tamen reddit xx. & v. lib. de firma. & Archiepiscopus habet suum gablum sicut prius. Ricardus Constabularius habet inde unum manerium Grave∣nai in feodo ab Archiepiscopo quod in T. E. R. se defendebat pro uno sull', & nunc similiter & valet vjl. Hanc terram habet Archiepise. in Hundret de Boctune. De Taeneham. Teneham est manerium Archiepiscopi & in T. E. R. se de∣fendebat pro v. sull' & dimid. & nunc similiter, & est appretia∣tum Ll. Dimidium sull' terra tenet Godefridus de Melling in scapai ab Archiepiscopo quod valet iiijl. & tn' reddit Cs. Oswardus vero tenuit hoc idem sull' ab Archiepiscopo Cantu∣arberiae in T. E. R. Hanc praedictam terram habet Archiepis∣copus in Hundret de Tenham. De Cerringes. Cerringis est proprium manerium Archiepiscopi & in T. E. R. se defendebat pro viij. sull', & nunc pro vij. quia Archiepisc. habet aliud ad suam propriam carrucam, & valebat in T. E. R. xxl. & habet inde Archiep. iiijl. & vijs. de glabo. Nunc vero valet xxxl. sed tn' reddit xll. de firma. Et Archiep. habet inde gablum sicut prius.
De Plukele. In eodem Hundredo & in Lest de Wiwarleth habet Archiepis∣copus unum manerium Plukelai in dominio quod in T. E. R. se defendebat pro uno sull' & nunc similiter & valet xvl. & tam' reddit xxl. de firma. Haec maneria habet Archiepiscopus in Hun∣dret de Calehela. De Geldingeham. Gelingham est proprium manerium Archiepiscopi, & in T. E. R. se defendebat pro vj. sull' & est apretiatum hoc quod Archiepisc. habet inde in dominio x. & viij. lib. & hoc quod An∣scetillus de Ros & Rodbertus Brutinus habent xl•. Et tamen red∣dit Archiepiscopo de firma xx. & v. lib. & xviijs. Hoc maneri∣um est in hundredo de Certaham. De Meidestane. Maeidestane est proprium maneriam Archiepiscopi & in T. E. R. se defendebat pro x. sull'. Et ex iis tenet Radulfus u∣num sull' quod est apretiatum ls. Et Willielmus frater Episcopi Gundulfi ij. sull', & sunt apretiat' xl. Et Anscetillus de Ros unum sull' quod est apretiatum lxs. Et duo homines habent inde j. sull', qui reddunt altari sanctae Trinitatis xvjs. & tam valet illud sull' xxs. Hoc manerium habet hundret in seipso. De Nordflita. Nordflita est manerium Archiepiscopi, & in T. E. R. se defendebat pro vj. sull' & nunc pro v. & est apretiatum xx. & vij. lib. Sed tamen ille qui tenet reddit inde de firma xxx. & vijl. Et infra leugam de Tonebrig est inde tantum quod est apre∣tiatum xxxs. Hoc manerium & Meppaham jacent in hundredo de Tollentr'.
De Bixle. Bixle est manerium Archiepiscopi & in T. E. R. se defen∣debat pro iij. sull' & nunc pro ij. & est apretiatum xxl. & red∣dit xxxl. & viij•. & est in hundredo de Ealmestrou, & in di∣midio Led de Sutune iiij. sull'. De Earhede. Earhede est manerium Archiepiscopi, & in T. E. R. se de∣fendebat pro iiij. sull' & nunc similiter. Et Osuvardus tenuit illud ab Archiep. in T. E. R. & est apretiatum xvjl. & tam▪ reddit xxjl. Hoc manerium habet Archiep. in hundredo de Lite∣let j. sull. & dimid. De Bradestede. Bradestede tenuit Wlnod cild ab Archiep. T. E. R. Et nunc tenet illud Haimo ab isto Lanfranco Archiepisc. & tunc defen∣debat se pro uno sull' & dimid. & nunc similiter, & est apretia∣tum xvijl. Istud manerium est in hundredo de Hostreham. De Otteford. Otteford est manerium Archiep. & in T. E. R. se defende∣bat pro viij. sull' & nunc pro totidem. Et est apretiatum lxl. Et hoc quod Haimo inde tenet est apretiatum lxs & x. & hoc quod Rodbertus interpres, & Gosfridus de Ros inde tenet viijl. & xs. Et hoc quod Ricardus de Tonebrig inde tenet xl. & xxiij. porcos. De Sunderhersce. Sunderhersce est manerium Archiepisc. quod Godwinus tenuit T. E. R. injuste & Archiepiscopus iste Lanfrancus explatita∣vit illud contra Episcopum Bajocensem juste per concessum Regis, & in T. E. R. se defendebat pro uno sull' & dimid. & nunc
similiter. Et est apretiatum xviijl. & tam' qui tenet illud reddit inde xx. & iiij. lib. & unum equitem de firma Archiepiscopo. Haec muneria sunt in hundredo de Codesede. De Wroteham. Wroteham est manerium Archiepiscopi & in T. E. R. se de∣fendebat pro viij. sull' & est apretiatum xx. & iiij. lib. & tam' ille qui tenet reddit inde de firma xxx. & v. lib. Et de iis prae∣dict. viij. sull' tenet Will' Dispensator j. sull' quod est apretiatum iijl. Et Gosfridus de Ros aliud quod est apretiatum iijl. Et Fare∣manus unum sull' & dimid. & est apretiat' Cs. Et hoc quod Ri∣cardus habet xvl. Hic finit hundredus de Wroteham. De Mellingetes. Mellingettes est manerium Archiep. & in T. E. R. se defen∣debat pro ij. sull' & nunc similiter, & est apretiatum ixl. & tam' reddit de firma Archiepiscopo xvl. Hoc manerium habet Archie∣piscopus in hundredo de Lavercefeld. De Derente. Dairente est manerium Archiepiscopi, pro ij. sull' se defen∣debat in T. E. R. & nunc similiter. Et est apretiatum xvl. Et xs. habet inde Ricardus infra Castellum suum, & tam' Archie∣piscopus habet in firma sua xviijl. De Einesforde. Einesford est manerium Archiepiscopi, & in T. E. R. se de∣fendebat pro vj. sull', & nunc similiter, & nunc tenet Radulfus filius Hospaci ab Archiepiscopo, & est apretiatum xxl. Et ex eo habet Ricardus de Tonobrig tantum quod est apretiatum iijl.
De Hulecumbe. Hulecumbe tenuit Aelferus in T. E. R. de Archiepiscopo, & defendebat se pro ij. sull' & dimid. & nunc tenet Comes de Os de Archiepiscopo, & defendit se pro ij. sull', & est apretiatum xjl. Archiepiscopus habet iiij. praebendas ad Nuventune, & sunt apretiatae vjl. Tota summa Clxxx. & vij. sull' & dimid. Incipiunt maneria Monachorum in Kent. NOrdunda est manerium monachorum Sanctae Trinitatis, & est de cibo eorum, & est de hundredo de Cantuarberia, & in T. E. R. se defendebat pro uno sull'. & ei subjacent C. Burgen∣ses iij. minus qui reddunt viijl. & vjd. de gablo, & est apretiatum x. & vij. lib. Hc manerium est de Hundret de Cantuar. De Eastrege. Eastrege est manerium monachorum, & de cibo eorum, & in T. E. R. se defendebat pro vij. sull' & nunc similiter. Et in alia parte est dimid. sull' & unum ioc'. & v. aeceres. Gedinges, & valet xxx. & vij. lib. & x•. & iijd. inter totum. De Tilemannestune. Willielmus Folet tenet j. manerium Tilesmannestune ab Ar∣chiepiscopo, & hoc est de terra monachorum, & in T. E R. se defendebat pro j. sull', & nunc facit similiter, & valet xxxs. Iste idem Will' habet de praedicta terra dimid. sull' ab Archie∣pise. in Fenglesham, quod tenuit Lenenot in T. E. R. ab Ar∣chiepisc. & valet xxs. Iste idem Will' habet adhuc ab eod. Archiepisc. et de praedicta terra monachorum Stepenberga quod se defendebat T. E. R. pro
dimid' sull', & nunc facit similiter. Et Godwinus tenuit illud in temp. E. R. ab Archiepisc. Aedzi & valet xxxs. Bocland se defendit pro j. jug. Hic finit hundret de Estrege. De Sandwic. Sandwic est manerium sanctae Trinitatis, & de vestitu Mo∣nachorum, & est Leth & Hundredus in seipso, & reddit Regi servitium in mare sicut Dovera, & homines illius villae antequam Rex eis dedit suas consuetudines reddebant xvl. quando Archi∣episcopus recuperavit reddebat xll. & xl. milia de alecibus. Et in praeterito anno reddidit Ll. & allecia sicut prius. Et in isto anno debet reddere lx. & x. lib. & allecia sicut prius. In T. E. R. erant ibidem Ccc. & vij. mansura. Nunc autem lx. & xvj. plus. De Muneketune. Munechetun est manerium monachorum & de cibo eorum, & in T. E. R. se defendebat pro xx. sull', & nunc se defendit pro x. & viij. & est apretiatum xll. Hoc praedictum manerium est in hundredo de Tenet. De Eadesham. Edesham est manerium monachorum sanctae Trinitatis & de cibo eorum & in T. E. R. se defendebat pro xvij. sull' & nunc similiter, & de gablo reddit xvjl. & xvjs. & iiijd. & valet xxxl. de firma & Cs. de gersuma. Et ex iis sull' habet Rodbertus filius Watsonis ij. id est, Ege∣dorn qui valent vijl. & tamen qui tenet reddit inde viijl. Et Rogerius tenet ex his j. sull' ad Beraham q' valet iiijl. Hoc manerium habet hundret in seipso & in Laed est de aestraie. De Iiecham. Iecham est manerium monachorum & de cibo eorum, & in
T. E. R. se defendebat pro iiij. sull', & nunc similiter, & est apre∣tiatum xxx. & ij. lib. Et hoc quod Will' de Hedesham habet inde viz. j. sull' ad Rocinges valet vijl. Hoc manerium est in hundret de Dunahamford. De Saesaltre. Saesealtre est Burgus monachorum & de cibo, & proprie de coquino eorum. Et Blittaere tenet illud de monachis. Ibique est terraduarum carrucarum & est apretiatum Cs. Hoc manerium in nullo hundret est. De Certeham. Certaham est manerium monachorum & de vestitu eorum & in T. E. R. se defendebat pro iiij. sull', & nunc similiter, & est apretiatum xx. & v. lib. & tamen reddit xxxl. Godmeresham. Godmaeresham est manerium monachorum & de vestitu eorum & in T. E. R. se defendebat pro viij. sull' & est apretiatum xxl. sed tamen reddit xxx. Hic sinitur hundretus de Feleberga. De Cert. Cert & manerium monachorum, & de vestitu corum & in T. E. R. se defendebat pro iij. sull' & nunc similiter & est apre∣tiatum xxl. Istum Cert est hundret. De Litlecert. Litelcert iterum est manerium monachorum & de cibo eorum quod in T. E. R. se defendebat pro iij. sull', & nunc pro ij. & dimid. & valet viijl. Et ex iis habet Will' fil' Hermenfridi dimid. sull', id est, Pette, ab Archiepiscopo in feodo, & reddit inde altari sanctae Trinitatis xxl. pro omnibus consuetudinibus & valet xls.
De Apeldre. In Letd de Limware jacet hundret de Blacctune, in quo Rod∣bertus de Rumene tenet ad firman j. manerium Apeldre, & est de cibo monachorum S. Trinitatis & in T. E. R. se defendebat pro ij. sull' & nunc pro j. & valet xijl. Sed tamen reddit xvjl. xvjs. & vijd. De Welle. Waell v'est manerium monachorum sanctae Trinitatis, & est de ibo eorum, & in T. E. R. se defendebat pro vij. sull' & nunc pro v. & valet xxiiijl. & iiijd. & tamen reddit xjl. de firma. Hoc manerium & Litlecert sunt in hundret de Calehele. Holingeburne. Holingburne est manerium monachor. & de cibo eorum, & in T. E. R. se defendebat pro vj. sull' & nunc similiter. Et de isto manerio tenet Eps' Baiocensis dimid. sull' ab Ar∣chiepisc. per gablum, & postquam Eps' habuit hoc dimid. sull' nunquam reddit inde scottum. Et est appretiatum inter ttum hoc manerium xxxl. De Boctune. Ratel tenuit Boctune de Archiepiscopo Cantuarberiae & de∣fendebat sein T. E. R. pro dimid. sull', & istud dimid. sull' est & fuit de vj. sull' de Holingeburne. Nunc autem tenet illud Ra∣dulfus filius Toroldi ab Archiepisc. & est apretiatum xl•. Haec maneria sunt in hundret de Haihorna. De Merseham. Merseham est manerium S. Trinitatis & de cibo eorum, quod T. E. R. se defendebat pro vj. sull', & quado Archiepus
eum recepit pro v. & dimid. & modo pro iij. & Hugo de Mund∣ford habet ex iis unius medietatem & valet xviijl. Hoc manerium jacet in Limwarled in hundret de Langebrige. De Aelmesland. Rodbertus filius Watsonis tenet de Priore Cantuarberiae Ael∣mesland ad firmam, & praecepto ejusdem Prioris reddit firmam secrestano ejusdem ecclesiae. De Werehorne. In Limwarled & in hundret de Hamme habent monachi S. Trinitatis de vestitu eorum j. manerium Werchorne j. sull', & est apretiatum lxs. De Broke. In Laed de Wiworlaed & est hundret in quo tenet Rodbertus de Rumene j. manerium Broc ad firmam de cibo monachorum, & pro j. sull' defendebat se, & nunc pro dimidio, & valet iiijl. De Langeport. Idem Rodbertus habet in Langport de terra monachorum j. sull' & dimid. de Archiepisc. quod idem Archiepisc. diratioci∣navit contra Epm' Baiocensem. Et Godwinus Comes tenuit illud, ibique pertinebant & pertinent xx. & j. burgenses, de quibus Rex in mare habet servitium, ideoque quieti sunt per totam An∣gliam, exceptis tribus forisfacturis quae habet Rodbertus in Ru∣mene. Adhuc vero pertinet ibi j. jugum terrae, & haec omnia va∣lent xvjl. De Niwendenne. In Limwarlaed & hundred de Selebrichtindaene habet Archie∣piscopus de terra monachorum j. manerium Niwendene in domi∣nio
quod in T. E. R. tenuit Leofric de praeterito Archiepiscopo, & pro j. sull' se defendebat & subjacebat Saltwade. Nunc est apretiatum viijl. & x•. garsumae. De Berewicke. In Limwarlaed in Hundred de Strate habet Will' de Edesham de terra monachorum j. manerium de Archiepiscopo Berewic quod tenuit Godricus Decanus & pro dimid' sull' se defendebat & nunc similiter, & est apretiatum xjl. De Hede & Saltwde. In Limwarlaed in Hundred de Hede habet Hugo de Munford de terra monachorum j. manerium Saltwode de Archiepiscopo, & comes Godwinus tenuit illud & tunc se defendebat pro vij. sull' & nunc sunt v. & tam' non scottent nisi pro iij. & in Burgo de Hede sunt cc. & xxv. burgenses qui pertinent huic manerio, de quibus non habet Hugo nisi iij. forisfacta, & est apretiatum xxviijl. & vjs. & iiijd. De Prestetune. Prestetune est manerium monachor. & est de victu eorum, & in T. E. R. se defendebat pro j. sull' & nunc similiter, & est apretiatum xvl. Hoc manerium est in hundred de Feversham. De Liveland. Liveland est terra monachorum, quam Ricardus Constabulari∣us tenet in feodo ab Archiepiscopo, & Decanus Cantuarberiae habuit & tenuit eandem terram & in T. E. R. se defendebat pro j. sull' & nunc similiter, & valet xxs. Haec maneria habent monachi in hundred de Feversham. De Leanham. Lenham est manerium monachor. quod Godefridus de Mellin∣ges
tenet ab Archiepiscopo in feodo & in T. E. R. se defende∣bat pro ij. sull' & nunc similiter, & valet viijl. & tam' reddit xijl. & xs. de firma. De Fearnlege. Fernlege est manerium monachorum, & est de cibo eorum, & in T. E. R. se defendebat pro vj. sull' & est appretiatum xxijl. Et hoc quod Abel monachus inde tenet per jussum Archiepiscopi & apretiatum vjl. Et hoc quod Ricardus inde habet infra leugam suam iiijl. & de istis vj. sull' tenet Godefridus dapifer dimid. sull' quod est apretiatum ixl. Hoc manerium habent monachi in hundred de Maedestane. De Pecham. Pecham est manerium S. Trinitatis de cibo monachorum & in T. E. R. similiter fuit, & se defendebat pro vj. sull' & ex istis habet nunc Ricardus de Tunebrige ij. sull' & j. jugum. Et ex istis ij. sull' & joco isto nunquam scottavit Ricardus postquam habuit ea. Et in T. E. R. fuit hoc manerium apretiatum xijl. & nc viijl. Et praefatapars Ricardi valet iiijl. Et in Stotingeberga quod tenuit Edricus de E. R. est dimid. sull' unde ipse Edricus dabat Scottum ad Pecham spontanee, non quod pertineret ad sanctam Trinitatem, nec ad monachos. Hoc manerium est de hundred de Litelfeld. De Meapeham. Mepaham est manerium monachorum, & de cibo eorum, & in T. E. R. se defendebat pro x. sull' & est apretiatum xxvjl. & infra leugam Ricardi habetur tantum quod est apretiatum xviijs. & viijd. Hoc manerium habent monachi in hundred de Toltetem. De Cliva. Cliva est manerium monachorum & de vestitu eorum & in
T. E. R. se defendebat pro ij. sull' & dimid. & est apretiatum xvjl. Hoc manerium est in hundred de Scamele. De Orpintune. Orpintuna est manerium monachor. & de vestitu eorum & in T. E. R. se defendebat pro iij. sull' & nunc pro ij. sull' & di∣mid. & est apretiatum xxvl. & tamen reddit de firma xx. & viij. lib. Et in hoc eodem manerio tenet Malgerus ab Archiepiscopo iij. juga terrae quae quidem liber homo tenuit in T. E. R. & haec tria juga non scottabant cum hoc manerio & sunt de explacitatione quam fecit Archiepiscopus contra Epm' Baiocensem per conces∣sum Regis. Et illa iij. juga sunt appretiata Ls. & ex iis eisdem sull' habet Dirmannus dimid. sull' ad Kestane. De Saendlinge. Elfgaet tenuit Saendlinge ab Archiepiscopo in T. E. R. & nunc tenet Hugo nepos Herberti ab Episcopo Baiocen. & defen∣debat se in T. E. R. pro j. sull' & dimid. & nunc similiter, & est appretiatum viijl. Haec maneria sunt de hundred Aelmestrin & sunt in medio Led de Sudthune. De Fremingeham. Fremingeham est manerium monachor. & de vestitu corum quod Ansgodus Rubitoniensis tenet ab Archiepiscopo, & tn'red∣dit firmam monachis & in T. E. R. se defendebat pro j. sull' & nunc similiter, & est appretiatum xjl. Hoc manerium est in hundred de Clacstane. De Gravenea. Graven est manerium monachor. & de vestitu eorum quod Richardus Constabularius tenet in feodo ab Archiepiscopo, &
tamen reddit firmam monachis, & pro j. sull' se defendit, & jacet in hundred de Boctune. De Hlose. Hlose est manerium monachorum & de vestitu eorum & pro j. sull' se defendit quod Abel monachus tenet & firmam mona∣cis reddit. Hoc sull' jacet in vj. sull' de Fernlege. De Surlinge. In Surlinge est dimid. sull' & pertinet ad vestitum monachor. quod Godefridus Dapifer tenet & firmam reddit. De Huntindune. Huntindune est manerium monachorum & de vestitu eorum & defendit se pro dimid. sull' quod Godefridus Dapifer tenet & & firmam reddit. Istud dimid. sull' est de vj. sull' de Fernlege. De Burricestune. Burgericestune tenent Wlfricus & Cole & est ibi dimid. sull' & reddunt inde Cs. altari S. Trinitatis. Hoc dimid. sull' est de x. sull' de Meidestane. Tota summa Cxxx. & iij. sull' & dimid.
The Record of Archbishop Winchelsey his Inthroni∣zation, Scripturae xvj•. shewing in and after what forme the Archbishops of Canterbury anciently were inthronized: and thence intitled. Forma Inthronizationis Archiepiscopi. Die dominico post festum sancti Michaelis, viz. vjto. No. Octob. Anno Dom. 1294. Archiepiscopus Inthronizatus fuit ab Henrico tunc Priore ecclesiae Christi Cantuar. forma sequenti. EOdem die summo mane, conventus primam, & totum servi∣tium usque ad magnam missam celebrarunt, & postea, cappis induti, in choro Dominum Archiepiscopum expectarunt qui in manerio conventus apud Chertham illa nocte & per quinque dies praecedentes moram fecerat continuam. Cumque venisset Archiepiscopus ad portam Cimiterii de equo descendit, & Prior sacris indutus pallium ipsius Archiepiscopi de manu cujusda clerici ejusdem Archiepiscopi in panno mundo plicatum recepit, & dictum pallium deplicavit & illud Capellano prius cum Con∣ventu revestito tradidit deferendum, qui in vase argenteo panno serico candidissimo cooperto pallium deplicatum, manu erecta, conventu praecedente coram Archiepiscopo & Priore ad magnum altare solempniter deportavit, & super illud posuit. Conventu vero in Choro remanente Archiepiscipus ante magnum altare se prostravit orando. Completa oratione & data populo benedictione, Cantor T Deum incepit. Pallio vero super altare remanente, & Sedes lignea Archiepiscopi. conventu in choro Te Deum canente Archiepiscopus ad sedem suam ligneam n choro interim declinavit. Quo cantato, Prior, deinde singuli per ordinem ad altare accedentes pallium oscula∣bantur deinde Archiepiscopum. Hiis peractis pallium in Vesti∣arium delatum est: & Archiepiscopus ad cameram suam decli∣navit.
Cumque Dominus Rex de Sancto Augustino venisset, & ecclesiam intrasset, Archiepiscopus solempnioribus pontificalibus in Vestiario indutus & pallio redimitús, cum Priore, & tribus Diaconis, & tribus Sub. diaconis Cardinalibus chorum intravit. Ad cujus introitum, Cantor Bs' Deum time incepit, quod conven∣tus Subdiaconi Cardinales. solempniter decantavit. Iuterim verò Archiepisc. & Prior & praedicti Ministri Altaris stationem fecerunt retro magnum eretrum bea∣ti Blasii. Sedes marmo∣rea. altare sub feretro beati Blasii coram sede marmorea versi ad Ori∣entem. Rex verò juxta sedem praedictam stando cum multis no∣bilibus Regni Archiepiscopum expectavit Rseio verò percantato, Prior subjunxit collectam. Dominus qui de excelso coelorum. & dicta collecta, Prior Archiepiscopum usque ad praedictam sedem marmoream perduxit. Et facta modica statione coram sede, Prior subjunxit aliam collectam. Omnipotens sempiterne Deus. Dicta verò collecta, Prior dictum Archiepiscopum inter brachia sua reverenter recepit, & ipsum in sede praedicta intronizavit per verba subscripta quae legit in cedula quam manu tenebat. In Dei nomine Amen. Authoritate ejusdem ego Henricus Prior istius ecclesiae Christi Cantuar. intronizo te Dominum Robertum Archiepiscopum in hac Cant. ecclesia, in qua idem Dominus noster Iesus Christus custodiat introitum tuum ex hoc nunc & usque in seculum Amen. Lecta cedula vocatisque testibus, Prior rogavit quendam notarium publicum quod praemissa omnia in publicam formam redigeret, ad memoriam futurorum. Hiis peractis, octo monachi cantum Benedictus coram Archiepiscopo in Cathedra sedente sub feretro sancti Blasii alternatim decanta∣verunt. Quo cantato, Prior collectam subjunxit. Omnipotens sempiterne Deus. Qua dicta, Cantor Of sicium missae de Trinitate solempniter incepit. Archiepiscopus coram sede sua versus ad Orientem incepit Gloria in excelsis, & postea ibidem collectam missae subjunxit, & lecto Evangelio, Credo ibidem incepit, & postea Dominus vobiscum ibidem subjunxit. Cantato verò offi∣cio, de sede sua descendit, & ante magnum Altare venit, & oblationem panis & vini à Cantore prout moris est recepit, & ex∣tunc totam missam ibidem complevit, nec postea illo die ad sedem suam est reversus. Missa celebrata indulgentias populo concessit, & sacris vestibus in vestiario exutus, cameram suam intravit,
& vestibus festivalibus ad aulam magnam in palatio suo decli∣navit pransurus. Rege verò autem ingresso discubuernt omnes & Aula magna Palatii. spendidè sunt refecti. Postmodum vero Rex & Archiepiscopus ac etiam omnes Praelati & Proceres cameram Archiepiscopi in Palatio sunt ingressi,——prout moris est post cibum sumpturi. Deinde Rex as S. Augustinum rediit, & Archiepisc. in camera sua remansit. Caeteri verò omnes ad propria cum gau∣dio sunt reversi. Praedictae verò intronizationi interfuerunt Do∣minus Edwardus Rex Angliae, & E. filius suus, & E. frater ejusdem Regis, ac etiam London'. Lincoln'. Hereford', Elyen', Norwicen', Roffen' & Dunelm' Episcopi. Et Glovec', Lincoln', Penebr', Marescal', Hereford' & Warewik' Comites, ac eti∣am innumerosa multitudo aliorum Praelatorum & Procerum Regni. A Grant of power delegated to the Prior of Christ-Church Scriptura xvja. by a Count Palatine, to create Notaries. VEnerabili in Christo ptri Priori ecclesiae Christi Cantuar. Bassyanus de Allyate de Mediolan' Dei gratia Comes Pala∣tinus Salutem & debitam diligentiam in commissis. Sagax hu∣manae Causae con∣cessionis. naturae discretio, memorid hominum labitate pensatâ, ne diuturnitate temporum quae inter contrahentes aguntur▪ oblivio∣nis defectui subjacerent, tabellionatus adinvenit officium, per quod contrahentium vota scribuntur & scripturae ministerio post∣modum longum servantur in aevum. Cum itaque ex parte vestra nobis extitit humiliter supplicatum, ut vobis potestatem creandi tres tabelliones seu not arios publicos concedere dignaremur. Nos Concessio. hujusmodi supplicationibus in hac parte favorabiliter annuentes, praefatam potestatem usque ad dictum numerum paernitati ve∣strae authoritate nobis & antecessoribus nostris à divis Imperato∣ribus super consiciendis tabellionibus seu notari is publicis concessa plenariè duximus concedendam, vestram paternitatem ad hu∣jusmodi potestatem obtinendam approbantes. Verum quia volu∣mus quod forma solita in creatione not ariorum observetur, ne Formalia crea∣tionis Notar.
minus idonei & insufficientes ad hujusmodi of sicium exercendum deputentur, diligenti examinatione praemissa, eosdem quos cre∣are volueritis per Pennam, Calamartum atque Cartam quae tunc in manibus tenebitis praesentialiter investiatis, recepto prius ab eisdem tribus sigillatim, sacri Imperii nomine, fidelitatis solitae, necnon & de ipso tabellionatus officio fideliter & legaliter exer∣cendo, corporali Iuramento. Dantes & concedentes unicuique illorum trium authoritate vobis, tenore praesentium, ut superius exprimitur, concessa, plenam licentiam & liberam potestatem Instrumenta, acta, prothocolla, & literas exemplandi, faciendi, copiandi & publicandi testes recipiendi, & examinandi ac pub∣licandi, testamenta conficiendi apperiendi & approbandi, con∣fessiones super quibuscunque contractibus audiendi & recipien∣di, & insinuandi & scribendi ultimas decedentium voluntates, tutores & curatores dandi, alimenta decernendi, decretum inter∣ponendi & faciendi ac scribendi quaelibet alia Instrumenta & scripturas sive contractus tam ultimarum voluntatum, quam quorumcunque aliorum negotiorum, & Tabellionatus officium libere, prudenter & fideliter ubilibet exercendi, & omnia alia & singula scribendi & faciendi, quae ad saepedictum officium spe∣ctare noscuntur vel etiam pertinere. Et ad unumquemque eo∣rundem trium cum necesse fuerit, in omnibus & singulis supra∣dictis, & quae ad of ficium pradictum pertinent liberè recurra∣tur. Forma autem Iuramenti per unumquemque eorundem trium talis erit, dicatur etiam sic cuilibet sigillatim. Tu jurabis ad Forma Iura∣menti pr notarium prae∣standi, sancta Dei Evangelia quod nunquam er is contrarius Romanae ec∣clesiae, nec imperio, nec nobis, nunquam falsam facies cartam. Testamentum autenticum & omnia ea quae autenticari debent non autenticabis in cartis abrasis, bombacinis vel papyris. Con∣tratus verò, acta causarum, testamenta, donationes, & omnia ea quae ad artem & officium notarii pertinent, prout audiveris & rogatus fuer is, manu propria, cum tuo nomine & signo scribes & utenticabis. Dicta quoque testium bona fide, sine fraude scribes & recipies, & generaliter omnia alia & singula quae ad ipsam artem & officium not' spectant juxta fidelitatem & officii consue∣tudinem fideliter ac integraliter observare jurabis. In quorum omnium testimonium & certitudinem pleniorem presens privi∣legium
in forma publici Instrumenti fieri mandavimus per nota∣rium infrascriptum, & nostri sigilli fecimus appensione muniri. Dat' & act' Lugd. in ecclesia maiori, sub anno Domini Millesi∣mo trecentesimo sexto, die v. mensis Martii, Indictione iv. tem∣pore Domini Clemen. P P. quinti anno primo, praesentibus dis∣cretis viris Albertino filio dicti Comitis laico & Vitale Fagiani clerico Medioln' Dioc. testibus ad hoc specialiter vocatis & rogatis. Et ego Willielmus Thomae dicti Coci de Ros clericus Here∣ford. Dioc. publicus sacri Romani Imperii authoritate Notar' omnibus praedictis interfui, & de dicti comitis mandato presens privilegium scripsi, & publicavi, meo∣que signo consueto signavi rogatus. A forme or faculty of a Notaries creation by vertue of the precedent delegation. HEnricus permissione divina Prior ecclesiae Christi Cantuar. Dilecto sibi in Christo Iohanni de Watford clerico Lincoln' Dios. Salutem, & in agendis viam veritatis. Hii sunt ad officia publica meritò promovendi, quos morum honestas, literarum peritia & factorum experientia sufficientes reddunt ad laborum fastigia, & solicitudines publicas subeundas. Cum igitur De∣minus Bassyanus de Alliate de Mediolano Comes Palatinus nobis potestatem creandi tres tabelliones seu notarios publicos authori∣tate eidem Domino Bassiano & antecessoribus suis à divis Im∣peratoribus super conficiendis tabellionibus seu notariis publicis concessa, plenariè duxerit concedendam, prout in literis suis patentibus inde confectis quarum tenor inferius describitur pleni∣us continetur. Nosque virtute potestatis ejusdem, cum exacta diligentiâ, servata formâ in eisdem literis contenta, Ma' Richar∣dum de Northon' Lincoln' Dioc', & Iohannem de Berham Can∣tuarien. Dioc' Tabelliones seu Notarios publicos nuper creavi∣mus, unumque adhuc creare, virtute potestatis ejusdem, tabelli∣onem seu notarium publicum valeamus: probitatis merita, &
sagacitatis industriam te idoneum redden' ad tabellionatus offi∣cium exercendum, quae & quem, diligenti examinatione prae∣missa in te invenimus, attendentes: recepto prius à te ad sancta Dei Evangelia corporaliter juramento super omnibus & singulis articulis servandis in praedictis patentibus literis contentis, & de tabellionatus officio fideliter & legaliter exercendo, te crea∣mus Tabellionem & N' publicum, ac de eodem officio per Pennam, Calamarium atque Cartam quae in manibus tenemus praesentialite investimus authoritate qua fungimur memoratâ Dantes & concedentes tibi plenam licentiam & liberam potesta∣tem faciendi & exercendi omnia & singula quae in eisdem paten∣tibus literis continentur, & ad Tabellionatus officium spectare noscuntur, vel etiam pertinere, & quod ad te, si necesse fuerit, in omnibus & singulis supradictis & quae ad praedictum officium pertinent liberè recurratur. Tenor autem praedictarum literarum talis est. Venerabili in Christo patri—Priori ecclesiae Christi Cant. Bassianus de Alliate de Mediolano Dei gratia Comes Pala∣tinus Salutem, &c. ut supra. In cujus Rei testimonium & cer∣titudinem pleniorem praemissa per Hugonem de Byford notarium publicum infrascriptum in hanc publicam formam redigi manda∣vimus & sigilli nostri appensione muniri. Dat' & act' apud Wale∣worth juxta Lamheth Anno Domini Millesimo trecentesimo nonc. Indictione octava, vicesimo septimo die mensis Martii, Praesen∣tibus discretis viris Iohanne de Teneth, Hugone de sancta Mar∣gareta, Alexandro de Sandwico monachis ecclesiae nostrae praedi∣ctae, Bertino de Twitham Ad. de Thrulegh armigeris nostris literatis testibus ad haec vocatis specialiter & rogatis. Et ego Hugo de Byford Clericus Hereford. Dioc. publicus authoritate Imperiali notarius, praemissis Iuramenti praestationi, creationi & investiturae concessioni & da∣tioni una cum testibus praedictis, anno, indictione, die & loco praedictis praesens interfui, & ea omnia prout supra scribuntur fieri vidi & audivi, & ad mandatum dicti Domini Prioris in hanc publicam formam redegi, meoque signo consueto signavirogatus.
The Kings writt forbidding such Notaries the exer∣cise of their office, and damning the credit of their Instruments, intituled Breve de Officio Tabellionis authoritate Imperiali non exercendo. REx Vi. &c. Ex parte Cleri & populi regni nostri gravis Immunis Angliae à sub∣jectione Im∣periali. relatio nostris auribus insonuit & tumultus, quod licet reg∣num nostrum Angliae ab omni subjectione imperiali sit immune, & ab origine mundi extiterit alienum, tanta tamen multitudo No∣tariorum authoritate imperiali officium publicum in Regno nostro praedicto, tam de hiis quorum cognitio ad nos & non ad alium pertinet, quam de aliis, exercentium crevit, quod nobis & juri coronae nostrae grave exheredationis periculum & incolis & habi∣tatoribus dicti Regni nostri dampnum irrecuperabile praesumitur evenire, nisi remedium apponetur in hac parte. Nos igitur vo∣lentes hujusmodi dampnis & periculis prout Iuramenti vinculo astringimur pro viribus obviare, & dictum regnum nostrum inde exuere, prout decet, tibi praecipimus quod in singulis locis infra Ballivam tuam ubi expedire videris publicè proclamari, & ex parte nostra firmiter inhiberi facias, ne quis hujusmodi Notarius, sub paena quae incumbit in causis, contractibus, seu aliis negotiis officium notarii exerceat quoquo modo. Facias atē in dictis locis publicari & districtiùs inhiberi, ne qui Archiepiscopi, Episcopi seu alii praelati vel eorum Ministri instrumentis hujusmodi No∣tariorum ex nunc faciend. fidem aliquam praebeant ullo modo. T. meipso apud Westm'. xxvj•. die April. Anno Regni nostri xiijtio.
A Composition made Anno 1242. between the Abbey Scriptura xvija. of St Austins, and the Priory of Christ-Church, about divers things, especially maritime customes at and about Minster and Sandwich. NOverint universi praesens scriptum inspectari quod cum in∣ter viros religiosos Dominum Robertum Abbatem & Con∣ventum S. Augustini ex parte una, & Dominum Rogerum Pri∣orem & Capitulum ecclesiae Christi Cant. ex altera super terris, redditibus, consuetudinibus maritimis juribus variis & diversis agitata esset diutiùs materia questionis, tandem de communi vo∣luntate & assensu partium, de consilio virorum prudentum ami∣cabiliter in hunc modum conquievit, viz. quod Abbas & Con∣ventus praenominati pro bono perpetuae pacis concedunt quod Prior & Capitulum memorati terras & redditus de feodo S. Augustini quas dicebantur hactenus occupasse de cetero habeant tam in Cant. quam extra. Ita tamen quod aequivalentes terras ac red∣ditus permutationis nomine alibi reeipiant ab eisdem. Simili modo concedunt Prior & Capitulum memorati Abbati & Con∣ventui praedictis in similibus similem permutationem. Ita tamen quod de caetero neutra pars terras vel redditus alterius partis in∣trabit, vel sibi appropriare praesumet, nisi licentia super hac petita prius & optenta. Item pro bono pacis concessum est à Priore & Capitulo antedictis quod de cetero ad Fletum de Menster per Fletum de Menster. flumen de Sandwico sit accessus per navigium & recessus, hoc adjecto, quod si in ipso flumine, ante dictum Fletum aliqua navis anchoram fixerit, vel levandae navis, vel negotiandi, seu merces alias transferendi causa se ibidem exoneravit, dicti Prior & Capitulam consuetudines maritimas habeant. In Fleto autem an∣tedicto nihil juris de caetero vendicabunt, sed omnes consuetudines & emolumenta liberè percipient Abbas & Conventus praedicti ratione fundi in eodem. Ita tamen quod tenentes dictorum Prio∣ris & Capituli liberi sint & quieti ab omni consuetudine de qua hactenus liberi esse consueverunt, nec dictum Fletum malitiosè
ampliabunt Abbas & Conventus praedicti in dictorum Prioris & Capituli detrimentum. Simili modo provisum est quod Prior & Capitulum memorati omnes consuetudines maritimas habeant in portu de Sandwico ex utraque parte Fluminis, secundum tenorem & usum cartarum suarum infra terminos in ipsis cartis contentos, quia sic hactenus usi sunt. Ita tamen quod dicti Abbas & Conven∣tus Villa de Sta∣nore. in villa sua de Stanore & in terris suis dominium habeant & usum consuetum: quod si in dicta villa de Stanor sive in terris dictorum Abbatis & conventus sive in flumine infra dictos termi∣nos inter quscunque personas discordiae vel contentiones emersc∣rint, secundum qualitatem delicti justitia super his siet sicut hacte∣nus fieri consuevit. Vltra locum autem qui vocatur Hennebrigge prope Stanor versus Clivesende, Ramesgate, Margate, Westgate, Hennebrigge. Clivesende. Ramsgate. Margate. West∣gate. sive in aliis terris dictorum Abbatis & Conventus tam in Tha∣neto quam extra, & ex alia parte maris in tenemento ipsorum de Northborne Idem Abbas & Conventus omnes consuetudines ma∣ritimas ratione applicationis & terrae suae percipient preterquam ut distinctum est Ita quod in mari nil juris vel consuetudinis mari∣timae percipient praeterquam ut distinctum est ratione applicationis & terrae suae, nec impedient nec procurabunt quo minus dicti Prior & Capitulum per suos Ministros in mari secundum tenorem carta∣rum suarum & usum, jura & consuctudines maritimas recipere & capere possunt, nec aliquam querent occasionem vel aliquid facient per quod dictorum Prioris & Capituli jura & consuetudines maritimae infra suos terminos maris & terrae in aliquo minuantur. Similiter dicti Prior & Capitulum ultra dictum locum qui dicitur Hennebrigge nil juris aut maritimae consuetudinis quae dictis Ab∣bati & Conventui ratione applicationis & terrae suae provenire pos∣sunt accipint, vel impedient nec procurabunt quo minus naves quae applicare voluerint ad terras dictorum Abbatis & Conventus applicent & consuetudines maritimas reddant quae ipsis ratione ap∣plicationis & terrae suae debent, nec aliquam quaerent occasionem vel facient aliquid per quod dictorum Abbatis & Conventus jura & consuetudines in terris suis in aliquo minuantur sed locis suis utrique libere utantur consuetis. Item concedunt liberaliter Prior & Capitulum memorati quod in vicula ipsorum praedicti Abbas
& Conventus & eorum familia propria——Item quo∣niam Navicula Pri∣or. & Con∣vent. per clericos recusatos à Capitulo sancti Augustini & à Capi∣tulo ecclesiae Christi Cant. aliquando ad monachatum admissos, & è converso, sepius consuevit discordiae fomes seminari, concessum est ab utrisque quod de caetero ex causa culpae vel defectus recusa∣tus ab alterutro capitulo à neutro recipiatur. A Composition between the same houses about a Scriptura xviij•. Kay and house at Fordwich. With such circumstances as are added by the Relator, Thorne, St Augustines Chronicler. A lieger booke of Christ-Church hath a copie of it in French. Vidi. ANno Domini Mcclxxxv•. die Lunae proximo post festum Translationis sancti Thomae Martyris sedata est discordia quae Caya & domus apud Fordwich mota fuerat inter Abbatem sancti Augustini & Priorem sanctae Trinitatis de quadam caya & domo aedificata in quodam prato apud Forwicum per Priorem sanctae Trinitatis, quae aedificia Abbas sancti Augustini destrui praecepit, quibus iterum per Priorem ibi∣dem aedificatis Abbas secundo funditùs evertit meremio & omnibus aliis ibidem inventis in Sturam. projectis. Vnde ad praedictam li∣tem pacificandam Dominis Henrico Episcopo de Verdun, Otes de Episcopus de Verdun. Otes de Gransonne. Stephanu de Pencestre &  nobiles. Gransonne, Stephano de Pencestr' & aliis nobilibus per Dominum Regem ad hoc specialiter assignatis, sub hac forma conquievit, quod Prior pro se & suis Successoribus: concessit quod in prato versus ecclesiam in Oriente de cetero aliquam domum alicujus aedificii sine gratiâ & licentiâ Abbatis nunquam levabit. Et quia praedictus Prior non potest bene esse sine domo super ripam de Fordwico pro suis vinis & aliis suis victualibus recipiendis & servandis Abbas praedictus concessit Priori & suis successoribus unam plateam in Fordwico super ripam situatam quae tenet in longitudine ix. perti∣catas
de xvj. pedibus & dimid. in latitudine xxij. pedes, reddendo inde Abbati S. Augustini unam Rosam in festo sancti Iohannis Bap∣tistae pro omnibus servitiis, sectis Curiarum, & omnibus aliis de∣mandis; donis, Iudiciis, executionibus & omnibus aliis delictis ibidem factis eidem Abbati semper salvis, sicut in aliis locis ejus∣dem villae idem Abbas habet vel solet habere Ita quod in dicto manso aliquas mercandizas, res vel victualia praeterquam propria bona ejusdem Prioris non recipiet nec permittet quoquo modo fore recepta Pro hac autem concessione Prior praedictus dedit Abbati & ecclesiae suae tres acras prati cum omnibus suis pertinentiis in Fordwico unde una acra jacet ex latere prati elemosinar' sancti Au∣gustini, & aliae duae jacent partim in prato ubi domus prius sic fuit levata, & partim in aliis locis prope pratum Abbatis, sicut bundae monstrant & testantur, Reddendo inde Priori unam Rosam in festo S. Iohannis Baptistae pro omnibus servitiis & demandis. Ordina∣tum Barrer. & Pi∣les. fuit etiam quod barrer' & piles per Abbatem in cursu aquae erectae super calsetum ibidem per Custodem quinque portuum de∣ponentur & illud calsetum per Abbatem & homines suos de Ford∣wico reparatum fiat communis Abbati, Priori, & Communitati villae praedictae, à quibus omnibus perpetuis futuris temporibus ad fugandum & cariandum debet sustentari Nec licebit Priori & successoribus suis in eadem villa de caetero aliquid perquirere de tenura Abbatis sine ejus voluntate vel successorum suorum. Et quia per istam compositionem seu ordinationem totum pratum in quo continetur quaedam walla vocata walla seu casea Cellerarii ecclesiae Walla Celle∣rarii eccles. Christi Cant. Christi Cant. quae continet xxti perticatas in longitud. & viginti pedes in latitudine data fuerat Abbati & Conventui siue quacunque for prisa in excambium pro platea apud Fordwicum ubi domus Pri∣oris & Conventus sanctae Trinitatis fuit aedisicata, nec poterant dicti Prior & Conventus extunc de Iure habere usum dictae Wallae ut prius habuerunt, super quo postea inter partes controversia orta per magnam compositionem sequentem provisum fuerat quod walla seu casea praedicta dictis Abbati & Priori communis ad curiandum & chaceandum quotiens necesse habuerint, & sibi viderint expe∣dire.
The forme of electing and installing the Prior of the Church of Canterbury. Scriptura xixa. STatuto die de Priore ligendo, congregatis omnibus fratribus in Capitulo, qui ad Capitulum commod' poterint venire; Do∣minus Archiepiscopus Capitulum intrabit cum solo Capellano suo, & proposito breviter verbo Dei, tanget de negotio electionis Prioris. Deinde praecipiet in virtute obedientiae & sub poena excommunica∣tionis maioris ipso facto incurrendae, ne aliquis à more, favore vel odio nominet aliquem in Priorem nisi illum quem magis idoneum & in spiritualibus & temporalibus esse crediderit circumspectum. Sub∣sequenter D. Archiepiscopus examinabit personaliter totum con∣ventum per singula capita. Et Capellanus suus scribet in rotulo no∣mina nominantium & nominatorum. Postea D. Archiepisc. deli∣berabit & conferet apud se illo die secundum Dominum & sanam & sanctiam conscientiamsuam, & prout in extremo judicio reddere voluerit rationem, de numero, zelo & merito nominantium, & idoneitate nominatorum in Priorem. In craslino verò Dominus Archiepisc. in pleno Capitulo illum quem maior & sanior pars Ca∣pituli nominaverit, in Priorem nominabit publicè ita dicens. In∣vocato nomine & auxilio sanctae Trinitatis & gloriosae virginis matris Christi, & omnium Sanctorum hujus ecclesiae nostrae Patro∣norum, ad laudem & honorem eorundum, fratrem N. de N. no∣minamus vobis Priorem. Nominatus verò statim surget, & in medio Capituli insufficientiam suam humiliter & instanter allega∣bit. Et statim praecentor incipiet. Te Deum Laudamus. Quo in∣cepto, omnes surgent, & conventu praecedente, & Domino Archi∣episc. & Priore sequentibus ibunt in ecclesiam solempniter cantan∣tes Te Deum. Et cum venerit in Chorum Dominus Archiepisc. Sllum Prio∣is. statim installabit Priorem in stallo suo ex parte Boreali. Quo facto Prior prosternat se super formam. Postea Dominus Archiepisc. in primo stallo chori ex parte australi expectabit quousque Te Deum percantetur. Quo finito, subjunget Dominus Archiepisc. Kyriel.
Christel. Kyriel. Pater noster. Et ne Nos. Salvum fac servum tuum. Esto ei Domine turris fortitudinis. Nihil proficiat inimicus in eo. Domine exaudi orationem meam. Domine vobiscum▪ Ore∣mus. Omnipotens sempiterne Deus miserere famulo tuo N. & dirige eum secundum tuam clementiam in viam salutis eternae, ut te donante tibi placita capiat, & tota virtute perficiat per Christum Dominum nostrum. Dicta itaque collecta omnes redibunt in Capi∣tulum, tam Dominus Archiepisc. quam Prior & conventus or∣dine quo supra. Et cum venerint in Capitulum antequam Dominus Locus Prioris in Capitulo. Archiepisc. sedeat, ponat Priorem in locum suum juxta sedem Ar∣chiepiscopi ex parte boreali. Et hiis expletis, Dominus Archiep. data benedictione conventui & populo redeat ad cameram suam in Palatio, & Conventus ad servitium divinum. Si verò Dominus Archiepisc. agens in remotis, non possit personaliter interesse electioni Prioris, tunc committet vices suas duobus fratribus de Ca∣pitulo Cant. ad audiendum & examinandum vota singulorum, si∣cut supra continetur. Et ipsi duo fratres scribent nomina nominan∣tium & nominatorum in Priorem. Et hujusmodi nomina inscriptis mittent vel portabunt Domino Archiepisc. sub sigillo communi Capituli ubicunque fuerit cra mare vel ultra. Et Dominus Ar∣chiepiscopus habita deliberatione & facta collatione ut praemittitur committet iterum vices suas alicui fratri de eodem Capitulo Cant. ad nominandum in Capitulo Priorem, & ipsum installandum in choro et ponendum in Capitulo in loco suo, juxta formam superius annotatam. The Chapters Confirmation of the Parsonages of Hakinton Scriptura xxa. and Tenham appropriated to the Archdeaconry of Canterbury by Stephen Langton the Archbishop. VNiversis sanctae matris ecclesiae filiis praesentes literas inspe∣cturis. I. Prior & Conventus ecclesiae Christi Cant. Salutem in Domino. Ad universitatis vestrae notitiam volumus pervenire nos cartam venerabilis patris nostri Domini S. dei gratia Cant. Archiepiscopi totius Angliae Primatis & sanctae Romanae ecclesiae
Cardinalis inspexisse sub hac forma. Vniversis sanctae matris eccle∣siae filiis praesentes literas inspecturis. S. permissione divina Cant. Archiepisc. totius Angliae Primas & sanctae Romanae ecclesiae Cardinalis Salutem in Domino. Curae pastoralis officium commis∣sum laudabiliter prosequemur, si mentis acumen & manus exer∣citium ad ea quae honorem Dei & ecclesiae profectum respiciunt soli∣citius convertamus. Ea propter Cantuariensis ecclesiae quae Metro∣polis est, cui authore Domino deservimus, in omnibus quae se∣cundum Deum possumus augmentare volentes honorem, & sup∣plere defectus, advertimus diligenter quod ecclesia illa quae inter Dignitas ec∣clesiae Cantuar. alias ecclesias Anglicanas obtinet principatum, utpote quae aliarum mater est & magistra, non nisi unum habet Archidiaconum, cujus Archidiaconatus proventus ita fuerunt hactenus tenues & exiles quod ipse, qui authoritate tantae ecclesiae inter alias plus habere di∣noscitur honoris, vix habere de suo possit ad expensas & sumptus necessarios competentes. Volentes igitur defectum hujusmodi qui Ecclesiae de Tenham & Hackington. in scandalum ecclesiae nostrae redundat salubri provisione supplere ecclesias de Tenham & Hackinton, quae ad patronatum nostrum spectare noscuntur, de voluntate & assensu Capituli nostri, mona∣chorum scilicet ecclesiae Christi Cant. in Capitulo existentium Ar∣chidiaconatui ipsi duximus in perpetuum uniendas, decernentes ut qui pro tempore Archidiaconatum illum obtinuerint ecclesias prae∣dictas, tanquam de corpore ipsius Archidiaconatus liberè possideat & quietè. Ad hoc cum actenus temporibus nostris de consuetudine sit obtentum quod Officialis noster Decanos constituerit in Diocesi Cant. qui constitutistatim tenebantur Cantuar. Archidiacono re∣spondere, volumus & de voluntate & assensu praedicti Capituli nostri statuimus ut de cetero Archidiaconi Cant. qui pro tempore fuerint Decanos constituant, & amoveant pro suae voluntatis ar∣bitrio prout melius viderint expedire in Dioc. memorata, & sibi respondeant sicut decet, cum absurdum sit ut alius eos constituat quam is qui eis debeat praeesse, & cui respondere tenentur, praeser∣tim cum ipsis referentibus corrigere debent caeterorum errata. Vt igitur haec omnia perpetuis temporibus stabilem obtineant firmita∣tem praesenti scripto sigillum nostrum duximus apponendum. A∣ctum Anno Domini Millesimo ducentesimo vicesimo septimo. mense
Decembris. Nos igitur haec omnia sicut à praememorato venerabili patre nostro S. Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo piè & rationabiliter pro∣visa sunt & concessa, quantum in nobis est, rata habemus & ac∣cepta. In cujus rei testimonium praesenti scripto sigillum nostrum apposuimus. Actum Anno Domini Millesimo ducentesimo vicesimo septimo, mense Decemb. An enlargement of the same Archdeacons Iurisdiction by the same Archbishop. Scriptura xxj•. S. Dei gratia Cant. Archiepiscopus totius Angliae Primas & sanctae Romanae ecclesiae Cardinalis. Dilectis filiis universis ec∣clesiarum Rectoribus per Cant. Dioc. constitutis Salutem, gratiam & benedictionem. Ad universitatis vestrae notitiam volumus per∣venire nos in Cantuariensi capitulo constitutos, de assensu & vo∣luntate ipsius Capituli, Prioris I. & Conventus ecclesiae Christi Cant. concessisse dilecto filio, magistro S. de Langton Archid. Cantuar. & successoribus suis, ut omnes ecclesiae parochiales Cant. Dioc. tam ad nostram quam ad Capituli nostri donationem spe∣ctantes, & earum Rectores, Capellani etiam tam perpetui quam annui, in morum correctione, & ecclesiarum visitatione caeteris∣que omnibus ad Archidiaconi officium spectantibus, eisdem in per∣petuum sint subjecti. Vnde vobis mandamus quatenus praefato Ar∣chidiacono & successoribus suis in praemissis de cetero intendatis. In cujus rei testimonium has literas nostras patentes vobis duximus transmittendas. Dat' Anno Domini Millesimo ducentesimo vice∣simo septimo, mense Decembris.
The same Archbishops Charter of Revocation of cer∣taine Scriptura xxij•. Churches in the times of Baldwin and Hubert his predecessors exempted from the Archdeaconry, intituled Carta S. Archiepiscopi de Revocatione ecclesiarum exemp∣tarum tempore Baldwini & Huberti, & de revocatione dignitatis Archidiaconatus. VNiversis sanctae matris ecclesiae filiis praesentes literas inspe∣cturis S. permissione divina Cant. Archiepisc. totius Anglia Primas, & sanctae Romanae ecclesiae Cardinalis Salutem in Domino. Sicut ea quae rationabiliter provisa fuerint & statuta robur optinere debent perpetuae firmitatis, sic si q' sint contra rationis tramitem attemptata digna correctione convenit emendari. Cum igitur nobis constet Archidiaconatum Cant. per abusum quorundam temporibus piae recordationis Baldewini & Huberti praedecessorum nostrorum, necnon & nostris temporibus in magna parte fuisse minus rationa∣biliter diminutum, quibusdam ecclesiis quae ad nostram seu capituli nostri donationem pertinent Archidiaconi Cant. Iurisdictioni se subtrahentibus tam in morum correctione, quam in ecclesiarum visitatione & ceteris pertinentibus ad officium Archidiaconi me∣morati. Nos volentes praedictum Archidiaconatum in statum me∣liorem & debitum reformare, de voluntate et assensu totius Capi∣tuli nostri, in ipso capitulo existentes statuimus, quod etiam prae∣senti scripto duximus confirmandum, ut de cetero omnes ecclesiae parochiales Cant. Diec. tam ad nostram quam ad Capituli nostri donationem spectantes, et earum Rectores Archidiacono Cantuar. quicunque pro tempore fuerit in perpetuum sint subjecti, tam in morum correctione, quam in ecclesiarum visitatione et ceteris om∣nibus quae ad Archidiaconi officium spectare noscuntur, non obstante exceptione quae facta fuisse preponitur à memoratis antecesseribus Capellae de Hakinton & Lamheth. nostris Baldwino viz. Et Huberto occasione capellarum de Hakin∣tun
& Lamheth quas ipsi in praejudicium Cant. ecclesiae constru∣ere nitebantur, praesertim cum talis exemptio potius fuerit vela∣men malitiae quam libertas, & audaciam frequentiùs praestitit delinquendi, cum etiam eaedem capellae per sententiam Apostolicam fuerint demolitae, & sententiatum fuerit illa omnia irritanda quae occasione ipsarum fuerant attemptata, sicut in rescripto Apo∣stolico contineri perspeximus evidenter. Vnde volumus & fir∣miter praecipimus omnibus Rectoribus ecclesiarum praedictis, & Capellanis eorum tam annuis quam perpetuis ut magistro Simoni Archidiacono Cant. & ejus successoribus Cant. Archidiaconis, in hiis quae ad officium Archidiaconi pertinent decetero sint sub∣jecti, debitam eis in omnibus reverentiam & obedientiam, tan∣quam Archidiaconis impendendo. In cujus Rei testimonium pre∣sens scriptum sigilli nostri munimine duximus roborandum. A∣ctum Anno Domini Mo. CCo. vicesimo septimo, mense Decem∣bris. Valt'. A personall Composition betweene the Chapter Scriptura xxiija. and the same Archdeacon touching Juris∣diction in the Vacancy. VNiversis sanctae matris ecclesiae filiis ad quos praesens scrip∣tum pervenerit Rogerus Prior & Capitulum ecclesiae Christi Cantuar. Salutem in Domino. Noverit universitas vestra quod cum contentio verteretur inter nos R. Priorem & Capitulum ec∣clesiae Christi Cantuar. ex una parte & magistrum Simonem de Langeton Archidiaconum Cant. ex altera super quibusdam ju∣ribus ad Archiepiscopum Cant. dum vivit sine contradictione & immediatè spectantibus, viz. super institutionibus faciendis ad vacantes ecclesias, & super collationibus ecclesiarum vacan∣tium Iura Archie∣piscopalia. authoritate concilii, ac etiam super cognitione causarum matrimonialium, quae ipsius Archiepiscopi forum dum vivit immediatè contingunt. Item super causis omnibus quae moventur & moveri possunt inter Suffraganeos & Suffraganeorum subjectos totius provinciae subjectae ecclesiae nostrae Christi Cant. tum per simplicem querimoniam, tum per appellationem factam vel faci∣endam
ad ipsum Archiepiscopum dum vivit in omnibus casibus à Canone diffinitis, tum etiam in causis tuitionum appellationum factarum ad sedem Apostolicam inter eosdem & quoslibet totius provinciae supradictae, quatenus procedunt appellationes à cogni∣tione ordinaria vel extraordinaria delegatione. Item super insti∣tuendo clerico seculari & poenitentiario in eadem ecclesia, sic conquievit. viz. quod nos Prior & Capitulum concedimus pro bono pacis & intuitu personae ipsius, praedicto mag. Simoni Ar∣chidiacono personaliter & ad vitam suam quod authoritate eccle∣siae Archidiacono quae concessa. nostrae Cant. Metropolitanae, habeat, sede vacante, Instituti∣ones infra Dioces. & extra, collationes ecclesiarum vacantium authoritate concilii, & cognitiones causarum matrimonialium. Ita tamen quod ex ista nostra concessione, nec quoad titulum, nec quoad fidem bonam, nec quoad aliquam praescriptionem inchoan∣dam sive complendam in praedictis juribus post mortem ipsius Ar∣chidiaconi vel cessionem nullum nobis possit praejudicium gene∣rari. De illis verò quae sunt circa personas Episcoporum quoad querelas de eis deponendis vel appellationes ab eis faciendas ad se∣dem Cant. & similiter de tuitionibus appellationum ab eis ad Do∣minum Papam interpositarum, sic est actum inter partes praedictas, quod dictus Archidiaconus (tenore praesentium) protestatur & confitetur se nullā vendicare jurisdictionem nec cohertionem ali∣quam faciendam in personis Episcoporū occasione alicujus quere∣lae contra eos motae vel movendae, vel ipsorum negligentiae; nec vendicat appellationes factas à personis Episcoporum nec ab eo∣rum Officialibus, ipsis Episcopis existentibus extra regnum. Si∣militer Quae P. & Convent. re∣servata. nec tuitiones appellationum ab eisdem ad Dominum Pa∣pam factarum cum sint de sequela dictarum appellationum. Set ipsi Prior & Capitulum in praedictis quod suum est exequantur. Ecclesias autem vacantes quae nostrae sunt donationis dabimus personis quibus videbimus expedire, & collatione facta signifi∣cabimus Archidiacono instituendos eosdem, qui absque omni contradictione & examinatione personae, & inquisitione de per∣sona ac difficultate qualibet instituet sine mora, nisi evidens & Poenitentiari∣us. manifestum quid appareat propter quod hoc facere non possit, dummodo super aliis articulis sicut moris est inquiratur. Magi∣stro vero Willielmo penitentiario mortuo vel amoto de alio substi∣tuendo
clerico seculari in Penitentiarium sic convenimus, quod de Prioris & Archidiaconi praeficiatur assensu, qui tantum in ecclesia nostra & non alibi quotiens commodè poterit injunctum sibi officium prout Dominus dederit salubriter exequetur. Ille autem Penitentiarius secularis providetur in supplementum fra∣trum nostrorum penitentiariorum deputatorum vel deputandorum à Capitulo, ita quod tam salubre negotium nullum defectum ha∣beat vel neglectum. Invocationem verò brachii secularis contra personas excommunicatorum tam à nobis authoritate privilegii nostri quam ab aliis claves ecclesiae contemnentium habeat Archi∣diaconus, & sic excommunicatos à nobis ad instantiam nostram faciat publicè denuntiari. Ista autem sic procedit compositio quod Compositio temporalis. tantummodo ad tempus Archidiaconi supradicti durabit, ita quod post obitum ipsius vel cessionem nullum hincinde praejudici∣um in aliquogeneretur. Vtraque verò pars haec omnia supradicta bona fide promisit fideliter observare. Et ut haec compositio ut praedictum est robur optineat, duplicatum est hoc scriptum in modum cyrographi, cujus una pars sigillo nostro signata penes dictum Archidiaconum remanebit; altera verò pars sigillo dicti Archidiaconi signata penes nos in testimonium residebit. Act apud Cant. Anno Domini Mo. CCo. xl. primo xijo. Kalen. Sep∣tembrs. A Composition betweene Saint Augustines Abbey Scriptura xxiiija. and the Citie of Canterbury about limits and liberties, intituled by Thorne Compositio cum Civibus Cant. ANno Domini Millesimo Cclxviijo. in crastino Purificatio∣nis beatae Mariae, Anno Regni Regis Hen. filii Regis Io∣hannis xlijo. apud Westm' coram eodem Domino Rege, conve∣nit ex consensu ipsius Domini Regis inter Abbatem sancti Augu∣stini Cant. & Cives dictae Civitatis super quibusdam contenti∣onibus motis inter eos, viz. quod si aliquis latro captus fuerit cum manu opere, ita quod possit vocari Infangthef, de porta Cimi∣terii . Porta cimiter Occidentalis. Occidentalis sancti Augustini usque ad domum Henrici
Fabri, & à domo H. Fabri usque ad domum Nicholai de le Ber∣ton, & deinde per vicum qui vocatur Loderslane usque ad novam Loderslane. Nova strata. stratam, & sic à nova strata usque ad sanctum sepulchrum à dex∣tris remanebit de cetero civibus & libertati Civitatis Cant. sine contradictione praedicti Abbatis vel successorum suorum vel ec∣clesiae Sti Aug' imperpetuum, sive ille qui captus sit, de hominibus Abbatis vel de libertate sua interius vel exterius fuerit. Et si qua∣liscunque captus fuerit, qui similiter vocari debeat Infangthef in sinistra parte praedictorum bundarum & metarum, vel à sancto Sepulcro usque Chaldane, quantum fuerit de feodo ipsius Abbatis ex utraque parte, & similiter à domo praedicti Henrici Fabri per Chaldne. viam qua itur apud Fispole, ex utraque parte usque ad Fispole, Fispole. scilicet quicquid sit de feodo ipsius Abbatis, & similiter si talis latro inventus fuerit in campis de Northome, & per vicum qui ducit ad portam S. Augustini, de cetero remaneat praedicto Ab∣bati . & Successoribus suis & ecclesiae suae in perpetuum. Ita quod servientes ipsius Abbatis illos licitè capere poterint infra prae∣dictas metas & bundas, & justitiam facere de ipsis secundum cartam suam & legem & consuetudinem Angliae, sine contra∣dictione praedictorum civium vel heredum suorum inperpetuum, sive ille qui captus fuerit sit de villa vel de libertate praedictae ci∣vitatis vel aliunde. Ita tamen quod propter istam conventionem nihil depereat praedictis civibus de juribus suis quae habuerint in tenentibus praedicti Abbatis, qui manentes sunt infra metas & bundas praedictas, quae remaneant tam praedicto Abbati quam praedictis civibus, quin illi qui mercandisas fecerint sint in Lot & Scot & in Tallag' & in defensione ipsorum contra omnes sicut Lot Scot. Tal∣lag. prius fuerunt sin. aliqua contradictione ipsius Abbatis vel Suc∣cessorum suorum. Ita quod quando tallagium assessum est super eos, tallagium illud colligetur per visum Ballivi Domini Abbatis si interesse voluerit, & si non tunc licitè per Ballivos praedictae Civitatis. Dicti etiam cives nihilominus infra metas praedictas & bundas habebunt per Coronatorem suum visum hominum mor∣tuorum & vulneratorum, & praesentationem quae pertinet ad coronam Domini Regis coram Iustic' in adventu suo sicut prius habuerunt attachiac' & prisonam omnium eorum de quibus dictus Abbas non potest faere Iustitiam in Curia sua & si ille qui captus
fuerit per praedictum Abbatem infra praedictas metas & bundas evaserit de prisona dicti Abbatis dicti cives non debebunt respon∣dere Prisona Ab∣batis. de ipso escapio coram Iustitiarii, sed dictus Abbas & succes∣sores sui ipsos acquietabunt coram eisdem. Et concessum est hinc∣inde quod si aliqua contentio oriatur inter eos de aliquibus articulis quibus fortasse dictus Abbas dicit se usum fuisse, vel dicti cives dicunt se habuisse in feodo ipsius Abbatis, & non possunt inter eos inde convenire sine aliquo placito, querens veniet ad curiam, & habebit breve Domini Regis ad vicecomitem quod per sacramen∣tum xij. tam militum quam aliorum liberorum & legalium homi∣num forinsecorum per quos rei veritas melius sciri poterit, & qui nec praedictum Abbatem nec praedictos cives aliqua affinitate contingant, inquirat rei veritatem de jure & usu per illos xij. terminabitur contentio, quia utraque pars concessit quod sine ali∣qua calumpnia tenebit se contentum de hoc quod praedicti Iurati utrique parti dabunt per sacramentum suum. The Ordination of the Vicarage of St Paul Cant. Scriptura xxva. VNiversis Christi fidelibus ad quos praesens scriptum perve∣nerit, Magister Hugo de Mortuo mari Officialis Curiae Cantuar. gerens vices venerabilis patris Domini Bonifacii Dei gratia Cant. Archiepiscopi totius Angliae Primatis in remotis agentis Salutem in domino sempiternam. Noveritis nos ad prae∣sentationem magistri Hamonis Doge Rectoris ecclesiae sancti Pauli Cantuar. Virgilium de Alcham Capellanum ad Vicariam praedictae ecclesiae, de consensu & assensu venerabilis patris R. dei gratia Abbatis S. Augustini Cant. & ejusdem loci Conventus qui dictae ecclesiae veri sunt patroni admisisse, ipsumque vicari∣um charitatis intuitu instituisse cononicè in eadem. Salvis ta∣men dicto magistro Hamoni Rectori dictae ecclesiae & successoribus Reservata Re∣ctori. suis ejusdem ecclesiae Rectoribus octo marcis argenti annuis de fructibus dictae Vicariae ad Natal' Domini, ad Pascham, ad fe∣stum Natalis beati Iohannis Baptistae, & ad festum beati Micha∣elis equaliter percipiendis. Et dictus Vicarius solvet procurati∣ones Onera Vicarii. Domini Archidiaconi, & alia omnia onera ordinaria susti∣nebit.
Habebit autem dictus Vicarius & percipiet nomine Vi∣cariae Iura Vicarii. suae omnes obventiones, oblationes, casus & alia. Iura om∣nia ad dictam ecclesiam sancti Pauli aliquo modo spectantia & pertinentia (exceptis bladis & fabis in campo) & sic est ad prae∣sens taxata Vicaria supradicta. In cujus Rei testimonium pre∣sentes literas ei fieri fecimus sigillo Officialitatis Curiae Cantuar. firmiter roborat'. Dat' Cantuar. 5. Id. Decemb. Anno Domini 1268. The Ordination of the Vicarage of St Mary Northgate Canterb. Scriptura xxvja. Anno Domini 1346. Bonae memoriae Iohannes Cant. Ar∣chiepiscopus Vicariam parochialis ecclesiae beatae Mariae de Northgate Cant. religiosis viris Priori & Conventui sancti Gregorii Cant. appropriatae, de expresso dictorum Religiosorum & Domini Thomae Sheme Vicarii dictae ecclesiae consensu in certis ordinavit portionibus, sub hac forma. QVod viz. idem Vicarius & successores sui in dicta ecclesia Iura Vicariae. Vicarii haberent & perciperent nomine Vicariae praedictae li∣bere & absque impedimento & contradictione dictorum religio∣sorum omnes oblationes in primis missis parochianorum dictae ec∣clesiae de Northgate defunctorum ubicunque sepeliendorum, in dicta ecclesia factas & faciendas, ac in secundis missis hujusmodi defunctorum parochianorum ibidem haberent illi oblationes factas & faciendas qui eas de Iure vel consuetudine habere deberent quodque dicti Vicarii omnes & omnimodas alias oblationes in dicta ecclesia de Northgate, & in quibuscunque locis infra fines, limites seu decimationes dictae ecclesiae scituatis qualitercunque factas & faciendas, seu ad eam vel in ea provenientes, seu in∣posterum provenire valentes, oblationibus & obventionibus hos∣pitalis Hospitale de Northgate ex∣ceptum. de Northgate Cant. duntaxat exceptis. Dictique Vicarii omnes decimas lanae, agnorum, porcellorum, aucarum, pomorum, pirorum, canap', lini, fabarum & aliorum fructuum & herba∣rum
in ortis sive gardinis crescentium, ac decimas Warenciae sive mader vulgariter nuncupat', infra dictam parochiam pro∣venientes, nec non omnes alias minutas decimas ad dictam ec∣clesiam qualitercunque spectantes, omnesque alios proventus, quos dictae ecclesiae Vicarii ab antiquo percipere consueverunt, percipient & haberent, praeterquam omnes maiores decimas (ad Raservata Re∣ligiosis. quatuor marcas annis singulis aestimatas) ad dictam pertinentes ecclesiam, quas Religiosi praefati sibiipsis perpetuum reservarunt. Quodque Vicarii antedicti onus deserviendi praefatae ecclesiae in Onera Vicarii. divinis, inventionisque librorum & ornamentorum dictae eccle∣siae, cercorum processionalium, & unius lampadis in Cancello dictae ecclesiae ardere debentis, ministrationisque panis, vini, lu∣minar & aliorum ad celebrationem divinorum necessariorum ibidem, ac etiam solutionis decimarum ac aliarum impositionum quarumcunque quae Anglicanae ecclesiae imponi contingent pro me∣dietate taxationis dictae ecclesiae, suis subirent sumptibus & ex∣pensis. Praefati verò religiosi onus refectionis & reparationis Onera Reli∣giosor. Cancelli dictae ecclesiae intus & exterius, ac solutionis hujusmodi decimarum & impositionum quarumcunque, pro alia medietate taxationis ipsius ecclesiae, necnon caetera onera ordinaria & ex∣traordinaria eidem ecclesiae incumbentia seu incumbere debentia Vicariis dictae ecclesiae non ascripta superius, agnoscerent perpe∣tuum & subirent. The Ordination of the Vicarage of Holy-Crosse Scriptura xxvija. of Westgate, Cant. IOhannes permissione divina Cantuar. Archiepiscopus totius Angliae Primas & Apostolicae sedis Legatus cunctis Christi fidelibus Salutem consequi sempiternam. Ex officii nostri debito Religiosos viros Priorē & Conventum Prioratus sancti Gregorii Cantuar. quibus ecclesia parochialis sanctae Crucis de Westgate Cant. appropriata esse dicitur, & Dominum Iohannem dictum Sorges vicarium ejusdem ecclesiae, ad exhibendum coram nobis ordinationem Vicariae ejusdem ad judicium nuper fecimus evo∣cari. Sed dictae partes in termino ad praemissa eis dato nullam
ordinationem hujusmodi exhibere se posse, quia eam non habue∣runt, allegarunt. Pars insuper dictorum Religiosorum asserunt quod ipsi onera solutionis decimarum & aliarum impositionum quarumcunque pro taxatione ipsius ecclesiae, necnon alia onera ordinariaeidem in cumbentia in perpetuum agnoverunt, quodque ipsi nihil de fructibus, redditibus, proventibus seu obventionibus ecclesiae praefatae pro tempore dicti Vicarii perceperunt, quamvis aliorum vicariorum ejusdem ecclesiae temporibus certam pecuniae pensionem habere consueverunt & percipere ab eisdem. Dictus etiam Vicarius asseruit quod ecclesiae praefatae commoditates quae∣cunque sibi pro sua sustentatione congrua & oneribus suae Vicariae incumbentibus vix sufficiunt his diebus, unde nos super vero valore annuo, omnium & singulorum fructuum, redituum, proventuum, & obventionum ejusdem ecclesiae in quibuscunque rebus consistant, necnon de & super omnibus & singulis eidem ecclesiae incumbentibus oneribus, quae viz. per dictos religiosos & quae per Vicarium ipsius ecclesiae solebant agnosci, summariè & de plano, absque strepitu & figurâ Iudicii praemissis finem volentes imponere; de consensu dictarum partium inquisitionem in forma Iuris fieri fecimus diligentem, quam judicialiter pub∣licavimus & examinavimus in presentia partium earundem. Demumque de consensu dictorum Religiosorum Vicariae prae∣dictae Patronorum, Vicariam ecclesiae memoratae, ejus conside∣ratis facultatibus, & ponderatis in ea parte undique ponderandis, ordinandum duximus modo infrascripto, & taxandum & limi∣tandum quid & quantum praefati Religiosi in futurum perceperint ex fructibus, reditibus & proventibus ecclesiae prelibatae. Ordi∣namus siquidem & statuimus quod dicti Religiosi & Successores Reservata Re∣ligiosis. eorum decimas omnium & singulorum hortorum inter sines & limites parochiae praedictae constitutorum ecclesiae undecunque, necnon decimas cujusdam molendini Sheffoes-mill vulgariter nuncupati infra parochiam ejusdem ecclesiae scituati percipiant & habeant post instans festum Nativitatis Sancti Iohannis Baptistae temporibus sequuturis. Dictus autem Vicarius & Successores sui Concessa Vi∣cario. ibidem Vicarii habeant & teneant duas mansiunculas subtus ec∣clesiam praedictam ex utraque ipsius parte scituatas ad Vicarium ejusdem ecclesiae antiquitus pertinentes, ceteras etiam decimas
tam majores quam minores, necnon oblationes ac fructus, reditus, proventus & obventiones omnes & singulas ad dictam pertinentes ecclesiam seu inposterum pertinere valentes causa seu occasione qui∣buscunque dictis religiosis superius non ascripta percipiant, teneant, habeant ipsius ecclesiae Vicarii in perpetuum suae nomine Vicariae. Onus autem eidem deserviendi ecclesiae in divinis ac ministrationis, Onera Vicarii. & exhibitionis panis, vini, luminar', & aliorum quae ad celebrati∣onem divinorum ibidem necessaria fuerint per Rectores seu Vica∣rios locorum inveniendorum seu ministrandorum de jure vel con∣suetudine in nostra Diocesi usitata, ac etiam lotionis vestimento∣rum & ornamentorum dictae ecclesiae inventionisque seu exhibi∣tionis straminis quo dicta sternatur ecclesia prout & quotiens opus fuerit, Vicarii ecclesiae praefatae suis agnoscant & subnt sumpti∣bus & expensis. Onera vero refectionis & reparationis Cancelli ejusdem ecclesiae, inventionisque seu exhibitionis & reparationis Onera Reli∣giosor. librorum, vestimentorum & ornamentorum ejusdem quae per ec∣clesiarum Rectores inveniri seu exhiberi vel reparari de Iure vel consuetudine debent aut solent Ac insuper onus solutionis decima∣rum & aliarum impositionum quarumcunque quae dictam ecclesiam secundum ejus taxationem vel aliter concernere inposterum pote∣rint seu debebunt, necnon & caetera onera ordinaria & extraordi∣naria ecclesiae praedictae qualitercunque incumbentia seu incumbere debentia Vicario ejusdem ecclesiae qui erit pro tempore non ascripta superius, dicti Religiosi subeant in perpetuum & agnoscant. Re∣servantes nobis & Successoribus nostris Archiepiscopis Cantuarien∣sibus dictam Vicariam augmentandi & diminuendi si & quando nobis aut eis videbitur expedire, plenariam potestatem. In quo∣rum testimonium sigillum nostrum fecimus hiis apponi. Dat. Salt∣wood quinto Id. Iunii Anno Domini Millesimo trecentesimo qua∣dragesimo septimo, & nostrae translationis quarto-decimo.
The Ordination of the Vicarage of St Dunstan, Cant. Scriptura xxviija. VNiversis tenore praesentium innotescat, quod Nos Walterus permissione &c. facta inquisitione super valore fructuum & obventionum omnium ecclesiae sancti Dunstani juxta Cant. quae viris religiosis Priori & Conventui sancti Gregorii Cantuar' ap∣propriatam esse dinoscitur: Vicarium ecclesiae S. Dunstani ordi∣namus in hunc modum, ut viz. ejusdem loci Vicarius qui pro tem∣pore Iuta Vicarii. fuerit pro sua sustentatione & suorum omnes decimas minores, oblationes & caeteros proventus omnimodos percipiat, decima gar∣barum cujuscunque bladi in campis crescentis duntaxat excepta, Reservata Re∣ligiosis. quam praefatis Religiosis nomine Rectoriae applicamus, ac ipsos hu∣jusmodi garbarum decimas perpetuis futuris temporibus percipere debere decernimus ac etiam ordinamus. Onera vero tam ordinaria Onera eorum. quam extraordinaria Cancelli, librorum & ornamentorum, qua∣tenus ad Rectores locorum pertinere consueverunt per hanc nostram ordinationem plene agnoscent. Salvanobis potestate hanc nostram ordinationem interpretandi, declarandi, corrigendi, addendi seu detrahendi quotiens & quando nobis expediri videbitur. In cujus &c. Dat' apud Mortlake decimo sexto alen' Augusti 1322. The tenor of the same Vicarages augmentation. IOhannes permissione divina Cant. Archiepiscopus totius Angliae Primas & Apostolicae sedis Legatus, cunctis Christi fidelibus Salutem perennem. Ne perpetui ecclesiarum parochialium Vicarii, Causae aug∣mentationis. propter rerum inopiam, & suarum portionum tenuitatem egeant, nostro pastorali officio convenit remedium adhibere. Eapropter re∣ligiosos viros Priorem & Conventum sancti Gregorii Cant. ecclesi∣am sancti Dunstani Cant. in proprios usus habentes, ut Domino Stephano Vicario ecclesiae antedictae cujus Vicariae praesentatio ad ipsos dicitur pertinere, sufficientes de ipsius ecclesiae fructibus, pro∣ventibus & obventionibus portiones, unde ipse possit & Successores
sui in dicta ecclesia Vicarii possint congruam sustentationem habere, & sibi incumbentia onera supportare, infra certum à nobis eis prae∣sixum terminum assignarent, nostra authoritate legitima moneri fecimus & induci. Qui quidem religiosi quandam exhibuerunt ordinationem dictae Vicariae per bonae memoriae Walterum quondam Cant. Archiepiscopum praedecessorem nostrum factam, in qua taliter continetur quod Vicarius dictae ecclesiae qui pro tempore fue∣rit decimas minores, oblationes & caeteros proventus ad dictam pertinentes ecclesiam, & provenientes undecunque ad eam debeat percipere & habere, decimis garbarum cujuscunque generis bladi de terris infra parochiam praedictae ecclesiae constitutis provenien i∣bus dictis religiosis retentis. Sed idem Vicarius asserens dictas por∣tiones in hujusmodi ordinatione Vicariae contentas & assignatas eidem nullatenus sufficientes fore; judicialiter demum, post alter∣cationes diuinas dictarum partium super sufficientia & insuffici∣entia portionum dictae Vicariae assignatarum in ordinatione praedicta super valore eorum annuo de mandato nostro & consensu dictarum partium legitimè inquisito, compertum extitit portiones easdem per praedictum praedecessorem nostrum, ut praemittitur assignatas Vi∣cariae ipsius ecclesiae quatuor marcis annis singulis duntaxat valere. Vnde Commissarius noster in hujusmodi negotio rite proccdens, auditis propositis & allegationibus partium earum, ncnon deposi∣tionibus testium praedictorum hincinde rimatis plenarie & discussis, nihil que per partem religiosorum quare potiones dictae Vicriae augmentarinon debeant & suppleri effectualiter proposito sive di∣cto, terminis successivis & variis ad hoc datis, concurrentibusque omnibus & singulis quae in ea parte requirebantur de Iure, in prae∣sentia dictarum partium coram eo sufficienter comparentium, di∣ctam Vicariam augmentari debere pronuntiavit finaliter & decre∣vit Ipsisque Vicariis & Successoribus suis ibidem Vicariis ultra Augmentatio ipsa. ordinationem nostri praedecessoris praedicti, ea rata manente, man∣sum dictae Vicariae quem Vicarii ejusdem inhabitare solent antiqui∣tus, necnon & pensionem duarum marcarum sterlingorum annuam per Religiosos praedictos solvendarum sibi & successoribus suis ibidem Vicariis in festis Natalis Domini & sancti Iohannis Baptistae equalibas portionibus annuatim in dictae assignatae su portionis
augmentum canonicè assignavit. Ordinavit insuper & decrevit Onera Vicarii. quod idem Vicarius & sui successores in eadem ecclesia Vicarii fu∣turis temporibus eidem ecclesiae deserviant in divinis sustentationi∣busque cereorum, luminarium, ac panis & vini, pro celebratione missarum in eadem. Necnon in quibuscunque solutionibus deci∣marum & impositionibus aliis extraordinariis dictae ecclesiae ad quatuor marcas estimata onera pro medietate supportabunt. Prae∣fatique religiosi refectiones & reparationes cancelli dictae ecclesiae, Onera Reli∣giosor. inventionemque librorum, vestimentorum & ornamentorum ad Rectores locorum pertinentes sbibunt perpetim & agnoscent, re∣servata nobis & Successoribus nostris &c. Vnde Nos idem Iohan∣nes Archiepiscopus praemissa omnia & singula authoritate nostra ordinaris (ut praemittitur) ritè facta approbamus & tenore prae∣sentium confirmamus. Dat' Cantuariae, iijo. Cal. Augusti Anno Domini Millesimo Cccmo. xlijo. & nostrae translationis nono. A Record shewing the ancient forme and Custome of payment of Tithes in Canterbury, taken out of the Archbishops princi∣pall Scriptura xxix. Registry. THomas permissione divina Cantuar. Archiepiscopus totius, &c. Dilectis in Christo siliis Commissario nostro Cant. gene∣rali & Archidiaconi nostri Officiali Salutem, gratiam & benedi∣ctonem. Clamosa insinuatione quorundam Rectorum & Vicario∣rum ecclesiarum nostrae Civitatis ad aures nostras pervenit, quod licet ex antiqua & rationabili consuetudine tam in nostra Civitate quam alibi per totam Civitatem London' antiquitus observata & legitimè praescripta, etiam in contradictorio judicio aliquotiens obtenta, pro quolibet hospitio seu domicilio dictae nostrae Civitatis pro decem slidis sterlingorum per unum annum conducto, qua∣dantem, & si pro viginti solidis hujusm' hospitium seu domus per annumconducatur, obolum, & pro hospitio pro quadraginta solidis per annum conducto denarium, & si hospitium hujusm' pro majori summa per annum conductum fuerit, plus, juxta summam seu por∣tionem praedict', inhabitantes & conducentes domos et hospitia hu∣jusmodi qualibet die dominica per annum, et singulis etiam festio
solempnibus, & praecipuè Apostolorum quorum etiam vigiliae per annum jejunantur, Deo & ecclesiae in cujus parochia domus seu aedificia hujusmodi situantur offerre debeant & tenentur. Sunt tamen nonnulli dictae nostrae Civitatis qui tam oblationes suas hu∣jusmodi Oblationes. ecclesiis eorum parochialibus ac Rectoribus & Vicariis earundem vigore dictae consuetudinis debitas, quam decimas eo∣rum Decimae per∣sonales. personales de lucro negotiationum suarum provenientes & ec∣clesiis quarum sunt parochiani debitas injustè subtrahunt & sub∣trahere moliuntur, ac decimas hujusmodi solvere contradicunt, obji∣cientes contra Rectores & Vicarios hujusmodi decimas petentes con∣suetudinem non solvendi decimas supradictas, quam Canones vo∣cant corruptelam, & plerumque quod deterius est confederatis & coadunatis pluribus conditionis similis, per illicitas conventiculas contra decimas hujusmodi exigentes ex praecogitatâ malitiâ gratis insurgunt, & quatenus in eis est Rectores & Vicarios sic petentes injustè opprimunt & jurium ecclesiaslicorum subtractiones diversis modis adaugent contra canonicas sanctiones, in animarum suarum grave periculum & libertatis ecclesiasticae laesionem manifestam. Nos igitur animabus nostrorum subditorum prospicere & morbo hujusmodi pestifero quantum à Canone est permissum mederi cupi∣entes. Vobis con' & utrique vestrum di' committimus & man∣damus firmiter injungendo, quatenus in singulis ecclesiis dictae nostrae Civitatis omnes & singulos decimas & oblationes hujus∣modi injustè subtrahentes, & eas debitè non solventes, diebus dominicis et festivis intramissarum solempnia, cum major affue∣rit populi multitudo, authoritate nostra peremptoriè moneatis et efficaciter inducatis, quod de eorum decimis seu oblationibus sub∣tractis ecclesiis quarum sunt parochiani, infra unius mensis spatium à tempore monitionis vestrae continuè numerandum satisfaciant competenter. Et quod de caetero subtrahentes hujusmodi suas deci∣mas et obltiones quatenus ad eos attinet fideliter persolvant ut te∣nentur, sub poenâ excommunicationis majoris quam in contrave∣nientes et monitionibus vestris non parentes in hac parte, mora et culpa eorum in ea parte praecedentibus per vos volumus canonicè fulminari, et sic excommunicatos publicè nuntiari. De nomini∣bus verò hujusmodi subtrahentium cum omni diligentia et cateld
plenius inquiratis seu inquiri faciatis in singulis parochiis ecclesia∣rum dictae nostrae Civitatis, in quibus per ipsarum ecclesiarum Rectores & Vicarios fueritis congruè requisiti. De die verò recep∣tionis presentium, monitionisque & executionis vestrarum in hac parte factarum modo & forma, ac de nominibus subtrahentium hujusmodi, necnon de omni eo quod feceritis & inveneritis in hac parte, nos cum per partem dictorum Rectorum & Vicariorum fueri∣tis congruè requisiti certificetis, per vestras literas patentes, seu certificet alter vestrum qui praesens mandatum fuerit executus per suas literas patentes harum seriem continentes. Dat' in palatio nostro Cant. xiiij•o. die menfis Aprilis Anno Domini Millesimo Cccmo. nonagesimo septimo, & nostraetranslationis anno primo. Another Record to the same purpose, taken out of the Registry of the Consistory at Cant. being a depo∣sition Scriptura xxxa. or witnesses examination taken in a suite, Anno 1457. there commenced, for tithes, by the then Parson of St Elphege, Cant. THomas Proude de parochia sancti Elphegi Civitatis Cantuar. aetatis L. annorum & ultra, liberae conditionis ut dicit, inter∣rogatus an sit consuetudo in Civitate Cant. quod omnes & singuli parochiani cujuscunque parochiae tenentur offerre diebus dominicis & aliis diebus solemnibus quorum vigiliae jejunantur secundum valorem redditus domuum, hoc est, si domus solvat xxs. obolum, & si xls denarium, & sic secundum ratam ascensivè & descen∣sivè, dicit quod sic. Interrogatus quomodo scit, dicit quod ita ipse observavit, & obtulit, & sic vidit observari toto tempore suo, ac etiam sic audivit à tempore & per tempus cujus contrarii memoria hominum non existit à praedecessoribus suis ita observatum fuisse Interrogatus an novit aliquam constitutionem in hac parte latam dicit quod audivit quod sic, & quod virtute illius constitutionis ac consuetudinis praedictae quidam magister Galfridus Langbrok nuper Vicarius sancti Dunstani extra muros Civitatis Cantuar. contra
Iohannem Belsyre parochianum suum in casu consimili per senten∣tiam diffinitivam victoriam obtinuit. Interrogatus insuper an Cu∣rati dictae Civitatis praesentes & praedecessores sui pro temporibus suis, & praesertim dictus Dominus Iohannes Permenter Rector sancti Elphegi fuerunt & sunt in possessione seu quasi juris perci∣piendi & habendi hujusmodi oblationes ab inhabitantibus & occu∣pantibus domos & hospitia infra suam parochiam modo & forma praemissis, dicit quod sic. Interrogatus per quantum tempus, di∣cit quod de notitia, & scientia suis per x. xx. xxx. & xl. annos, & de auditu suo per lx. annos, & per tempus cujus contrarii me∣moria hominum non existit, & nunquam audivit de contrario us∣que ad litem hanc motam. These things are con-tested by William Sellow and Iohn Mersh both of that Parish. An abstract out of the Life of St Elphege, written by Osborne Scriptura xxxja. a Monke of Canterbury in the Conquerors time, of what concernes the siege and spoile of Canterbury (both Cathedrall and Citie) happening in the yeare 1011. never be∣fore Printed. SEd totius malignitatis magister simul ac minister Diabolus, Di∣abolus inquam totius malignitatis magister simul ac minister, dum infideliū paucitatem ad injustam justi hominis necem propter copiam fidelium impellere non potuisset, aliam patrandi scelers artē aggreditur, per quam illi omni sociorum timore sublato quod ne∣quissimè cogitaverant crudelissimè exequerentur. Quendam nam∣que Edricum Rex totius Imperii sui Praefectum statuerat, hominem Edricus Regis & Regni P∣fectus. humili quidem genere, sed qui lingu divitias ac nobilitatem com∣paraverat, callentem ingenio, suave eloquio, & qui omnes d temporis mortales cum invidià atque persidià tum superbiâ & cru∣delitate superaverat. Hujus igitur fratrem primò nobilitati Can∣tuariorum in praesentia Regis gratuitò maledicentem, deinde ea
quae unicuique ex paterna hereditate pervenissent violentâ domina∣tione invadentem, hujus inquam fratrem lubricum ac superbum eadem nobilitas aggressum interfecerat, edes succenderat; justo Dei judicio agente, ut qui in alios injustè exarsisset: ipse justae vindictae poenas exolvisset. Cujus sanguinis frater superstes ulti∣onem à Rege postulat. Denegat Rex postulata, jure fratrem per∣emptum pronuntiat, qui tantam nobilitatem tanta animi mobili∣tate regali palatio inpetere praesumpsisset. Praefectus colorem mu∣tatus palatium egreditur, junctisque secum decem milibus viris quam optimè armatis occisum fratrem ulcisci conatur. Sed dum conatus suos parùm processisse conspiceret, resistentibus iis quos importunissmos adverfarios habebat, & ingenti virtute contra certantibus, elatus in iram, Danorum conciliabula expectat, auxi∣ilia perquirit, non jam ad Cantuarienses solos debellandos, sed ad totius Britanniae fines depopulandos. Quorum ignaviam male∣dictis increpitat, quod tot annos laborando nihil offecerint; cum praesertim Rex senio & languore, principes otio, omnesque divitiis ac voluptatibus contabescant. Opus tantummodo esse incepto, cetera rem ipsam expedire. Regnum post victoriam aequa sorte dividen∣dum, se Orientalibus Anglis, illos verò Aquilone potiri. Cujus hominis pollicitationibus principes Danorum arrecti simul & me∣mores sociorum per doctrinam Pontificis sibi praereptorum socios se infatigables ad quodcunque ducere vellet promittunt, dextrasque dant & accipiunt, sacramenta exigunt & porrigunt. Itaque ma∣urato consilio Dani & Angli: Dani relicta statione quam hie∣mandi gratiâ propè Londoniam ceperant, cum innumerâ classe & non segniter armatâ Portum Sandvicum subeunt, ea viz. ratione, quod illam & ad receptionem navium habilem & civitati ad quam Portus Sand∣wici. tendebant acceperint primum. At Edricus cum innumera pedestri multitudine & ipse pedes occurrens exercitum intolerabilem fac'. Hostes Pontifici Praefectis nobilitati omnis Cantuariae necem inten∣tant. Cujus Rei fama civitas Cantuariorum vehementer permota, propterea quod neque alimentorum subsidia in ea fuissent, nec illis comparandis tempus jam idoneum suppeteret totas spes atque res suas in manus summi sacerdotis comendat, templumque Domini quod excellentissima omnium populorum veneratione ibi quidem
colitur assidua supplicatione frequentat. Arbitrabantur etenim sese propter loci sanctitatem ibi vitari posse, & omnia magis fieri, quam se violenta inimicorum manu inde avelli. Sed verus ac sempiternus Deus, &c. Mox universa nobilitas, quae olim in legis violatorem vindi∣ctam exercuerat: universa inquam nobilitas lacrimabili quaest Pontificem circumdat, orat ut urbem exeat, vitae consulat: in vulgi morte damnum quidem esse, sed quovis modo tolerabile; illius verò vitam omnium in terravitas excellere. Sentiens autem beatus ille suasionem tametsi piam sua tametsi existimatione in∣dignam, longè inquit alia mihi via gradiundum puto, dum prae∣teritos mecum labores reputans, aeternam Dei retributionem cogito, &c. Postquam accepere ea homines quibus omnia quam mors & cru∣ciatus corporis cariora erant, citato mox consilio, diversi alius alio se transferunt: plures verò placandi gratià Danos accedunt, ratos se apud hostes tutos fore qui infra muros Civitatis tuti esse non possent. Sed è contra omnia venère. Sed me piget ista nar∣rare. At Aelphegus convocatis pauperibus populi sui, horta∣batur Aelphgus. eos bono animo esse, Deum prae oculis habere, praeter eum qui corpus & animam in gehennam perdere potest nichil formi∣dare, &c. Deinde Episcopali super illos benedictione effusa, pacis com∣munione in osculo sancto libata, dum divini epuli omnes parti∣cipes efficeret, se illis, illos sibi, utrosque autem omnium protectori Deo commendavit. Iamque dies aderat primos visura tumultus: Ecce tota Civitas hostili agmine circumvallata omnem exeundi civibus libertatem negabat. At illi pro muris consistentes, resi∣stendi audaciam non tam ostendebant quam simulabant. Vigesi∣mo autem obsidionis die exhausto quicquid ad vitae usum parave∣rant, mittitur à Pontifice qui Dano subgerat ut ab incepto desi∣stat, populum innocenter obsidionem pati, cavere ne divinae cor∣reptionis flagello pro filiorum castigatione ad tempus concesso ni∣mis insenter abutatur. Fieri plerumque ut quem pater heredem vult, bac percutiat, baculum post in ignem projiciat. Sed Angli (nam illi ad impietatem procliviores extiterant) quo amplius cognatum populum afflictari cernebant, eo seroores
instare, vineas agere, turres extruere, arietibus murum ferire, igneas faces jacere, prorsus nihil intactum habere. Inde feralis per contiguas domos ignis conceptus, horrendos crines attollit, ac saeviente austro per omnia loca se dilatando spargit. Cernere tibi videreris, aut Romanas flammas Neronem mirari, aut Tro∣jana incendia Aeneam deflere. Tum vero miseranda inter cives cunctatio, utrumnam desertis murorum propugnaculis ad pro∣prias domus convolarent, an eis neglectis munitioni incumbe∣rent: vicit communem utilitatem privata affectio, filiorum dul∣cis recordatio tuendae familiae innata compassio Currunt itaque furore praecipites, animositate audaces, neque vitae memores nequ mori potentes. Rapiunt è mediis ignibus conjuges & caros liberos, hostili gladio statim feriendos. Sed illis ad cineres aedi∣ficiorum attentiùs occupatis, ecce quod dictu quoque miserabile est, effracta urbe, exercitus ingreditur, terribilis sonitus ex Vastatio Ci∣vitatis. clamore vocum simul & ex clangore tubarum attollitur; adeo ut omnia Civitatis fundamenta concuti viderentur. Quae tunc Danorum im∣manitas. facies rerum, quam miserabilis confusio malorum, sub nullius scientiam cadere potest qui non ejusdem calamitatis spectator af∣fuerit. Alii namque ferro jugulati, alii flammis consumpti, plu∣res verò supra muros praecipites dati, nonnulli quod dicere pudet per verenda suspensi deficiunt. Matronae quas ceteris clariores nobilitas effecerat, dum thesauros quos non habebant coguntur prodere capillis per omnis civitatis plateas distractae, ad ultimum flammis injectae moriuntur. Super omnia in minorem aetatem crudelitas desevit, dum parvul à matrum uberibus evulsi aut lanceis exciperentur aut superacto plaustro minutatim conteren∣tur. Iam verò ea quae sequuntur mala pro dolorum magnitudine vix enarrare valeo. Ecce etenim venerandus Pontifex non fe∣rens tantam suorum depopulationem, dum forte plangentium Monachi in eccles. Salva∣toris circum∣septi. turba monachorum in ecclesia Salvatoris circumseptus fuisset: repente manibus tenentium se lapsus de ecclesia evasit, currens∣que ad locum cadaveribus plenum inter densissimos hostium cuneos se ingerit, talia geminando inclamitans. Parcite ait par∣cite, &c. Protinus ergo innumeris manibus fortissimis athleta carpitur, ac intercepto gjure vox loquentis praepeditur. Vinculis palmae Aegus capi∣tur.
innectuntur, genae unguibus dissecantur, pugnis & calcibus latera tunduntur. Inter haec servus Dei muto simillimus, ne uno qui∣dem verbo dolorem prodere; sed sancti spiritus consolatione ro∣boratus, summa tantum labia quasi cum Deo loquens movere. Sicque ad atrium Templi non tam deductus quam impiorum ma∣nibus impulsus, jubetur novi flagitii spectator assistere, quate∣nus mortem ante mortem videret, nullumque mortis genus ex∣isteret, quod illum sive patientem sive suis condolentem praeteri∣ret. Accedunt itaque filii Diaboli ad templum filii omnipotentis Dei, cuppas super invicem positas inflammant, tectum exinde molientes amburere. Iam plumbi materies à facie ignis resoluta Templum spoliatum. coepit introrsum defluere, cum beaa monachorum plebs caput pallio cooperta, amaris lachrymis faciem rigata in Deum per om∣nia confisa egrediebatur, datura pro Salvatore quod pro omnibus ille dignatus est impendere. Ad quam ferro excipiendam mox carnifex occurrens, mirabili atque miserabili eandem caede de∣vastat. Quid tum quaeso &c. Igitur ex omni numero, qui ad octo millia hominum protende∣batur, Decimatio po∣puli. quatuor solummodo monasticae professionis, octingentos autem inferioris ordinis viros remansisse accepimus, quos primum beneficii gratiâ pro decimis computatos, deinde verberibus acri∣ter—aut pecuniaria redemptione dignos judicaverint aut servilibus mancipandos operibus secum abduxerunt &c. Iam populo caeso, jam urbe flammata, jam denique Christi templo violato, perscrutato, spoliato, extrahitur sanctus toto corpore vinctus, furentis populi manibus occidendus. Cumque Porta septen∣trionalis. ad Portam Septemtrionis praecedentium raptu, & subsequen∣tium impulsu traheretur, ecce ii quos solos paulo ante ex omni Civitatis ruina superfuisse commemoravi, pedes trabibus inserti sub militari custodia tenebantur. Qui viso Pontisice &c. Ducitur igitur ostia Christi de urbe ad classem, de classe ad carcerem, de carcere ad iniquitatis Iudicem. Carcerem pronun∣tio quem horror tenebrarum foedavit, quem augustia parietum foedavit, quem ranarum importunitas foedavit. Ibi virum menses septem duodeno milite septum servavere rati illum eccle∣siae patrimonia spoliaturum, ac pro sua liberatione eis daturum. Sed Elphegus &c.
Expectato autem sacrosancto Dominicae requici Sabatho, cum perfectae salutis integritatem se recepisse, nec quemquam ex omni populo per totum triduum obiisse conspicerent, legant prin∣cipes legionum quatuor, qui pontifice adito, primò quidem pro impenso beneficio gratias exhibeant, deinde hujus conditionis alloquium proponant, ut si vita ac libertate velit potiri sexaginta argenti talenta persolvat, singulis talentis quinquaginta libra∣rum pondera appensis. Praeter haec spondeat se suasurum Regi, ut cum impossibile sit absque grandi pecunia Anglos Danis conci∣liari ducenta superioris ponderis talenta solvantur, sicque foedus inter utrosque populos firmum constituatur. Quo ille accepto nun∣tio, &c. Foundation of Lukedale Chantery. SCiant praesentes & futuri ad quos praesens scriptum pervene∣rit Scriptura xxxija. quod ego Rogerus Dei gratia Abbas Sancti Augustini Can∣tuarien. & Conventus ejusdem loci concessimus Reginaldo de Cornhelle & heredibus suis habere cantariam suam in capellâ Reginaldas de Cornhelle. sua quae constructa est intra septa Curiae suae de Lukedale facien∣dam Curia de Luke∣dale. per Capellanum suum commensalem in propriis expensis, salvo in omnibus Iure matricis ecclesiae de Littlebourne, ita quod praefatus Reginaldus vel heredes sui nullis futuris temporibus onerabunt personam vel sacerdotem praedictae ecclesiae de Little∣bourne occasione cantariae in jam dicta capella faciendae. Reddet igitur tam praedictus Reginaldus quam heredes sui integrè & plenariè deciniationes omnium terrarum quas habent in eadem parochiatam magnas quam minimas matrici ecclesiae de Little∣bourne. Praeterea dbunt decimas duarum partium molendini de Bremlinge, & tertiae partis si eam recuperare potuerint, & deci∣mas Molendinum de Bremlinge. feni tantilli prati quod ibi habent & duos solidos annuos super altare matricis ecclesiae de Littlebourne, reddend, per manum Willielmi de Socting vel heredum suorum in duobus terminis, scilicet in media quadragesima 12•. & in festo sancti Michaelis 12d. Visitabunt etiam matricem ecclesiam cum oblationibus suis in quatuor annuis festivitatibus, Natalis scilicet Domini, Puri∣ficationis,
Paschae, & festivitate sancti Vincentii, cum in parti∣bus illis fuerint, ut parochiani saepedictae ecclesiae de Littlebourne. Sacerdos etiam qui pro tempore in saepenominatâ capellâ mini∣strabit fidelitatem faciet personae saepedictae matricis ecclesiae, quod in nullo defraudabit eam in decimis magis sive minimis, nec in praedictis oblationibus confessionibus sive testamentis, spon∣salibus, sive purificationibus, vel tricennalibus, vel in aliquibus ad Ius ecclesiae de Littlebourne pertinentibus. Veniens itaque saepenominatus Reginaldus in Capitulum nostrum sacramentum prestitit pro se & heredibus suis se & heredes suos in omnibus & per omnia haec supradicta fideliter observaturos. Hiis testibus &c. A Grant made by Archbishop Wlfred to the family at Scriptura xxxiija. Christ-Church permitting them to enjoy certain houses which themselves had built (it seemes) upon the reedifying of the Monastery. IN nomine sanctae Salvatoris Dei & Domini nostri Iesu Christi Anno ab incarnatione ejusdem Dei & redemptoris mundi † D. CCC. xiij. Indict. iija. praesidente Christi gratia archipon∣tifice Wlfredo Metropolitano sedem ecclesiae Christi quae sita est in Doroverna civitate Anno iiijo. Episcopatus ejusdem Archie∣piscopi divina ac fraterna pietate ductus amore Deo auxiliante renovando & restaurando pro honore & amore Dei sanctum mo∣nasterium Dorovernensis ecclesiae reaedificando resici auxiliantibus ejusdem ecclesiae presbiteris & Diaconibus cunctoque Clero Do∣mino Deo servientium simul. Ego Wlfredus misericordia Dei Archisacerdos pro intimo cordis affectu dabo & concedo fa∣milia Christi habere & perfruere domos quas suu proprio labore construxerunt jure perpetuo hereditatis munificentia illis viven∣tibus seu decedentibus cuicunque relinquere vel donare voluerint unusquisque liberam habeant facultatem in eodem monasterio donandi sed nec alicui foras extra congregationi. Ita etiam in Christi caritate obsecrans praecipio omnibus successoribus meis
hanc praedictam donationem inconcusse & inviolatam salva ra∣tione servandam sine fine semper in evum: hac tamen conditione ut Deo humiliores & gratiores omnium beneficiorum Dei semper existant, seduloque frequentatione canonicis horis ecclesiam Christi visitent orantes ac deprecantes pro seipsis propriis piaculis & pro aliorum remissione peccatorum misericordiam Domini implorent. Necnon domum refectionis & dormitorium commu∣niter frequentent juxta regulam monasterialis disciplinae vitae observant. Vt in omnibus honorificetur Deus & vita nostra & bona conversatio nobis nostrisque proficiat in bonum. Si quis illo∣rum per audaciam suae malae voluntatis hanc praedictam constitu∣tionem inritam habere & in oblivionem deducere, & congregare convivias ad vescendum & bibendum seu etiam dormiendum in propriis cellulis sciat se quisquis ille sit reatum se esse propriae do∣mi & in potestate Archiepiscopi ad habendum & cuicunque ei placuerit donandum. l' manentem itaque hanc kartulam in sua nihilominus firmitate. Ego Wlfred gratia Dei Arch' episc' signo sanctae crucis Christi confirmans subscripsi. ✚ Ego Wernoth pr' Ab' con' & subscripsi. ✚ Ego Wulfheard pr' con' & sub'. ✚ Ego Heamund pr' con' & sub'. ✚ Ego Oswulf pr' con' & sub'. ✚ Ego Ceolstan pr' con' & sub. ✚ Ego Tudda pr' con' & sub'. ✚ Ego Diornoth pr' con' & sub'. ✚ Ego Guthmund pr' con' & sub'. ✚ Ego Cuthberht pr' con' & sub'. ✚ Ego Coenhere Dia. con' & sub'. ✚ Ego Brunheard Dia. con' & sub'. ✚ Ego Haehferth praeposi' con' & sub.
An Apologie for Archery, by Mr Iohn Bingham, in Scriptura xxxiiija. his Notes upon Aelians Tactiks, pag. 24. &c. ARrowes] Archers have alwayes beene of speciall esteeme for the field, and preferred before the other kindes of light∣armed. Many nations have beene commended for their skill in shooting. Amongst the Grecians the Cretans were (of ancient time) sole Archers, Pausan. in Attecis 40. as Pausanias witnesseth. Yet was not their service equall with the service of the Persians. For Xeno∣phon confesseth, that the Persian Bowe over-reached the Cretan a great way: and that the Rhodians with their sling out-threw the Cretan Bow. Of the Carduchans a people, through whose Countrey the Grecians passed at their returne out of Persia Xenoph. de expd Cyri. lib. 4. 322. C. Xe∣nophon writeth thus: They carried no other armes, then Bowes and Slings. They were excellent Archers; and had Bowes well nigh three Cubits long; Arrowes more, then two Cubits. When they shot, they drew the string, applying their hand somewhat toward the neither end of the Bow, setting their left foote forward. With their Ar∣rowes they pierced both Targets, and Curates. The Gre∣cians putting thongs to the middest of their Arrowes sent them backat the enemy in steed of Darts. The same in effect is reported by Diod. Sicul. lib. 14. 411. Diodorus Siculus. Of the Parthian horsemen, Appian saith: When Crassus commanded the light-armed to disband, and goe to the charge, they went not farre, but meeting with many Arrowes, and being sore galled with them, they retired streight, and hid themselves amongst the armed, and gave beginning of disorder, and feare, re∣presenting to the sight of the rest, the force, and violence of the shot, that rent all armes, they fell upon, and made way aswell thorough bodies, that had the best, as the worst furniture defensive: giving mighty and violent strokes from stiffe and great Bowes, and forcing out the Arrow boysterously with the compasse, and bent of the Bow. Plutarch. in Crasso.  Plutatch hath the very words, that are in Appian. The Indians
also were good Archers, albeit not much praised by Q. Curtius, Curtius lib. 8 353. He saith: their Arrowes were two Cubits long, which they deliver out of their Bowes, with more labour, then effect: for as much as the Arrow whose whole efficacy is in lightnesse, becometh altogether unwieldy by reason of the weight. And yet he telleth, that Alexander, at the assault of the principall City of the Mallians, was stroake thorough his Curace into the side beneath the Pappes with an Indian Arrow: with whom Plutarch in Alexan. Diod. Sicul. li. 7. 614. Plutarch and Diod. Siculus accord. Arr lib. 6. 129. E. Arrian addeth the wound was so deepe, that his breath was seene to issue out together with his bloud. The Gothes and other people of the North, that invaded the Romane Empire, had their chiefe victories against the Romanes by the helpe of Bowes, and Arrowes. Veget lib. 1. cap. 20. Vegetius (before alleadged) speaketh it plainely: So our Souldiers, saith he, unarmed both bodies and heads, encountring with the Gothes, were oftentimes wholly defeated, and slaine, with the multitude of their Arrowes. I may not pretermit the praise of our Nation in this skill. Our owne stories testifie, that the great battailes, we gained against the French, were gained by the joynt-shooting of our Archers principally. And that the English have heretofore excelled in Archery and shooting, is cleare by the testimony even of Strangers. Aurel. Cicuta de . mil. lib. 2. 206. Cicuta (whom I named before) commending the use of Bowes, as necessary for the service of the field (and that long after Guns were invented) preferreth the English before all other, and setteth him downe, as a patterne for other to follow. And Patrit. Parall. parte secunda lib. 3. pag 37. Patritius, disputing of the violence of Arrowes, doubteth not to affirme, that an English Arrow with a little waxe put upon the point of the head, will passe through any ordinary Coslet or Curace. Howsoever the credit of Bowes is lost, at this present, with many great Soul∣diers, yet have they of ancient time been highly prised. Veget. lib. 1. cap. 15. Vege∣tius saith; how great advantage good Archers bring in fight, both Cato in his Bookes of military discipline doth shew evidently, and Claudius, by augmenting the number of Archers, and teaching of them the use of their Bowes, overcame the enemy, whom before he was not able to
match. Scipio Africanus (the yonger) being to give battaile to the Numantines, that before had forced a Roman army to passe under the yoake, thought he could not otherwise have the better, unlesse he mingled chosen Archers in e∣very Century. And Leo cap. 6. §. 5. Leo the Emperour in his Constitutions military hath this Constitution amongst other: You shall com∣mand all the Roman youth, till they come to forty yeares of age, whether they have meane skill in shooting, or not, to carry Bowes and Quivers of Arrowes. For since the Art of shooting hath been neglected, many, and great losses have befalne the Romanes. And in another place: Leo cap. 11. §. 49. you shall enjoyne the Commanders under you, in winter to take a view, and to signifie to the Turmarches (Coronells) how many horse, and what kinde of armes the Souldiers, under their Commands, stand in need of, that necessary provisi∣on be made, and the Souldiers be furnished in time conve∣nient. But specially you are to have care of Archers; and that they, who remaine at home, and have vacation from warre, hold Bowes and Arrowes in their houses. For care∣lesnesse herein hath brought great damage to the Romane State. So Leo. This of old time was the opinion of the Romanes concerning Archers. How we are falne out with them in our dayes (the skill of the Bow, being a quality so commendable, and so proper to our Nation) I know not, unlesse fire-weapons perhaps have put them out of countenance. And surely it may not be de∣nyed, that the force of fire-weapons of our time doth farre exceed the height of all old inventions for annoying the enemy. And, when I have given them the first place, I will not doubt to give the second to Bowes and Arrowes: being so farre from casting them of, that I would rather follow the wisdome of the Grecians; who albeit they esteemed Arrowes the best flying weapons, yet thought it not amisse to hold in use slinges, and darts. Every weapon hath it property; and that which is fit for one service, is not so fit for another. The fire-weapons have their advantages; They have also their disadvantages. Their advantage is, they pierce all defence of armour, and lighting upon a place of the body, the wound whereof endangereth life, they bring with
them certaine death. Their disadvantages are, they are not al∣wayes certaine, sometimes for want of charging, sometimes through overcharging, sometimes the Bullet rowling out, some∣times for want of good powder, or of dryed powder, sometimes because of an ill dryed match, not fit to coale, or not well cocked. Besides they are somewhat long in charging, while the Muske∣tier takes downe his Musket, uncockes the match, blowes, proynes, shuts, casts of the pan, castes about the musket, o∣pens his charges, chargeth, drawes out his skouring sticke, rammes in the powder, drawes out againe, and puts up his skouring sticke, layes the musket on the rest, blowes of the match, cockes, and tryes it, gardes the pan, and so makes ready. All which actions must necessarily be observed, if you will not faile of the true use of a Musket. In raine, snow, fogs, or when the enemy hath gained the winde, they have small use. Adde that but one ranke (that is the first) can give fire upon the enemy at once. For the rest behinde, discharging, shall either wound their owne Companions before, or else shoote at randon, and so nothing endanger the enemy, the force of a musket being onely availeable at point blancke. Contrariwise the disadvantage of Arrowes is in the weaknesse of the stroke, which is not able to enter a Curace, that the foote or horse now use. Yet can no wea∣ther be found, wherein you may not have good use of Bowes: raine, snow, winde, haile, fogs, hinder little (especially the string of the Bow being not to wet) nay rather profit. Because in them you can hardly discerne, muchlesse avoyde, the fall of the Arrow. As for quicknesse in delivery, the Bow farre excelleth the Musket. A good single Archer is able to give five shot in ex∣change for one of the Musketier; and that with such certainty, that you shall not heare of an Archer that misseth the delivery of his Arrow, where the Musketier, often faileth by reason of the accidents and impediments before by me rehearsed. Ioyne that a whole squadron of Archers, being embattailed, may shoote at once together: which onely the first ranke of Musketiers may doe. And make the case there were a hundred Musketiers, and a hundred Bow-men each digested into ten files, each file contai∣ning ten men, the Bow-men shall be able to shoote at once a hun∣dred
Arrowes (all their Arrowes) for ten Bullets given by the Musketiers, namely those ten of the first ranke discharging alone. It must not be pretermitted, that the Bow and Quiver both for marching, and all service, are lighter and of lesse labour to use, then a Musket, which is no small advantage in armes and fight. To conclude, the Bow-men may be placed behinde the armed foote, and yet in shooting over the Phalange annoy the ene∣my before joyning, and Plut. in Sylla. all the time of fight, even whilst they are at pushe of Pike; where the Musketier, there placed, must either idlely looke on, or else playing with his Musket, most of all endanger his owne friends. Neither is the force of Arrowes so weake, as is imagined, no not in the arming of our dayes. For the Pike albeit he have his head and body covered, yet are his legs, and feete, his armes, and hands open to wounds: any of which parts being wounded brings a disability of service. To say nothing of his face, and eyes, before which the showers of Ar∣rowes falling like a tempest without intermission, must needs breed a remedilesse terror, and make him thinke rather of saving himselfe, then offending his enemy. The Musketier being also unarmed is as subject to the shot of Arrowes, as the Archer is to the shot of the Musket; and the Arrow touching any vitall part, as much taketh away life, as doth the Musket. Lastly a horse-man for his owne person (I must confesse) is safe enough from the danger of Arrowes by reason of his armour; but his horse, being a faire and large marke, and having neither barbe, nor pectorall, nor ought else to hide his head or breast, how can hee escape wounds? Witnesse our fields in France, where our Ar∣chers alwayes beate the French horse, being barbed, and better armed, then our horse are, at this day. And for the bloudy effect of Bowes the story of Plutarch is worth the rehearsing. He, in the life of Crassus hath thus: Plutarch in Crasso. The Parthians opposing the Cataphracts against the Romane horse, the other Persians galloping here and there dispersedly, and troubling the face of the field, broke up from the bottome, Hils of Sand, that raised infinite dust, whereby the Romanes lost their sight and voyce: and thronging together, and thrusting one another were wounded, and dyed not a simple, of
quicke death, but tormented with convulsions and pangs of griefe, wallowing up, and downe, in the sand to breake the Arrowes in their wounds, or else endevouring to pluck out the hooked heads, which had pierced veines and si∣newes, renting a fresh themselves, and adding torment to torment: so that many dyed in this manner, and the rest became unprofitable. And when Publius Crassus desired them once more to charge the Cataphracts, they shewed their hands nailed to their Targets, and their feete faste∣ned to the ground, whereby they were unable either to flye, or fight. These wonders did the Parthian Bowes, which notwithstanding were not to be compared to our ancient English Bowes, either for strength, or farre shooting. And that we may not seeme to rely upon antiquity alone. Patric. paral. il. pa l. 2. 39. The battaile of Curzo∣lare (commonly called the battaile of Lepanto) fought in our dayes betwixt the Turkes, and Christians by Sea may serve for an experience of the service of Bowes and Arrowes. In which there dyed of the Christians by the Arrowes of the Turkes above five thousand, albeit they were in Galleyes and Ships, and had their blinds pretended to save from sight, and marke of the Turkes, where as the Artillery of all sorts of the Christians consumed not so many Turkes: notwithstanding the Christians had the victo∣ry. Now then for us to leave the Bow, being a weapon of so great efficacy, so ready, so familiar, and as it were so domesticall to our Nation, to which we were wont to be accustomed from our Cradle, because other Nations take themselves to the Musket, hath not so much as any shew of reason. Other Nations may well forbeare that, they never had. Neither Italian, nor Spaniard, nor French, nor Dutch, have these five hundred yeares, beene accounted Ar∣chers. It was a skill almost appropriated to our Nation. By it, we gained the battailes of Cressy, of Poitiers, of Agincourt, in France: of Navarre, in Spaine: By it, we made our selves famous over Christendome. And to give it over upon a conceit onely (for no experience can say that our Bow was ever beaten out of the field by the Musket) will prove an imitation of Aesops dog, who carrying a piece of flesh in his mouth over a River, and se∣ing the shaddow in the water, snatched at the shaddow, and left
the flesh. I speake not this to abase the service of Muskets, which all men must acknowledge to be great; I onely shew, there may be good use of Bowes, if our Archers were such, as they were wont: which is not to be despaired, and will easily come with exercise. A Discourse of the Priviledge commonly called Vide pro Becket in Catalogo Archiep. Clergy, branched into the five following Particulars, viz. 1. The nature and qualities of the priviledge, what it is, and whence it came. 2. The forme and manner how it is put in practice. 3. The antiquity thereof in the land. 4. The extent of it to lay men, and the cause thereof. 5. The declining of it by degrees, and restrained condition thereof with us at this day. TO begin with the first. The better to know the nature and quality of this priviledge, liberty, immunity, ex∣emption 1. Particu∣lar. (callit which you please) I must let you know, that by the Canon-law (for I will looke no higher) every Cler∣gie man hath a certaine Franchese granted him, knowne by the terme of Privilegium Clericale, the which as a chaine, consisteth and is made of many links. One, and that the chiefe, whereof is this. That he may not be called to secular judgement c. Si diligenti. De foro comp. & Lindw. in Pro∣vinciali. de off. Ord c. 2. verb. ecclesiasticali pri∣vilegio.. That is, that he may not be convented nor brought into question for any matter by or before a tempo∣rall Judge. Within the compasse and extent of the which priviledge, the Canons and Canonists bring as well civill as criminall causes, so exempting Clerkes from the secular power in the one as well as the other. And by the way, if Dr Ridley, from whom I have it, be not deceived, this I may safely say, that many titles of the Canon-law, such as those of buying and selling, of leasing, letting and taking to ferme, of morgaging and pledging, of giving by Deed of gift, of detecting of collusion, and cousenage, of murder, of theft, and
receiving of theeves, and such like, although they are known notoriously to belong to the conusance of the Common∣law at this day, yet with the matters whereof they treate, were anciently in practice and allowed in Bishops Courts, in this land, amongst Clerks. My Author, in my judge∣ment, speakes probably, but his reasons are many and large his discourse, and therefore (for brevity sake) I referre you over to his Booke View of the Civill and Ec∣clesiasticall Law. pag. 103.. In case this once were so, yet time hath worne it quite out of use, a thing both at home and abroad notorious; for Conarruvias a late Civilian of Spaine can say, that, as in France, in reall actions, so also in England, in reall, mixt and personall actions, by custome here used, Clerks are convented and compelled to answer before the secular Judge Conarr. Pract. quaest. c. 3. Tom. 2. pag. 497. num. 5.. A course (as he noteth) that much with∣drawes them from their calling, and such an one as is not knowne to take place in Spaine. Ad rem redeo. The Clergy of this Kingdome bearing themselves too much upon this priviledge, heretofore dared, and in other parts to this day are not afraid, to act and commit many foule and hai∣nous crimes: the truth of which assertion will easily ap∣peare by the Story both of the Venetian Controversie, and of Archbishop Becket, who may be rightly said, like a stout Champion, to have stood in defence and maintenance of this ecclesiasticall liberty (amongst the rest) usque ad aras: This being one of the articles, (as himselfe in his Epistle to Pope Alex. 3. reports) for which he and the King were at mutuall defiance viz. That Clerks and religious men might be taken from the Church to secular judgement Fox. Acts and Monum. Tom. 1. pag. 282.. The conse∣quence of this priviledge being so bad, and withall the peremptorinesse of the men of the Church in claiming it as due and derived to them Iure divino (for so they here sometimes did, and in other parts yet doe think of it) have provoked many to argue and debate the case pro & contra. Amongst which (besides the controversie betweene Pope Paul. 5. and the Venetians about it; and another like diffe∣rence happening in France between the Prelates and the Lord Peters many yeares agone, reported in the Acts and
Monuments vol. 1. pag. 462. and so forward) Duarenus Com. in Digest. tit. de Iudic. . ult. pag 166. bisupra. a famous Civilian of France, and Conarruvias f (whom I na∣med afore) an eminent Lawyer of Spaine, and a Bishop, both, as to the Papists, without exception, being such themselves, have scanned and discussed the point, both of which conclude, that this priviledge descendeth not de Iure divino. Which being so, inquire we next what positive law there is to uphold it; The Bases then and props whereon it rests, have their chiefe foundation laid in many chapters of that question 11. Q. 1. and in C. at si clerici. c. clerici. and c. qualiter. de Iudic. c. Nullus. c. si diligenti and c. significasti de foro competenti, and in many other places of the Canon-law mentioned of Conarruvias, ubi supra. Through the coun∣tenance and warrant of which Canons, and in imitation of them (as I suppose) the Constitutions extant in the Provin∣cial. c. 1. de foro competen. and c. 1. de Poenis. and other the like unto them were agreed upon and made with us. Taking these and the like Canons for their warrant, the Ordinaries heretofore with us in England were wont to addresse them∣selves to the secular Magistrates, and of them to require and claime such Clerks (called convict before, and attaint after judgement) as they detained, and went about to bring or had brought to a triall, for any criminall matter, such as fellony and the like. And if deniall or refusall were made of their delivery, then to proceed to the coertion of the Judge by the censures of the Church, untill he should actually deliver up the Clerke Cap. 1. de foro competenti in Provinciali.. But if they were delivered upon their demand, then they tooke them and the matter to their hearing. Who, if Clerks in holy orders, and able canonically to purge themselves of the objected crime (I say, canonically, because vulgar purgation was and is for∣bidden by the Canon-law Tit. 15. de pur∣gatione canonica & vulgari.) then were they acquitted. If they failed in such their purgation, then were they degra∣ded, or else sent to doe perpetuall penance in some Mona∣stery. But if no Clerkes, but meere laymen, then were they dismissed in case of such purgation, but if they were not able so to purge themselves, then were they perpetually
imprisoned (the punishment for an attainted Clerke, with∣out any allowance of purgation at allThe aetiolo∣gy of this see in the Reforma∣ti. legum eccle∣siastic. de Pur∣gation. cap. 4..) Which things shall more largely be made appeare unto you out of the Statutes and Canons to be cited in the ensuing discourse. Of the further nature of Clergie, see S. Hen. Finsh his Booke Of Law. lib. 4. pag. 462. For I have tarried long enough on that point. Yet before I passe to the next, be pleased that I set before you the forme of a Proclamation used to be sent out and published before purgation, as I met with it in an old manuscript booke in my keeping, intituled Litera proclamatoria seu citatoria quorum interest. VV. Permissione divina Conventualis ecclesiae Westm' Abbas humilis discreto viro Decano de B. salutem & mutuum in Domino charitatis affectum. Instat apud nos W. de A. clericus super crimine homicidii per ipsum (ut imponitur) in villa de B. perpetrati, in Curia laicali coram non suo judice, de facto dampnatus, nobisque adjudicandus secundum libertates ec∣clesiasticas liberatus, & carceri nostro, prout moris est, vinculis mancipatus, ut sibi ob ecclesiasticae libertatis honorem, paternae solicitudinis officio assistentes, ipsius clerici purgationem super imposito sibi crimine canonicè recipere dignaremur. Volentes igitur dicto clerico in sua justa petitione, quatenus cum justitia poterimus nostri officii debitum impartiri, ceterisque quorum in∣terest, plenam & celerem exhibere justitiam in hac parte: dis∣cretionem vestram sub mutuae vicissitudinis obtentu requirimus & rogamus in juris subsidium, quatenus tribus diebus dominicis proximis post receptionem praesentium, in ecclesiis de B. & C. & aliis convicinis publicè & solempniter denuntietis seu denun∣tiari faciatis, si qui dictum clericum super facinore memorato accusare, seu aliter procedere voluerint, contra eundem, seu reclamare quominus ipsius purgationem in forma juris admittere, & ad ejus liberationem procedere non debeamus, coram nobis vel Commissario nostro compareant in ecclesiae nostra Conventuali Westm' proximo die Iuridico post festum O. S. proposituri &
ostensuri in forma canonica, causas si quas habeant quare dictam purgationem ejusdem W. super dicto crimine (ut praemittitur) diffamati in forma juris admittere, & ad ejus liberationem pro∣cedere non debeamus, ac etiam audituri & facturi in praemissis quod juris fuerit, & consonum rationi, alioquin in dicto negotio procedetur quatenus de jure poterit & debebit, eorum absentiâ non obstante qualiter autem, &c. To this place belongs the writ called Terris, bonis & ca∣tallis 2. Particu∣lar. rehabendis post purgationem. For which see the Inter∣preter, in Litera. T. I leave it to the learned to informe and satisfie themselves in this first Particular by many learned treatises written on this subject, especially of late by occa∣sion of the Venetian Controversie. And so I passe to the se∣cond Particular, namely the forme how this Priviledge is put in practice, that is, the Formalities used at and about the de∣manding and allowing of Clergie here in England. But these are so common to be seene at every Assises and Sessi∣ons, and so obviovs in many mens writings, that I shall not need to make their recital take up any part of my discourse. I leave them therefore, and invite you to my next Parti∣cular. The Antiquity of this Priviledge here in England. As con∣cerning 3. Particu∣lar. which I finde that Matthew Paris makes mention of it in the dayes of Hen. 2. in these words. Quod de caetero cle∣ricus non trahatur ante Iudicem secularem personaliter pro aliquo crimine vel trangressione, nisi pro forestâ & laico feodo, unde Regi vel alii Domino seculari laicum debetur servitiumMatth. Paris. in Hen. 2.. The Antiquity of this priviledge also shewes it selfe by many of the provinciall Constitutions, for example, by c. Item statui∣mus, and c. si aliqui. de Poenis. as likewise by c. contingit de Iudiciis, all made by Boniface Archbishop of Canterbury An. Dom. 1261. and other the like. And indeed the Antiquity of it is plainely seene in Beckets dayes. For albeit the King and his Ministers opposed and resisted it, yet then, if not sooner, it began to take roote here in England. And how∣ever
by this Customes or Articles of Clarendon, the Kings purpose was to put it downe, and take it away, yet, in part of his penance for the death of the Archbishop, these Ar∣ticles that originally were the occasion of the murder were by himselfe revokedAntiquitat. Britan. in vita Thomae Bec∣ket.. So as it may be said to have prevai∣led at that time, as it were, in contradictorio judicio. And not onely so but afterward, by degrees, through the meanes of succeeding Archbishops (Stephen Langton especially, and Boniface, stout Prelates both) backed by the Pope and his Canons, it did take place so farre, as that, not onely after the publication of Magna Charta, it was ever construed and conceived to be a Church-libertyVide Stat. 4. H. 4. c. 3., but also sithence, beside the participation that it had with the rest of the Church liberties in generall in their allowance by the often iterated confirmation of that Grand-Charter, it became at length established by many particular Acts of Parliament, as first of all by that of the 3. Ed. 1. c. 2. following within little more then twenty yeares after the making of the great Charter. The next whereunto (from which we may argue the allowance of it) is that of the 4. Ed. 1. c. 5. Thirdly it obtained expresse confirmation by the Stat. of Articuli Cleri. 9. Ed. 2. c. 15. & 16. But my purpose being onely in this place to shew the Antiquitie of this priviledge, and not to make any larger Catalogue of the Acts of Parliament that have de tempore in tempus confirmed it to the Church, then may serve to prove the same to have once, and that how long since, beene in it numbers absolute here in this land, therefore enough of this. Come we now to the extent of this Priviledge. Touch∣ing which I must needs say that the Canon-law (as all know) Particular 4. affords it onely to Clerkes in orders. Secondly, that, for ought that I can finde, there is not any Statute of this land that ex professo hath granted or extended it to laymen, one∣ly the Stat. 4. Hen. 7. c. 13. and some other since imply it. How is it then that heretofore and at this day laymen lay hold of, and have the benefit of this priviledge? Surely,
by Custome, which as Harpsfield Hist. eccles. Angl. writing of Hen. 7. wit∣nesses, first set footing here in those dayes. Quin & hoc (saith he) his temporibus in Anglia obtinuit, ut si quis legere potuisset, & si nullo sacro ordini foret initiatus, pari potiretur privilegio. Now how this Custome come up I freely confesse I am to learne, and one would wonder how lay-men should come to share with Clerkes in their so peculiar priviledge. Polydor Virgil making mention of it, saith because Clericis affinesHistor. Angl. lib. 26.. But in my poore opinion haply thus. Because an evident great favour and benefit redounded to Clergy-men in the enjoying of this priviledge, in that notwithstanding their conviction before the secular Magistrate, they might escape without punishment (at least of death, and losse of member) in case they were able canonically to purge them∣selves before their Ordinary. And because also by the Canon-law, it belonged to the Church and ecclesiasticall Judge to handle the plea of Clergie, namely whether the offender be indeed (as in word he affirmes himselfe to be) a ClerkeC. Si Iudex. de senten. excem. lib. 6.. Therefore, in favour of lay-men, who could not but take it much to heart to see Clerkes by this their immunity to escape, they themselves the whilest for want of it, suffering; and no lesse in favour of life; the secular Magistrates admitting and conniving at their plea, or their Ordinaries plea for them, of Clergy, permitted them as Clerkes to have the benefit of Clergy, in case (to colour over the matter) they could but read like a Clerke (the Booke being made as it were Vmpire betweene the two Judges:) the Ordinaries in the interim, for the inlargement of their Jurisdiction readily condiscending, and after com∣mon practice had in processe of time given it the force of a Custome and so of a law, being constrained to make no difference in this point of Clerks and Laics that would pray their Clergy, but to challenge, claime and require them all alike; so farre forth (namely in such cases) as the Statutes of the land have not disallowed nor restrained the same. Ita mihi videtur, correctione alterius melius me sentien∣tis semper salva. And so inclining towards an end of this
discourse, I desire you to hearken to the last of my five Par∣ticulars. The declining and waning of this Priviledge by degrees, and 5. Particu∣lar. restrained condition thereof with us at this day. To demon∣strate which I will tye my selfe to speake even wholly out of the Statutes and Canons of this our Realme: ordering them so, as that out of them you may see this point histori∣cally lead along from beginning to end. Turning then with me the old saying Religio peperit divitias, & filia devo∣ravit matrem, into Immunitas peperit impunitatem, & filia &cVt partus ille viperinus, de quo Plinius. lib. 10. c. 62.. you shall see this plainly verified in the subsequent story. If you have beene versed in Beckets story, you can∣not but know that this immunity stood then generally ac∣cused of begetting impunity, and instances of it are there given in some Clerkes that escaped punishment altogether, or, if any, suffered but slight paines nothing answerable to the quality of their faults by vertue of this exemption, which thing caused the Kings so eager oppugning thereof. Now no course or provision (that I can finde) was taken for remedying this abuse either by the Church or State after∣wards, untill that Boniface aforesaid in the yeare 1261. made and set out a provincial ConstitutionCap. Item Sta∣tuimus de poenis. in Provincial. commanding and in∣joyning Bishops in their Diocesses to erect and have one or more Prison or Prisous for the safe keeping of Clergy-ma∣lefactors. Providing withall that if any Clerke be so incor∣rigible, and accustomed to commit wickednesse, such as for which, if he were a lay-man, he should by the lawes of the land suffer death, that he shall be adjudged to perpe∣tuall imprisonment, &c. This Constitution, whether for want of execution, or because it was not penall enough, did not afterwards generally serve turne to keepe Clerkes within compasse, as may be gathered out of the very se∣cond Statute 3. Ed. 1. cap. 2. that makes mention of this priviledge. For there, to the end the King should not need to provide any other remedy therein, he admonisheth and enjoyneth the Prelates, upon the faith which they owe to him, and
for the common profit and peace of the Realme, that Clerkes convict of fellony delivered over to the Ordinary shall not be delivered without due purgation: which argu∣eth a remissnesse this way in Ordinaries in former time. This Stat. being made in the yeare 1275. within three yeares after, namely Ann. Dom. 1278. the Prelates assem∣bled in Convocation, consult, conclude upon and make a Constitution Cap. Clerici de Purgatio. Canon. in Provincial. providing against the too-easie enlargement of criminous Clerkes, and the admission of slight and slen∣der purgations for them, and injoyning a solemnity and wary exactnesse to be used therein, so that no occasion of offence be offered to the King or his Ministers through the non observance of this Constitution. Had not both these last mentioned Stat. and Constit. laine neglected without execution, as it should seeme (by the preamble of the Stat. 23. H. 8. c. 1.) they did, they might haply have beene the last that needed to have beene made of this nature. But because they wrought not that good effect which was ho∣ped and expected, therefore in the 25. of Ed. 3. ano∣ther Stat. (viz. c. 4.) is inacted, and (as I gather by it) up∣on this occasion, viz. Because that Clerkes were suffered, by Ordinaries, upon slight purgations, to be inlarged and dismissed to their incouragement to offend againe, there∣fore the secular Magistrats debarred them their Clergy, and sine delectu personarum, punished them and lay men all alike. Now complaint being made here of in Parliament by the Prelates, this Stat. was agreed upon and made, whereby for redresse of the injury offered to the Church and Church-men, provision is first made for the priviledge of it and them, and then insueth a promise made in their be∣halfe by the then Archbishop of Cant. (Simon Islep) to the King, that he will make a convenient Ordinance, where∣by Clericall offenders delivered to the Ordinaries shall be safely kept and duely punished, so that no Clerke shall take courage to offend for default of correction. The perfor∣mance of which his promise you shall finde recorded and testified by a Successor of his the Author of the Antiquitates
Britannicae, in the life of the same Simon pag. 244. under the yeare of Grace 1351. As also by Harpsfield in his Eccles. Hist. p. 532. whose severe Constitution made in that behalfe; if you desire to see, although you will not finde it (I know not why) incorporated into Lindwoods Provincial, yet is it extant amongst the Provinciall Constitutions placed and annexed at the latter end of the Legatine Constitutions, in some Bookes (in mine Fol. 150.) I must therefore why the Stat. 4. H. 4. c. 3. should about 50. yeares after the date of it, call for such a Constitution, as if it had beene yet un∣made, and the old promise of the Archbishop not hitherto performed. For so the Stat. intimates, in so much as the then Archbishop Thomas Arundell was faine to renew the promise in Parliament, which notwithstanding was neither by himselfe nor by any other succeeding Archbishop per∣formed, as is testified and avouched by the forecited Stat. 23. H. 8. c. 1. And thus much of the first part of the Apo∣phthegme. Immunitas peperit impunitatem. Great now had the patience of the King and State beene in expecting the reformation of such abuses as grew by reason of this ecclesiasticall priviledge, and a long time had the secular arme forborne to apply a temporall, but more terrible remedie and animadversion. So that now, sith neither the former Constitutions of the Church could keepe the Clergie in awe (as indeed how is it likely they should, the Authors of them not having gladii potestatem Duaren. De sacr. eccles. mi∣nister. & benef. lib. 1. c. 4.?) neither the ingeminated threats of applying a temporall remedy to curbe their extravagancies, would make them and others, partakers with them in their priviledge, to be∣ware, it was now high time to clip the wings of this master∣lesse liberty by restraint. For untill the fourth yeare of H. 7. we shall finde no Act of Parliament that hath any whit dero∣gated or taken away from this priviledge. But then (which brings on the latter part of the Apophthegme. Filia devora∣vit matrem) because that in confidence and trust of the priviledge of the Church, divers persons had beene the more bold to commit murder, rape, robbery, theft and all
other mischeivous deeds, because they have beene con∣tinually admitted to the benefit of the Clergie, as often as they did offend in any of the premisses (as the preamble of the Stat. 4. H. 7, c. 13. unneth) therefore, for avoiding of such boldnesse, it is enacted that the benefit of Clergie shall be but once allowed to any person not being within orders, and that convicted persons (to the end, as I sup∣pose, it may be knowne whether they have had their Cler∣gie once before, or not) shall be marked with the letter M. for murder, or F. for any other fellony, and that to be done openly in the Court, before he be delivered to the Ordinary. Thus for Lay-clerkes. Now for Clerkes in or∣ders, it also provides, that if upon their second asking of their Clergie, they have not their letters of orders, or a certificate from their Ordinary witnessing the same, ready to show, or doe produce the one or the other by a day given them by the Justices to bring them in, then to loose the benefit of their Clergie as he shall doe that is without or∣ders. This Act (it should appeare) was not strict enough to bridle the insolencies of some Clergie-men and others that bare themselves upon the priviledge of Clergie. In the 23th yeare therefore of the next King (H. 8.) his reigne, the Parliament having in the preamble of the Stat. 23. ejusd. H. cap. 1. enumerated many severall promises iterated and made by the prelates to take course within themselves, and by their owne power and authority without any need of the States, helpe to suppresse the insolencies of such male∣factors, as upon confidence of Clergy dared the commit∣ting of almost whatsoever foule enormities and outrages, and declared how these promises were frustrate and came to none effect, and withall complained of the many abuses of Ordinaries in and about purgations. For remedy, they inact that Clergy shall be taken quite away from all persons that are not within holy orders, which shall commit petit treason, Wilfull murder, and many the like fellonies. And as for persons in orders, none (saith the Statute) that shall
be convict of any the fellonies therein mentioned shall be suffered to make purgation before his Ordinary, but shal re∣maine and abide in perpetuall prison under the keeping of the Ordinarie, unlesse he become bound with sureties (such as the Stat. there alloweth and accepteth of) for his good abearing, with certaine other clauses and provisoes. A∣mongst which one is for the degrading of Clerkes convict, and sending them to the Kings bench, there to suffer judge∣ment to dye, as lay-men. You see this priviledge now brought pretty low, yet it stoopes lower, and now comes to be almost quite eclipsed. For besides many severall Acts of Parliament 23. H. 8. c. 11. & 25. H. 8. c. 3. & 5. betweene the last spoken of, and the 28. H. 8. c. 1. taking it away from divers sorts of fellonies. By this Act of 28. H. 8. 1. Clerkes in orders are brought un∣der the same paines and penalties that others be, which be∣ing but temporall, and made to endure onely unto the last day of the next Parliament, when that time came about, was by the Stat. 32. H. 8. cap. 3. as good and beneficiall for the common wealth made perpetuall. By which lact Act, over and above, in expresse words, it is decreed that Clerkes in orders, in such manner as lay-clerkes are wont to be, shall be burnt in the hand for such fellonies as they may or ought to have their Clergie for. This priviledge being brought thus low rose up no more. For after the last mentioned Stat. came that of 1. Ed. 6. c. 12. whereas large an enumeration is made what offences shall exclude their Authors of their Clergie, as in the for∣mer. It suffered yet daily further restraint. For afterwards Statutes upon Statutes, one at the heele, and in the necke of another take it from this and tother offender, as Rastals Kalender, in verbo Clergy will fully direct, as also will Lam∣bards Eirenarcha. pag. 540. and so forward, to which I referre you. For Conveniunt cymba vela minoramea. And now, to set before you that which principally hath devested and outed the Church of her Jurisdiction over such as were and are to reape benefit by this priviledge, and
to shew unto you how the ancient course of the law in the point of delivering Clerkes to their Ordinaries to be pur∣ged, came to be altered. I have to acquaint you that the Stat. of 18. Eliz. c. 6. (the causes and motives for making whereof are in the preamble expressed, amongst the rest, to be these, viz. the avoyding of sundry perjuries and other abuses in and about the purgation of Clerkes convict deli∣vered to the Ordinaries) hath quite taken away purgation, untill that time ever accustomed, ordaining withall that no man, that shall be allowed his Clergie, shall be commit∣ted to the Ordinary, but presently enlarged (after allow∣ance of Clergy and burning in the hand:) Providing never∣thelesse that the Justices, for the Offenders further cor∣rection, may retaine him in prison for a time. Thus have you seene how this priviledge hath declined and beene brought downe to the present despicable condition where∣in it is with us at this day. Remaines so meane, as by them the once flourishing estate of it will hardly gaine beleefe. Truely then Quod fuit in pretio, sit nullo denique honore. Suffer me to conclude this discourse with his sweet me∣ditation, Quarles Hist. of Ionah. Me∣ditat. 10. who making Gods mercy the subject of his con∣templation, in allusion to this practice and allowance of Clergy to convicted Prisoners, thus ejaculates. Like pinion'd prisoners at the dying tree, Our lingring hopes attend and waite on thee; (Arraign'd at Iustice barre) prevent our doome; To thee with joyfull hearts we cheerly come; Thou art our Clergy; Thou that dearest booke, Wherein our fainting eyes desire to looke. In thee we trust to read (what will release us) In bloudy characters, that name of Iesus.
The Copy of an ancient Ms. shewing and setting forth the forme of some kinde of Law-trialls a∣mongst Scriptura xxxva. the English-Saxons. IN nomine Dei summi regis aeterni. Plerumque etenim contin∣gere  solet ut res possessae hereditatis acquisitae in contentionem plerisque & altercationis conflictum deveniunt nisi cum idoneis testibus & subscriptionibus sapientum & fidelium personarum testimoniis tractata & confirmata fuerint. Quapropter sapientes salubrem consilium prudentium quaerunt, & cyrographorum cauti∣onibus & heroicorum virorum testimoniis confirmantur ne impo∣sterum aliquibus altercationibus vel scrupulo falsi suspitionis cor∣rumpuntur, aut nebulo ignorantiae in aliquo fuscetur. Idcirco etenim Oswlf Dei gratia Dux atque Princeps Provinciae Orien∣talis Oswlf Dux at∣que Princeps Provinciae O∣rientalis Can∣tiae. Cantiae circa suae propriae hereditatis jura tractare studuit. Et hoc coram beatae memoriae Wlfredo Archiepisco, coramque Abbatis Wernotho atque Feologeldo ceterisque fidelissimis & re∣ligiosissimis Ceolstano, viz. Aethelhuno atque Heremodo pres∣byteris ecclesiae Christi, necnon saepe coram sociis suis & amicis fidissimis, qualiter post discessionem suam circa hereditatem suam imposterum agere voluisse, id est, ut post dies uxoris suae & filii ejus Eardwli, filiae quoque suae Ealfthrythae ad ecclesiis Dei omnia dare Deo & sanctis ejus sibi in sempiternam hereditatem sub eorum testimonia dare praecepit sicut in altera kartula mani∣feste & lucide comprobatur. Sed tamen post obitum Oswlfi Ducis surrexit excitata à quibusdam quaestio & contentio magno circa hereditatem Oswlfi contra uxorem ejus Beornthrythae cujus alter∣cationis conflictum neque à Domino Archiepiscopo nec ab aliqui∣bus personis inferioribus ullo modo sedare potuit, sed utrique par∣tes ad synodale concilium advocari & invitari jubebantur, & cum ad synodum devenissent & diligenti investigatione verita∣tis sententia utrarumque partium à sancto synodo quae facta est in loco praeclaro cet aeclea querendo examinaretur, inventum est nihil justius nec rectius esse posse constare quam sic perseverare hereditatem Oswlfi sicut ipse Oswlf prius proprio arbitrio per omnia donare coram praedictis testibus decreverat, atque ita hoc
etiam ab illo sancto synodo perpetua perdurare dejudic atum est. Insuper etiam sancta illa synodus decrevere statuit ut illa alter∣catio nunquam amplius per aliquam inquietudinis discordiam post diem illum & deinceps excitando moveretur, & hoc cum signo sanctae crucis Christi perenniter perdurare conscripserunt Et si quis posthaec alicujus personis homo Diabolica instigatus te∣meritate insurrexerit qui hoc Kanonica & synodalia decreta in∣fringere temptaverit à societate sanctorum omnium, & à coetu congregationis & communionis ipsorum sciret se esse alienatum synodali judicio statuerunt. Sed heu pro dolor ille antiquus vene∣natissimus serpens qui protuplaustu piacula indidit, & huma∣num genus sibi per haec subdidit, ceu caelydra infesta & pestifera in quorundam pectore adhuc turgescit, & ad excitandos sediti∣ones discordiasque committendas post curricula quantorum anno∣rum id est xxxiiij iterum ecclesiam Christi & hereditatem san∣ctorum ejus adgravare ac depravare impia nisu ac prava volun∣tate conatus est, atque illam praedict' altercationis conslict reno∣vare & excitare post synodalia decreta, ac probabilium patrum sanctiones studuit. Quamobrem congregata multitudine spirita∣lium Synodale con∣cilium apud Cantuariam. seculariuque personum in Dorovernia Civitate, anno domi∣nicae incarnationis Dcccxliiij. in dict. Aethelwlfo Regi praesente atque Aethelstano filio ejus Ceolnotho quoque Archimetropolitano Archiepiscopo; necnon Tatnoth presbitero electo ad Episcopalem sedem Dorobrevi, id est, civitatis Hroi, cum Principibus, Du∣cibus, Abbatibus & cunctis generalis dignitatis optimatibus inter Dorobrevis. quas etiam ille venenatissimus anguis cognomento Aethelwulf ad turbandum & inquietandum ecclesiam Dei deveniens, sicut sepe progenies & parentes ejus fecerunt, prolatis falsis machi∣namentis è latebris cordis suae dicens hereditatem Oswlfi Ducis cum auro & argento patris sui Aethelheah esse comparatum, & per hoc spoliare ecclesiam Dei & sanctos coenubias ad quas here∣ditas illa periinebat cum pravis sequacibus nisus est. Tunc ille Archiepiscopus Ceolnoth & familia ejus id est ecclesiae Christi illa per ordinem replicavit qualiter in illo sancto synodo de illo reconciliatum & dejudicatum est. At ille nolens adquiescere, neque judicio synodis & probabilium patrum sanctionibus neque adsertione & veredicavoce Episcopi vel alicujus personis tunc
etenim à sapientibus & prudentibus trutinatum ac dijudicatum Iuridici exa∣minisprisca formula. est familiam ecclesiae Christi, & familiam aet Folcanstane, fa∣miliam quoque at Dobrum, necnon & familiam aet Liminge ad quos hereditas illa pertinebat justo juramenta hereditatem illam sibi ipsis contra hereditatem Aethelheahes castigare, nam & ita fecerunt. Iuraverunt xxx homines de familiis praedictis, xij presbeterli, ceterii communi gradus & sic etiam illa altercatio utrarum{que} partium perenniter sedari decretū est, & illa altercatio nunquam amplius per aliquam inquietudinis discordiam post diem illum excitando moveatur, & firmiter decreverunt ut sub ana∣thematis vinculo esset nodatus qui hanc reconciliationem in ali∣quo Anathema in violatores. irritum faceret, sicut & ille excommunicatus constat à con∣sortio sanctorum omnium & à communione synodalis concilii & familiis nostris ecclesiaeque Dei alienus existat qui hoc Kanonica Statuta & synodalia praecepta infringere studuit, nisi digne Deo & hominibus praesumptionis suae conamen emendare voluerit, & hoc signo sanctae crucis Christi roborando omnes pariter conscrip∣serunt. ✚ Ego Aethelwlf Deo dispensante Rex Occidentalium Anglo∣rum hanc praedictam reconciliationem familiae Christi & here∣ditatis Ethelheahes, & omnem altercationis conflictum qui inter se concitatum habuerunt sedatum esse demonstrans, & hoc cum sapientibus meis signo sanctae crucis Christi perenni titulo roborabo & subscribo quorum subter in scedula liquescunt vocabula. ✚ Ego Aethelwlf Dux con' & sub'. ✚ Ego Cynewlf con. & sub. ✚ Ego Lulling con. & sub. ✚ Ego Aethelheah con. & sub. ✚ Ego Aethelheah con. & sub. ✚ Ego Gisshard con. & sub. ✚ Ego Ceolnoth gratia Dei Metropolitanus Archiepisc. cum presbyteris & familia sua hoc id est signo sanctae crucis Christi roborando subscripsi. ✚ Ego Alchhere Dux con. & sub. ✚ Ego Aethelwlf Dnx con. & sub.
✚ Ego Freothoric Ab' con. & sub. ✚ Ego Aethelmod con. & sub. ✚ Ego Aethelred con. & sub. ✚ Ego Freothoric con. & sub. ✚ Ego Denemod con. & sub. ✚ Ego Beornfreth con. & sub. ✚ Ego Osfere con. Haec sunt etiam nomina familiae Christi & illius familiae aet Folcanstane necnon aet Dobrum, atque aet Liminge qui hanc jurationem juraverunt, quorum nomina subter adno∣tantur. ✚ Ego Abba pr' con. & sub. ✚ Ego Brunheard pr' con. & sub. ✚ Ego Hunred pr' con. & sub. ✚ Ego Hysenod pr' con. & sub. ✚ Ego Wigmund pr' con. & sub. ✚ Ego Eof pr' con. & sub. ✚ Ego Degmund pr' con. & sub. ✚ Ego Wealdhere pr' con. & sub. ✚ Ego Aethelred pr' con. & sub. ✚ Ego Cichus con. & sub. ✚ Ego Sigemund con. & sub. ✚ Ego Bornfred con. & sub. ✚ Ego Wynna con. & sub. ✚ Ego Sygeanod con. & sub. ✚ Ego Wihtred con. & sub. ✚ Ego Willmund con. & sub. ✚ Ego Beornmod con. & sub. ✚ Ego Cynwif. ✚ Ego Willhere. ✚ Ego Berhtnoth. ✚ Ego— ✚ Ego Ceolbald con. ✚ Ego Alchhere. ✚ Ego Duddel. ✚ Ego Ethelhere. ✚ Ego Nothhere.
Records extracted from the Tower of London, touch∣ing the liberties of Canterbury. Scriptura xxxvj2. Viz. Ex bundello recordorum & brevium Regis, de anno decimo nono regni Regis Ricardi secundi. RIcardus Dei gratia Rex Angliae & Franciae & Dominus Hiberniae Thes' & Camerar' suis salutem. Volentes certis de causis certiorari quae & cujusmodi libertates civibus Cantuar. apud Cantuar. coram Iohanne de Berewyk & sociis suis Iusticiar' itinerantibus in comitatu Kanciae Anno Domini Edwardi filii Regis Henrici quondam regis Angeliae vicesimo primo allocatae fuerunt, necnon quae & cujusmodi libertates eisdem civibus allocatae fuerunt coram Henrico de Stanton & sociis suis Iusticiar' Domini Regis Edwardi proavi nostri itinerantibus apud Cant. Anno regni sui sexto in recordo & processu coram eisdem Iusti∣ciar' habitis de morte Alexandri Carectarii Prioris ecclesiae Christi Cantuar. infra Prioratum ejusdem Prioris ut dicitur in∣terfecti, vobis mandamus quod scrutatis rotulis praedictorum Iusticiar. de annis praedictis in Thesaur' nostra sub custodia vestra existentibus nos de eo quod inde inveneritis in Cancellr' nostra sub sigillo scaccarii nostri distincte & aperte sine dilatione redda∣tis certiores, hoc breve nobis remittentes. Teste meipso apud Westm' qua decimo die Novembris, anno regni nostri decimo nono. Scarle. Placita coronae coram I. de Berewyk, Thoma de Normanville, Willielmo de Bereford, Iohanne de Lythegreynes & Hugone de Kane Iusticiar' itinerantibus apud Cantuar. in Comitatu Kanciae à die Paschae in quindecim dies anno regni regis Edwardi filii Re∣gis Henrici vicesimo primo. De scriantiis dicunt quod Willielmus de Lynstede Rector ec∣clesiae de Stureye tenet Alderman' de Westgate in capite de Domi∣no Rege per seriantiam unius esperuarii sri quae valet per annum Westgate.
decem marcas, nesciunt quo waranto. Et similiter Iohannes fi∣lius Iohannis de Handlo tenet Aldr' de Redingate Cant. in Capite Redingate. de Domino Rege quae valet per annum duos solid', nihil inde fa∣ciendo Domino Regi per annum nesciunt quo waranto. Et simi∣liter Edmundus de Tyerne tenet Alder' de Worthgate quae valet Worthgate. per annum duos solid' in capite de Domino Rege, nihil inde fa∣ciendo eidem Domino Regi per annum, nesciunt quo waranto. Et similiter Thomas Chicch tenet Aldr' de Burgate quae valet Burgate. quadraginta denar' per annum. Et Stephanus Chicche tenet Alder' de Northgate quae valet duos solidos per annum. Et Io∣hannes Northgate. de Holt tenet Aldermann' de Newingate quae valet per Newingate. annum duos solidos nihil inde faciendo Domino Regi per annum, nesciunt quo waranto. Ideo praeceptum vicecomiti quod venire faciat eos, &c. Postea praedictus Stephanus Chicche & alii ex∣cepto magistro Willielmo de Lynstede veniunt & dicunt quod praedictae Aldermanriae spectantes sunt & annexae ad firmam Civitatis praedictae, viz. sexaginta libr'. quas solvunt Domino Regi pro praedicta Civitate per annum. Et Iur' istius civitatis hoc idem testantur. Ideo remaneant quousque & Postea venit praedictus mag' Willielmus de Lynstede & dicit quod ipse tenet praedictam seriantiam de quodam Willielmo de Godstede, red∣dendo eidem Willielmo inde per annum centum solid. sine quo ipse non potest inde respondere &c. Ideo praeceptum est Vicecom' quod venire faciat eundem Willielmum, &c. Et praedictus mag' Wil∣lielmus ponit loco suo Phm' de Intebergh' clericum. Postea Wil∣lielmus de Godstede per attornatum suum venit & dicit quod ipse tenet eandem seriantiam de communitate civitatis praedictae red∣dendo inde per annum quadraginta denar' ad firmam civitatis & hoc á tempore quo non extat memoria. Et Iur' hoc idem testantur. Ideo praedicti mag' Willielmus de Lyndestede & Willielmus de God▪ ede inde sine dine, salvojure Domini Regis &c. De liberta∣tibus dicunt quod cives Cantuar' tenent eandem civitatem de Domino Rege reddendo inde per annum ad scaccarium Domini Regis sexaginta libras. In qua quidem civitate praedicti cives clamant habere return' brevium, emendas assisae panis & cer∣visiae, Pillor', Tumbrell', & furcas nesciunt quo waranto. Ideo praeceptum est vicecom' quod venire faciat praedictos cives. Postea
praedicti cives veniunt & dicunt quod Dominus Henricus Rex pater Domini Regis nunc concessit eis & carta sua confirmavit quod ipsi & heredes sui habeant & teneant de eodem Henrico Rege & heredibus suis imperpetuum praedictam Civitatem Cantuar. ad firmam pro sexaginta libris sterlingorum singulis annis sol∣ven' per manum suam viz. ad Sccm' Pasche triginta libr', & ad Sccm' sancti Michaelis triginta libr' per cartam suam quam proferunt & quae hoc idem testatur. Et quoad return' brevium & alias praedictas libertates dicunt, quod idem Dominus Hen∣ricus Rex concessit eis quod ipsi & eorum heredes imperpetuum habeant return' brevium Regis praedictam civitatem & liberta∣tem ejusdem civitatis tangen' tam infra suburbium quam infra Civitatem praedictam. Et quoad praedictas libertates, viz. tenere placita coronae habere mercatum, feriam, furcas & Weyf' in civitate praedicta, dicunt quod Dominus Henricus Rex pater Do∣mini Regis nunc concessit eis omnes libertates & liberas consue∣tudines quas habuerunt tempore Henrici Regis avi ipsius Henrici Regis patris D'omini Regis nunc, quando meliores & liberiores eas habuerunt. Et dicunt quod cives praedicti & antecessores sui praedictis libertatibus à tempore praedicti Henrici Regis proavi Domini Regis nunc plene usi sunt. Et Iohannes de Mulford qui sequitur pro Rege petit judicium pro Domino Rege de sicut prae∣dicti cives nullam speciale warantum ostendunt à Domino Rege vel ab aliquo antecessore suo de libertatibus praedictis nisi tantum quod Dominus Henricus Rex pater Domini Regis nunc concessit eis omnes libertates & liberas consuetudines quas habuerunt tem∣pore Henrici Regis proavi Domini Regis nunc, quae quidem liber∣tates non specificantur in praedicta carta, si praedictas libertates, viz. emendas assise panis & Servisie, pillor', tumbrell', fur∣cas & Weyf' clamare possunt per eandem cartam. Postea inqui∣situm est per Iur' istius civitatis si praedictae libertates annexae fuerunt praedictae civitati tempore quo praedictus Dominus Hen∣ricus Rex dimisit praedictis civibus praedictam civitatem ad feodi firmam dicunt quod sic. Ideo remaneant salvo jure Domini Re∣gis, &c. Quaedam Avicia de Lymebernestere de London inventa fuit Borgha sancti Martini. occisa in Borgha sancti Martini, nescitur quis eam occidit.
Primus inventor & quatuor vicini veniunt & non maletr'. Et praedicta Borgha sancti Martini in qua ista felonia facta fuit ab ultimo itinere hic usque nunc subtraxit se à civitate ista cum qua solebat esse respondens in itinere Iustic. de omnibus ad coronam Domini Regis pertinentibus. Et similiter compertum est per rotulos I. de Reygate & sociorum suorum Iusticiar. ultimo itine∣rantium hic quod praesentatum fuit coram eisdem Iusticiar' quod tenentes istius Borghae sancti Martini & de la Fyspole solebant Fyshpole. facere sectam ad hundredum Domini Regis de Burgate, de tribus septimanis in tres septimanas, & ad Portmotum civitatis, & Portmotum. quod subtraxerunt se ad dampnum Domini Regis duorum soli∣dorum per annum per quendam Iohannem de Tonford tunc balli∣vum Archiepiscopi Cantuar. Et idem Iohannes modò venit & dicit quod praedicta borgha nunquam subtracta fuit per ipsum. Et praedicta Borgha sancti Martini venit & quoad hoc quod sole∣bant respondere & intendere cum hominibus istius civitatis ad praesentandum quae ad coronam pertinent, bene cogn. quod ipsi in aliis itineribus respondere solebant cum hominibus istius Civi∣tatis. Et qd' ipsi nunquam praemuniti fuerunt nec sum. ad aliquid praesentandum cum eis. Et quod ipsi semper parati fuerunt ad praesentandum cum eis si praemuniti fuissent. Et Iur. istius Civi∣tatis praesentes sunt & non possunt ostendere nec verificare quod unquam praemuniverunt praedict. borgham ad aliquid praesen∣tand. cum eis. Set omnino praedictam feloniam infra praecinctum istius Civitatis factam concelaverunt. Ideo ad judicium de eis dem duodecim Iur. Et praedicta borgha de cetero sit intendens & re∣spondens cum praedictis civibus de hiis quae ad coronam pertinent. Et quod Coron' Civitatis de cetero fac. officium coronatoris in praedicta Borgha. Et eadem borgha sancti Martini quoad prae∣dictam sectam dicit quod nunquam consueverunt facere sectam ad hundredum praedictum de Burgate nec ad Portmotum Civi∣tatis praedictae nisi tantum bis in Anno ad arma monstranda. Et de hoc ponit se super patriam. Et Iur. istius Civitatis simul cum militibus ad hoc electis dicunt super sacramentum suum quod omnes residentes & comorantes in eadem Borgha debent venire quater per annum ad hundredum de Burgate ad summonitionem Ballivorum Civitatis ad praesentandum ea quae ad visum franci∣plegii
pertinent. Et similiter venire debent ad Portmotum istius civitatis quociens cives praedicti corniare fecerint commune cornu Civitatis praedictae, & dicunt quod praedicta secta subtracta est per octodecim annos elapsos ad dampnum Domini Regis duode∣cim denar. per annum. Ideo consideratum est quod praedicta Bor∣gha de cetero faciet praedictas fectas, & quod distr. decetero ad praedictam sectam fac. Et quod Dominus Rex recuperet arre∣ragia sua de eadem borgha viz. octodecim sold. Et praedicta borgha in misericordia. Et quoad tenentes de Fyspole dicunt quod ipsi fac. sectam sicut facere consuerunt. Et quod nichil est a retro domino Regi Ideo remaneant &c. Et quoad Iohannem de Tomford dicunt quod ipse non fecit praedictam subtractionem, nec per ipsum facta fuit. Plita' coronae de Com. Kanciae coram Henrico de Stanton, Wil∣lielmo de Ormesby, Henrico Spigurnel, Iohanne de Mutford & Willielmo de Goldington Iusticiar. Domini Regis itiner antibus apud Cantuar. in octabis Nativitatis sancti Iohannis Baptistae, anno Regniregis Edwardi filii regis Edwardi sexto. Adam le Corour occidit Alex' Carectarium Prioris ecclesiae Christi Cantuar. infra Prioratum ejusdem Prioris. Et statim post captus fuit & coram Iusticiariis ad diversas transgressiones, &c. tanquam clericus convictus liberatus fuit Archiepiscopo Cant. & adhuc est in prisona de Maydenstan, nulla habuit catalla nec fuit in warda quia extraneus primus inventor & duo vicini veniunt & non maletr. Et Alex. atte Amerye & Thomas Biane duo vicini non veniant & nec maletr. Et Alex. fuit attach' per Thomam Beane & Galfm' Coupere. Ideo in misericordia. Et praedictus Thomas fuit attach' per Williel' Sellynghale & Ri∣chardum de Wykham. Ideo in misericordia. Postea compertum est per rotulos Coron' Civitatis Cantuar. & testatum quod Iohan∣nes Andrew tunc coronator &c. venit in crastino circa horam primam post feloniam praedictam factam, & voluit vidisse cor∣pus & fecisse officium Coronatoris, & Willielmus de Derby te∣nens locum Richardi de Wylmynton tunc Senescalli praedicti Pri∣oratus, & Thomas Percy custos portae praedicti Prioris non permi∣serunt ipsum Coronatorem intrare. Et postea praedictus Prior misit pro coronatoribus forinsecis, viz. Henrico de Woghope,
Willielmo Baroun qui obierunt & Iohanne de Aldelose Coronatore superstite qui ceperunt Inquisitionem de morte praedicta apud le Barbecan extra Castrum Cantuar. in praesentiis Warrese' de Va∣loign' Barbecan. & Iohannis de Bourne tunc Custodum pacis, &c. Et prae∣ceptum est vicecom' quod venire faciat praedictum Priorem, &c. Postea venit praedictus Prior & dicit quod Prioratus ejus est locus exemptus à Civitate Cantuar. & ab ejus libertate. Dicit etiam quod praedictus Coronator per ipsum impeditus non fuit, nec praedicti Coronatores forinseci per ipsum fuerunt mandati. Et hoc petit quod inquir. Et Iur. Civitatis simul cum militibus ad hoc electis dicunt super sacramentum suum quod Richardus de Wylmynton qui obiit tunc Senescallus ejusdem Prioris non permi∣sit dictum Iohannem Andrew Coronatorum intrare dictum Prio∣ratum pro officio suo faciendo set claudere fecit portas ejusdem Prioratus ita quod intrare non potuit, set dicunt quod hoc fecit nesciente Priore. Dicunt etiam quod idem Richardus misit pro praedictis Coronatoribus forinsecis qui ibidem venerunt, & prae∣dictum mortuum viderunt. Et dicunt quod idem mortuus postea sepultus fuit per quosdam garciones qui prius erant socii ipsius mortui quorum nomina ignorant. Et quod praedicti Coronatores ceperunt inquisitionem praedictam de praedicto mortuo apud le Barbecane, ut pradictum est. Et Iur. quesiti qui Coronatores so∣lebant facere officium coronatoris in praedicto Prioratu temporibus retroactis, dicunt quod semper ante illud tempus Coronatores Ci∣vitatis Cantuar. illud fecerunt. Quesiti etiam si praedicti coro∣natores forinseci venissent ibidem per mandatum Prioris, dicunt quod non, set per praedictum Richardum de Wylmynton ignorante praedicto Priore. Ideo idem Prior inde quietus. Postea venit prae∣dictus Willielmus de Derby & non potest dedicere quin impedi∣vit praedictum Coronatorem Cantuar. nec quin claudere fecit portas praedicti Prioratus, per quod idem Coronator officium suum de praedicto mortuo ibidem facere non potuit. Ideo ipse custoditur: Et praeceptum est vicecom' quod capiat praedict' Thomam Percy, &c. Postea venit praedictus Willielmus de Derby & fecit finem pro praedicta transgressione per quinque marcas, per pl' Iohannis de Sfeld, & Thomae Dod de Faveresham. Postea venit praedictus Thomas, & non potest dedicere quin fecit praedictam transgres∣sionem.
Ideo ipse custoditur. Postea venit & finem fecit per qua∣draginta denar. per plm' Richardi de Haddelegh. Md. quod iste tenor exemplificatus est sub eo qui sequitur te∣nore. Richardus dei gratia Rex Angliae & Franciae & Dominus Hiberniae. Omnibus ad quos praesentes literae pervenerint salutem. Inspeximus quandam certificationem nobis in Cancellaria nostra per Thes. & Camerar. nostros de mandato nostro missam in hec verba. Placita Coronae &c. de verbo in verbum usque in finem. & tunc sic. Nos autem certificationem praedictam ad requisitio∣nem dilectorum nobis Ballivorum Civitatis nostrae Cant. tenore praesentium duximus exemplificandam. In cujus, &c. Teste Rege apud Westm' quintodecimo die Anno A Codicill (or Charter) of Kenulf King of Mercia, of the gift of certaine Land in Canterbury (at a place now called Binney) to Wlfred Scriptura xxxvija. the Archbishop. IN nomine sancti Salvatoris Dei & Domini nostri Iesu Christi Regnante ac gubernante eodem Domino Iesu simulque spiritu † sancto gubernacula in imis & in arduis disponendo ubique regit. Licet sermo sapientium consiliumque prudentium stabilis perma∣neat, tamen ob incertitudine temporalium rerum divinis numi∣nibus muniendo perscrutando pro ignotis & incertis eventis stabi∣lienda robor andaque in Deo vivo & vero sunt. Quapropter ego Coenulfus gratia Dei Rex Merciorum viro venerando in Christi charitate summo pontificalis apice decorato Wlfredo Archiep. dabo & concedo aliquam partem terrae juris mei quae mihi largitor omnium bonorum Deus donare dignatus est pro intimo caritatis affectu, ut Apost' ait, hilarem enim datorem diligit Deus; Et hoc est in loco qui dicitur binnan ea circiter xxx. juger a inter duos rivos gremiales Fluminis quod dicitur Stur. Et haec terra libera Binnan ea. permaneat in perpetuam possessionem ecclesiae Christi. Quod si quisque huic largitioni contradixerit, contradicat ei Deus & de∣neget ingressum coelestis vitae. Actum est hoc Ao. Dominicae incar. Dccc. xiiijo. Indict. vja. his testibus consentientibus atque confirman. Quorum nomina nota sunt.
✚ Ego Coenuulf gratia Dei Rex Merciorum hanc donati∣onis confirmationem signo crucis Christi rob. ✚ Ego Wlfred arc' aeps' cons. & sub. ✚ Ego Denebyrht aepsc' cons. & sub. ✚ Ego Wlfhard aepsc' cons. & sub. ✚ Signum manus Eadberhti ducis. ✚ Signum manus Ealhheardi Ducis. ✚ Signum manus Ceolwlfi Ducis.
The Epilogue to his Countrymen. IF, by your good acceptance of these my La∣bours for the City, I may receive encourage∣ment to proceed in my endeavours, it is in my thoughts, by Gods assistance, in convenient time, to doe somewhat in like kinde for you in the Countrey. In the meane time, from that recourse which some of you have had unto me for satisfaction and informa∣tion to the memory of what Saints their Churches were at first commended, conceiving that it may give content both to them and others of you who (not out of any either superstitious or riotous instinct, I hope, but for those good and pious ends which the first Institution of the Encaenia Encaenia. had regard unto, namely, not onely the encouragement of others to the like acts of piety and devotion, by a thankfull commemoration of his or their bounty and munisicence who had either founded or endowed the Church, as at the first; but also the manifestation and maintenance of Christian Vnion, charity, and good society, by a kinde of Love-feast, as afterward the manner was) are desirous to reduce that ancient laudable Custome, sometime consonant to Canon Cap. Ex scrp∣turis. de Feriis in Provincial., of observing those Feasts of Dedication, now, through igno∣rance most what, I suppose, of their Saints names, generally in these parts laid aside; conceiving it, I say, an acceptable thing to revive and restore to each Parochial Church and Chapell the forgotten name and memory of such Saint or Saints, as at their dedication (upon such or like grounds as are judiciously rendred and laid downe elsewhere Hooker. Ec∣clesiastic. polity. lib. 5. num. 13.) were given (and are therefore proper) to them: having used my best diligence for a full Collection of those of Canterbury-Diocesse from good Record, I shall here leave it with you in
pawne, and as a pledge unto you of those my future endea∣vours for your further content hereafter, if God permit. Canterbury-Deanrie. St Alphege. Within the City. St Andrew. St Mary-Bredman. St Mary-Bredin. St Mary-Castle. Holy Crosse-of Westgate. St Edmu-of Ridingate. St George-of Newingate. St Iohn. St Margaret. St Mary Magdalen. St Mary-of Northgate. St Mary-of Queningate. St Michael-of Burgate. St Mildred. St Peter. All-Saints. St Dunstan. In the Suburbs. St Martin. St Paul. St Cosmas and Damian. Bleane. St Mary. Fordwich. St Mary. Little Hardres. St Michael. Herbaldowne. St Nicholas. Herbaldowne. St Stephen. Hackington. St Mary. Natyndon. St Nicholas. Sturrey. St Nicholas. Thannington. Milton.
Sandwich-Deanrie. St Clement. in Sandwich. St Iames. St Mary. St Peter. St Mary. Barfrestone. Bettishanger. St Pancrace. Colred. St Leonard. Deale. St Mary. Eastry. St Augustine. Eastlangdon. St Peter and Paul. Eithorne. St George. Ham. Knolton. St Martin. Great Mongeham. St Augustine. Norborne. St Mary. Ripple. St Nicholas. Ringwold. St Andrew. Sibertswold. Sutton. St Nicholas. Sholden. St Andrew. Tilmanstone. St Mary. Westlangdon. All Saints. Waldershare. St Peter and Paul. Worth. St Mary. Walmer. St Mary. Woodnesborough. Westbere-Deanrie. All Saints. Birchington. St Mary. Minster. St Mary Magdalen. Mounklon. St Giles. Sarre. St Iohn Baptist. in Thanet. St Lawrence. St Nicholas. St Peter. St Mary. Chistlet. St Martin. Hearne. St Mary. Hoth. Holy Crosse. St Mary. Reculver. St Elphege. Seasalter. St Iohn Baptist. Swalcliffe. All Saints. Westbere. All Saints. Whitstable. Bridge Deanrie. St Innocents, Adisham. St Nicholas. Ash. St Iohn Baptist. Barham. St Peter. Beaksbourne. St Iohn Evangelist. Ickham. St Giles. Kingstone. St Vincent. Littlebourne. St Peter. Molash.
St Mary. Bishopsbourne. St Peter. Bridge. St Mary. Brooke. All Saints. Boughton Alulph. St Mary. Chartam. St Cosmas and Damian. Challocke. St Mary. Chilham. All Saints. Chillenden. St Mary. Crondall. Elmestone. St Lawrence. Godmersham. Holy Crosse- Goodnestone. St Peter and Paul. Great Hardres. St Mary. Nonnington. All Saints. Petham. St Mary. Patricksbourne. St Mildred. Preston. Stodmersh. St Iames. Staple. All Saints. Stourmouth. St Mary. Stelling. St Andrew. Wickhambruex. St Mary. Wingham. St Gregory and St Martin. Wy. St Bartholomew. Waltham. St Margaret. Wemingswold. Dover-Deanry. St Antonine. Alkham. St Peter. Bewsfield. St Andrew. Buckland. St Peter. Charlton. St Martin. Cheriton. St Mary. Capleferne. St Peter and St Paul. Ewell. St Mary & St Eanswith. Folkstone. St Margaret. at Cliffe. St Martin. Guston. St Nicholas. Newington. St Laurence. Hougham. St Michael. Hawkinge. St Iames. In Dover. St Iohn. St Mary. St Nicholas. St Peter. St Mary. Liden. St Peter and St Paul. River. St Peter. Swinkfield. St Peter. West-cliffe. Ealham-Deanrie. St Martin. Acris. St Mary. Braborne. St Margaret. Bircholt. St Mary Magdalen. Denton. St Mary. Ealham. St Iames. Elmested. St Peter. Horton. St Mary. Hastinglegh. St Mary & St Eadburgh. Liminge. St Leonard. Hith. St Mary. Postling. St Oswald. Padlesworth. St Peter and St Paul. Saltwood. All Saints. Stanford. St Mary. Stowting. St Martin. Woodton.
Charing-Deanrie. St Mary. Ashford. St Nicholas. Boughton Malherb. St George. Bennenden. All Saints. Biddenden. St Peter and Paul. Charing. St Mary. Great Chart. St Mary. Little Chart. St Dunstan. Cranebrooke. St Mary. Eastwell. St Mary. Egerton. St Mary. Frittenden. St Peter and Paul. Hedcorne. St Mary. Hothfield. St Mary. Halden. St Lawrence. Hawkherst. St Mary. Kennington. St Peter. Newenden. St Mary. Pevington. St Nicholas. Pluckley. St Mary. Rolvinden. St Michael. Smarden. St Nicholas. Sandherst. St Mildred. Tenterden. St Mary. Westwell. Lim-Deanrie. S. Martin. Aldington. S. Peter and S. Paul. Appledoore. S. Romwald. Bonington. S. Peter and S. Paul. Bilsington. All Saints. Burmesh. S. Eanswith. Brenset. S. Augustine. Brookland. S. Peter and S. Paul. Dimchurch. S. Mary. Eboney. S. Thomas Martyr. Fairfield. S. Mary. Hinxhill. All Saints. Hope. S. Leonard. Herst. S. George. Ivechurch. S. Mary. Kenarton. S. Michael. Kingsnoth. S. Stephen. Lim. S. Peter and Paul. Newchurch. S. Mary. Orlastone. S. Mary Magdalen. Rokinge. S. Lawrence. in New Romney The present Church. S. Martin. S. Iohn Baptist. S. Nicholas. S. Clement. Old Romney. S. Mary. Sevington. S. Mary. Sellinge. S. Peter and Paul. Shadoxherst. S. Mary. Smeth. S. Augustine. Snave. S. Mary. Stone. S. Dunstan. Snargate. S. Mary. West-Hith. S. Mary. Willesborough.
All-Saints. Lyd. S. Marych. In the Mersh. S. Iohn Baptist. Mersham. S. Matthew. Warhorne. All-Saints. Wood-Church. S. Iohn Baptist. Wittresham. Satton-Deanrie. S. Margaret. Bromefield. S. Peter. Bredherst. Holy-Crosse. Barsted. All-Saints. Boxley. S. Peter. Boughton Monchensey. S. Michael. Chart. S. Martin. Detling. S. Peter and Paul. East-Sutton. S. Dunstan. Frensted. S. Mary. Goodherst. S. Iohn Baptist. Harietsham. All Saints. Hollingbourne. S. Margaret. Hucking. S. Mary. Lenham. S. Nicholas. Leeds. Loose. S. Mary. Langley. S. Nicholas. Linton. All-Saints. Maidestoe. Colledge-Church S. Faith. Parish-Church. S. Michael. Marden. S. Mary. Sutton Vallence. All Saints. Stapleherst. S. Mary. Thornham. S. Nicholas. Otham. All Saints. Vlcombe. S. Giles. Wormshill. Sittingborne-Deanry. Bicknore. S. Iohn Baptist. Bredgate. S. Peter and Paul. Borden. S. Bartholomew. Bobbing. S. Lawrence. Bapchild. All-Saints. Eastchurch. S. Michael. Hartlip. S. Margaret. Halstow. All-Saints. Iwade. S. Katherine. Kingsdowne. S. Clement. Leisdowne. S. Trinity. Milton. All-Saints. Morston. S. Mary. S. Sexburgh. Minster. S. Mary. S. Crosse. Milksted. S. Mary Newington. S. Trinity. Queenborough. S. Margaret. Rainham. S. Nicholas. Rodmersham. S. Mary Magdalen. Stockbury. S. Michael. Sittingbourne. S. Giles. Tong. S. Iohn Baptist. Tonstall. S. Mary. Vpchurch. S. Margaret. Witchling. Wardon.
Ospringe-Deanrie. Buckland. S. Peter and Paul. Boughton Blean S. Leonard. Badlesmere. S. Mary Magdalen. Davington. S. Iohn Baptist. Doddington. S. Mary. Eastling. S. Mary. Feversham. S. Bartholomew. Goodnestone. All-Saints. Graveney. S. Michael. Hearnhill. S. Thomas Apostle. Hartey. S. Mary. Luddenham. S. Lawrence. Leaveland. S. Peter and Paul. Linsted. S. Mary. Norton. S. Peter and Paul. Newenham. S. Peter. Ore. S. Lawrence. Otterden. S. Peter and Paul. Ospringe. S. Katherine. Preston. S. Mary. Selling. S. Iames. Sheldwich. S. Mary. Stallesfield. S. Mary. Tenham. S. Michael. Throuleigh. FINIS.
THE TABLE. A. ABbey, of S. Austins: See S. Austins. Abbots-Mill. 44 Adesham. 210, 433 Aelmesland, 436 Aghne 212 Aid, lent to the City by the Monks 292 Aldermanry, an Office, and the na∣ture of it 97 Aldermen, at Canterbury, from what antiquity ibid Aldington 216, 427 All-Saints-Church 336 St Alphege-Church 326 Almnery, at St Austins: See St Au∣stins: at Christ-Church: See Ca∣thedrall. Andresgate 329 St Andrewes-Church 332 Anselme Archbishop, his monument 241 Antiquity an ornament, 1, of Canter∣bury: See Canterbury: of Arch∣bishops in generall; and of the Archbishop of Canterbury in parti∣cular: See Archbishops. Antiquitates Britannicae; the commen∣dation of it by Cujacius, 273 Apostolic sedis Ligatus, that title, when first given to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and when it ceased 243 Appledore, the mershes there inned. 290, the manor, 435 Archbishoprick, at Litchfield 234 Archbishops: their antiquity in the Church, 223, number in England in former time and at this day, 227, Archbishops of Canterbury, their antiquity, 227, a Catalogue of them from p. 229, to p. 274, the forme of their inthronization, 275 441, their Palace at Canterbury, 186, their manors, 187, 241, 425, their buriall in Christ Church dis∣continued 273 Archdeaconry of Canterbury: when, and of whom erected 65, 298, en∣larged, 309, 310, 453, 456 Archdeacons there, a Catalogue of them, 298, &c. three at one time in the diocesse, 306, their house 310, composition with the monks, 411, 457, with the Archbishop, 319, fees for inducting Bishops 323 Archery, commended 267, an Apolo∣gie for it, 479 Archflamins 224 Arundell Archbishop, his monument and chantery 268, St William, his monument, 184 Atwood, a family in Canterbury 335 Austin-Fryers. See Fryers
St Austins Abbey, when and where∣fore founded, 46, by whom, ibid. their charters, 47, &c. Royall be∣nefactors to it 53, Monks there, of what order 54, the estimate of their revenewes, ibid. Abbat there, his dignity and priviledges 55, Harmes that befell it 56, by the Danes ibid. by fire, 57, by water 58, by the law of Mortmaine, ibid, by the generall dissolution. 60. Its present remaines, ibid. Almnery, ibid. Ethelberts Tower, 61, St Pancrace-Chapell, ibid. Church∣yard, 63, a common footway tho∣rough that, 17, common seales of the Abbey, 297, composition with the City, 338, 459 Authentick seales 288 B. BAiliffs of Canterbury 366 Ballock lane 347 Barbican, where, and why so called 35 Barham 213, 214, bis Barnacle-Crosse 149 Barton: mill 45, manor 88, 214, pri∣son, 286, Elizabeth Barton. See Nonery. Beausherne 87 Becket Archbishop, his murder 166, Tombe, 178, translation 245, Faire 246, shrine 247, jubilee 248, the Cities patron 250 Berewicke 437 Berksore 220, bis 241 Bertha 96 Bilsington-Priory, the parsonage there appropriated to it 263 Binne 213 Binnewith 101, a family in Canterbu∣ry so sirnamed 102, 139 Bishop of St Martin 65, 299 Bishopricke, the note of a City 240 Bishops Sees removed from villages to Cities, 240, titular Bishops 105 Bixle 213, 430 Blacke-Fryers. See Fryers Blacke Prince, his chapell 176, his chantery 177, his monument 184, his chantery-priests house 135 Blean: Wood 221, 382, Vicarage 118, 399 Bocholt 212, bis Bocking 217 Bocton 428, 435, Malherb, whence so called 384 Borle 221 Bovyton 221 Boxley 245 Bradested 430 Bramling 211 Breakpotlane 108 Bredgar-Colledge 269 Brewerslane 28, 129 Bridewell 141 British-Bricks. See Roman-Bricks Broke 220, 436 Brotewell 214, 217 Brownes, a family, Aldermen of West∣gate 97 Bulstake 146 Burgate 16, the Church there, ibid. 331, ward 146 Buriall (and Burning) of the dead in Cities forbidden, 46, 231, and why 232, when first permitted in England 233, of the Archbishops at St Austins, when first discontinued 233, when at Christ-Church 273 Burne 212 bis. 213, 214, 426 Burricestune 430 Byri 214
C. CAir, what it signifies 8 Cair-Kent. See Names of Can∣terbury. Cair-Medwag 25 Caldecote-manor 221, 260 Calvells, a family in Canterbury 68 Canterbury, the antiquity of it. j, 39 368, 410, names of it, ij, famous in the Romans time, iij, of whom founded, ibid. survey of it in Doomsday-booke, iiij, anciently a hundred, 95, 96, Malmesbury his commendation of it, 150, spoiled by the Danes, 238, the cause of its decay, 246, made a County per se, 368, the Citizens of it commen∣ded, ibid. the ecclesiasticall govern∣ment of it, 349, temporall 363, Liberties of it, 502 Canterburies, a family 347 Canterbury-lane ibid Capgrave Iohn, a famous Fryer 130 Sub deacon-Cardinals at Christ-Church 257 Castle at Canterbury how ancient 33, common prison kept in it of old 34 Catalogue of Archbishops of Cant. Archdeacons Maiors Priors See Archbishops. Archdeacons. Maiors. Priors. Cathedrall at Canterbury, the antiqui∣ty and nature of the foundation, 151, a Cathedrall monastery 152, the first Church there, built by the Romans 154, dedicated to our Sa∣viour, ibid. burned by the Danes, 155, reedified ibid. fired a second time 156, reedified ibid. name changed to St Trinity 157, enlar∣ged ibid, fired a third time 159, re∣edified ibid, new-named, and called Christ-Church ibid. the Campanile there 160, 190, Body new built, 161, 291. Quire repaired and Beckets Crowne 163, a Survèy ta∣ken of the present Church, 164, Porch, ibid. Body, ibid. Martyrdome, 166, Lady Chapell, 167, St Mi∣chaels Chapell 168. Quire, ibid. Quire-hangings, 169, Altars, 170, Beckets Chapell, ibid. his Crowne, 171, Vestry, 172, Treasury, 173, Deanes Chapell, ibid. Library, 174, Windowes, ibid. 385, Vndercroft, 175, French Church, ibid. Blacke Princes Chapell, 176, Lady Cha∣pell, 177, Beckets Tombe, 178, Chapter-house 179, loister, ibid. Monuments, 180, Font, 181, Church precinct, 188, Churchgate, 193, Cimitery gate, 194, Schoolehouse, ibid. Honors, 196, Infirmary, ibid. Dortor, 199, Refectory, 200, Court∣gate, 205, Northhall, ibid. Stewards Court, 207, Almnery, 208, Mint and Mintyard, 124, 209, benefa∣ctors to this Church, 210, buriall of the Archbishops procured to it, 234, that, when first discontinued, 273, Tombes in it mistaken, 236, 243, 256, 262, 265, the severall seales of it, at severall times, and for severall uses, 158, 159, 250, 251, 297. Cellarar of Christ-Church, his office and charge 201, his Halimot, 203, his hall and lodgings 204 Chamberlaine there, his office and
charge 201 Chantery lane 67 Chantr of Christ-Church 290 Chapters rurall 351 Charters, of Ethelbert and Augustine questioned, 7, before K. Withreds time questionable, and why, ibid. Charing 212, 428 Chart 212, 215, 218, 434 Chartham 434 Cheape, what it signifies 149 Cheyham 217 Chiches, a family in Canterbury 145, Aldermen of Burgate 97 Christ-Church. See Cathedrall. Church-government in England, A∣ristocraticall 225, 349 Churches, before the Conquest, mostly of wood 156, 324 Church matters, Laics' punished for meddling in them 268 Churchyards, their beginning in Eng∣land 233 City, a Bishops See, the note of it, 240 Clavering 379 Clementslane 347 Clergy, a discourse of the Priviledge so called 250, 485 Clive 438 Clothmarket 130, 147 Cokyns, a family in Canterbury 116, Aldermen of Worthgate, 97, a quondam hospitall of that name in Canterbury, where, by whom, and when founded ibid. Cokynslane ibid. 347 Combewell 245 Commendation of Canterbury by Malmesbury 150 Commissary, and Commissariship of Canterbury 353 Compositions, between Christ-Church and St Austins, 160, 283, 288, 415, 448, between the City and S. Austins, 338, 459, between the Archbishop and Archdeacon, 319 between the Monks of Christ-Church and the Archdeacon 311, 457, between the hospitall of Poore Priests, and the Parson of S. Margaret 141, 413, betweene the Gray-Fryers and Christ-Church 103 Conduit at Canterbury 274 Consistory at Canterbury 353 Controversie, between the Archbishop of Canterbury and his Monks, 252 betwixt the Archdeacon there and them 304, 311, 313, 314, 315, between the King and the Monks of S. Austins 308, between the Archdeacon and Commissary of Canterbury, 317, between the Archbishop and Archdeacon there, 319, between the City and S. Au∣stins, 17, between the City and S. Gregories 91 Copton 217 Cowlings 216 Cottons hospitall 144 Court Christian 363 Courts of Record 288 Crinemelslane 101 Croydon, the hospitall and schoole there 273 Cumbe 213 Curia Christianitatis 363 D. DAnes, infest S. Austins Abbey 56, the miracle to the contrary fabulous ibid. Invade and take Canterbury, burne the City and
Cathedrall, and tithe the people, 155, 238, 471 Dapschecourt St Eustace 401 Davington 262 Deane of Canterbury 357, 362, of Christ-Church, 275, the names of those of the new foundation 297 Deanes rurall 357 Decanus Christianitatis 362 Dedications of Churches 510 Dei gratia, usuall heretofore in the stile of Archbishops, &c. 269 Derent 431 Diepham, 220, 222, 280. Difference. See Controversie. Digges, a family in Canterbury 100, Aldermen of Newingate 97 Ditch about Canterbury how ancient, and of what breadth primarily 31, the neglect of it late dayes 32 Division of parishes 230 Doccombe 220 Dodingdale: manor 75, tithery, 76, family ibid. Doge Hamon, his Chantery 67, more of him 337 Doomsday booke why so called 4 Dorobernia See Names of Canter. Dorovernia Durovernum Dorobrvis 499 Dover, whence it tooke it name, 37 the Priory there: See S. Martins Dudindale. See Dodingdale, Dungeon: the manor 144, the hill ibid. S. Dunstans Church 342. vicarage 466, his shrine searched, and why 237, 421 Durolevum 25 E. EArhede 430 Earle of Glocester, his office and fees at the Archbishops inthroni∣zation 259 Eastbridge hospitall: of whom first founded and endowed 110, new founded 111, benefactors to it, 116, 118, 119. Chapell and Chantery there, 119, 120, 402. Eastry 213, 217, 222, 263, 432. Ebbeney 214 Ecclesiasticall government of Canter. 349 Ecclesiecdici 352 S. Edmunds Church 20, 343 Eghethorne 214 Einsford 431 Elizabeth Barton. See Nonnery. Encaenia 510 Old Epitaphs, rare in England 242 Esshe 222 K. Ethelberts first charter to S. Au∣stins, 47, his second 48, third, 49 Etheredeshith 215 Royall Exchange at Canterbury 121, 403 Eylwarton 217 F. FAires 246. At Christ-Church, 268 Fairefield 222 Fawkshall 177, 221 Fearnledge 216, 438 Fermary, See Infirmary. Ferry. See Westgate. Feversham: Towne, 244, Abbey,
when, of whom, and for whom founded ibid. names of some Ab∣bats there, 245, Church: difference about the patronage of it 308 Fincux Sr Iohn, 131, 184, 342 Firmins Barton 79 Fishmanschurch 148 Fishmarket ibid. 346 Flamins 224 Fogge Sr Thomas 183 Folkstane 215, 218 Fordwich-Trouts 45 Fraternities 108, 341 Free-Schoole: at S. Martins, 165, At Canterbury 194, 416 French Church in Canterbury 175 Freningham 222, 49 Fryers, how distinguished from Monks, 99, in margin 100 Augustine-emit-Fryers, whence so called 127, their habit 128, their first coming into England ibid. to Canterbury ibid. opposed by the Monks of Christ-Church 129, and by the parson of S. George, ibid. Iohn Capgrave a Fryer there 130, what benefactors they had 131 Black Fryers, 106, whence called Dominican-black, praedicant, ibid. their first coming into England, ibid. and to Canterbury. Their go∣vernours title ibid. Gray-Fryers, 99, whence called Franciscans, Minors, Observants, ibid. Mendicants, 100, their gover∣nours title ibid. when the first of them came into England, ibid. when first, where and by whom seated in Canterbury, ibid. composition be∣tweene them and Christ-Church, 103, their priviledges, 104, bene∣factors ibid. G. GAole of the City. See Prison Gates of the City, their number and names 16 Geddinge 211, 212, 213 Geferscipes, what 364 S. Georges Church, 329, gate. See Newingate. Gildhall in Canterbury 125 Gilds. See Fraternities. Gilingham 429 Godmersham, 213, 218, 222, 434 Goggeshall 218 Government of the City, ecclesiasti∣call, 349, temporall. 363 Graveny 213, 214, 439 Gray Fryers. See Fryers. S. Gregories Priory, when and by whom founded 88, a house of Re∣gular Canons, 89, their habit, ibid. the endowment and revenewes, ibid. the value, 90, fired, ibid. con∣troversie with the City, 91, articles of agreement between them, 397 Guildford, the hospitall there, 274, Sr Iohn Guildford 183 H. HAdleghe 214, 217 Hakynton 87, 309, 453 Halstow 222 Haltone 219 Hamme 215 Harghes 213, 214 Hawte Edmund 183 Hearne 258 Hengam Odmar 183
Henry the fourths monument 185 Herbaldowne, the names originall ex∣amined, 381, Hospitall there wherefore founded, 80, of whom, endowment, ibid. St Nicholas Church there 84, Chantery 86, the foundation of it 378 Hermitage at Northgate 29 Heth 215, 218, 437 Hlyden 211, bis Holy-Crosse Church, 339, Vicarage, 463 Holy maid of Kent. See Nonnery. Holingbourne 217, 221, 435 Horsleghe 218 Hospitall of Eastbridge St Iacobs St Iohns St Lawrence Pore Priests. See Eastbridge St Iacobs St Iohns St Lawrence Poore Priests Hottewell 140 Hubert de Burgh 10 Hulecumb 42 Huntindune 440 Hurdles (or Wattles) their use 10 I. S. IAcobs Hospitall, how ancient, and of what condition 77, the endowment and revenewes, 78, 79, of what value 79, how farre priviledged from tithes, ibid. Ickham 212, 216, 433, a family in Canterbury so sirnamed 14, 330 Iesus hospitall 88 Iewes in Canterbury 124 Iewry-lane ibid. Illegh 217 Impropriations 58 Infirmary and Infirmary Chapell. See in the Cathedrall. Inthronization of the Archbishops: See Archbishop. Ioane Lady Mohun 185 S. Iohns Church: 334, Lane ibid. hos∣pitall: when and by whom foun∣ded 88, the endowment, 92, fired 93, the Chapell there ibid. Irenarchae 359 Isabell Countesse of Atholl 185 Iudicature ecclesiasticall, how exerci∣sed of old 349 K. KIngsbridge: See Eastbridge. Hos∣pitall: See the same. Kingsmill 42 L. LAics, their medling in Church∣matters punished 268 Laling 217 Lambertslane 28, 129 Lamheth 211 Lanes in Canterbury 347 Lagdone, 214, Abbey there, 245, 262 Langport 436 S. Lawrence hospitall, when, by whom and wherefore founded 72, Foun∣ders charter 73, the endowment, ibid. Laza-houss about Canterbury 80
Leanham 216, 437, Mr Cambdens o∣pinion touching it examined 22 At Lee Sir Iohn 403 Leeds Castle 269 Leisdowne 20 Leprosie 80 Lex talionis 304 Liberties of Canterbury 502 Liminge, land in Canterb. granted to the Nonnes there 324, manor, 427 Little-Chert 434 Little-pet-lane 124 Liveland 437 Livingsbourne-Chantery 119, 404 Loders-lane 460 Longport 67 Lose 214, 440 Lukedale-Chantery, 66, foundation of it 476 M. MAidstone, hospitall, and colledge 254, 262, 265, manor, 429 Maiors of Canterbury, a Catalogue of them 366, &c. Malling 214, 431 Malmesbury, his commendation of Canterbury 15 Manors: of the Archbishop: See Archbishop: of the Monks of Christ-Church: See Monks. Manumission 182 St Margarets-Church, 344, Officials court there when first erected 346, the parsonage of it granted to Poore Priests-Hospitall 137 Margaret Dutchesse of Clarence, her monument 184 Market-crosse: See Bulstake. Market-field 149 St Martins: by Canterb. 64, Bishops See there, 65, 299, Schoole, 65, 195 416, by Dover, 220, when and of whom founded, 24, Buckland parsonage appropriated to it 263 St Mary Bredin Church 343 St Mary Bredman Church 329 St Mary Castle Church 76, 333 St Mary Magdalen Church, 331, Magdalen-Croft 332 S. Mary Northgate Church, 339, Vi∣carage 462 S. Mary Queningate Church: See Queningate. Mayners, a family in Canterbury 142 Spittle there, of whom founded, ibid. Chapell to it, ib. revenew, ib. Meadlane 101 Medmilne 138 Meltons 213 Mepeham manor, 216, bis. 222, 438, Archbishop, his tombe mistaken 262 Mercats in the City, and Suburbs 147 Mersey 217 Mersham 219, 435 Mersteham 217 S. Michael of Burgate Church: See Burgate. S. Mildreds Church 335 Milles upon Stoure 42 Milon 217, 218 Minchen-wood, 69, Nonnes ancient∣ly called Minchens ibid. Mints at Canterbury 123, 209 Mohuns, a family 185 English Monasteries of two sorts 152 Monks, whereby distinguished from Fryers, 99, in marg. 100, their vow, 153, diet, 200, employment, 262, those of Christ-Church, of what rder 153, their habit 154, manors 187, 202, 241, 432, dyed all to five 235, banished, 282, re∣stored, ibid. distressed 289
Monksda 77 Monkish policy 64 Monkton 216, 222, 263, 433 Monuments in Christ-Church 180 Mortality great in England 256, 264 Mortimer Sir Robert 280 Mortmaine 44 Mosaique-worke 171 Mote 66 N. NAmes, of Canterbury. See Can∣terbury, of the Cathedrall severall times altered: See in the Cathedrall. Newingate, 18, Ward 127 Newington by Sittingbourne, 25, ano∣ther Newinton 217 Newstreet 67, 460 S. Nicholas of Herbaldowne. See Her∣baldowne in Thanet 258 Niwenden 436 Nonnery of S. Sepulchres, when and by whom founded 68, the Nonnes there inclosed, 70, their number, 71, habit, ibid. Elizabeth Barton, the holy Maid of Kent, a name there, here impostures 70 Nonnes anciently called Minchens 69 Northfleet 429 Northgate, 29, Ward 132 Northwood: See Barton. Archbishops Norwood, 427, Monks Norwood, 432, Sir Roger Norwood 284 Notaries 287, 443, 445 Notaria 359 Noviomagus 24 Nunhelmestune 211 O. OAten-hill 148 Odo Archbishop, his tombe mistaken 236 Offa King, his charter to Christ-Church 234, 376 Officialls court. See S. Margarets Church. Orgariswike 212 Orpintune 439 Osborne the Monk, his relation of the Danish siege and massacre 471 Osterland 216 Otteford 41, 212, 214, 430 Out-aliens way 22 P. PAgeham 211, 222 Palace (of the Archbishop) at Canterbury 186 St Pancrace-Chapell 61 Parish-Churches in Canterbury, of them in generall, 324, in particu∣lar 325, &c. Parishes, their division 230 Pavement of the City, an Act of Par∣liament about it 148, 410 St Pauls Church, 337, Vicarage 461 Pecchinges 216 Peckham, 216, 438, Archbishop, his tombe mistaken 256 Periodeutai 352 St Peters Church 330 Petham 426 Pikenot-alley 346 Pitsaeus, Balaeus his plagiary 277 Pluckley 429 Pococks-lane 347 Polres, a family in Canterbury, Alder∣men of Northgate 97 Pomoerium, what 32 Poore-Priests Hospitall in Canter∣bury, when, of whom, and for whom founded, 136, Chapell, ibid. spared by the Dissolution, 140, when afterwards surrendred, 141,
granted to the City, ibid. The grant, 405, Composition with the Parson of S. Margaret 141, 413 Porta machecollata (a French word, as I have since learned) 29 Portrve of Canterbury 363 Portsoca 97 Posternes 31 Poultry 22 Prefect of Canterbury 363 Prestantune 216 Preston 217, 437 Princes Priests, their house in Canter∣bury: See Blacke Prince. Priors: alien, suppressed, 262, of Christ-Church, a Catalogue of them 275, &c. Priors Kay at Ford∣wich, 288, 450, a Lord Prior, 29, a spirituall Baron 298, the forme of his election and installation, 298, 452 Priory: of Christ-Church, fired 295, dissolved 297, value, 298, of Do∣ver, See S. Martin: of S. Gregories: See S. Gregories. Prison, in the Castle. See Castle. City-Prison, 27, 28, called the Spech-house 126, and why 127 Professions, of divers Abbots 245 Prohibitions, courses taken for their restraint 258 Provost of Canterbury 363 Q. QVarell. See Controversie. Queningate, 29, Church, 30, market, 147, in the margent, lane, 193 R. RAculver, 216, 220, 239, 258, 424, 427 S. Radegunds-Abbey 245 Reculver. See Raculver. Rents, of Church-lands, why so small 264 Rethercheape 149 Ridingate, 18, Ward 144 Risbergh 217 River of Stour, 37, the name, how ancient, and whence derived, ibid. projects to enlarge it 38 Rochester, the Bishoprick there, made elective 304 Rode, between London, and Canter∣bury, how it lay in the Romans time 21 Rokinge 212 Roman-bricks, 6, 62, 65, ports, 19, wayes 23 Ropers, a family in Canterbury 342 Ros Sir Thomas 118, 380 Rurall-Deanes 357 Rush-market 147 S. SAcrist of Christ-Church, his office, and charge 172, 201 Saendling 439 Salcockslane 347 Salthill 148 Saltwood 43y Sandherst 212 Sandwich, the Port there given to Christ-Church 155, resiged to the Crown 156, touching it again 217, 218, 219, 221, bis. 433 Sanguinis minutio, what, and why used of Monks 261 S. Saviours Church: See Cathedrall. Schoole: at Canterbury, 194, 416, at S. Martin, ibid. and 65, of the Iewes 124 Seales, not used here before the Con∣quest,
158, Authenticke Seales, 288 Septvant, a family 182, 330 S. Sepulchres Church, 71, Church∣yard and Parish, ibid. Nonnery: See Nonnery. Sesalter 222, 434 Shaffordsmill 45 Shaldeford 213 Sheldich 211 Shepeshanklane 347 Slindone 220 Smiths company 108 South Church 213 Spech-house, and Spech-house. lane, 28, 126 Staple, of wool, at Canterbury 133 Staplegate, ibid. a family in Canterbury 133, 328 S. Stephens. See Hakinton. Stystede 218, 220 Stodmersh, the parsonage of it granted to Poore Priests Hospitall 137 Stour. See River. Stoursaete 38, 425 Stourstreet 38 Stouting 218 Strangers, way, 22, Church, 175 Streets, an Act of Parliament for paving them 148 Suburbs 45 Sudbury Archbishop, a worthy bene∣factor to our City, 11, 265, his tombe mistaken 236, 65 Summagium (or Summarium) bosci, in Blenwood, granted to S. Sepulcres, 69, to S. Gregories, ibid. to Herbal∣downe-Hospitall ibid. Sunderherst 430 Sunnewineslane 347 Surling 440 Iewish Synagogue (or Schoole) at Can∣terbury. See Schoole. Synods 351 T. TAllage 284 Templares, their house in Can∣terbury 134 Temporall government of Canterbu∣ry. See Government. Tenham 212, 309, 428 Terrings 216 Terstane 221 Testes Synodales 359 Theobald Archbishop, his Tombe mistaken 243 S. Thomas hill 87 Thorholt-wood 221, 260 Thoroughfare in S. Austins Church∣yard 17 Thorough-hall-lane 147 Thurrock 218 Tiernes, a family in Canterbury, Al∣dermen of Worthgate 97 Tierne-crouch (or crosse) 20, 344 Tilemannestune 432 Tithes, how paid in Canterbury, 348, 468, 470 Titular-Bishops: See Bishops. Tombes, anciently how scituate, 252 divers in Christ-Church, mistaken: See Cathedrall. Totius Angliae Primas, in the Arch∣bishops title, when it first came up 240 Treasurer, of Christ-Church, his office, and charge 201 S. Trinity-Church: See Cathedrall. Turretts, in the City-wall, how ma∣ny, 16, convenient for Pest-houses ibid. V. VAgniacae 25 Verses, in Christ-Church-Win∣dowes
174, 385 A Vicars stipend, what of old 253 Vines 286 Vlcombe, the Colledge there, of whom erected 253 Vnlawfullnesses of buriall in Cities: See Buriall. Vow of Monks, threefold 153 W. VVAles, laid to the province of Canterbury [252 Waleworth 216 Wall, about Canterbury, 6. how anci∣ent, ibid. repaired by Archbishop Lanfranc, 8, provision to secure it, 10, benefactors to it, 11, 15, 327, a generall taxe throughout, the City, for repaire of it, 11, mea∣sured, and why, 13, the late neg∣lect of it censured, 14, Monks of Christ-Church, and their men, quit of murage 9, 10 Wardm 97 Wards, the City divided into them 96 Warelane 347 Warbam Archbishop, his bad presage of a Thomas, 272, Erasmus testi∣mony of him ibid. Waterlock-lane 135 Watling-street, in Canterbury 19 Wattles; See Hurdles. Welle 435 Werehorne 217, 436 West-cliffe 223 Westerham ibid. Westgate 27, the prison there, ibid. mill, 44, street, 94, Aldermanry, 97, ward 99, 193 Westwell 162, 223 Wheat-market 147 Willards-lane 347 Winchepe 149 Winchelsey Archbishop, where en∣tombed 257 Windowes at Christ-Church, the Iron∣worke, and verses 174, 385 Wingham Colledge: when, and of whom erected, 255, manor 427 Winulphus Hospitall: See Mayners-Spittle. Wodetone 211 Wood, a family in Canterbury: See Atwood. Woodden Churches: See Churches. Worthgate, 21, ward 136 Wroteham 431 Wye Colledge, when, and of whom erected, 271, surrendred, ibid. value, ibid. Wyke 66 Y. YElverton-Tithery. 310 FINIS.
