23876 S117724 99852934 18289
Ihesus. ¶The floure of the commaundementes of god with many exam∣ples and auctorytees extracte and drawen as well of holy scryptures as of other doctours and good auncient faders / the whiche is moche vtyle and prouffytable vnto all people. ¶The .x. commaundementes of the lawe. ¶Thou shalt worshyp one god onely. And loue hym with thy herte perfytely ¶God in vayne swere not wylfully Ne by nothynge that he made veryly ¶The sonday kepe and halow holyly Herȳge gods seruyce on them deuoutly ¶Fader and moder honour thou lowly And in theyr nede helpe them gladly ¶Slee thou no man malycyously Nor to his dethe consent wytyngly ¶Thou ne shalte commyt lechery But with thy wyfe in wedlocke onely ¶Thy neyghbours goodes stele not falsly. Nor nothynge withholde vntruely ¶Fals wytnesse bere thou not slyly Nor fals recorde for none enuy ¶Other mennes wyues take not flesshely Ne other women to knowe carnally ¶Other mennes godes coueyt not lightly Nor holde from them vnryghtfully ¶The fyue commaundemen¦tes of the chyrche. ¶The sondayes here thou masse and the festes of cōmaundement. ¶Of thy synnes thou the confesse at the leest one tyme of the yere. ¶And thy creatour thou shalte re∣ceyue / at Eester humbly. ¶These feestes thou shalte halo∣we / that ben gyuen the in cōmaun¦dement. ¶The foure ymbres vigyles thou shal faste / & the lente entyerly.
INRI depiction of the crucifixion of Jesus
The prologue of the translatour. IN the begynnynge of this lytell werke Almyghty god be my spede Indewe me lorde with some lytell sperke Of grace and connynge / my penne to lede So that in nothynge I excede Folowynge myn auctour / truely to endyght To thy laude and prayse in doynge this dede. And of thy blyssed mod / lorde moost of might O maris stella / o sterre moost bryght Shynynge in the fyrmament or skye The whiche doost guyde ye maryners by night And where thy helpe / sholde perysshe & deye As thou in heuen / syttest ryght hye Praye for those / vnto thy blyssed son That this to rede wyll them applye For theyr rewarde / may haue saluacyon Vpon the payne / of eternall dampnacyon To lerne and knowe / ye cōmaundements ten We all be bounde / without excusacyon And in especyall / we crysten men The day shall come / we knowe not when That vnto accompt / called we shall be For fere and drede / tremble shall we then And knowe not for helpe whyder to fle Wherfore in this worlde / blyssed is he That in herte lyueth pure and clene The deuyll / ye worlde / our cōscyence these thre Wyll cause our synnes / to be knowen & sene And what soeuer our lyfe hath bene Good of yll / it shall appere Wyll we or nyll we / sooner than we wene Before god / his sayntes / & his moder dere Wherfore whyles we ben lyuynge here Hauynge tyme / oportunyte / and space Serue we god / with herte entere Makynge petycyon vnto his grace In humble wyse / that in that place Where he is we may euer dwell Hauynge the fruycyon of his blyssed face And to be delyuered from the paynes of hell These doctours dyuyne / done preche and tell That ydlenes is a ryght peryllous vyce By the whiche our forne faders fell Example we haue of Salamon the wyse That whan he was besyed / about the deuyse. Of goddes temple / and good operacyon And in other vertues hym dyde excercyse He was neuer ouercome by temptacyon But as soone as he had delectacyon In ydlenes / slouthe / and womans company. Of wyll dysposed / by delyberacyon Renouncinge his faythe / commyted ydolatry Dauyd also lyued in aduoutry With Vryes wyfe / and caused to be slayne And ydlenes the rote / & cause of all theyr foly / This story the byble reherceth playne Ryght many in nōbre hath be knowen & seyen That ydlenes hath brought vnto perdycyon By lawe and Iustyce / demed vnto payne For theyr demerytes / and transgressyon And to auoyde / the peryllous infeccyon Of ydlenes slouthe / & other occasyōs of synne Hath boded me / vnder correccyon Out of frensshe / this mater to begyn Entendynge therby / no syluer for to wyn Ne yet none other temporall gayne But welthe of soules / escapynge the engyn Of the deuyll of hell / his snares / & his chayne Who euer is besy / gladde / and fayne Soules to dystroye / whome god hath electe Who gyue vs grace / heuen to attayne Of my hole mynde / this is theffecte ¶Explicit.
Tabula. ¶Here foloweth the table of this boke. MAn reasonable call the ayde of god & of the vyrgyn Mary for to enlumyne thin entēdement to knowe thy selfe. That is to knowe what thou arte / what synnes reygne in the / & how thou hast dyso¦beyed vnto god in brekynge his cōmaunde¦mentes. Saynt Bernarde sayth that thou shalt be better & more to alowe yf thou kno¦we thy selfe than yf thou knewe the cours of the sterres / the foundementes of ye erthe the strengthes of herbes / the complexyons of men and that thou haddest knowlege of the thynges celestyalles & infernalles. Vn∣de bernardus. Studo cognoscere teipsum qr multo melior et laudabilior eris si tei{pre}m cognoscas / {quam} si teiplum negleto cognosceris cursus syderum / fundamenta terrarū / vi∣res herbarum / complexiones hominum / et haberos noticiam celestum et infernorum. ¶Many persones there ben throughout ye worlde the whiche wyll not beleue of sym∣ple worde that they the whiche transgresse the commaundementes of god gone vnto dampnacion and pardycyon. And they the whiche wyll not beleue it / study they & seke they by this table theyr synnes as they ben declared in this boke / & they shall fynde by the holy scrypture wytnesse of certayne by auctorytees yt they lose paradyse & descēde in to hell in the whiche they shall be eternal¦ly without euer to haue ayde ne socoures in ony maner. ¶And for to fynde lyghtly the maters wherof this boke speketh hym beho¦ueth to loke what nombre & lettre is mar∣keth & gooth & in the nombre in the heyght of ye margen / & in those nombres & lettres shall be founde that yt a man demaūdeth. ¶The perambule & dyuysyon of this boke in the nombre .i. lettre .A. and the lefe .i. ¶To loue god wt all his herte & his neygh∣bour as hymselfe .i. B Folio. i Wherfor a mā sholde loue god with all his herte .i. C. Fo. i ¶Aboue all thynges .i. D Folio. ii ¶More than worldly goodes i. E Fo. ii ¶More than fader & moder i. F Fo. iii ¶More than his owne body .i. G Fo. iii More than all estates .i. h Fo iiii. Exāple .l. ii ¶That the auarycyous loue ye golde & syl∣uer more than god .ix. B Fo. xx ¶That the glotōs loue theyr wombes mo∣re than god .ix. E Fo. xxi ¶That this commaundemēt compryseth vnder it ye thre fyrst cōmaundemētes & the thre vertues theologalles .ii. A Fo. iiii ¶That many persones loue other thȳges more than god .ix. D Fo. xx To loue his neyghbour .ii. E Fo. v ¶The thynges esmoeuynges to loue his neyghbour .ii. F Fo. v ¶That he is cōmaūded to loue his neygh∣bour as hymselfe .ii. G Fo. vi ¶That to loue his neyghbour as hȳself cō¦pryseth ye werkes of mercy / ye .vii. last com∣maundemēts & ye cardynal vertues .ii. h. &c ¶That it is commaunded yt we loue eche other as god hath loued vs .iii. A Fo. v That god hath loued vs in many maners wherof we shall tell .v. Fyrst he hath loued vs for to saue and socour vs .iii. B Fo. viii ¶Secondly he hath loued the persones & hated the vyces .iii. C Fo. viii ¶Questyon / yf ye loue of theues & sȳners ye loue eche other be good .iii. C. eodem ¶Thyrdly god hath loued vs of worde & of operacyon togyders .iii. D Fo. viii ¶Fourthly he hath vs loued more thā his owne body .iii. E Fo. viii ¶Fyfthly he hath loued ye saluacyon of his ennemyes .iii. F Fo. viii ¶Questyon / how may I loue those ye doo me harme .iii. G Fo. ix ¶Questyon / who is it that is my neygh∣bour .iii. H Fo. ix
¶Of the vertue of charyte the whiche ex∣tendeth in all the commaundementes of god .iiii. A. Folio. x ¶How god defendeth in his commaunde¦mentes all euyll wordes / thoughtes / and o∣peracyons / & there commaundeth all good operacyons .v. A. Folio .xi. ¶Questyon vnder what commaundemē¦tes ben defended ye .vii. deedly synnes. And where ben commaunded the vertues oppo¦sytes and contraryes .v. C. Fo .xii. ¶Of the condycyons of the synners after the braunches of the seuen synnes mortal∣les .v. D. Folio .xiii. ¶Here foloweth the fyrst cōmaundement THe fyrst commaundement of god defendeth many thynges / and com¦maundeth some .vi. A. Folio. xiii ¶Fyrst it is commaunded to beleue in one onely god in trynyte / and to worshyp hym soueraynly .vi. B. Fo. xiiii ¶Secondly it is defēded to beleue in ydol¦les & straunge goddes in errours & folysshe credences .vi. C. Folio. xv ¶Thyrdly all the artycles of the fayth ben commaunded to beleue in lykewyse as holy chyrche holdeth & beleueth .vii. A. Fo. xvi ¶Fourthly of theffect of the .vii. sacramen¦tes the whiche ben comprehended vnder yt the artycles of the faythe. Credo sanctam ecclesiam catholicā. Sctōrum communio∣nē. Remissionē pctōrum .viii. A. Fo. xvii ¶Example in eodē loco .viii. C. Fo. xix ¶Fyfthly it is commaunded to loue god a¦boue all thynges. And how many people lo¦ueth other worldly thynges more than our lorde god .ix. A. Folio .xx. ¶Syxtely the pryde the whiche is agaynst the dyleccyon of god is defended in this cō∣maundement .ix. E. Fo. xxi ¶That humylyte is commaunded oueral & pryde defended .ix. F. Fo. xxi ¶Seuenthly that the synne of ydolatry & of infydelyte noyeth in many maners vnto the soules of them the whiche hath broken this cōmaundemēt. Quere .xliiii. b / c / d / e / f g / h / i / k. Folio .Ciii. ¶Of the seconde cōmaundement. THe seconde cōmaundement of god treateth of them the which swereth vnprouffytably .x. A. Fo. xxii ¶That god defendeth al vayne othes and inutyles vnder this worde (vanum) / & all le synges and languages the whiche ben a∣gaynst the dyleccyon of hym or of his holy sayntes .x. B. Folio. xxii ¶The maners of forswerynge by the othe affermynge .xi. A. B. Folio. xxiii ¶To be forsworne by the othe promyttyn¦ge .xi. C Folio. xiiii ¶That a venyall synne is transmuted in¦to mortall in foure maners .xi. D. Fo. xxv ¶That one othe is more byndynge than another .xi. E. Fo. xxv ¶The maners to blaspheme god / & that ye blasphemers ben yll .xii. A. B. Fo. xxvi ¶That the synne of blaspheme & of periu∣rynge noyeth in many maners vnto ye sou∣les of them the whiche hath broken this se∣conde cōmaundement. Quere ad numerū .xliiii. b / c / d / e / f / g / h / i / k / Fo. Ciii ¶Questyon / yf a man cōmyt synne at eue¦ry tyme yt he swereth .xiii. A. Fo. xxviii ¶What is requysyte to swere lefully with¦out ony synne .xiii. B. Fo. xxix ¶That a man sholde accomplysshe the vo¦wes made Iustly .xiii. C. Fo. xxix ¶That thynges requysyte to a vowe that is lefull .xiii. D. Folio. xxx ¶The thȳges wherfore a man is not boū∣de to accōplysshe his vowe .xiii. E. Fo. xxx ¶Remedy ayenst swerynge .xiii. F. Fo. xxx
¶Of the thyrde commaundement. THe thirde cōmaundement cōmaun¦deth to kepe ye feestes .xiii. A. Fo. xxx ¶The causes & reasons wherfore the son∣dayes and feestes ben commaunded to san¦ctyfye .xiiii. B Fo. xxxi ¶Questyon at what houre one sholde be¦gyn to kepe the feestes .xiiii. C Fo. xxxii ¶Questyon wherfore men do kepe an ho∣ly daye in one countre and not in another countree .xiiii. D Fo. xxxii ¶How in .vi. maners men sanctyfye the fe¦stes commaunded / the whiche maners ben put by psalmes / and some ben necessaryes for the sanctyfycacyon of the feestes / and the other ben Cerymonyalles for the au∣gmentacyon of good operacyons and of vertues .xv. A Fo. xxxii ¶The fyrst maner that men sanctyfyeth the feestes is for to abstayne them fro worl¦dely operacyons .xv. A Fo. xxxii ¶Questyon / yf a man may werke on the holy day without commyttynge of mortall synne .xv. B Fo. xxxii ¶The seconde mater is for to take hede to here the seruyce and the predycacyons or sermons xv. C. d. Fo. xxxiii ¶The thyrde maner is for to serue god & his sayntes .xvi. A Fo. xxxiiii The .iiii. is to wake ī oraysō .xvi. b. Fo. xxxv ¶The fyfth maner is for to yelde graces & thankes vnto god of his goodnes yt he hath don vnto vs .xvii. A Fo. xxxvi ¶Example of a good chylde the whiche yel¦ded graces and praysynges vnto our lorde in al the aduersytees the whiche came vnto hym .xvii. B Fo. xxxvii ¶The syxte is to wake in cōtemplacyon & to do ye werkes of mercy .xvii. C. Fo. xxxviii ¶That the reuerence and sanctyfycacyon of all holy thynges is brought in this com∣maundement .xvii. D. Fo. xxxviii ¶The maners how men breke the feestes commaunded .xviii. A Fo. xxxix ¶That those the whiche breketh ye feestes commaunded ben punysshed oft tymes in this worlde and they apperceyue not from whens suche punycyon vnto theym proce∣deth .xix. A Folio. xl ¶Of slouthe yt god defēdeth .xix. B. Fo. xlii ¶Example of a relygyous the whiche wol¦de do no good dede .xix. C Fo. xlii ¶Example of a man the whiche is dāpned for that / that he wolde doo no good opera∣cyons .xix. D Folio. xlii ¶Example of a curate the whiche taryed to admynyster the sacraments vnto his pa¦rysshen yt was seke .viii. C Fo. xix ¶That the synne too breke the feestes no∣yeth in many maners vnto the soules of them the whiche hath dysobeyed this thyr-cōmaundement. Quere ad numerū .xliiii. b / c / d / e / f / g / h / i / k / Fo. Ciii ¶Of the fourth cōmaundement. THe fourth commaundemēt of god treateth that a man sholde loue his parentes .xx. A Fo. xliii ¶Whiche ben the faders pryncypalles yt a man sholde honour .xx. B Fo. xliii ¶That in .vii. maners chyldren do honour vnto theyr faders .xxi. A Fo. xliiii ¶Fyrst for to salue them / to be bare heeded & to bowe the knee .xxi. B Fo. xliiii ¶Secondly to speke vnto theym swetely and humbly .xxi. C. Fo. xlv ¶Thyrdly for to loue thē in sechynge theyr welthe & helthe .xxi. D Fo. xlv ¶Fourthly for to submyt them in to theyr subieccyon and seruyce .xxi. E Fo. xlv ¶Fyfthly for to submyt theym vnto theyr obedyence .xxi. F Fo. xlv ¶Sextly for to helpe them wt body and wt goodes in necessyte .xxi. G Fo. xlvi
¶Seuenthly for to supporte them in theyr aege .xxi. H Fo. xlvii ¶The thynges that styreth for to honoure theyr faders .xxi. I Fo. xlvii ¶That the faders oweth vnto theyr chyl∣dren foure thynges the whiche ben nourys∣shynge / correccyon / techynge / & to shewe good example .xxii. a / b / c / d / e Fo. xlvii ¶That it is also commaunded to loue his neyghbour as hymselfe as it is declared he¦re before. Quere .ii. G Fo. vi ¶That the werkes of mercy ben here com¦maunded to be done towarde theyr faders and neyghboures indygentes and nedy .xxiii. A / b / c / d / e / f / g / h / i / k / l / m. Fo. l ¶That pryde the whiche is agaynst the dy¦leccyon of thy neyghbour is here defended & humylyte cōmaunded .ix. e / f. Fo. xxi ¶That the synne of those chyldren the whi¦che dyshonour fader & moder and the whi∣che fayle them at nede noyeth in many ma¦ners vnto theyr soules. Quere ad nume{rum} .xliiii. b / c / d / e / f / g / h / i / k. Folio .Ciii. ¶Of the fyfth commaundement. THe fyfth cōmaundemēt defendeth homycyde vniust .xxiiii. A Fo. liii ¶Of dethe spyrytuall and corporall yt god defendeth .xxiiii. B Folio. liii ¶That a man commytteth homycyde bo∣the corporally and spyrytually in many ma¦ners .xxiiii. C Folio. lv ¶That homycyde is a synne that demaun¦deth vengeaunce .xxv. A. Fo. lvii ¶A notable that these rauysshers ben de∣puted homycydes .xxiiii. D Fo. lvi ¶Whan it is that betynge is leful / & whan it is defended .xxv. B Folio. lvii ¶That betȳge is greter offence in one per¦sone than in another in eod. B. ¶That god defendeth all yre iniust ayenst his neyghbour .xxvi. A Fo. lviii ¶Of yre in herte .xxvi. B Fo. lviii ¶Of Yre the whiche is shewed bysygne or token .xxvi. C Folio. lviii ¶Of yre shewed by worde .xxvi. d. Fo. lviii ¶Of yre the whiche is shewed in operacy∣on and dede .xxvi. E. Fo. lix ¶That god defendeth Yre agaynst hym selfe .xxvi. F. Folio. lix ¶Of yre yt is ayenst god .xxvi. G Fo. lx ¶Of vengeaūce yt god defēdeth .xxvi. h. fo. lx ¶Questyon / whan it is that Yre is good / and whan it is venyall synne or whan it is mortall .xxvi. K Fo. lxii ¶Of remedyes agaynst the cursed synne of Yre .xxvi .L. Fo. lxiii ¶Of hate that god defendeth agaynst his neyghbour .xxvii. A Fo. lxiiii ¶That the synne of hae is to drede & to fle for fyue thynges .xxvii. b / c / d / e. &c. Fo. lxv ¶Other ylles .xliiii. b / c / d / e / f. &c. Fo. Ciii ¶That these haynours sholde pardon & pa¦cyfy togyders the iniuryes & offences done yf they wyll that god pardon theym theyr synnes .xxvii. G. Fo .lxvi. ¶Example of a knyght the whiche pardo∣ned vnto hym the whiche hadde slayne his fader and he hadde pardon for his synnes in eodem loco .xxvi. I Fo. lxvii ¶Other examples .Cxii. l / m. Fo. CC. xlii ¶To loue his neyghbour as he dooth hym selfe .ii. G Folio. vi ¶That enuy and al her braunches and de¦pendaunces ben defended by this cōmaun∣dement .xxvii. K. Fo. lxvii ¶Of the vertue of charyte the whiche is a¦gaynst the synne of enuye .iiii. A Fo. x ¶Of the vertue of pacyence the whiche is agaynst ye synne of Yre .xxviii. A Fo. lxviii ¶That the synnes of homycyde / yre / hate & enuye noyeth in many maners vnto the soules of them ye whiche hath broken this fyfth. commaundement. Quere ad nume{rum} xliiii. b / c / d / e / f / g / h / i / k. Fo. Ciii
¶Of the syxte commaundement. THe syxte cōmaundemement of god defendeth theft & all the braunches of auaryce .xxix. A. Folio. lxix ¶Of theft yt god defēdeth .xxix. B. Fo. lxx Of sacrylege yt god defēdeth .xxx. a. fo. lxxi ¶The examplary of those the whiche wel or yll paye theyr dysmes the whiche god cō¦maundeth to pay cerymonyally .xxxi. a / b / c / d / e. Folio .lxxiii. ¶A notable of rauysshers .xxiiii. D. Fo. lvi ¶Examples .Cix. e / f. Fo. CCxxxv Of vsury yt god defēdeth .xxxii. a. Fo. lxxv ¶Than faynt wrapped vsury hath .vii. kȳ¦des the whiche ben deuyded in many ma∣ners .xxxii. b / c / d / e / f / g / h / i. Fo. lxxvi ¶A notable of vsury manyfest .xxxii. K. Folio .lxxviii. ¶Of Symony the whiche is commytted in byenge and sellynge the thynges espyry∣tualles .xxxiii. A. Fo. lxxviii ¶That man commytteth symony in ma∣ny maners .xxxiii. B. Fo. lxxix Primo whan ony gyueth for to entre in to holy ordres / or in to ony bnefyce .xxxiii. C Secundo whan ony promytteth not to ta∣ke ony thynge of his tytle to be preest. D. Tertio whā that a man permytteth / or sel¦leth or byeth benefyces. E. F. G. H Quarto whan ony gyueth for to entre in to relygyon. I Quinto whan ony selleth the sacramentes of the chyrche. K. L. M Sixtely whan ony selleth ye gyftes of gra∣ce / or of vertues / or of connynge. N. ¶A notable yt these aduocates sholde not sell theyr scyences / but the trauayle of theyr bodyes .xxxiii. O. Fo. lxxxi ¶Example .lxxxi. E Fo. Clxxxii ¶Another example .Cvi. C. Fo. CCxxvii ¶The mater of restytucyon the whiche is in .v. questyōs .xxxiiii. a / b / c / d / e / f. Fo. lxxxii ¶That the synnes of thefte / auaryce / vsu¦ry / & symony noyeth in many maners vn∣to ye soules of those the whiche breketh this sexte commaundement. Quere ad nume{rum} xliiii. b / c / d / e / f / g / h / i / k. Folio .Ciii. ¶Of the seuenth commaundement THe seuenth cōmaundement of god defendeth all maners of lechery yt a man cōmytteth in dede .xxxv. A. Fo. lxxxiiii ¶Of ye synne of fornycacyon that god de∣fendeth .xxxv. B. Fo. lxxxiiii ¶Of ye synne of aduoutry the whiche god defendeth .xxxvi. A Fo. lxxxv ¶Of thynges merytoryous / and of the of¦fences lecherouses yt man cōmytteth wt his owne wyfe .xxxvi. D. Fo. lxxxvii ¶Fyue examples ben wryten here of some ye whiche hath knowen theyr owne wyues vnduely .xxxvi. e / f / g / h / i. Fo. lxxxvii ¶Of defloracyon the whiche god defen∣deth .xxxvii. A. Fo. lxxxviii Of incest yt is defēded .xxxvii. b. Fo. lxxxviii ¶Of sacrylege as vnto lechery yt god de∣fendeth .xxxvii. C. Fo. lxxxviii ¶Of thynges the whiche aggraueth the synne of the flesshe in men of the holy chyr∣che .xxxvii. D. Fo. lxxxviii ¶Examples in eodē loco. e / f. Fo. lxxxix ¶Of the synne agaynst nature & of sodo∣myte yt god defendeth .xxxvii. g. Fo. lxxxx ¶Of the vertue of chastyte in all sortes of people .xxxviii. A Folio. lxxxx ¶Of dronkennes and glotonny that god defendeth .xxxix. A Fo. lxxxxii ¶Of fastynge the whiche god commaun∣deth .xxxix. B. Fo. lxxxxiii ¶That the synne of lechery noyeth in ma¦ny maners vnto the soules of them ye whi∣che breke the .vii. commaundement. Quere xliiii. b / c / d / e / f / g / h / i / k. Fo. Ciii
¶Of the .viii. commaundement. THe .viii. commaundemente of god deffendeth all wordes the whiche ben agaynst the dyleccyon of his neygh∣bour .xl. A Fo. lxxxxiiii ¶Of fals wytnessynge that god dooth de∣fendeth .xl. B Fo. lxxxxiiii ¶Of cursed language that god dooth de∣fendeth .xl. C Fo. lxxxxvi Of lyenge yt god defēdeth .xli. a. Fo. lxxxxvii ¶Eyght kȳdes of lyenge .xli. b. Fo. lxxxxvii ¶That a man sholde fle lyenge & loue very¦te for many thynges .xli. C Fo. lxxxxviii ¶Of the .ix. commaundement THe .ix. cōmaundement of god defen¦deth the lecherous thoughtes & cō∣maūdeth clennes of herte .xli. a. Fo. lxxxxix ¶The concupyscence of the flesshe. How a man commytteth lecherye in his thought .xlii. B Fo. lxxxxix ¶The ylles and domages yt the yll though¦tes done .xlii. D Fo. C ¶Of the .x. commaundement. THe .x. commaundement of god de∣fendeth all yll thoughtes of thefte / couetyse / auaryce the whiche ben agaynst ye dyleccyon of his neyghbour .xliii. A. Fo. C ¶That those the whiche haue broken the commaundementes of god and the whiche ben in mortal synne sholde not withdrawe to do of good dedes though they sholde be dampned .xliii. B Fo. Ci ¶The dyfference betwene the good dedes the whiche is done in mortal synne & that yt is done in the state of grace .xliii. D. Fo. Cii ¶The thynges esmoeuynges for to kepe ye cōmaundementes of god .xliiii. A. Fo. Ciii ¶That many thynges ben noysaunts vn¦to those the whiche breketh the commaun∣dementes of god .xliiii. B Fo. Ciii ¶Fyrst the soule of the fractoure of euery commaundement is put vnto pouerte / for all inobedyence the whiche is mortal synne maketh to put inforgetfulnes the vertues and good operacyōs lately goten in eodē. b ¶Secondly inobedyēce the whiche is mor¦tall syn̄e noyeth vnto ye soule / for yf she rey¦gne in ony person she kepeth & letteth it fro¦getynge of vertues & of good spyrytuall de¦des yt ben merytoryous .xliiii. C Fo. Cv ¶Thyrdely Inbedyence noyeth. For she dyffameth the persones the whiche it com∣mytteth .xliiii. D Fo. Cvi ¶Fourthly Inobedyence noyeth. For she aueugleth & blyndeth the in wat de eyemof the soule .xliiii. E Fo. Cvii ¶Fyfthely inobedyence noyeth. For it is a lyen yt holdeth ye soules .xliiii. F. Fo. Cviii ¶Syxtely inobedyence noyeth / for she sle∣eth spyrytually the soule of the dethe of gylte .xliiii. G Fo. Cix ¶Seuenthly inobedyence noyeth / for she maketh to curse and too excommunycate .xliiii. H. Fo. Cix ¶Eyghtly inobedyence noyeth / for she put¦teth from paradyse .xliiii. I Fo. Cix ¶Nynthly inobedience noyeth / for she bȳ∣deth to payne & punycyon .xliiii. K. Fo. Cxi ¶All these thinges beforesayd serueth and also appropryeth vnto euery commaunde∣ment eyght condycyons the whiche the pyl¦grym of paradyse ought for to haue. Quē .xlv. A / b / c / d / e. &c. Fo. Cxii ¶Example that the body the whiche is a fole draweth the soule in to the waye of per¦dycyon of hell .xlvi. A Fo. Cxvi ¶That the pylgrym of paradyse sholde cō¦syder .iiii. thynges .xlvi. B Fo. Cxvi ¶Of the rewarde eternall that they shall haue the whiche kepe the commaundemen¦tes of god .xlvii. A Fo. Cxvii
¶Item of the rewarde of them the which well or euyl haue enployed theyr wyttes of nature vpon the holy commaundementes of god .xlviii. A Fo. Cxx ¶The maledyccions & excommunycaciōs of them the whiche haue dysobeyed god & ye chyrche .xlviii. B Fo. Cxx ¶Of the punycyon eternall that they shal haue the whiche breke the cōmaundemen∣tes of god .xlix. A Fo. Cxxiiii ¶Examples .Cvii. A / b / c / d / e. Fo. CCxxx ¶The deference of ye fyre of helle & of that of this worlde .xlix. B Fo. Cxxiiii ¶Questyon / yf the dampned shal haue pu¦nycyon for euery synne .xlix. C. Fo. Cxxv ¶The deference of the fyre of helle & of ye of purgatory .xlix. D Fo. Cxxvi ¶The table for to fynde the synnes and vertues. And fyrst. QVestyon vnder what commaun∣demente ben defended the seuen mortall synnes / & where ben defended the euyll wordes / thoughtes / and operacyons v. A. B. C. Fo. xi ¶The braunches of the seuen synnes mor¦talles .v. D Fo. xiii ¶Of theft & auaryce .xxix. A. B Fo. lxx ¶Of slouthe .xix. B Fo. xlii ¶Examples .xix. C. D. Fo. xlii ¶Of enuy xxvii. K Fo. lxvii ¶Of hate xxvii. A Fo. lxiiii ¶That these haynours sholde pacyfy thē togyders .xxvii. G Fo. lxvi ¶Examples Cii. l. m Fo. CCxlii ¶Of yre .xvi. A / b / c / d. Fo. liii ¶Of vengeaunce .xxvi. H Fo. lx ¶Of glotony xxxix. A Fo. lxxxxii ¶Of lechery xxxv. A / b. Fo. lxxxiiii ¶The vertues. ¶Of humylyte .ix. F Fo. xxi ¶Of charyte iiii. A Fo. x ¶To loue god .i. C / D / e / f / g. Fo. i ¶To loue his neyghbour ii. e / f Fo. v ¶Of faythe ii. B Fo .v. Et .vi. B. Fo. xii ¶Of hope .ii. C Fo. v ¶Of prudence / attemperaunce / Iustyce / and force .ii. K Fo. vii The braūche of ye .vii. vertues .ii. L. Fo. vii ¶The werkes of mercy .xxiii. A. Fo. l Et. ii H. I Fo. vi To serue god deuoutly .xvi. A Fo. xxxiiii Et .xxx. C. Fo. lxxii ¶Of pacyence xxviii. A Fo. lxviii ¶That god sendeth of trybulacions for. v consyderacyons .xxvi. G Fo. lx ¶Of fastynge .xxxix. D Fo. lxxxxiiii ¶Of the vertue of chastyte in all sortes of people .xxxviii. A Fo. lxxxx ¶The pater noster .xvi. C Fo. xxxv The aue maria expoūded .Cxix. B. Fo. cclii ¶The credo .vii. A Fo. xvi ¶Of penaunce .viii. B Fo. xviii ¶A notable. FOr to knowe / rede / or wryte ye allegacyons of auctorytees of this boke a man sholde knowe that ouerall where he fyndeth math. that is mathei / and whe¦re he fyndeth mar. yt is marci / & luc that is luce / & ioh. that is iohannis / also he shal fyn¦de ad rom̄. that is roma in epistola ad roma¦nos. Et .i. ad corī. yt is in prima epla ad corī¦theos / et primo ad thy. yt is in prima epla ad thymotheum / et ad gal. yt is ad gallathas / et ephe. is ad epheseos / et phyl. is ad philipē∣ses / et thessal. is ad thessalonicēses / et col. is ad collocenses / et hebre. is hebreos. Also he shall fynde gen̄. yt is genesis / etexo. is exodi / et leui. is leuitici. et nu. is numeri. et deut. is deutonomi / & .i. vl. ii. re. is primi libri regūl
secundi libri regū. ps. vel psal. that psalteru vel plalmi. et eccle. yt is ecclesiastes. et eccli. that is ecclesiastici. et sapīe. is sapientie. et prouer. is prouerbiorum. et ysa. is Ysaie. et the. is iheremye. et ezchi. is ezechielis. & dan̄. is danielis. &c. ¶Here foloweth the table of the exampla∣ry of this boke. MAn reasonable knowe thou yt god hath gyuen vnto the ten commaundementes / the whi∣che yu sholdest put in thy herte and kepe them and accomplis¦she vpon payne of dampnacyon eternall. Yf thou hast broken ony of them / take hede of the examples semblables vnto yt by this table for to se how it shall happen the yf yu put not in the correccyon & amendement. And for to fȳde those examples it behoueth to seche thorow the boke on hye in the mar∣gen the nombre of the leues that it marketh gooth on / and after the nombres of the ma∣ters with the a / b / c / & in that nombre and lettre ye shall fȳde euery example. ¶Fyrst the examples of obedyence shall be wryten Secondy those of inobedyence. After to he¦re the worde of god. Morouer ye examples of euery cōmaundement in partyculer shal come afterwarde. &c. ¶Obedyence. ¶Examples of obedyence. ¶Example that Abraham was obedyent vnto god .li. A Fo. Cxxvii ¶That a monke kest his sone in to an ouē brennynge by obedyence and he was not brente .li. B. Fo. Cxxviii ¶Of ye obedyence of Noe .lii. c. Fo. Cxxviii ¶Of ye obedyēce of Ioseph .li. d. Fo. cxxviii ¶Of the obedyence of yonge Thobye .li. E. Fo. Cxxix ¶Of the obedyence of a man named Ma∣thathyas .lii. A Fo. Cxxix ¶Of the obedyence of Ihesus and of his appostles .lii. B Fo Cxxix ¶Of the obedyence of saynt Mor yt went on the water .lii. C Fo. Cxxix ¶Of a relygyous the whiche dyde bynde a lyon .lii. D Fo. Cxxix ¶Of a relygyous the whiche aroused a busshe .lii. E Fo. Cxxix ¶Of the obedyence of a relygyous scryue∣ner named Marke lii. F. Fo. Cxxix ¶That abstinence precedeth the other ver¦tues in heuen .lii. G Fo. Cxxx ¶That relygyous folke obedyentes haue grete rewarde in heuen .lii. H Fo. Cxxx ¶Other examples .lv. f. g. Fo. Cxxxix ¶Of a relygyous obedyent and of an ob∣stynent .lii. I Fo. Cxxx ¶Of an abbot the whiche called agayne his relygyous deed / and he came agayne & was obebyent. And of the gloryous Ioyes or paradyse liii. A Fo. Cxxx ¶That a serpent was obedyent to a frere gardyner. Also of theft / & to doo good vnto his ennemyes .liii. B Fo. Cxxxi ¶Of hym the whiche commaunded vnto two dragons that they sholde kepe ye dore of his hous .liii. C Fo. Cxxxi ¶That the water of a streme was obedy∣ent vnto a bysshop .liii. D Fo Cxxxi ¶That the fyre yt brent a hous obeyed to a frere that prayed .liii. E Fo. Cxxxi ¶That the rayne touched not two freres in walkynge. liii F Fo. Cxxxi ¶Of the obedyence of a relygyous named Poule .liii. G Fo. Cxxxii ¶Of a nother relygyous that bare flesshe all naked liii. H Fo. Cxxxii
Inobedientia. ¶Examples of inobedyence. That Adam and Eue dysobeyed the com¦maundement of god .liiii. A. Fo. Cxxxiii ¶That for the dysobeysaunce of the man of god a lyon strangled hym in the way as he rode .liiii. B Fo. Cxxxiii ¶Of the dysobeysaunce of two nonnes ye whiche demaunded of ye pope yt they might confesse eche other .liiii. C Fo. Cxxxiiii ¶That the kynge Amalech resysted ayēst the wyl of almyghty god and euyl came vn¦to hym .liiii. D Fo. Cxxxiiii ¶That kinge saul was dysobedyēt to god & yll came to hym .liiii. E Fo. Cxxxiiii ¶Of the inobedyence of kynge Pharao & of his punycyon .liiii. F Fo. Cxxxiiii ¶Of the inobedyence of the prophete Io∣nas .liiii. G Fo. Cxxxiiii ¶That chore / dathan / and abyron and all theyr alyes descended in to hell by theyr ino¦bedyences & murmure. Also that the chyl∣dren of ysraell gadred of ye manna agaynst the commaundement of wyl of ye prophete Moyses .liiii. H. Fo. Cxxxv ¶Of a frere that was punysshed dyuyne∣ly for bycause that he murmured agaynst god .liiii. I Fo. Cxxxv ¶And a mā sholde note that all ydolatres appostates / heretykes / & other synners the whiche ben dampned ben punysshed in hell & pryuate from the realme of paradyse for theyr inobedyences. Verbum dei. ¶Examples for herynge the worde of god & the prechynges. That a grete synner repented hym and was saued in herynge a predycacyon or ser∣mon .lv. A. Fo. Cxxxvi That a relygious cōuerted in fewe wordes a man of yll conscyēce .lv. B. Fo. Cxxxvi ¶Of a mayster dylycatyfe yt wolde not he¦re ye worde of god ne do penaūce / & he was cōuerted in fewe wordes .lv. C. fo. cxxxvii ¶Of an yll knyght that in his lyfe ne was confessed but ones & at one onely predyca∣cyon he correcked hymselfe & was cōuerted vnto god .lv. D Fo. Cxxxvii ¶Of an erle yt conuerted hym un herynge the worde of god .lv. E Fo. Cxxxvii ¶Of a chorle the whiche wolde not here ye worde of god / and ye crucyfyxe stopped his eeres vnto hym in tokenynge that he wol∣de not here the prayers that men made for hym .lv. F. Fo. Cxxxvii ¶Of the parochyens of a curate the whi. che wolde not here the sermons & cōmaun¦dementes of ye chyrche .lvi. A Fo. Cxxxviii ¶Example cōtrary .lxxxxviii. F Fo. CCx ¶That a pastour was saued & correked hȳ herynge a sermon .lvi. B Fo. Cxxxviii ¶That to here the worde of god is moche prouffytable though that a persone retayne it not .lvi. C Fo. Cxxxviii ¶That some freres slept in herynge ye wor¦de of god / & herkenynge ydle wordes they were moche wakȳge .lvi. D Fo. Cxxxviii. ¶Example agaynst those the which fleeth the sermons .lvi. E Fo. Cxxxix ¶How the dede of a precher bare hym vn∣to the dethe / and that Ihesu cryst helped hym & chased ye deuyls .lvi. F. Fo. Cxxxix ¶That a monke reknowleged his defaw∣tes as he taught and shewed his other bre¦dren .Ci. A Fo. CCxv ¶That he yt precheth gods worde shall ha¦ue grete rewarde in heuē .lvi. G Fo. cxxxix ¶That the deuyll myght not strangle a knyght for that / yt he greted ye vyrgyn Ma¦ry / and for beyenge in wyll to here a predy¦cacyon was saued .lvi. H Fo. Cxxxix ¶Of a ryche man the whiche fled ye masse and the predycacyons and occupyed hym∣selfe
in mondanytees and ye deuyll bare hȳ away .lxv. A Fo. Clvi ¶Of a man the whiche gaue hymselfe vn∣to the deuyll to thende yt he sholde enryche hym / and after in a predycacyon he conuer¦ted hym .lx. H Fo. Cxlvii ¶That the commaundements of god shal be forgoten in ye last generacyō .lvi. I. fo. cxl ¶Of a ryche man that serued the deuyl .xl. yeres and at a predycacyon he dyde repent hym .lvi. K Fo. Cxl ¶That an vsurer correcked hȳ by ye admo∣nycyō of his frendes .lxxxvii. f. Fo. Clxxxx. ii ¶Of a monke that he deuyll drewe out of the chyrche whan the other dyde wake in o∣rayson .lxv. G Fo. Cvii ¶Of a lady the whiche herde often tymes the sermons and dyde not correcke her self And of her chamberer that desyred to here them .lxxxxix. B Fo. CCx ¶Primum preceptum Idolatria. ¶Examples vpon the fyrst cōmaunde∣ment of god. OF a preste prynce of ydolles yt brent in hel .lvii. A Fo. Cxl ¶Of ye ydolatry of kȳge Na¦bugodonozor whan he made .iii. chyldren to be put in the fur¦neys of fyre .xlvii. B Fo. Cxl ¶That Egeas ydolatre was slayne of the deuyll .lvii. C Fo. Cxli ¶That Dyascorus the whiche slewe saynt Barbara was ydolatre and deyed mysche∣uously .lvii. E Fo. Cxli ¶Of the dethe of Symon magus & other enchauntours .lxvii. D Fo. Cxli ¶That ye prouost Tarquyn ydolatre dyed myscheuously .lvii. F Fo. Cxli ¶That the kynge of Perce Cosdroe that wolde be worshypped as god had his heed smyten of .lvii. G Fo. Cxli ¶Of the cursed dethe of Dacyen & Vale∣ryen ydolatres .lvii. H Fo. Cxlii ¶Of the dethe of cursed kynge Yrace ydo∣latre .lvii. I Fo. Cxlii ¶Of the dethe of the tyraunt Quyncyen ydolatre .lvii. K Fo. Cxlii ¶Of the dethe of the cruell emperour Ne∣ron the whiche made to sle saynt Peter and saynt Poule .lvii. L Fo. Cxlii ¶Of the dethe of Maxymyen the enemye of god .lvii. M Fo. Cxlii Apostasia. ¶Examples of people apostates ¶That Iuyan ye apostate the whiche left the crystendome and persecuted the chyr∣che dyed myscheuously by the punycyon dy¦uyne .lviii. A Fo. Cxlii ¶Of Theophyle the whiche was apostate renounced god / and the gloryous vyrgyn Marye / and worshypped the deuyll of hell and afterwarde was saued by cōtrycyon & penaunce .lviii. B Fo. Cxliii ¶Of a monke the whiche renyed god the creatour & his baptym & after was saued by penaunce .lviii. C Fo. Cxliii ¶Of one the whiche renyed god of heuen for to escape the tourments and after was saued by penaunce .lxviii. D Fo. Cxliii ¶That a crysten man lost the crowne of glory for that yt he renounced vnto the cry∣stendome and a paynym dyde wynne the same .lviii. E Fo. Cxliiii ¶Of a man yt gaue yll counceyle for to ma¦ke ye crysten men to thende to renye ye fayth and that counceyle redounded fyrst vpon hymselfe .lviii. F Fo. Cxliii ¶Of a relygyous woman yt was apostate and open harlot and after was saued by pe¦naunce .Cxiii. A Fo. CCxliii
¶How our lorde Ihesus appered vnto a re¦lygyous the whiche lefte his ordre for to go in to the worlde .Cxv. G Fo. CCxlvii ¶That two relygyous were appost es / lecherous / and after reuerted and dyde pe¦naunce .lxxxxiii. E Fo. CCiii Contra hereticos. ¶Examples to confounde heretykes. ¶That deuylles kepte an heretyke frome brennynge / but whan the body of Ihesu cryst was brought thyder they myght not kepe hym .lix. A Fo. Cxliiii ¶That an heretyke was dōbe by ye vertue of the faythe .lix. B Fo. Cxliiii ¶That a cautelous heretyke was brent by a fole dyabolyke .lix. C Fo. Cxliiii ¶That the bysshop of the heretykes fay∣ned for to enlumyne & gyue syght to a blyn∣de man .lix. D Fo. Cxliiii ¶That a symple bysshop vaynquysshed & ouercame an heretyke a ryght grete phylo∣zophre .lix. E Fo. Cxlv ¶That by the pacience and good example of saynt Domynycke he conuerted an here¦tyke .lix. F Fo. Cxlv Contra fidem ¶Example of mysbeleuynge people. ¶Of chermers yt in the tyme of mast char∣med hogges .lx. A Fo. Cxlv ¶That ye deuyll lyed to a noble man to put him in errour for to deceyue hym at ye houre of his dethe .lx. B Fo. Cxlv ¶Of a man that gaue his soule for a quar¦te of wyne / and the deuyll dyde bete hym a way .lxxi. K Fo. Clxvii ¶That a woman in errour beleued in the songe of a Cuckowe .lx. C Fo. Cxlvi ¶That a relygyous in errour beleued in ye songe of a Cuckowe that he sholde haue ly∣ued two and twēty yeres / and he lyued but two yeres .lx. D Fo. Cxlvi ¶That there is mo women dampned thā men for theyr infydelyte .lx. E Fo Cxlvi ¶That some prepayred the table vnto the deuylles to thende that they sholde enryche them .lx. F Fo. Cxlvi ¶That kynge Ochorias sent to seke coun¦ceyle of the deuyll and his messagers were brente with the fyre celestyall / and he deyed myscheuously .lx. G Fo. Cxlvi ¶Of a man the whiche gaue hymselfe to the deuyll to thende that he sholde enryche hym .lx. H Fo. Cxlvii ¶Of a woman yt renyed her faythe / slewe her chylde / and gaue herselfe to the deuyl & after had mercy .lx. I Fo. Cxlvii Fides ¶Examples of the faythe ¶That a mountayne was put frome one place to another in conferminge the faythe catholyke .lxi. A Fo. Cxlviii ¶Of a preste good catholyke the whiche entred wtin the fyre for to approue ye faythe & was not brent .lxi. B Fo. Cxlviii ¶That Abraham & many other obedyēts had grete faythe in god as it is sayd in obe∣dyence .li. A / b / c. &c. Fo. Cxxvii Superbia. ¶Example of proude folke. ¶That Adam and Eue commytted pryde whan they appetyted to be as gods / in kno¦wynge good and euyl .liiii. A Fo. Cxxxiii ¶That yll came vnto ye kynge Roboam to gyue proude answere vnto the chyldren of ysraell .lxxxxix. M Fo. CCxiii ¶That the deuyll bare away in body & in soule an erle proude / fyers / & replete with synnes .lxxxxix. N Fo. CCxiii
¶Of the pryde and blaspheme of ye kynge Sennacheryb .lxii. K Fo. Cii ¶Another example .Cix. F Fo. CCxxxv ¶That ye kynge Anthyochus was proude ouer humayne force .lxxxv. D. Fo. Clxxxix ¶That the deuyll was seen vpon the tray¦ne of a womans gowne pompeously aour∣ned .lxv. D Fo. Clvii ¶That it dyspleased vnto almyghty god ye creatour that a certayne woman clothed and aourned her doughter pompeously & gaye .lxxiii. F Fo. Clxx ¶Of the cursed ryche man yt was pompe¦ously clothed .lxxxiiii. A Fo. Clxxvi ¶That the kynge Cosdroe yt was proude had ye heed stryken of .lxvii. G Fo. Cxli ¶Of an ypocryte the whiche fayned to fa∣ste and eate secretely and he was choked of a dragon infernall .Cv.C Fo. CCxxv ¶That the deuylles gate the soule from the myserable body of an ypocryte with an hoke .Ciiii. C Fo. CCxxvi ¶That Nychanor had his heed smyten of & his ryght hande the whiche reysed hym proudely ayenst ye prestes .lxix. A Fo. Clxii ¶Of a womā dampned that aourned her heed .lxxx. C Fo. Clxxxxvii Humilitas contra superbiam. ¶Example that a holy nonne fayned to be a fole / and wasshed the pottes / wyped the dysshes / and dyde all thynges meke & hum¦ble .lxi. C Fo. Clviii ¶That humylyte kepeth a man from fal∣lynge in to the laces and nettes of ye deuyls of hell .Cii.r Fo. CCxxiii ¶That the prynces the whiche prayed He lye humbly was not brent as the other the whiche spake proudely .lx. G Fo. CCxlvi ¶Secundum preceptum Blasphemia. ¶Examples vpon the seconde com∣maundement of god. OF a sone of a woman of ysrael that was stoned for his blas∣pheme .lxii. A Fo. Cxlix ¶Of a childe of the aege of .v yeres blasphematour that the deuylles dyde drawe out from his faders lappe .lxxii. B Fo. C.xlix ¶Of a player the whiche blasphemed the wombe of the vyrgyn Mary and yll came vnto hym .lxii. C Fo. Cl ¶Of an erle blasphemer .lxii. D Fo. Cl ¶Of one of the burgeys of Parys ye whi∣che hadde his tongue bored thorowe for his blaspheme .lxii. E Fo. Cl ¶Of a player blasphematour the whiche brake the armes of the ymage of ye vyrgyn Marye / and he was strangled of the deuyll his mayster .lxii. F Fo. Cl ¶Of a blasphematour that the deuyll dy∣de sle .lxii. G Fo. Cl ¶Of a blynde knyght the whiche was en∣lumyned for that / yt he strake a Iewe ye whi¦che blasphemed the vyrgyn Mary moder of god .lxii. H Fo. Cli ¶Of .ii. players to whome there came yll for blasphemynge .lxii. I Fo. Cli ¶That there came yll vnto kinge Senna¦cheryb the whiche sente vnto kynge Eze∣chyas wordes blasphemynges agaynst al∣myghty god .lxii. K Fo. Cli ¶That the kynge Nabugodonozor made a decrete yt all people yt blasphemed the god of Sydrac / Mysaac and Abdenago sholde perysshe & his hous wasted .lvii. b Fo. Cxi ¶That a dāpned woman was tourmēted for her blasphemes. &c .lxxxx. a. Fo. clxxxxvi ¶That the deuyl bare away a tauerner yt permytted to blaspheme & to swere in his tauerne .lxxi. I Fo. Clxvi
Periurium ¶Example that a tauerner lost the vsage of speche for swerynge by the vyrgyn Ma¦ry moder of god .lxiii. A Fo. Cli ¶Of chyldren ye sware / and in playenge were drowned .lxiii. B Fo. Cli ¶That the heed of a swerer was tourned that / that was before behynde / & the cattes cryed on his graue .lxiii. C Fo. Clii ¶That two marchaūtes sayd vnto theyr curate yt they myght sell nothynge without lyenge & swerynge .lxxxxix. K Fo. CCxii ¶Other examples of swerynge ben wry∣ten in ye .viii. commaundement of god. Que¦re .lxxxxviii. A / b / c. &c. Fo. CCxix Vota. ¶Examples that a man sholde accom∣plysshe his vowes. ¶That the chyldren of ysrahel accomplys¦shed theyr vowes after yt they had the vy∣ctory on theyr enmyes .lxili. D Fo. Clii ¶Of a vyrgyn yt vowed chastyte & after wolde be maryed .lxiii. E Fo. Clii ¶Of a man the whiche had made a vowe the whiche was dampned. Also example of extorcyon and of the paynes and tourmen¦tes of hell .lxiii. F Fo. Clii ¶Of a doctour the whiche had vowed the whiche lost his syght for that / yt he accom∣plysshed not his vowe .lxiii. G Fo. Cliii ¶That it is grete peryll to fayle to accom¦plysshe his vowe .lxiii. H Fo. Cliii ¶That a preste the whiche wolde not ac∣complysshe his vowe defyned yll his dayes also of his Iugement and of his cruell pu¦nycyon .lxiii. I Fo. Cliii ¶Another example .Cxiii. B Fo. CCxliii ¶Of a chorle the whiche vowed to saynt Myghell a kowe and her calfe & accomplys¦shed not his vowe .lxiii. K Fo. Cliiii ¶That some Jewes made a folisshe vowe to sle saynt Poule .lxiii. L Fo. Cliiii ¶That a woman was blynde for that / yt she defayled to accomplysshe her vowe as she had promysed .lxiiii. G Fo. Clv ¶Tertium preceptum. Operatio. ¶Examples vpon the thyrde commaunde¦ment of god. OF a man yt Moyses made too stone for ye / yt he gadred wood on the day of the feest cōmaun¦ded .lxiiii. A Fo. Cliiii ¶That a woman was dyuy¦nely punysshed for that she enclosed her fel∣de on saynt Iohans day .lxiiii. B Fo. Cliiii ¶Of a man the whiche wrought on ye son∣day .lxiiii. C Fo. Cliiii ¶Of a man the whiche caryed hey on the sonday .lxiiii. D Fo. Clv ¶Of a man that bare his wheet on ye feest day .lxiiii. E Fo. Clv ¶Of a carle yt went to ye ploughe on the ho¦ly daye .lxiiii. F. Fo. Clv ¶Of two women the whiche baked theyr breed in the feest of sonday .lxiiii. G. Fo. Clv ¶Of a woman that baked breed on ye feest commaunded .lxiiii. I Fo. Clv ¶That god sent punycyon to them yt bra¦ke his commaundements .lxiiii. K Fo. Clv ¶Of cordweyners ye one kept the feestes & the other not .lxiiii. L Fo. Clv ¶Of a mowyer yt ceased to mowe on ye sa¦serday at euensonge tyme and his felawes wolde not .lxiiii. M Fo. Clvi ¶That byers & sellers on ye feestes ought to be reproued .lxiiii. N Fo. Clvi ¶Example that yll came vnto a ryche mā that fledde the seruyce and the predycacy∣ons and lepte on horsbacke and went vnto
mondanitees whan they range to masse on the feestes .lxv. A Fo. Clvi ¶Of a woman that wolde haue hāged her selfe / & as she herde rynge too the sacrynge she sette her vpon her knees and so was de¦lyuered lxv. B Fo. Clvi ¶That the deuyll bare a boke wherin was writen the synnes of men and women & in especyall a complyn that saynt Austyn had forgoten .lxv. C Fo. Clvi ¶That the deuylles were seen vpon the trayne of a womans gowne pompeously arayed in ye chyrche .lxv. D Fo. Clvii ¶That saynt Bryce sawe the deuyll ye whi¦che wrote the yll wordes that were spoken in the chyrche .lxv. E Fo. Clvii ¶That the deuyll gaue in charge to a wo∣man to lette the oraysons of other in ye chyr¦che by her Ianglynges .lxv. F Fo. Clvii ¶Of a monke that the deuyll drewe oute of the chyrche whan ye other waked in oray¦son and prayer .lxv. G Fo. Clvii ¶Of a man dampned the whiche yode to playe and to drynke at ye tauerne whan he sholde haue ben at the seruyce wthin the ho¦ly chyrche .lxvii. D Fo. Clix Somnolentia ¶Examples of slepynge in herynge the seruyce of god. ¶Of a monke indeuout the whiche slepte in orayson .lxvi. A Fo. Cviii ¶Of a monke the whiche was stryken wt a knotte of strawe in slepynge for bycause that he was indeuout and weyke in speryte towarde god .lxvi. B Fo. Clviii ¶Of a monke vnto whome the deuyll ga¦ue vnto drynke of hote boylyng pytche in slepynge .lxvi. C Fo. Clviii Pigricia. ¶Example of a soule dampned yt wept the tyme yt it had loste .Cviii. B Fo. CCxxxii ¶Of a relygyous that wolde do noo good dedes .xix. C Fo. xlii ¶Of a man yt was dampned for yt he wol∣de do no good dedes .xix. D Fo. xlii ¶Of a curate the whiche taryed to admy∣nyster the holy sacramentes vnto his paro¦chyen seke .viii. C Fo. xix Oratio. ¶That a man sholde take hede to the oray¦son that he maketh .lxvi. E Fo. Clviii ¶Of a deuout relygyous that ceased not to be in yt orayson of the psalmody / & good odour yssued out of his mouthe .xiii. yeres af¦ter his dethe .lxvi. F Fo. Clviii ¶That at the prayer of a sȳple shoo maker a good man ferme in ye faythe a moūtayne was taken fro one place & transported in to another .lxi. A Fo. Cxiviii ¶That by the oraysons & fastynges that saynt Basyll made wt his college they were preserued from yll yt Iulyan the appostate wolde haue done to them .lviii. A. Fo. Cxlii ¶That at ye prayer of the prophete Helye fyre descended from heuen yt brent an hon∣dred men the whiche yede to seche coūcyle of the deuyll .lx. G Fo. Cxlvi ¶Of a sone yt prayed for his moder & dyde penaunce & she appered vnto him at the en¦de of .vii. yeres / and she was saued by his prayers .lxv. F. Fo. Clvii ¶That one of the relygyous of saynt Gre¦gory was delyuered from purgatory for to synge masses for him .lxxxii. E. Fo. Clxxxiiii ¶That the prayer of Balaam was vniust whan he desyred to deye wel / and he wolde not lyue well .lxxxx. D Fo. Clxxxxviii ¶That the orayson of those the whiche bē yll is somtyme exalted to theyr shame and confusyon .lxxxxvii. D Fo. CCviii
¶That a knyght deed wolde not the pray∣yer of theym the whiche were in synne / but desyred the prayer of a good and holy her∣myte .lxxxxviii. G Fo. CCx ¶That the prayer of Susan̄e was herde & & she kept fro dethe .lxxxxvi. C. Fo. CCxvi ¶That the orayson of an holy fader was not exalted / for yt he for whome he prayed delyted in the thoughtes of fornycacyon wt out resystȳge therto. hōdred. d. Fo. CCxiiii ¶Of a man the whiche resysted not ayenst the synnes / & therfore the orayson of ye here¦myte was not exalted .C.e Fo. CCxv ¶That the request of ye cursed ryche man was not graunted whan he demaūded one droppe of water / and that the Lazare shol∣de go to his bredren .lxxxiiii. A. Fo. Clxxxvi ¶Gula. ¶Examples of etynge & drynkȳge whā men sholde serue god. ¶That yll came vnto Adam and Eue the whiche eate of the apple agaynst ye cōmaun¦dement of god .liiii. A Fo. Cxxxiii ¶That the dragon infernal strangled a re¦lygyous the whiche eate secretely and fay∣ned to faste .Cv.C Fo. CC.xxvi ¶That a nonne the whiche eate a letule be¦fore that she serued god / & without makȳge the sygne of the crosse was posseded of the deuyll .lxvii. A Fo. Clix ¶That a conuers dranke of wine without makynge the token of the crosse & without lycence / and he was posseded of the enmye the deuyll .lxvii. B Fo. Clix ¶That yll came vnto a smyth the whiche vsed to drynke & ete whan other were at ye seruyce of the chyrche .lxvii. C Fo. Clix ¶That a seruaūt sawe by vysyon his may¦ster tourmented in hell / vnto whom the de¦uylles gaue too drynke of fyre and sulphre brennynge .Cvii. D Fo. CCxxxi ¶That a ryche man was put in to a chay∣re of fyre the whiche was constrayned of de¦uylles to drynke of a lycoure ryght bytter / stynkynge / & foule .Cvii. B Fo. CCxxxi ¶Of the cursed ryche man that eate & drā¦ke delycatyuely lxxxiiii. A Fo. Clxxxvi ¶Of a man yt slewe his fader & his moder whan he was dronke .lxxvii. B Fo. Clxxv ¶Of a seruaunt yt serued wel his mayster in his youthe / and whan he was dronke he slewe hym .lxxvii. C Fo. Clxxvi ¶Of a seruaunte yt stale fygges from his mayster .lxxxi. B Fo. Clxxxi ¶Of some the whiche retorned vnto theyr glotonyes after ester .Cii. D. Fo. CCxviii ¶Of a man dampned yt yode to swere and to drynke at the tauerne with his felawes whan he sholde haue ben in the seruyce of ye chyrche .lxvii. D Fo. Clix ¶Of a man named Vodo yt yode vnto the tauernes whan he sholde haue gone vnto ye chyrche / & what drynke and bedde he hath now in hell .lxvii. E Fo. Clx ¶Of a pylgrym that solde his gowne for to drynke wyne .lxxxxiii. G Fo. CCiii ¶That the deuylles approched them at a dyner to those the whiche spake euyll wor∣des / and the aungelles drewe them backe∣warde .lxxxxix. H Fo. CCxii ¶That yll came vnto a boucher yt mocked the holy asshes / & dranke at ye tauerne whā other were at ye masse .lxvii. F. Fo. Clx ¶That yll came vnto a knyght the which yode to vylyte the tauernes whan he shol∣vysyte the dedycacyons and pardons of ye chyrches .lxvii. G Fo. Clx ¶Of an holy man yt eate of breed & dranke water agaynst the cōmaundement of god / & a lyon strangled hȳ .liiii. B Fo. Cxxxiii ¶Of a woman dampned the whiche vsed her lyfe in glotony / & lechery. And her hus∣bande was vnto the contrary the whiche ly¦ued sobrely .lxxxxii. A Fo. CC
¶Of a tauerner that the deuyl bare away in body & in soule .lxxi. I Clxvi ¶Of a man that solde his soule for a quar∣te of wyne and the deuyll dyde bere hym away .lxxi. K Fo. Clxvii ¶Venatio. ¶Examples of honters. ¶That lorde the whiche honted on ye holy dayes hadde a chylde that hadde eeres of a dogge .lxviii. A Fo. Clxi ¶That no man wyst where a honter beca¦me yt honted on ye feestes .lxviii. B. Fo. Clxi ¶Chorea. ¶Examples of dauncynge on ye feestes ¶That the deuyll wolde haue borne away a mayden the whiche daunced on the son∣dayes .lxviii. C Fo. Clxi ¶Of men and women the whiche daūced a yere without that ony persone myght so∣cour them .lxviii. D Fo. Clxi ¶Of a woman dauncer .lxviii. E. Fo. Clxii ¶That a mayden was rauysshed in a daū¦ce and vyoled and after went and hanged herselfe .lxviii. F Fo. Clxii Fudus ¶Examples of players on the feestes cō¦maunded. ¶Of a player the whiche blasphemed the wombe of the gloryous virgyn Mary & yll came to hym .lxii. C Fo. Cl ¶Of a man dampned yt yode to playe at ye tauerne. &c. lxvii. D Fo. Clix ¶Of chyldren the whiche in playenge and swerynge were drowned .lxiii. B Fo. Cli ¶Of a player blasphematour that the de∣uyll slewe .lxii. G Fo. Cl ¶Another example .lxii. F Fo. Cl ¶Of two players vnto whom there came harme .lxii. I Fo. Cli ¶That the heed of a player was tourned yt that was before behynde in swerynge and blasphemynge .lxiii. C Fo. Cli ¶Ecclesia. ¶Examples of the chyrche. ¶That Nychanor was slayne after yt he had thretened ye chyrche .lxix. A Fo. Clxix ¶That Iulyan the appostate was slayne dyuynely the whiche hadde persecuted the chyrche .lviii. A Fo. Cxiii ¶How there came yll of a chyrche the whi∣che was made of vsuryes / rapynes / & euyll goten goodes .lxxxvii. D. Fo. Clxxxxiii ¶Of a knyght yt was tourmented in pur∣gatory for that he vyolated the chyrchyar∣de & slewe a man in it .lxxvii. F Fo. Clxvi ¶That Helyodorus was punysshed in ta∣kynge the treasours of the chyrche of Ihe∣rusalem .lxxxii. B Fo. Clxxxiii ¶That many were dampned for that / yt they posseded vniustly an herytage the whi¦che hadde ben taken awaye frome the holy chyrche .lxxxii. A Fo. Clxxxiii ¶That haynours were punysshed diuyne¦ly for that / that they slewe a man within ye chyrche .lxxix. B Fo. Clxxix ¶That the kynge Ozyas became lepre in the chyrche for that / yt he toke the encenser and presumed to doo the dyuyne offyce of ye preestes .lxxxv. G. Fo. Clxxxix ¶Sepulchra. ¶Examples of sepultures. ¶Of a synner that deuylles drewe out of the chyrche .lxix. B Fo. Clxii ¶That people the whiche deye cursedly sholde not be buryed within the chyrche∣yarde .lxii. G Fo. Cl
¶That an vsurer buryed in a cloyster of a monastery kepte the monkes from slepe & reste .lxix. C Fo. Clxii ¶That the cattes cryed vpon the graue of a swerer .lxiii.C. Fo. Clii ¶Quartum preceptum. ¶Filii ¶Examples vpon the fourthe commaun∣dement of god. THat Absalon deyed myscheuous¦ly bycause yt he warred wt his fa¦der Dauyd. lxx. A Fo. Clxiii ¶That a sone the whiche defay¦led vnto his fader & moder bare a tode .iii. yere in his face. lxx. B. Fo. Clxiii ¶That yl came vnto Cham yt mocked his fader Noe. lxx. C Fo. Clxiiii ¶Of two sones the whiche slewe theyr fa∣der. lxx.D Fo. Clxiiii ¶Of a sone the whiche dyde stryke his mo∣der. lxx.E Fo. Clxiiii ¶Of a chylde that the deuyll dyde bere a∣way. lxx.G. Fo. Clxiiii ¶That a good & a true chylde loued his fa¦der & myght not suffre yt a man dyde to hȳ ony yll. lxxi. A Fo. Clxiiii ¶That the nature of byrdes techeth to re∣membre his frendes. lxxi. B Fo. Clxv ¶Of a doughter the which nourysshed her moder with soukynge the mylke of her bre. stes. lxxi. C Fo. Clxv ¶Of a chylde that bote of the nose of his fader. lxxi. D Fo. Clxv ¶That the kinge Salamon honoured his moder. xxi. H Fo. xlviii ¶That a mannes berde grewe longe after as he hanged. lxxi. E Fo. Clxv ¶Of a man the whiche was felle & harde vnto his fader and his yongest sone repre∣ued hym. lxxi. F Fo. Clxv Patres. ¶Example of a fader & of his sone ye whi∣che cursed eche other in helle. And of a good fader and his sone the whiche blyssed eche other in heuen. lxxi. G Fo. Clxvi ¶Of a fader & his sone dampned for yf go¦ten goodes. lxxiii. A Fo. Clxviii ¶That a fader sholde loue god more than his owne chyldren / parentes / and frendes carnalles. lxxii. A Fo. Clxvii ¶Of a fader yt badde his sone to holde his fynger in the fyre tyl that he had sayd. Aue maria. lxxii. B Fo. Clxvii ¶That a fader sholde do good dedes why les that he lyueth without trustynge to his chyldren and heyres. lxxii. C. Fo. Clxvii ¶Other examples of semblable maters & thynges. lxxii. D. E Fo. Clxviii ¶Another example that a man sholde doo good dedes. And yt a fole taught wel a wy∣se man. lxxii. F Fo. Clxviii ¶Of a fader the whiche put an heuy malet in a coffre and toke the keyes vnto his chyl¦dren. lxxiii. B Fo. Clxix ¶That a fader was put out in his aege of his two doughters. lxxiii. C Fo. Clxix ¶That a good moder loued naturally her chylde and myght not endure that he had ony harme. lxxiii. D Fo. Clxix ¶That a moder cursed .x. chyldren yt she had / and they trembled incōtynent & were punysshed deuynely. lxxiii. E Fo. Clxx ¶That i dyspleased vnto god that a wo∣man aourned her doughter & clothed ouer pompeously. lxxiii. F Fo. Clxx Correctio. ¶Examples of correccyon. ¶That softe correccyon prouffyteth more than sharpe. lxxiiii. A Fo. Clxx ¶Of the softe correccyon that was doone
vnto a chylde. lxxiiii. B Fo. Clxx ¶That saynt Benet bette and correcked a monke yt the deuyll drewe out of ye chyrche whan other prayed. lxv. G Fo. Clvii ¶Of the correccyon of two relygyous mē wherof ye abbot correcked ye one & spared ye other. lxxiiii. C Fo. Clxx ¶That a man sholde correcke hym whan he is admonested. lxxii. D. Fo. Clxviii. Et lxxvii. E Fo. Clxxvi ¶Of a woman dampned the whiche dys∣praysed all they in that repreued her of syn∣nes & ylles. ixxi. H Fo. Cixvi ¶That a man sholde drawe abacke & cor∣recke y• synners swetely. lxxiiii. E. Fo. Clxxi ¶That Ysaac the sone of Abraham was o¦bedyent vnto his fader whan he wolde ha∣ue sacryfyed hym. li. A. Fo. Cxxvii ¶That many persones correcked them in herynge ye worde of god / as it is sayd in ver¦bum dei. lv. A / b / c / d. Fo. Cxxxvi ¶That Helye correcked not well his chyl∣dren as apperteyned. lxx. F Fo. Clxxiii ¶That Absolon was in youth so yll correc¦ked that he made warre on his owne fader Dauyd. lxx. A Fo. Clxxiii Caritas. ¶Examples of charyte. ¶Of a cluster of grapes the whiche was sent vnto many by charyte / and vnto the weykest lxxv. A Fo. Clxxi ¶Of the charyte & loue of .ii. men yt wolde deye ye one for the other. lxxv. B. Fo. Clxxi ¶That an holy man named Sāctulus de¦lyuered hymselfe to be slayne for loue & cha¦ryte of his neyghbour. lxxv. C Fo. Clxxii ¶Another example. lxxv. D Fo. Clxxii ¶That the herte of a vyrgyn was cut for the grete loue that she hadde vnto our lor∣de god. lxxv. E Fo. Clxxii ¶Of the charyte of hym yt wanne his bro∣der that was fallen in to fornycacyon in ke kynge hym from synne & made hym to doo penaunce. lxxv. F Fo. Clxxii ¶That one rere wtdrewe another frome cursed wyl / not by force but by charite and pacyence. lxxv. G Fo. Clxxiiii ¶Of people the whiche haue lyued out of charyte as the cursed ryche man Dyues. Quere in tenactas. in sexto {pre}cepto. lxxxiiii. A / b / c. Fo. Clxxxvi ¶Of a charitable man the whiche yode vn¦to heuen after his dethe before that his bo∣dy was colde. lv. B Fo. Cxxxvi ¶Examples of the werkes of mercy. Que re. xxiii. C / d / e / f / g. Fo. l ¶Of almesdede. quere post. ¶Quintum preceptum. Homicidum iniustum ¶Examples vpon the .v. commaunde∣ment of god. OF Cayn that slewe his broder Abell. lxxvi. A Fo. Clxxiii That kinge Achab & his wyfe made to sle naboth to haue his vyneyarde. lxxvi. b. Fo. clxxiii ¶That Herode ascolonita made to sle the Innocentes lxxvi. D Fo. Clxxiiii ¶That Ioab slewe the prynce Abner ma¦lycyously and Amasam and euyll came vn¦to hym. lxxvi. C Fo. Clxxiiii ¶That Herode antyppa made to sle saynt Iohan baptyst. lxxvi. E Fo. Clxxiiii ¶That Iudas / Pylate / and ye Iewes we∣re homycydes of the dethe of our lorde Ihe¦su cryst. lxxvi. F Fo. Clxxv ¶That a man named Lucrece made for to sle saynt Beatryce. lxxvii. A Fo. Clxxv ¶Of a man that slewe his fader & moder whā he was dronke. lxxvii. B Fo. Clxxv ¶Of a seruaunt yt slewe his mayster whā he was dronke. lxxvii. C Fo. Clxxvi
¶Of a doughter the whiche slewe her fa∣der & her moder & after had mercy by con∣trycyon & confessyon. lxxvii. D Fo. Clxxvi ¶Another example of an archdeaken yt sle¦we the bysshop. lxxxv. I Fo. Clxxxx ¶That many ydollatres and tyrauntes hath made to martyr and to sle of crystiens I mustly as dyde Egeas / Dyascorus / the prouost Tarquyn / Dacyen / Valeryan / Hy race / Quyncyen / Neron / and the cursed Maxymyen. lvii. C / d / e / f. Fo. Cxli ¶Of the dethe of two cursed auncyent pre¦stes the whiche wened to haue made Su∣sanne todeye. lxxxxvi. C Fo. CCvii ¶That Dauyd made to sle Vrye vniustly & cōmytted aduoutry. lxxvii. E Fo. Clxxvi ¶That a knyght was gretely tourmented in purgatory for that / yt he vyled ye chyrch∣yarde and hurte a man greuously within the same. lxxvii. F Fo. Clxxvi ¶Of a none the whiche dyde slee her chyl¦de. lxxxxiii. F Fo. CCiii ¶Another example. lxxxxiii. H Fo. CCiii ¶That the aungell shewed vnto Tongda¦lus a valey replenyshed with coles of fyre in the whiche were put the homycydes and murderers. lxxvii. G Fo. Clxxvii Homicidium dubium. ¶Examples of homycyde doubtfull. ¶That saynt Peter made to dye Anamye & his wyfe Saphyre for that yt they detrau¦ded ye pryce of a felde. lxxviii. A. Fo. Clxxvii ¶That Dauyd made to sle the yonge mā the whiche lyed to hym that he had slayne kynge Saul. lxxviii. B Fo. Clxxvii ¶That Helye the prophete fell frome his chayre / & of his two sones the whiche were slayne. lxx. F Fo. Clxiiii Homicidium iustum ¶That an archebisshop named Vdo was beheded within his chyrche for his synnes & cursed lyuynge by the Iust Iugement of god. Cvi. D Fo. CCxxviii ¶That Achar was Iustly stoned & slayne for he was a thefe. lxxx. A Fo. Clxxx ¶Of a man that was stoned by the com∣maundement of Moyses for that yt he ga∣dred & bare wood on the day of the feest cō∣maunded. lxxiiii. A Fo. Clxx ¶That Iulyan the appostate was Iustly slayne. lviii. A Fo. Cxlii ¶That Cosdroe was slayne Iustly for his yll lyfe. lviii. G Fo. Cxlii Ira. ¶Examples of Yre. ¶Examples of a woman dampned for the kepynge of yre without beynge in wyll for to pardon. lxxviii. D Fo. Clxxviii ¶That a lady Impacyent and yracundy∣ous tourmented gretely her chambyrere / yt was vysyted of god. lxxxxix. B Fo. CCx ¶Of a man ful of stryfe & dyscorde yt dyed myscheuously. lxxxxix. A Fo. CCx ¶Of a man yt sayd to his wyfe / goo in the deuylles name. lxxxxix. D Fo. CCx ¶Of hym yt sayd to his seruaunt / vnhose me deuyll. lxxxxix. E Fo. CCxi ¶That god is wrothe wt them yt breke his commaundementes. lxiiii. K Fo. Clv Impacientia. ¶Examples of Impacyence. ¶Of a woman that the deuyll dyde bere away. lxxxxix. O Fo. CCxiii ¶Of a man the whiche commaunded him selfe vnto the deuyll of hell by his Impacy¦ence. lxxxxix. P Fo. CCxiii ¶Of a clerke Impacyent yt wrothed him agaynst god. lxxxxix. Q Fo. CCxiii
¶Of a woman Impacyēt for that her chyl¦de wepte. And of a man the whiche dyde le¦de an hogge. lxxxi. C Fo. Clxxxi ¶That a crysten man loste the crowne of glory by his Impacience / for that he myght not endure with the other the whiche were martyred. lviii. E Fo. Cxliiii Of a womā īpacyent. lxxxxix. B. Fo. CCxx Paciencia. ¶That a mayden had pacyence whan her maystresse cursed her. lxxxxix. B. Fo. CCxx ¶That saynt Machayre was pacyent as he was wronged and beten for a woman yt had imposed vpon hym yt she had cōceyued of hym. lxxxxi. A Fo. Clxxxxviii ¶That a seke man was vesyted of the aun¦gell of god. xxiii. G Fo. li ¶That a thefe was taken & put to dethe / and the vyrgyn Marye made hym to be bu¦ryed honestly. Cxx. F Fo. CCliii ¶That a synner bare vnto his dethe his se¦kenes in remembraunce of the passyon of our lorde. Cxiiii. A Fo. CCxliiii ¶Of the pacyence of a man the whiche lo∣ued better to be slayne & brent than to bre∣ke the commaundement of god. Nō me∣chaberis. C.B Fo. CCxiiii ¶Of the pacyence of a good chylde yt pray¦sed god in al aduersytees. xvii. B. Fo. xxxvii ¶Of an holy man that scorged them that had taken his hors. lxxxii. H Fo. Clxxxv ¶Of an olde man yt had pacyence whan yt theues bare away his godes & bare them a sacke after them the whiche they had forgo¦ten. lxxxii. I Fo. Clxxxv ¶That by ye pacyence of saynt Domynyk he conuerted an heretyke. lix. F Fo. Clxv Inuidia. ¶Examples of enuye. ¶That Cayn dyde slee his broder Abel by enuye. lxxvi. A Fo. Clxxiii ¶That the Iewes made our lorde to deye by enuye. lxxvi. F Fo. Clxxv ¶That Herode wende to slee our Ihesus by enuye. lxxvi. D Fo. Clxxvii ¶Of enuye. xxvii. K Fo. lxxiii Odium. ¶Examples of hate. ¶That a knaue was dampned for hate / ye wolde be reuenged. lxxix. A. Fo. Clxxviii ¶Of haynours the whiche slewe a man in the chyrche and they were punysshed dy∣uynely. lxxix. B Fo. Clxxix ¶That ye deuyll slewe a man for kepynge or hate & wolde not pardō. lxxix. c. Fo. clxxix ¶That ye deuyll wolde haue letted saynt Thybauit to pacyfye the barons of cham∣payne yt were at debate. lxxix. D Fo. Clxxix ¶Another example. C.ii.Y Fo. CCxxiii ¶Of a woman that put dyuysion in good maryage. lxxxxix. E Fo. CCxi ¶Of thre persones the whiche hated a pa∣tryarke & imposed fals cryme vpon hym & they were punisshed. lxxxxvii. A. Fo. CCvii ¶Of a knyght yt pardoned vnto hym that had slayne his fader / & he had pardon of his synnes. xxvii. I Fo. lxvii ¶That by ye name of Ihesus a womā par¦doned her enmyes. Cxii. G Fo. CCxlii ¶That one obstynate {per}doned his enmyes for ye loue of Ihesus. Cxii. H Fo. CCxiii ¶Of a frere the whiche was enflambed in hate agaynst the procuroure of the sayd co∣uent. Cxxii. C Fo. CClv ¶Of a noble man yt pardoned the homycy¦de of his broder / and the crucyfixe enclyned his heed to hym. Cxii. L Fo. CCxlii ¶That Ihesu cryst wolde not pardon one deed tyll yt he had pardon of him that he had offended. Cxii. M Fo. CCxliii
¶That a seruaunt was sent in to outwar∣de derkenesses for that / yt he ne wolde par∣don the lytell debt as ye lorde had pardoned hym the grete debt. xxvii. H Fo. lxvi ¶Of detraccyon and of derysyon. Quere lxxxxv. ii. b / c / d / e / f. Fo. CCix ¶Sextum preceptum Furtum. ¶Examples vpon the .vi. commaunde¦ment of god. THat a thefe named Achar was stoned and his substaunce brent by the commaundement of our lorde god. lxxx. A Fo. Clxxx Other exāple. lxxvii. a. Fo. clxxv ¶Of a thefe the whiche was fastened and holden with his theft vpon the buryell of a deed body. lxxx. B Fo. Clxxx ¶That the deuylles slewe a thefe and bare away his soule for that ye he had withhol∣den the hors of a deed man yt sholde be gy∣uen to the poore folke. lxxx. C Fo. Clxxx ¶That a chylde yt had stolen an halfpeny from his cosyn was punysshed in the pytte of hell / and after brought agayne vnto his body. lxxx. D Fo. Clxxxi ¶That a carle was punysshed of ye deuyll for that yt he had stolen a stake of an hedge in his neyghbours felde. lxxxi. A. Fo. Clxxxi ¶Of a seruaunte yt stale fygges from his mayster. lxxxi. B Fo. Clxxxi ¶Of a thefe yt stale calstockes / & herbes fro a relygyous man. liii. B Fo. Cxxxi ¶Of theues the whiche dyde ete the breed and the sustenaunce of a good and holy her myte. liii. C Fo. xxxi ¶Of a man in paynes that had takē away shepe skynnes fro a wydow & wthelde parte of a felde. lxxxviii. A Fo. Clxxxxiii ¶That the deuyll of helle dyde bere away in body and soule a theuyl she coueytous ad¦uocate. lxxxi. E Fo. Clxxxii ¶That a fader dyde curse his sone beynge in hell. lxxi. G Fo. Clxvi ¶Of a fader and his sone dampned & put in a ponde of fyre for that yt they hadde go∣ten and withholden mennes goodes vniu∣stly. lxxiii. A Fo. Clxviii ¶Of a tayler named Martyn the whiche dyde steele clothe in cuttynge gownes and other vestures. lxxxi. F Fo. Clxxxii ¶That four men of a lygnage were dam∣ned and hanged in helle for ye they posseded falsly an herytage. lxxxi. G Fo. Clxxxiii ¶Another exāple. lxxxiiii. d Fo. Clxxxviii Sacrilegium. ¶Examples of sacrylege. ¶That an erle & many of one lygnage we∣re dampned for that yt they posseded īiustly an herytage that hadde ben taken from the chyrche. lxxxii A. Fo. Clxxxiii ¶Another example. lxxxvi. A Fo Clxxxxi ¶That Helyodorus was punysshed dyuy∣nely in takynge the treasours of ye chyrche of Iherusalem. lxxxii. B Fo. Clxxxiii ¶Of the punycyon of a man that denyed ye syluer of the chyrche that hadde ben lende vnto hym. lxxxii. C Fo. Clxxxiiii ¶Of theues sacryleges the which were pu¦nysshed for that / yt they had stolen the crosse & ye godes of ye chyrche. lxxxii. d. Fo. clxxxiiii ¶Of a relygyous of saynt Gregory ye whi¦che was buryed in the donghyll for that / yt he withhelde thre pyeces of golde of the co∣munyte. lxxxii. E Fo. Clxxxiiii ¶That a marchaunt was poore whyles yt his broder yt was abbot gaue hym ye godes of the chyrche. lxxxii. F Fo. Clxxxiiii ¶That a seculer was poore whyles yt his broder yt was monke gaue to hȳ ye goodes of the chyrche. lxxxii. G Fo. Clxxxv
¶Of a holy man the whiche gaue ye whyp vnto those that had take his hors away fro hym. lxxxii. H Fo. Clxxxv ¶That theues sacryleges reuoked them∣selfe to penaunce & made restytucyon by ye pacyēce of an olde man. lxxx. I Fo. lxxxv ¶Of Iulyan the appostate yt persecuted ye chyrche. lviii. A Fo. Cxlii Decime ¶Examples to pay the tythes. ¶Of Cayn & Abel yt payed theyr tythes ye one well & the other yll. lxxvi. A Clxxiiii ¶Of a lorde the whiche retayned ye tenthe of the godes that he dyde gyue vnto his ser¦uaunt. lxxxiii. A Fo. Clxxxv ¶Of a knyght the whiche tythed well and his vyne dyde bere fruyte. ii. tymes in one yere. lxxxiii. B Fo. Clxxxvi ¶Of a symple man ye tythed well & he dy∣de myracle. lxxxiii. C Fo. Clxxxvi ¶Examples for them the whiche taketh ty¦thes. lxxxiii.D Fo. Clxxxvi Iudices ¶That the kinge of Perce made to fley an euyll Iuge. lxxxi. D Fo. Clxxxii ¶Of a baylyf that corrupt Iustyce by gyf¦tes. lxxxi. C Fo. Clxxxi ¶Of two fals Iuges that condēpned Su¦sanne. lxxxxvi. C Fo. CCvii ¶Of an aduocate that loste his tongue in his dethe. lxxxxix. G. Fo. CCxii ¶Another example of a ryght cursed ad∣uocate. lxxxi. E Fo. Clxxxii Dona. ¶That saynt Fortyn bysshop was punys∣shed for that / yt he toke a vestyment of an vsurer. Cvi.C Fo. CCxxviii ¶That Gyesy was lepre and his lygnage for a gyft that he toke of the ryche man Na¦aman. lxxxv. B Fo. Clxxxviii ¶That Iudas was dampned ye toke. xxx. pence to sell our lorde. lxxvi. F Fo. Clxxv. ¶That those the whiche kept ye tombe of our lorde toke money for to bere fals wyt∣nes. lxxxxvi B Fo. CCvi Of a baylyf yt toke an oxe. clxxxi. Fo. Clxxxi ¶That Symon magus offred gyftes to the appostles. lxxxv. A Fo. Clxxxviii ¶Of a prophete that forsoke the gyftes of a kynge. liii. B Fo. Cxxxiii Rapina. ¶That the deuylles bette a knight for that yt he toke a cowe from a poore woman wy¦dowe. Cix. E Fo. CCxxxv ¶Another exāple. lxxxviii. A Fo. Clxxxxiii ¶Of a rauyssher in paynes that toke a wy¦dowes gote & dyde grete oppressyons vnto his subgectes. Cix. F Fo. CCxxxv ¶Another example. liii. C Fo. Cxxxi ¶Another exāple. lxxxvii. D Fo. Clxxxxiii ¶That a myller sawe a rauyssher payned in hell. Cx. A Fo. CCxxxv ¶That the deuyll myght not strangle an harlot / for that yt he serued ye gloryous vyr∣gyn Marye. lvi. H Fo. Cxxxix ¶That saynt Iohan conuerted the prȳce of theues. lxxiiii. E Fo. Clxxi ¶That the kynge Cosdroe the whiche pyl∣led the chyrches had his heed smyten of by his sones. lvii. G Fo. Cxli ¶That a thefe was saued by the vyrgyn Marye. Cxx. Fo. CCiii ¶That kynge Saull pylled the countree of Amalech agaynst the wyll of god & yll ca¦me vnto hym. liiii. E Fo. Cxxxiiii ¶That the deuyll posseded Lucrece that made saynt Beatryce to dye for to haue her herytage. lxxvii. A Fo. Clxxvi
¶Of a woman dāpned yt was nourysshed of thynges yll goten. lxxi. H Fo. Clxvi ¶That a seruaunt sawe his mayster ledde in to dyuers paynes for that ye he had ben an oppressour and persecutour of the poore people. Cvii. D Fo. CCxxxi ¶Another example. lxxxii. H Fo. Cixxxv Tenacitas et īmisericordia. ¶Examples of people to moche holdȳge and vnmercyfull. ¶Of the cursed ryche man ye had no pyte on the poore lazare the whiche dyed for hon¦ger. lxxxiiii. A Fo. Clxxxvi ¶Of our Durant the whiche lyued wtout huyngepyte ne mercy vpon the poores in∣dycentes. lxxxiiii. B Fo. Clxxxvii ¶Of a ryche man vnmercyfull ye fledde in the tyme of famyne for drede to gyue & to do elmesse. lxxxiiii. C Fo. Clxxxviii ¶That a monke sawe ryche men hanged in hell. lxxx D Fo. Clxxxviii ¶Of the dethe of a ryche man / ad or a po¦re woman. Cv. A Fo. CCxxvii ¶That two men were lepres for that / yt they had horroure and indygnacyon of le∣pres. lxxxiiii. F Fo. Clxxxvii ¶Of a man the whiche gaue hymselfe vn∣to the deuyll to thende yt he sholde enryche hym. lx. H Fo. Cxlvii ¶That the deuyll charged a woman to re¦ceyue poore folke on the day & to put them out by nyght. lxv. F Fo. Clvii ¶Of a carle ye gaue vnto the deuyll that yt that he had to ete whan. ii. clerkes demaun¦ded almesse. lxxxxvii. H Fo. CCviii ¶Of maryners ye forsware them of fere to gyue almesse. lxxxxvii. F Fo. CCviii Misericordia. ¶That god sent. xx. s. for one peny yt was gyuen to a poore man. lxxv. D Fo. Clxxii ¶Of a ma charytable yt was drowned do y g y• workes of mercy. lv. B Fo. Cxxxvi ¶That Corne{us} and saynt Eustace were conuerted for the almesdedes that they had done. xii. B Fo. Cl ¶That a barly lofe the whiche a man kest furyously vnto a poore man prouffyted hȳ moche. xliii. C Fo. Cii ¶Other examples. xxii. e / f / g. Fo. li ¶Of a man that was mercyfull & volup∣tuous. Cxxii. D Fo CClvi ¶That a relygyous gaue colwortes to a there yt worde haue stolen. liii. B Fo. Cxxxi ¶That an he myte fedde a thefe that stoe his substaunce. liii. C Fo. Cxxxi Symonia ¶Examples of people symonyakes. ¶Of Symon magus yt wolde by ye grace of the holy goost. lxxxv. A Fo. Clxxxviii ¶Of the punycyon of Gyezy that was sy¦monyake. lxxxv. B Fo. Clxxxviii ¶Of ye symonyake Hieroboam ye solde the bysshopryches. lxxxv. C Fo. Clxxxviii ¶That kynge Anthyochus was symonia¦ke and also proude ouer the pussaunce hu∣mayne. lxxxv. D Fo. Clxxxix ¶Of a man dampned that had many be∣nefyces. lxxxv E Fo. Clxxxix ¶Another example contrary of a monke the whiche was chosen to be bysshop and he refused it / and after that he deyed well and was saued. Ciiii. G Fo. CCxxvii ¶That a man sholde not constytute ony man in benefyces by theyr prayers carnal∣les. lxxxv. F Fo. Clxxxix ¶That a man seculer sholde not do the of fyce of a preste. lxxxv. G Fo. Clxxxix ¶Example in Alchynus that lordes sholde not constytute people of euyll lyfe in bene∣fyces. lxxxv. H Fo. Clxxxx
¶That he that precheth shal haue grete re¦warde in heuen / & that fewe curates ben saued. lvi. G Fo. Cxxxix ¶Of a man yt was bysshop iniustly & he dy¦ed sodaynly. lxxxv. I Fo. Clxxxx ¶That a chanon was accused of ye patron of the chyrche. lxxxv. K Fo Clxxxx ¶That a conuers wolde haue ben bysshop by the inductyon of the deuyll and he was hanged. lxxxv. L Fo. Clxxxx Vsura. ¶Examples of people vsurers ¶Of the punycyon & dampnacyon of an vsurer from whose wombe there proceded a tree. lxxxvi. A Fo. Clxxxxi ¶Of an vsurer the whiche wolde not resto¦re cryed at his dethe that he dyde brenne & broyle. lxxxvi. B Fo. Clxxxxi ¶Of the myscheuous dethe of an vsurer the whiche sayd in his sekenes that he dyde eate pence. lxxxvi. C Fo. Clxxxxi ¶Of the horryble dethe of a meschaunte vsurer. lxxxvi. D Fo. Clxxxxi ¶Of a womā vsuresse yt made to bury her money wt her. lxxxvi. E Fo. Clxxxxi ¶Of an vsurer the whiche demaunded ay¦de of his golde and syluer whan he was in deyenge. lxxxvi. F Fo. Clxxxxii ¶Of an vsurer yt cōmaunded his soule to the deuyll for that / yt it wolde not abyde wt his goodes. lxxxvi. G Fo. Clxxxxii ¶Of an vsurer yt wolde not restore and he was borne vpon an asse to the galowes and there buryed. lxxxvii. A Fo. Clxxxxii ¶That the deuyll dyde sette hym vpon ye cofre of an vsurer where as ye money was put. lxxxvii. B Fo. Clxxxxii ¶That a persone shold not pray for an vsu¦rer deed. lxxxvii. C Fo. Clxxxxiii ¶What befel of a chyrche made of vsuries & extorcyons. lxxxvii. D Fo. Clxxxxiii ¶Of an vsuret the whiche wolde not resto¦re to other. lxxxvii. E Fo. Clxxxxiii ¶Of an vsurer yt confessed & restored in his laste dayes. lxxxvii. F Fo. Clxxxxiii ¶Of an vsurer ye deuyls plucked out of his graue in the chyrche and drewe hym out by the fete. lxix. B Fo. Clxiii ¶That a vsurer buried in a cloyster waked the monkes. lxix. C Fo. Clxiii Restitutio. ¶Examples of restytucyon. ¶Of one named Frederyk tourmented in hell for that he restored not the thynges yll goten. lxxxviii. A Fo. Clxxxxiii ¶Of a chylde yt was in paynes of purgato¦ry for that yt he hadde not restored ye syluer borowed. lxxxviii. B Fo. Clxxxxiii ¶Of a man tourmented in purgatory for the defaute of payenge syxe pence that he owed. lxxxviii. C Fo. Clxxxxiiii ¶Of a relygious ye was in ye paynes of pur¦gatory for an half peny that he owed vnto a feryman. lxxxviii. D Fo. Clxxxxiiii ¶That two men were neclygētes to resto¦re and to pay as they had promysed / and ye one was lepre & the other stryken wt the fyre of saynt Anthony. lxxxxvii. D Fo. CCviii ¶That the deuylles dooth lette for to re∣store. lxxxviii. E Fo. Clxxxxiiii ¶Of a fader & his sone dampned ye wolde not restore. lxxiii. A Fo. Clxviii ¶Of vsurers the whiche wolde not restore lxxxvi. a / b. Fo. Clxxxxi. &. lxxxvii. A. Fo xcii ¶Of a player dampned yt restored not his wynnynges. lxvii. D Fo. Clix ¶That god gaue charge vnto a chylde yt he sholde restore an hafpeny that he hadde stolen. lxxx. D Fo. Clxxxi ¶Of an abbot yt sent agayne the money gy¦uen to his monastery for yt it was of yll ac∣quysycyon. lxxxvii. F Fo. Clxxxxiii
¶Of an vsurer the whiche confessed & re∣stored. lxxxvii. F Fo. Clxxxxiii ¶Of a man that restored to other and put hymselfe in good operacyons for that / yt no¦ne of his parents & frendes wolde put theyr lytell fynger in the fyre a whyle for the loue of hym. lxxii. A Fo. Clxvii ¶Other examples of semblable mater yt a man sholde restore to other & do good ope¦racyons wtout taryenge to his parents af∣ter his dethe. lxxii. c / d / e / f. Fo. Clxvii ¶Of a riche man the whiche restored who sayd vnto his sone yt he sholde holde his fȳ¦ger in the fyre tyll he had sayd one Auema∣ria. lxxii. B Fo. Clxxvii ¶Of theues the whiche dyde make resty∣tucyon. lxxii. H. I Fo. Clxxxv Excommunicatio ¶Examples of excommunycacyon. ¶That a whyte lofe became blacke in the excōmunycacyon. lxxxix. A Fo. Clxxxxiiii ¶That storkes left theyr nest yt was in the hous of a man incontynent that he was ex¦communycate. lxxxix. B Fo. Clxxxxv ¶That the sparowes yt made noyse in a chyrche yode out incontynent that they we¦re excōmunycate. lxxxix. C Fo. Clxxxxv ¶That the floures of an apple tree fell & dryed incontynent yt the excōmunycacyon was drawen for a portos yt was in the sayd apple tre. lxxxix. D Fo. Clxxxxv ¶That a rauen became hydeous & his fe∣ders fell fro him as soone as ye bysshop had excommunycate for his rynge yt the rauen had taken. lxxxix. E Fo. Clxxxxv ¶That excommunycacyon cast Iustly or Iniustly is to drede as it appered in .ii. mon¦kes yt gelded thē selfe. lxxxix. f. Fo. Clxxxxv ¶Of a preste the whiche was excommuny¦cate the whiche deyed sodaynly as he wolde synge. lxxxxiii. D Fo. CCiii ¶That the lyghtnynge consumed one ex∣communycate. lxxxix. G Fo. Clxxxxvi ¶That a gardyn excommunycate wolde bere no fruyte tyll the tyme that it was as∣soyled. lxxxix. H Fo. Clxxxxvi Maledictio ¶Examples of maledyccyon ¶Of the maledyccion the whiche came vn¦to Adam for the brekȳge of the cōmaunde∣ment of god. liiii. A Fo. Cxxxiii ¶That Cayn was cursed of god for that / yt he slewe his broder Abell / & also for that / yt he tythed yll. lxxvi. A Fo. Clxxiiii ¶Of a woman yt cursed her .x. chyldren / & they were incontynent punysshed dyuyne∣ly horrybly. lxxiii. E Fo. Clxx ¶That Noe kest maledyccyō vpon his ne¦uew the sone of Cham / for that / yt the sayd Cham mocked ye sayd noe. lxx. C. Fo. Clxiiii ¶Of a fader & his sone yt cursed eche other in hell. lxxi. G Fo. Clxvi ¶Of the maledyccyon of .iiii. monkes that slewe a beere. lxxxix. I Fo. Clxxxxviii ¶Of the maledyccyon yt saynt Machayre vttred vpon hym that brake ye commaun∣dements of god. lvii. A Fo. Cxl ¶Of a lady the whiche cursed her chambe¦rere. lxxxxix. B Fo. CCx ¶That ye sone of kynge Achab bare in this worlde the punycyon & maledyccion of his faders synne. lxxvi. B Fo. Clxxvi Dyabolus ¶Example of a man the whiche sayd vnto his seruaunt / vnhose me deuyll. And incon¦tynent the deuyll was redy & began to vn∣hose hym. lxxxxix. C Fo. CCxi ¶Of a man that sayd vnto his wyfe go in the deuylles name and the deuyll posseded her incontynent. lxxxxix. D Fo. CCxi
¶That the deuyl serued to ye carte of saynt Thybault. lxxix. D Fo. Clxxix ¶That ye deuyl strake a monke wt a strawe in slepynge. lxvi. B Fo. Clviii ¶Of an yll erle that the deuyll dyde bere away. lxxxxix. N Fo. CCxiii ¶Another example. Cx. A Fo. CCxxxv ¶Of a woman impacyent yt the deuyll ba∣re away. lxxxxix. O Fo. CCxiii ¶Of a man that the deuyl dyde drowne in a water. lxxxxix. P Fo. CCxiii ¶That the deuyl bare away a tauerner in body and soule. lxxi. I Fo. Clxvi ¶That the deuyll toke a man yt had solde his soule. lxxi. K Fo. Clxvii ¶Of a chylde that the deuyll dyde bere a∣way. lxx. G Fo. Clxiiii ¶Of a chorle yt gaue vnto the deuyll that yt he had to eate. lxxxxvii. H Fo. CCviii ¶Of an aduocate that the deuyl dyde bere away. lxxxi. E Fo. Clxxxii ¶That the deuyl wrote synnes within the chyrche. lxv. E Fo. Clvii ¶That the deuyll bare a boke wryten of synnes. lxv. C. Fo. Clvi ¶That the deuylles were vpon ye tayle of a woman. lxv. D Fo. Clvi ¶That the deuyll gaue a monke pytche to drynke. lxvi. C Fo. Clviii ¶That the deuyll encharged a woman. iiii thynges. lxv. F Fo. Clvii ¶That ye deuyll made a woman to renye her faythe & to sle her chylde. lx. I Fo. cxlvii ¶That the deuyll gaue a payre of shone to an olde woman for too put dyuysyon in a maryage. lxxxxix. E Fo. CCxi ¶Other examples of decepcyons of the de¦uyl. lviii. B Fo. Cxliii. Et. lx. G Fo. Cxlvi ¶That the deuylles vnburyed a synner in the chyrche. lxix. B Fo. Cxlii ¶Septimum preceptum Luxuria. ¶Examples vpon the .vii. commaun∣dement of god. OF a woman dāpned yt knewe lecherously one of her parētes & dyde many synnes of whose mouthe yssued many todes & venymous bestes in her con∣fessyon. lxxxx. A Fo. Clxxxxvi ¶Of ye punycion of a curyal yt habyted his god doughter. lxxxx. B Fo. Clxxxxvii ¶Of a woman dampned for tyrynge and aornynge of her heed for shewynge of her pappes / for dauncynge / & vnshamefull en¦bracementes. lxxxx. C Fo. Clxxxxvii ¶That .xxiii. M men were brent wt the fyre celestyall for ye synne of lechery / & Balaam gaue ye counceyle. lxxxx. D Fo. Clxxxxviii ¶That by the occasion of ye lechery of Hero¦de & his Herodyen saynt Iohans heed was smyten of. lxxvi. E Fo. Clxxiiii ¶That Absalon knewe his faders cōcuby¦nes as it is wryten in the .xvi. chapytre of ye seconde boke of kynges / & soone after was slayne cruelly. lxx. A Fo. Clxiii ¶Of a yonge man lecherous that conuer∣ted hym. Cxv. F Fo. CCxlvii Stuprum. ¶Examples of deflourynge of vyrgyns. ¶That a vyrgyn was corrupte wt a yonge man and by malyce she imposed the synne vnto saynt Machayre the whiche was pa∣cyent. lxxxxi. A Fo. Clxxxxxviii ¶Of a knyght dampned and tourmented in hell the whiche toke the maydenheed of a vyrgyn. lxxxx. B. Fo. Clxxxxix ¶That Ammon the sone of Dauyd was slayne of Absalon for that yt he had deflored Thamar. lxxxxi C Fo. Clxxxxix ¶That a doughter was rauysshed in the
daunce and vyoled / and after hanged her selfe. lxviii. F Fo. Clxii ¶That Sychem the whiche deflored Dy¦ne the doughter of Iacob was slayne & his fader Emor. &c. lxxxxi. D Fo. Clxxxxix ¶Of hym the whiche enbraced the ketles & the cawdrons of ye kechyn wenynge to en¦brace vyrgyns. lxxxxi. E Fo. Clxxxxix Concilium malum ¶That an olde baude coūceyled yll a yon¦ge woman. lxxxxi. F Fo. CC ¶That Ionadab counceyled yll Ammon to deflour Thamar. lxxxxi. C. Fo. Clxxxxix ¶That Balaam gaue yll counceyle for to make to commyt fornycacyon with ye chyl∣dren of ysraell / for there were .xxiiii. thousā¦de brent with the fyre that descended from heuen. lxxxx. D Fo. Clxxxxviii ¶That a wytche counceyled yll Theophy¦le to renye god. lviii. B Fo. Cxliii ¶That kinge Ezechyas sought counceyle of the deuyll / & his messagers were brent wt the fyre celestyall. lx. G Fo. Cxlvi ¶Of a man yt gaue yll counceyle to mar∣tyr the crysten men / & that counceyle redoū¦ded fyrst on hymselfe. lviii. F Fo. Cxliiii ¶That the yonge men counceyled yll the kynge Roboam to gyue proude answere to ye chyldren of ysrael. lxxxxix. M Fo. CCxiii Adulterium. ¶Examples of aduoutry. ¶That a woman vsed her lyfe in lechery∣es and glotonyes / and her husbande was vnto the contrary the whiche lyued ryght sobrely. lxxxxii. A Fo. CC ¶Of ye dāpnacion of a burgeys aduoutrer & of a woman wedded. lxxxxii. B Fo. CCi ¶Of an aduoutrer yt deuyls posseded at ye chyrche dore. lxxxxii. C Fo. CCi ¶Of an aduoutresse dampned yt two dra¦gons tourmented. lxxxxii. D Fo. CCi ¶Of ye payne of a man yt knewe ye wyfe of his neyghbour. lxxxxii. E Fo. CCi ¶That a man sawe a woman payned for her aduoutry. lxxxxii. F Fo. CCi ¶Of a yonge man that synned wt his wyfe maryed. lxxxxii. G Fo. CCi ¶That .ii. aduoutresses bet eche other for a pyece of clothe. lxxxxii. H Fo. CCi ¶That a quene rode on Arystotle yt was a grete clerke. lxxxxii. I Fo. CCii ¶That Dauyd cōmytted aduoutry and homycyde. lxxvii. E Fo. Clxxvi ¶Of a woman aduoutresse that bare an hote yren. lxxxxii. K Fo. CCii Deccatum in matrimonio. ¶That in the solempnyte a man sholde ab¦stayne fro his wyfe. lxxxxiii. A Fo. CCii ¶That the chyldren of a man and of a wo¦man might not haue baptym for the synne the whiche they commytted togyder in ma¦ryage. lxxxxiii. B Fo. CCii ¶That a woman chylded .ix. chyldren at a burden. lxxxxiii. C Fo. CCii ¶Of this mater .iiii. examples ben wryten in the floure of the commaundementes of god. xxxvi. e / f / g / h / i / . Fo. lxxxvii Sacrilegium. ¶Examples of lecherous people of the chyrche. ¶That a preest that was a fornycatoure deyed sodaynly. lxxxxiii. D Fo. CCiii ¶That two relygyous were lecherous ap¦postates. lxxxxiii. E Fo. CCiii ¶Of the dampnacyon of a nonne yt cōmyt¦ted lechery. lxxxxiii. F Fo. CCiii ¶Of two lecherous prestes Iuges that co¦ueyted Susanne. lxxxxvi. C Fo. CCvii
¶That the deuyll charged a woman to do lechery wt prestes. lxv. F Fo. Clvii ¶That a relygious appostate & lecherous had mercy in requyrȳge ye sone of ye vyrgyn mary on crystmas day. Cxiiii. A Fo. ccxliiii ¶That a pylgrym sawe a preste caste in ye pytte of hell. lxxxxiii. G Fo. CCiii ¶Of the punycyon of two prestes the whi¦che receyued theyr creatour & redemptour in synne. xxxvii. E Fo. lxxxx ¶Of a relygyous woman dampned that was a grete almeswoman in her lyfe / but she conceyued a chylde and secretely dyde sle it. lxxxxiii. H Fo. CCiii ¶Of the terryble Iugement and horryble punycyon that was doone of an archebys∣shop named Vdo a grete harlot & of cursed lyfe. Cvi. D Fo. CCxxviii ¶Of a relygyous yt couered his handes of drede to touche his moder in goynge ouer a water. xxxvii. F Fo. lxxxx Castitas et bonitas ¶That a vyrgyn sawe a preste clere & fay¦re in syngȳge masse. lxxxxiiii. A Fo. CCiiii ¶That two relygyous vyrgyns were fro crystmas tyl the day of saynt Iohn̄ baptyst in spekȳge of god & wende to haue be there but two houres. lxxxxiiii. B Fo. CCiiii ¶Other examples. xxxviii. E Fo. lxxxii ¶That a bysshop chast and pure sawe on ester day some cōfessed ye which were blacke & other whyte. lxxxxiiii. C Fo. CCiiii ¶Other examples. xxxvii. F Fo. lxxxx Peccatum sodomyticum. ¶Examples of ye synne of sodomye. ¶Of the lechery and meruaylous punycy¦on of Sodom. lxxxxv. A Fo. CCv ¶Of the warre and slaughter that was made vpon the sodomytes Beniamyn for the lechery that they commytted in ye wyfe of Leuyte pylgrym. lxxxxv. B Fo. CCv ¶Of a man the whiche haunted his wyfe sodomytly. lxxxxv. C Fo. CCvi ¶That a sodomytyke deyed Impenytent & dyspeyred yt sayd that he sawe hell / ye tour¦ments & the deuyls. lxxxxv. D Fo. CCvi ¶That a woman sodomytyke was vnbu∣ryed horrybly. lxxxxvi. E Fo. CCvi ¶That the deuylles haue horroure of the synne of sodomye. lxxxxv. F Fo. CCvi ¶Octauum preceptum. Testimonium. ¶Examples of fals wytnessynge. OF a crystyen yt forsware hym cauteloussion ye auter of saynt Nycolas. lxxxxvi. A Fo. ccvi ¶That they the whiche kept the tombe of Ihesu cryst toke money for to wytnes fals yt ye dysciples had stolen ye body by nyght. lxxxxvi. b. Fo. CCvi ¶Of the fals wytnessynge that two aun∣cyent prestes made agaynst Susanne & yl came vnto them. lxxxxvi. C Fo. CCvii ¶That the kynge Achab & Iesabell made to make fals wytnesses agaynst the good man Naboth for to slee him and to possede his vyneyarde. lxxvi. B Fo. Clxxiii Periurium. ¶Examples of periurynge. ¶Of thre persones the whiche forsware them in imposynge fals cryme vpon a pa∣tryarke. lxxxxvii. A Fo. CCvii ¶Of a man yt forsware hym & myght not wtdrawe his hande. lxxxxvii. B Fo. CCvii ¶Of a man yt wolde forswere hym for mo¦ney lende. lxxxxvi. C Fo. CCviii ¶Of two men the whiche forsware them
and the one was mesell and the other was seke of ye fyre of saynt Anthony by dyuyne suffraunce. lxxxxvii D Fo. CCviii ¶Of a kynge & of many of his people the whiche forsware theym and they deyed so∣daynly. lxxxxvii. E Fo. CCviii ¶Of maryners the whiche forswore them of drede for to gyue of almesse vnto a poore man. lxxxxvii. F Fo. CCviii ¶Of hym the whiche constreyned a man to swere and knewe well that he sholde be forsworne lxxxxvii. G Fo. CCviii ¶Of a earle that gaue vnto the deuyl that ye he hadde to ete whan two clerkes him de¦maūded almesse. lxxxxvii. H Fo. CCviii ¶Of a frere deane of Coleyne the whiche forsware hym for money that had be lende to hym. lxxxii. C Fo. Clxxxxiiii Mendatium ¶Examples of lyenge / and it is to be no¦ted that al fals wytnesses and periuryes ben lyes. ¶That ye holy saynt Iherom was belyed before god / the whiche commaunded that he were beten / and af er the sayd Iherom dyde penaunce. lxxxxviii. A Fo. CCix ¶That two marchaūtes sayd vnto theyr curate yt they coude nothȳge sell wtout lyen¦ge & swerynge. lxxxxix. K Fo. CCxii ¶That the deuyll lyed vnto a noble man to deceyue hȳ at his dethe. lx. B Fo. Cxlv ¶That the deuyll lyed vnto our fyrst mo∣der Eue. liiii. A Fo. Cxxxiii ¶Of a doughter the whiche dyde make a lye. lxxxxi. A Fo. Clxxxxviii ¶That the yonge man yt made a lye vnto Dauyd was slayne / for he sayd yt he hadde slayne Saul & had not. lxviii. B Fo. lxxviii ¶Another exāple. lxxxxvii. A Fo. CCvii Detractio ¶Examples of detraccyon. ¶Of some relygyous the whiche made de∣traccyon of theyr broder the whiche was in deyenge. lxxxxviii. B Fo. CCix ¶Of a detractour dampned for his detrac¦cyons. lxxxxviii. C Fo. CCix ¶Of a detractour yt had his tongue amon¦ge todes. lxxxxviii. D Fo. CCix ¶Of a detractour yt bote hȳselfe & wasted his tongue. lxxxxviii. E Fo. CCx ¶Of a good fader yt slepte whan herde de∣traccyon. lxxxxviii F Fo. CCx ¶That one deed apered to a knyght as he detracted hym. lxxxxviii. G Fo. CCx ¶Of .iii. detractours yt imposed fals cryme to a patryarke. lxxxxvii. Fo. CCviii Derisio ¶Examples of derysyon. ¶That yll came vnto a boucher the which mocked the holy asshes and vngreaced his tethe to drynke at the tauerne whan other were at masse. lxvii. F Fo. Clx ¶That yll came to Cham yt mocked his fader Noe. lxx. G Fo. Clxiiii ¶Of a rybaude the whiche mocked his fe∣lawe for that / yt he yode to here a predyca∣cyon. lv. A Fo. Cxxxvi Murmuratio ¶Examples of murmure ¶That Chore / Dathan / and Abyron / and CCl. men descended in to hell all quycke ho¦sed & shodde for yt they murmured agaynst god & Moyses. liiii. H Fo. Cxxxix Another example in eodem loco. ¶Of a frxe the whiche was punysshed dy¦uynely for that that he murmured agaynst god. liiii. I Fo. Cxxxix ¶That an hermyte murmured ayest god for his diuyne Iugemēts. Cvi. b. Fo. ccxxvi
Loqui ¶Examples of euyll spekers. ¶Of a man full of bate & dyscorde the whi¦che sayd at his dethe yt all those that he trou¦bled apposed agaynst him & enforced them to sle hym. lxxxxix. A Fo. Cx ¶Of a lady full of wrathe that cursed her mayden. lxxxxix. B Fo. Cx ¶Of hym that sayd to his seruaunt vnho¦se me deuyll / and incontynent the deuyl vn¦hosed hym. lxxxxix. C Fo. Cxi ¶Of a man yt sayd to his wyfe / goo in the deuylles name. lxxxxix. D Fo. Cxi ¶Of a woman that put diuysyon in good maryage. lxxxxix. E Fo. Cxi ¶Of a woman that cursed her .x. chyldren and they trembled incōtynent of punycion dyuyne. lxxiii. E Fo. Clxx ¶That saynt Bryce sawe the deuyll that wrote the euyll wordes yt men spake in the chyrche. lxv. E Fo. Clvii ¶Of a woman yt had ye vpper parte of her body brent in the chyrche after her dethe for her cursed tongue. lxxxxix. F Fo. Cxi ¶Of a man dampned of whome Lucyfer demaūded a songe for them yt he had songē in the worlde. Cvii. D Fo. CCxxxi ¶Of a knyght that spake horcely for that yt he gloryfyed him in syngynge swete leche¦rous wordes. lxxxxi. B Fo. Clxxxxix ¶Of an aduocate the whiche loste his ton¦gue in his dethe / for that he had habounded in yll languages. lxxxxix. G Fo. Cxii ¶That the aungelles ben presente whan men speke good wordes / & whan euyll wor¦des ben spoken the deuylles ben alway pre¦sent. lxxxxix. H Fo. Cxii ¶That a knyght abstayned hȳ fro spekyn¦ge to fle yll wordes. Ciiii. D Fo. CCxxvi ¶Of a mā that solde his soule & the deuyll bare it away. lxxi. K Fo. Clxvii Audire. ¶Exāples of them ye herken yl wordes: ¶That the syster of saynt Damyen was tourmented for that yt she had taken plea∣sure to here songes. lxxxxix. I Fo. CCxii ¶That a bysshop was tourmented in pur¦gatory for that / yt he herde the detraccyons of his clerke. lxxxxix. L. Fo. CCxiii ¶Of a man tourmented in hell for his vay¦ne songes that he hadde vsed in the worlde folysshely. Cvii. D Fo. CCxxxi ¶Of a woman dāpned yt had arowes wt∣in her eeres / for that / yt she herde folysshe wordes. lxxxx. A Fo. Clxxxxvi ¶Nonum preceptū et decimum Cogitatio mala. ¶Examples vpon the .ix. and .x. com∣maundement of god. THat Lucrece coueyted to haue & to possede the herytage of saynt Beatryce: & the deuyl posseded & slewe hym. lxxvii. A Fo. Clxxv ¶That a grete almesse woman was dampned for the wyll yt she had to cō∣myt lechery. C. A Fo. CCxiii ¶That Arystotle synned whan he couey∣ted & prayed the quene to commyt lechery / albeit that he performed not the operacyon outwarde. lxxxxii. I Fo. CCii ¶That a woman brake this commaunde¦ment whan she desyred and prayed a clerke to vse of his enbracȳges C. B Fo. CCxiiii ¶That a noble woman brake this cōmaū∣dement whā she desyred her porter of leche¦ry though yt she dyde nothynge / for he wol∣de not consent. C. C Fo. CCxiiii ¶That ye auncyents the whiche coueyted Susanne brake this commaundement al∣beit that they dyde nothynge as they pur∣posed. lxxxxvi. C Fo. CCvii
¶Of a frere yt delyted him in thoughtes of fornycacyon without resystynge & therfore his aungel was sory & the orayson of an ho¦ly fader the whiche prayed for him was not exalted. C. D Fo. CCxiiii ¶That the deuyll had slayne a yongman replete with yll thoughtes yf god had not ayded hym. Cxv. F Fo. CCxlvii ¶Of a monke vnto whom god sent breed good & fayre / & after that he had lecherous thoughtes & elacyon he loste the sayd good breed. Ci. A Fo. CCxv ¶Of a frere yt was tempted in his thought of the spyryte of fornycacyon and god suf∣fred that he sawe it in the lykenesse of a wo∣man. Ci. B Fo. CCxvi ¶That incontynent yt a man hadde of yll thoughtes in walkynge ye deuyll felowshyp¦ped with hym & after that he was confessed ye deuyll knewe hȳ not. Ci. C Fo. CCxvi ¶That it behoueth to yelde accompt at ye daye of the Iugement of euyll thoughtes Ci. D. Fo. CCxvi. &. Cviii. D. Fo. CCxxxii Cogitatio bona ¶Examples of good thoughtes ¶That a frere wanne .vii. crownes on a nyght for resystynge agaynst yll thoughtes & temptacyons. Cii. A Fo. CCxv ¶That a relygyous apostate repeated hȳ it appereth that the wyll is reputed for the dede. Cii. B. Fo. CCxvii ¶Another exāple. Cxv. F Fo. CCxlvii ¶That a thefe came vnto an hermyte in good wyll to amende hym the whiche her∣myte dyspraysed hym / & a tree slewe hym & he went to heuen. Cii. C Fo. CCxvii Penitentia ¶Of Theophyle the which was saued by penaunce. lviii. B Fo. Cxliii ¶Of ye penaunce of a monke that had re∣nyed god. lviii. C Fo. Cxliii ¶Of the penaunce of a bysshoppe that re∣nyed god. lviii. D Fo. Cxliii ¶Of a man yt gaue hymselfe to ye deuyll to thende to be enryched / and after he was saued by penaunce. lx. H Fo. Cxlvii ¶Of two relygyous men the whiche were apostates and harlottes and after saued by penaunce. lxxxxiii. E Fo. CCiii ¶That the prynce of theues yt saynt Iohn̄ conuerted was saued by penaunce and cor¦reccyon. lxxiiii. E Fo. Clxxi ¶That of theues were reuoked to doo pe∣naunce & made restytucyon by ye pacyence of an olde fader. lxxxxii. H. I Fo. Clxxxv ¶That theues repented them and dyde pe¦naunce by yt an holy man made to kepe his dore wt dragons. liii. C Fo. Cxxxi ¶Of hym the whiche wanne his broder yt was fallen in fornycacyō in doynge penaū¦ce for hym. lxxv. F Fo. Clxxxiii ¶The goodnes that penaunce & the other sacramentes done shall be founde in ye flou¦re of the commaundementes of god in the nombre. viii. B. &c. Fo. xviii ¶That a man sholde do of good dedes in his lyuynge wtout to trust his frendes after his dethe. lxxii. A b / c / d / e / f. Fo. Clxvii Contritio ¶Examples of contrycyon ¶Of a synner yt repented hym at a predy∣cacyon & at euery teere yt he wept he brake a lynke of the chayne that he had about his necke. lv. A Fo. Cxxxvi ¶Of the contrycyon & correccyon of a rely¦gyous halot. Cxiii. A Fo. CCxliii ¶Of a thefe yt repented hym & was saued by contrycyon. Cii. C Fo. CCxvii ¶That by contrycyon a relygyous aposta¦te was saued. Cii. B Fo. CCxvii
¶That a woman the whiche renyed her faythe & slewe her chylde was saued by the grete contrycyon yt she had / & for beynge in wyll to confesse her. lx. I Fo. Cxlvii ¶Of a doughter that slewe her fader / and her moder & had mercy by contrycyon and confessyon. lxxvii. D Fo. Clxxvi ¶Of the correccyon of a man of grose con¦scyence. lv. B Fo. Cxxxvi ¶That a woman vnto whome the deuyll gaue in charge .iiii. thynges was saued by grete contrycion & her sone dyde penaunce for her. lxv. F Fo. Clvii Confessio. ¶Examples of confessyon. ¶That by detaute to confesse one synne ye doughter of a kynge was dampned ye whi∣che hadde be a grete gyuer of almesses to ye poores. lxxxxiii. H Fo. CCiii ¶That a woman a gyuer of almesse was dampned by defaute to confesse one leche∣rous thought. C. A Fo. CCxiiii ¶That a woman was dampned for yt she ne made hole cōfessyō. lxxxx. A Fo. clxxxxvi ¶That a womā a giuer of almesse yt slewe two of her chyldren was dāpned by defaut of confessyon. lxxxxii D Fo. CCi ¶Another example. Cxxii. D Fo. CClvi ¶That a man and a woman were damp¦ned for that / yt theyr confessyon at the dethe was made without charite & good purpose And that a woman synner was saued for yt that her confessyon was salutary and wel made. lxxxxii. B Fo. CCi ¶That a bysshop saw on Eester day some men confessed / of the whiche some were all blacke and some whyte the whiche denoteth yt all they yt go to confessyon be not in the sta¦te of grace. lxxxxiiii. C Fo. CCiiii ¶That a blacke man bounde with a grete te chayne of yren went to confession and he came agayne more strongely bounde & blac¦ker than before. Cii. Z Fo. CCxxiii ¶That confessyon is the thynge yt noyeth the deuyll moost. Cii. & Fo. CCxxiii ¶That ye deuyl knewe not a man after his confessyon. Ci. C Fo. CCxvi ¶Another exāple lyke. lxxxxv. f. Fo. ccxlvii ¶Another example. Cxxiii. F Fo. CClvii ¶Of a myller dāpned yt wolde not cōfesse hym at his dethe. Cx. A Fo. CCxxx ¶Of a clerke dampned for lacke of confes¦syon / the which yode to the tauerne to play & to drynke. &c. whan he sholde haue be at the masse. lxvii. D Fo Clix ¶Of an vsurer yt confessed him & restored at his dethe. lxxxvii. F Fo Clxxxxiii ¶Of a detractour dampned yt cōtempned to confesse hym at his dethe & yet he was warned. lxxxxviii. C Fo. CCx ¶Of a woman yt bare an hote yren in her hande wtout hauynge yll after her confessy∣on and after that she retorned to syn̄e was brente. lxxxxii. K Fo. CCii Eucharistia. ¶Examples of the sacrament of ye auter. ¶Of an abbot yt sayd that ye hostye consa∣cred was not the body of Ihesu cryst but yt it was his fygure. lxxxxii. D Fo. CCxviii That Iudas receyued his creatour in mor¦tall synne and euyll dyde come vnto hym therfore. Cii. E Fo. CCxix ¶Of a woman yt laughed whā saynt Gre∣grory admynystred vnto her on Eester daye the whiche was incredule towarde ye holy sacrament. Cii. F Fo. CCxix ¶Of a woman yt put the body god before hogges. Cii. L Fo. CCxx ¶Of a mayden yt shed the body of god vp on colwortes. Cii. M Fo. CCxx ¶That the vyrgyn Marye & many other vyrgyns the whiche were at the dethe of a
wydowe yode on knees and worshypped ye body of our lorde whan it was brought to her. Cv. A Fo. CCxxvii ¶That the hony bees made to the body of our lorde a chapell & and an auter in doyn∣ge hym honoure. Cii. O Fo. CCxxi ¶That a hors / an oxe / and an asse knewe Ihesu cryst in the sacrament and honoured hym. Cii. I Fo. CCxx ¶Of the hors of a Iewe the whiche knewe Iesu cryst in the sacrament of the euchary¦stye. Cii. K Fo. CCxx ¶That the oxes knewe Ihesu cryst in the felde. Cii. N Fo. CCxx ¶Of a chylde of .ix. yeres ye was admyny∣stred at his dethe. Cxxiii. A Fo. CClvi ¶Of the sone of a Iewe the whiche was preserued from brennynge for that / that he hadde receyued the body of our lorde Ihesu cryst. Cii. P Fo. CCxxi ¶Of a man hanged the whiche might not deye tyll that he hadde receyued his crea∣toure. Cxiiii. C Fo. CCxlv ¶That a vyrgyn sawe a preste replenys∣shed with grete clerenesse & beaute in syn∣gynge masse. lxxxxiiii. A Fo. CCiiii ¶That a bysshop sawe on eester day some men confessed the whiche were blacke & the other whyte. lxxxxiiii C Fo. CCiiii ¶Of a holy fader the whiche withdrewe ye synners from receyuynge theyr creatour in mortall synne. Cii. S Fo. CCxx ¶Of the punycyon of the relygyous of saynt Bernarde that receyued his creatour in mortall synne. Cii. R Fo. CCxx ¶Of the punycyon of two prestes the whi¦che dyde receyue theyr creatour in mortall synne. xxxvii. E Fo. lxxxx ¶Of an euyl preste syn̄er the whiche recey¦ued the body of Ihesu cryst with grete dyf¦fyculte. Cii. G Fo. CCxix ¶Of a preste fornycatour yt deye sodaynly as he preprayred hym to synge the masse at the auter. lxxxxiii D Fo. CCiii ¶Of the punycyon of a curyal that knewe lecherously a yonge doughter the nyght of Eester. lxxxx. C Fo. Clxxxxvii ¶That the daye of Eester the body of our lorde lept out of the mouthe of a man / and he myght not receyue it for that / yt he hadde knowen his wyfe on the vygyll of the sayd Eester. lxxxiii. A Fo. CCii ¶Another example. lxxxxii. G Fo. CCi ¶That the seruaunt yt had stolen his may∣sters fygges myght not receyue our lorde of saynt Thomas. lxxxi. B Fo. Clxxxi ¶That a woman yt wolde haue hāged her selfe was delyuered in herynge them rynge to a sacrynge. lxv. B Fo. Clvi ¶That the deuyls kept an heretyke from brennynge / but whan ye body of Iesu cryst was brought they myght noo longer kepe hym. lix. A Fo. Cxliiii ¶Of a man yt wolde not leue his synne & came to receyue his creatour agaynst ye de∣fence of the preste. Cii. Q Fo. CCxx ¶That a woman appered to a preste in sȳ¦gynge masse. lxxxx. C Fo. Clxxxxvii ¶Of the punycyon of some the whiche re∣tourned vnto theyr glotonyes and synnes after Eester. Cii. T Fo. CCxxii ¶Another example. lxxix. C Fo. Clxxxxv ¶Of a man the which was delyuered fro ye paynes of purgatory by ye saynge of thre masses. Cii. V Fo. CCxxii ¶Of a frere the whiche sholde haue be .xv. yeres in purgatory / & he was delyuered by one masse Cii. x Fo. CCxxii ¶That one of the relygyous of saynt Gre¦gory was delyuered fro purgatory by .xxx. masses. lxxxii. E Fo. Clxxxiiii Perditio bonorum. ¶Examples of them yt deye in mortal syn̄e dampne themselfe / lose paradyse and al
goode spyrytualles as vnto the soule. ¶In lykewyse as ye water departeth fro ye broken pot euen so dooth all ye vertues of a man by mortall synne. Cii. Y. Fo. CCxxiii ¶Another example yt the aungell sayd to a vyrgyn / chaste / deuout / almesgyuer / and charytable yt she myght not be saued but yf she had pacyēce / for ye synne of yre reygned in her. lxxxxix. B Fo. CCx ¶Of the doughter of a kynge a grete al∣mesgyuer the which was dampned for one mortall synne. lxxxxiii. H Fo. CCiii ¶That a woman a gyuer of almesse was dampned for the delyberacyon of wyl to do lechery. C. A Fo. CCxiii ¶Of a woman gyuer of almesse dāpned yt slewe .ii. chyldren. lxxxxii. D Fo. CCi ¶That a woman the which fasted & excer¦cysed her in oraysons & good operacyons was dampned for kepynge of yre without wyll to pardon. lxxviii. D Fo. Clxxviii ¶That a monke lost ye breed celestyall af∣ter yt he had done synne. Ci. A Fo. CCxv ¶That a yonge man the which had lyued lowably ynough in Innocence vyrgynall was dampned and lost by cōmytynge mor¦tall synne. lxvii. D Fo. Clix ¶That ye sone of a ryche man yt serued god in fastynges / orayson / & in good operacyōs was dampned for kepynge yre in his herte & wolde be auenged. lxxix. A Fo. Clxxviii ¶That an erle was dampned for an hery¦tage yll wtholdē though yt he had done good operacyons. lxxxii. A Fo. Clxxxiii Finis iniquorum est peccatum. ¶Examples of mortal synne the whiche is ye lyne wherby ye deuylles holdeth synners ¶That the deuylles helde a man bounden with a chayne and ledde hym with grete so lace & Ioye. Cii. Z Fo. CCxxiii ¶That saynt Bernarde sawe a synner yt had a chayne about his necke ye whiche had mo than an .C. lynkes / & at euery teere that he wept there fell a lynke. lv. A Fo. Cxxxvi ¶That the deuyll sayd to a doctour that a man beynge in synne is so bounde that he ne may do ony operacyon the whiche to hȳ is merytoryous. Cii. & Fo. CCxxiii ¶That saynt Anthony sawe ye worlde ful of the deuyls nettes. Cii. r Fo. Cxxiii ¶That a monke sawe of ryche men hāged wtin the fyre of hell / hanged yt is to say by ye lyne of ye deuyll. lxxxiiii. D Fo. Clxxxviii ¶Of a woman dāpned bounde wt chaynes in a basket. lxxxx. C Fo. Clxxxxvii ¶Of some auarycyous vsurers hanged in the fyre of hell. lxxxvi. A Fo. Clxxxxi ¶That foure men were hanged in hell for that / yt they dyde possede vniustly an hery∣tage. lxxxi. G Fo. Clxxxiii Mors bonorum. ¶Examples of some the whiche hath accō∣plysshed the wyll & cōmaundement of god hath deyed of good dethe & hath had conso¦lacyon of god & of his sayntes. ¶That a holy fader sawe at his dethe god & his prophetes. Ciii. A Fo. CCxxiiii ¶That the sayntes of paradyse and ye an∣gelles & god came vnto the dethe of an ho∣ly fader. Ciii. B Fo. CCxxiiii ¶That a woman sawe Ihesu cryst at her dethe. Ciii. C Fo. CCxxiiii ¶That a frere shewed Iesu cryst wt his fȳ¦ger in syngynge. Ciii. D Fo. CCxxiiii ¶That a holy bysshop was cōforted with sayntes at his dethe. Ciii. E Fo. CCxxv ¶That sayntes conforted an holy bysshop at his deche. Ciii. F Fo. CCxxv ¶That saynt Peter conforted a mayden named Gelyne. Ciii. G Fo. CCxxv ¶That a preste that fledde the company of a woman was conforted at the dethe of
ye sayntes of paradyse. Ciiii. A Fo. CCxxv ¶That by the good correccyon the whiche was done vnto a chylde he fynysshed well his dayes. lxxiiii. B Fo. Clxx ¶That a frere went to heuen as swyftly as an arowe. Ciiii. B Fo. CCxxvi ¶Of the dethe of a pylgryme yt was con∣forted of angelles of paradyse / & of ye dethe of a synner. Ciiii. C Fo. CCxxvi ¶That a knyght sawe the dethe of an yll man yt the deuylles tourmented. And also he sawe the dethe of a good man yt angelles bare to heuen. Ciiii. D Fo. CCxxvi ¶Of an holy fader yt deyed in the drede of god. Ciiii. E Fo. CCxxvi ¶Of a pryour relygyous the whiche sayd yt he deyed lawfully / faythfully / amyably & Ioyously. Ciiii. F Fo. CCxxvii ¶Examples of the inestymable Ioyes of paradyse. xlvii b / c / d. Fo. Cxix ¶Of a monke the which was chosen to be bysshop and he refused it / and after deyed well. Ciiii. G Fo. CCxxvii ¶Examples of the dethe of many holy per¦sones of the whiche the byble maketh men∣cyon. Ciiii. H Fo. CCxxvii Mors malorum. ¶Examples of some the whiche hath not wylled to accomplysshe the cōmaundemen¦tes of god & they ben deed of euyll dethe in paynes and dolours. ¶That the deuyll drewe the soule from ye body of a cursed riche man wt a hoke & a wo¦man wydowe was conforted of our lady & other vyrgyns. Cv. A Fo. CCxxvii ¶Of a monke ypocryte yt eate secretely & fayned to fast / and the dragon infernall de¦uoured hym. Cv. C ¶That the deuylles gate ye soule of an ypo¦cryte wt an hoke. Ciiii. C Fo. CCxxvi ¶That a knyght sawe yt the deuyls take a yll mannes soule. Ciiii. D Fo. CCxxvi ¶Another example. Cvii. D Fo. CCxxxi ¶Another exāple. lxxxxiii. H Fo. CCiii ¶That Cayn was cursed of god & deyed impenytent. lxxvi. A Fo. Clxxiiii ¶That the pyllars of sodom deyed impe∣nytentes. lxxxxv. A Fo. CCv ¶That Chore / Dathan / and Abyron im∣penytences descended all quycke in to the helles. liiii. H Fo. Cxxxix ¶That Absolon impenytent deyed mys∣cheuously. lxx. A Fo. Clxiii ¶That the harlot Iesabell was caste by a wyndowe / defouled with horses / and eten with dogges. lxxvi. B Fo. Clxxiii ¶Of ye dethe of iudas. Cii. E Fo. CCxix ¶Of ye dethe of pylate. lxxvi. F Fo. Clxxv ¶That a sodomityke deyed impenytent & dyspayred & sayd yt he sawe hell ye tourmen¦tes and deuylles. Cv. B Fo. CCxxviii ¶Of a ryche man. lxxxxiiiii. A Fo. Clxxxvi ¶Examples yt many ydolatres deyed mys¦cheuously. lvii. c / d / e / f / g. Fo. Cxli Of a player blasphemer yt the deuyll dyde slee. lxii. G Fo. Cl ¶That Lucrece ended his dayes mysche∣uously. lxxvii. A Fo. Clxxv ¶Of the horryble dethe of a cursed vsu∣rer. lxxxvi. D Fo. Clxxxxi Iudicia dei. ¶Example that a monke requyred of god that he myght se his secrete Iugementes the whiche sawe them and knowleged that they ben ryght dyffycyle and harde for to knowe. Cvi. A ¶That an holy bysshop named Fortyn was punysshed by the Iugement of god for that / yt he receyued a vestement of a ryche vsurer. Cvi. C Fo. CCxxvii ¶That an hermite murmured ayenst god for his dyuers iugementes Cvi. B
Iuditium. ¶Examples of the Iugement. ¶Of the Iugement of many persones the whiche had done the werkes of mercy. ¶Of a man yt was mercyfull and lyued vo¦luptuously. Cxxii. D Fo. CClvi ¶Of a relygyous that was at his dethe in Iugement before god of whome he was de¦maunded accompt of all that he had done and sayd. Cxxii. E Fo. CClvi ¶That ye deuyl accused before god in iuge¦ment one of ye relygyous of saynt Gregory yt was at his dethe. lxxxviii. B Fo. CCix ¶That the deuylles put in balaunce all ye euylles yt the ryche Peter had done / and ye good put a barly lofe on the other syde of ye balaunce. xliii. C Fo. Cii ¶That saynt Iherom was beten in Iuge¦ment before god. lxxxxviii. A Fo. CCix ¶Of .iii. deed men reysed yt were put in Iu∣gement before god. Cviii. D Fo. CCxxxii ¶That the deuylles accused in Iugement before god a chylde the whiche had stolen but onely an halfpeny from his cosyn ger∣mayne. lxxx. D Fo. Clxxxi ¶That a ryche man vnmercyfull was cy∣ted in Iugement before god & there was iu¦ged to dethe etnall. lxxxiiii. C Fo. Clxxxviii ¶That a ryche sone sayd at his dethe yt he was sentenced. Cv. B Fo. CCxxvi ¶Of the Iugement of a detractour damp¦ned. lxxxxviii. C Fo. CCix ¶Of ye vehement Iugement of a dronken smyth. lxvii. C Fo. Clix ¶That a seruaunt sawe his mayster in iu∣gement before god. Cviii. D Fo. CCxxxi ¶That a relygyous was presented in Iu∣gement before god and retrayed from glo∣ry for an half peny the whiche he dyde owe to a passage. lxxxviii. D Fo. Clxxxviii ¶Of a man letygyous and full of debate the whiche spake at his dethe of his Iuge∣ment and sayd that all those the whiche he hadde troubled apposed strongely agaynst hym. lxxxxix. A. Fo. CCx ¶Of a man presented in Iugement before god / of whome the Iuge demaunded the reason wherfore he hadde made a man to swere syth that he knewe well that he shol∣de be forsworne. lxxxxvii. G Fo. CCviii ¶That our lady delyuered a lecherous cler¦ke fro dampnacyon. Cxxi. B Fo. CClv ¶That the gloryous vyrgyn Marye and saynt Peter delyuered a monke from dam∣nacyon. Cxxi. C Fo. CClv ¶That a yonge man the whiche accōplys∣shed not his vowe was borne in Iugement before god. lxiii. H Fo Cliii ¶Another example of a preste that was Iuged. lxiii. I Fo. Cliii ¶That a cursed bysshop was cyted in iuge¦ment before god. lxxxv. I Fo. Clxxxx ¶That a chanone was accused in Iuge∣ment before our lorde god of the patron of the chyrche. lxxxv. K Fo. Clxxxx ¶Of the Iugement and of the horryble & terryble punyciō yt was done of an archbys¦shop named Vdo. Cvi. D Fo. CCxxviii Peni inferni. ¶Examples of the paynes of hell. ¶Of a fader of housholde the whiche sawe two pondes and the tourmentes that ben in hell. Cvii. A Fo. CCxxx ¶Of a fader & his sone dampned yt brente in hell. lxxiii. A Fo. Clxviii ¶That the dampned ben punysshed wtin the fyre of hell. lvii. A Fo. Cxl ¶That ye cursed Dyues is punysshed in ye fyre of hell. lxxxiiii. A Fo. Clxxxvii ¶That a monke sawe ryche men hanged in the fyre of hell. lxxxiiii. D Fo. Clxxxviii ¶That a woman was dampned & punys∣shed terrybly in hell for many synnes that
she had cōmytted. lxxxx. A Fo. Clxxxxvi ¶Of a woman dampned the whiche she∣wed vnto the worlde her brestes & aourned her heed. lxxxx. C Fo. Clxxxxvii ¶Of a woman aduoutresse and dronken dampned. lxxxxii. A Fo. CC ¶Of a burgeys and of an aduoutrer dam¦pned. lxxxxii. B Fo. CCi ¶That a woman dampned was tourmē∣ted with two dragons. lxxxxii. D Fo. CCi ¶Of an other woman that was also dam¦pned. lxxxxii. F Fo. CCi ¶Of the dampnacyon of a woman for an yll thought. C. A Fo. CCxiii Of a nonne dāpned. lxxxxiii. F Fo. CCiii ¶Of the thre Herodes that were hanged in hell. lxxvi. E Fo. Clxxiiii ¶Of some auarycyous vsurers hanged in hell. lxxxvi. A Fo. Clxxxxi ¶That four men were hanged in hell for yt / yt they posseded falsely an other mannes herytage. lxxxi. C Fo. Clxxxiii ¶That an erle and many of his lygnage were dampned & punysshed cruelly for that that they posseded an herytage iniustly the whiche hadde ben taken away from ye chyr¦che. lxxxii. A Fo. Clxxxiii ¶That a ryche man was put in a chayre of fyre. Cvii B Fo. CCxxxi ¶That a man was tourmented in purga∣gatory for that yt he vyoled the chyrcheyar∣de and hurte a man greuously within the same. lxxvii. F Fo. CClxxvi ¶Foure examples of the paynes of purga¦torye. lxxxviii. A / b c / d Fo. Clxxxxiii ¶That a woman sawe the paynes of her husbande & other. Cvii. C Fo. CCxxxi ¶Other exāples. lxxxxix. I. L Fo. CCxii ¶That a seruaunt saw his mayster ledde in to dyuers paynes. Cvii. D Fo. CCxxxi ¶That a scoler of parys appered vnto his mayster after his dethe in grete tourment of fyre. Cviii. A Fo. CCxxxii ¶Of two men the whiche were in paynes & were reysed by the prayers of saynt Tau¦ryn. Cviii. C Fo. CCxxxii ¶Of thre deed men reysed the whiche tol∣de of the paynes of purgatory and of hell & how they were in Iugement before almigh¦ty god. Cviii. D Fo. CCxxxii ¶That the deuyll sayd that the soule of an erle Wyllyam was terrybly tourmented in helle. Cviii. E Fo. CCxxxiii ¶Of a relygyous the whiche wolde more sooner entre in to the fyre of hell than to be¦holde the deuyll. Cviii. F Fo. CCxxxiiii ¶That the vysyon of the deuyl is terryble & hydeous. Cix. A Fo. CCxxxiiii ¶Of a man the whiche consydered yf af∣ter a thousande yeres the dampned sholde be delyuered fro hell. Cix. B Fo. CCxxxiiii ¶Of the doughter of a kynge dampned in hell. lxxxxiii. H Fo. CCiii ¶Another example. Cvi. D Fo. CCxxxv ¶That it anoyeth to a persone to be in a base bedde without to be departynge ther∣fro. Cix. C Fo. CCxxxv ¶That a mayster dylycatyfe correcked hȳ¦selfe in thynkynge on the wormes and pay¦nes the whiche the vnhappy dampned sou¦les haue. lv. C Fo. Cxxxvii ¶Of a daunceresse yt the deuylles bare in to hell & there brent her. lxviii. E Fo. Clxii ¶Of a knyght dampned & tourmented in hell. lxxxxi. B Fo. Clxxxxix ¶That a yonge man made hymselfe rely∣gyous for thinkynge yf his fayre membres sholde be the pasture and mater of the fyre of hell. Cix. D Fo. CCxxxv ¶Of the punycion of a knyght the whiche rauysshed the cowe of a poore woman wy∣dowe / and how one deuyll bette hym more than the other. Cix. A Fo. CCxxxv ¶Of a fader & his sone dampned & punys¦shed in hell. lxxiii. A Fo. Clxviii ¶Of a man rauyssher in paynes ye whiche
toke the gote of a woman wydowe & dyde of grete oppressyons & dyseases to his sub∣gectes. Cix. F Fo. CCxxxv ¶Of ye punycyon & dampnacyon of a man named Vodo. lxvii. E Fo. Clx ¶Of a knyght yt appered to his doughter in tourment. lxvii. G Fo. Clx ¶That a pylgrym sawe a prelate caste in ye fyre of hell. lxxxxiii. G Fo. CCiii ¶That a vyrgyn was rauysshed slepynge vpon the mouthe of the pytte of hell & sawe the soules tourmented. lxiii. E Fo. Clii ¶Another example. lxiii. F Fo. Clii ¶That a myller was borne to se the tour∣mentes of hell & after was brought agayne to his body. Cx. A Fo. CCxxxv ¶Of the clerke of a bysshop how he was dampned. lxvii. D Fo Clix ¶That a knyght deyed & after was brou∣ghte agayne in too his body that tolde of a brydge ouer a stynkynge water where him behoued to passe. Cx. B Fo. CCxxxvi ¶Of the vysyon of Tongdalus yt suffred many paynes in purgatory and sawe of ye tourmentes of helle / & after was brought to his body. Cx. B Fo. CCxxxvi Iesus. ¶Examples of the name of Ihesus. ¶That god delyuered a man from many perylles. Cxii. A Fo. CCxli ¶That ye deuyll was chaced fro a woman in the name of Ihesus. Cxii. B Fo. CCxli ¶That ye name of Ihesus abateth the tem¦tacyons of the deuyll. Cxii. C Fo. CCxli ¶That the name of Ihesus gyueth many vertues. Cxii. D Fo. CCxli ¶That by the gloryous name of Ihesus a clerke was delyuered and a thefe was con¦uerted. Cxii. E Fo. CCxlii ¶That a relygious was heled of ye axes by the name of Ihesus. Cxii. F Fo. CCxlii ¶That by the puyssaunce of ye name of Ihe¦sus a woman pardoned vnto her ennemy∣es. Cxii. G Fo. CCxiii ¶That a man obstynate and hatefull par∣doned his enmyes for the loue of the blyssed Ihesus. Cxii. H Fo. CCxlii ¶That the temptacyons of the deuyl was taken away by the token of the crosse / and in the moost sacred and blyssed name of Ie¦sus. Cxii. I Fo. CCxlii ¶That in the namynge of Ihesus the de∣uyll is repelled & his temptacyons taken a∣way. Cxii. K Fo. CCxlii ¶Of a noble man the whiche pardoned ye homycyde of his broder / and the crucyfyxe enclyned his heed vnto hym within ye chyr¦che. Cxii. L Fo. CClii ¶Another example. xxvii. I Fo. lxvii ¶That Ihesu cryst wolde not pardon vn¦to a deed man tyl yt he had demaunded par¦don of his broder the whiche he hadde of∣fended. Cxii. M Fo. CCxliii Natiuitas christi. ¶Examples of the natyuyte of Ihesus. ¶That a nonne the whiche habandoned her in synne had mercy in requyrynge the blyssed sone of the vyrgyn Marye the daye of crystmas. Cxiii. A Fo. CCxliii ¶That the infancye or chyldehode of Ihe∣su cryst delyuered a relygyous from temp∣tacyon. Cxiii. B Fo. CCxliii ¶That Ihesu cryst appered vnto a wo∣man in the lykenes & semblaūce of a ryght fayre chylde. Cxiii. C Fo. CCxliiii ¶That two vyrgyns relygyouses were in good contemplacyon from the masse of cry¦stenmasse daye tyll vnto the daye of ye feest of saynt Iohan baptyst / and they wende yt they hadde not ben there but the space of. ii houres. lxxxxiiii. B Fo. CCiiii ¶That a vyrgȳ had so grete loue & deuoci¦on
vnto the chylde of the vyrgyn Marye yt they appered vnto her on the day of cryst∣mas. lxxv. E Fo. Clxxiii Passio christi. ¶Examples of the passyon of our lorde. ¶That a grete synner bare the dethe in his sekenes in the remembraunce of the passion of Iesus. Cxiiii. A Fo. CCxliii ¶Of the swetenes of the passyon of Ihe∣su cryst yt a man had the whiche sayd .v. pa∣ter nosters. Cxiiii. B Fo. CCxliiii ¶Of a knyght yt myght not deye on ye ga∣lowes for that / yt he had sayd euery day thre tymes pater noster in the honour of yt passy¦on of Ihesus. Cxiiii. C Fo. CCxlv ¶That well came vnto a man yt made mȳ¦de of the passyon of our lorde in his lyenge downe and in rysynge agayne frome his bedde Cxiiii D Fo. CCxlv ¶Of a woman yt loued the passyon of cryst that chylded & deyed on the fryday & was saued. Cxiiii. E Fo. CCxlv ¶That the oraysons the whiche ben made in the remembraunce of the crosse & the pas¦syon of our lorde Ihesus pleased hym gre∣tely. Cxiiii. F Fo. CCxlv ¶Of a frere yt honoured ye passyon of Ihe¦su cryst. Cxiiii. G Fo. CCxlvi ¶That the passyon of Ihesus styreth to haue the vertues and to resyst agaynst the deuyll. Cxv. A Fo. CCxlvi ¶That the sygne of the crosse was foūde in a martyrs herte. Cxv. B Fo. CCxlvi ¶That a conuers had the lyfe & passyon of Ihesu cryst for a lesson in the table whan he dyned or souped. Cxv. C Fo. CCxlvi ¶Of a relygyous the whiche lerned thre lettres the whiche he dyde recorde often ty∣mes. Cxv. D Fo. CCxlvi ¶Of an abbesse yt made to rede ye passyon whan she deyed. Cxv. E. Fo. CCxlvii ¶That our lorde shewed his woundes to a yonge man. Cxv. F Fo. CCxlvii ¶That our lorde reuoked an apostate for shewȳge his woūdes. Cxv. G Fo. CCxlvii ¶Of a thefe murderer yt repented hȳ / ma¦de confessyon & had to penaunce to saye a pater noster before ony crosse that he sholde fynde. Cxv. H Fo. CCxlviii Signum crucis. ¶Examples of the tokens of the crosse. ¶That the token of the crosse appered to the emperour Cōstantyne / and araysed a deed man and heled a woman that was se¦ke. Cxvi. A Fo. CCxlvii ¶That saynt Iustyne had vyctory & resy¦sted agaynst the deuyll by the token of the crosse. Cxvi. B Fo. CCxlviii ¶Of a man of warre penytent that resy∣sted agaynst the deuyls temptacyon by the token of the crosse. Cxvi. C Fo. CCxlviii ¶That the token of the crosse serued vnto a Iewe agaynst the deuylles yt helde theyr chapytre Cxvi. D Fo. CCxlviii ¶That a man shewed at his dethe that he had receyued the crosse and ye deuyl fledde away. Cxvi. E Fo. CCxlix ¶That well came to a man that made me¦mory of the passyon and of the token of the crosse. Cxiiii. D Fo. CCxlv ¶That the oraysons the whiche ben ma∣de in the remēbraunce of the crosse & passyō please hym gretely. Cxiiii. F Fo. CCxlv ¶That the sygne of the crosse was founde in a martyrs herte. Cxv. B Fo. CCxlv ¶That a mayden dyde eate a letuse with∣out makynge ye sygne of the crosse & sheete the deuyll. lxvii. A Fo. Cxlix ¶That a relygyous conuers dranke wyne wtout makynge the sygne of the crosse and agaynst his obedyence and he dranke the deuyll. lxvii. B Fo. Cxlix
Aqua benedicta ¶Examples of holy water. ¶That the deuylles whiche were in a seke mannes hous were chased away by castyn¦ge of holy water. Cxvii. A Fo. CCxlix ¶That the deuyll myght not entre in to a dronken mannes mouthe for a droppe of holy water that was fallen therin that sa∣me day. Cxvii. B Fo. CCxlix ¶That as a knyght sprynkled hym with holy water the deuyll cryed that he sholde not touche hym. Cxvii. C Fo. CCxlix ¶That whan a synner obstinate had dron¦ken of holy water he repented & confessed hym and chaunged his lyfe from euyll to good. Cxvii. D Fo. CCxlix Maria. ¶Examples of ye gloryous vyrgyn Mary ¶That ye vyrgyn Mary delyuered an ab∣bot and many other persones for syngynge this responce. Felix nam{que}es / to haue her helpe. Cxviii. A Fo. CCl ¶That (salue regina) auayleth for to dye well. Cxviii. B Fo. CCl ¶That the vyrgyn Mary apeased ye thon¦ders / & tempestes of weder for sayenge of salue regina. Cxviii. C Fo. CCl ¶That the vyrgyn Mary restored ye han¦de of Iohan Damascene that made (salue sancta parens. Cxviii. D Fo. CCli ¶Of the salutacyon angelyke how a rely∣gyous made the chapelet vnto the vyrgyn Marye. Cxix. A Fo. CCli ¶Aue maria expounded. Cxix. b Fo. CCli ¶Of hȳ that knewe nothȳge of good but Aue maria. Cxx. A Fo. CClii ¶Of hym that kneled in the name of the vyrgyn Marye. Cxx. B Fo. CClii ¶Of a moder yt taught her chylde to salue the vyrgyn Mary. Cxx. C Fo. CClii ¶That the deuyll myght not strangle a knyght for that yt he saluted ye vyrgyn Ma¦rye. lvi. H Fo. Cxxxix ¶That ye virgyn Marye ayded a woman that was borne slepynge vpon the pytte of hell. lxiii. E Fo. Clii ¶That ye vyrgyn Marye ayded a woman to thylde in the see of the mounte of saynt Myghell. Cxx. D Fo. CCliii ¶That the virgyn Marye kept a paynter from harme. Cxx. E Fo. CCliii ¶Of the good & honoure that the vyrgyn Mary dyde vnto a thefe that fasted the sa∣terdayes in her honour and absteyned fro doynge yll. Cxx. F Fo. CCliii ¶That a thefe beheded myght not deye wt out confessyon for that / yt he fasted the sater¦dayes in the honour of the gloryous vyrgȳ Marye. Cxx. G Fo. CCliiii ¶That the virgyn Mary ayded a thefe at his dethe for he hadde fasted on ye saterday in the honour of the gloryous vyrgyn Ma∣rye. Cxx. H Fo. CCliiii ¶That a thefe hanged myght not deye wt out receyuynge the sacramentes / for he had fasted the vygylles of the gloryous vyrgyn Marye. Cxx. I Fo. CCliiii ¶That a thefe broken myght not deye wt out confessyon for he had fasted ye vygylles of our lady. Cxx. K Fo. CCliiii ¶Of a monke dyspencer yt was dronke to whome the ennemy appered for to sle hym and the integrate vyrgyn Mary dyde saue hym. Cxxi. A Fo. CCliiii ¶That our lady delyuerd a lecherous cler¦ke from dampnacyon. Cxxi Fo. CClv ¶That the gloryous vyrgyn Mary and saynt Peter delyuered a monke from dam¦pnacyon. Cxxi. C Fo. CClv ¶Of some monkes the whiche qrake theyr scylence. Cxxi. D Fo. CClv ¶Of hym ye whiche brake the armes of ye chylde of the vyrgyn Mary yt was choked
of the deuyll. Cxxi. E Fo. CClv ¶Of a knyght wt one eye yt was illumyned for that / yt he smote a Iewe yt had blasphe∣med ye vyrgyn Marye. lxii. H Fo. Cli ¶That the vyrgyn Mary was meane for Theophyle to haue pardon & saluacyon of that yt he had renounced god and the sayd vyrgyn Marye. lviii. B Fo. Cxliii ¶Of theym the whiche slewe a man in the chyrche of yt vyrgyn Marye the whiche had terryble punycyon. lxxix. B Fo. Clxix ¶That a woman yt deyed in mortal synne was brought agayne in to her body for to do penaunce at the request of the gloryous vyrgyn Marye for that yt the sayd woman serued her. Cxxii. A Fo. CClv ¶How as a man sholde haue be sentenced and dampned he was delyuerd at ye request of our lady & his soule was brought agayne to his body. Cxxii. B Fo. CClv ¶That a fayre doughter pompeously clo∣thed & wery of dauncȳge on a sonday was delyuered from ye deuyll yt wolde haue bor∣ne her away for that / yt she called ye ayde of the vyrgyn Marye. lxviii. C Fo. Clxi ¶That the vyrgyn Marye ayded a frere yt was enflambed in hate ayenst ye procurour of the couent. Cxxii C Fo. CClv ¶That the vyrgyn Mary vesyted & cōfor¦ted a poore woman at ye dethe and assured a deaken. Cv. A Fo. CCxxv ¶That the vyrgyn marye ayded in the Iu¦gement of a man that was mercyfull and voluptuous. Cxxii. D Fo. CClvi ¶Of a relygyous yt was at his dethe in Iu¦gemēt before god / & our lady & the sayntes ayded hym. Cxxii. E Fo. CClvi Innocentia. ¶Examples of innocent people. ¶Of a chylde innocent yt kept the ordre of myneurs relygyous & wold take no money he lyued debonayrly & deyed in good confi¦macyon. Cxxiii. A Fo. CClvi ¶Of a scoler innocent yt chased the deuyll from a mayden. Cxxiii. B Fo. CClvii ¶That a lytel innocent gate pardō of god for an appostate. Cxxiii. C Fo. CClvii ¶That the oraysons of chyldren innocents is moche worthe for the deed bodyes and ye quycke. Cxxiii. D Fo. CClvii ¶Of a chylde innocent yt touched an hote yren. Cxxiii. E Fo. CClvii ¶Of a womā aduoutresse yt bare an hote yron in her hande wtout hauynge yll after true confessyon. lxxxxii. K Fo. CCii ¶That the deuyl knewe not the synnes of a sȳneresse after true cōfessyon & sayd yt she was a good woman. Cxxiii. F Fo. CClviii Virtus. ¶Examples of vertuous people. ¶Of the vertues of fyue holy deuoute fre∣res. Cxxiiii. A Fo. CClvii ¶That foure vertues were in foure holy hermytes Cxxiiii. B Fo. CClix ¶Of the excercytees of fyue contemplatyf freres. Cxxiiii. C Fo. CClix ¶Of ye vertue of .iiii. freres. lii. g Fo. Cxxx ¶Of foure other sortes of vertuous peo∣ple. lii. H Fo. Cxxx ¶Of a relygyous obedyent and of an ab∣stynent. lii. I Fo. Cxxx ¶That a man & his wyfe were sēblable in merytes vnto saynt Pafuncius the holy fa¦der. Cxxiiii. D Fo. CClix ¶That a mynstrell was lyke in meryte to saynt Pafuncius. Cxxiiii. E Fo. CClix ¶That a prouost & his wyfe were sembla∣bles to a hermyte. Cxxiiii. F Fo. CClx ¶Examples of people obedyentes. li. A / b c / d / e / f. &c. Fo. Cxxvii ¶Examples of people charitables. lxxv. A b / c. &c. Fo. Clxxi
¶Examples of people stedfast in & ferme in the faythe. lxi. A / b. Fo. Cxlviii ¶Example of a nonne the whiche fayned to be a fole. lxi. C Fo. Cxlviii Of a relygyous yt ceased not to be in ye oray¦son of the psalmody. lxvi. F Fo. Cxlviii ¶Of vyrgynyte and chastyte. lxxxxiiii. a / b / c. Fo. CCiiii. Et. xxxviii. C. Fo. lxxxxi ¶Of a frere yt wanne .vii. crownes in one nyght to resyst in his thought to ye deuylles temptacyon. Cii. A Fo. CCxvi ¶Of a relygyous the whiche bywrapped his handes to thende yt he ne sholde touche his moder. xxxvii. F Fo. lxxxx ¶Examples of the dethe of vertuous peo∣ple. Ciii. a / b / c. &c. Fo. CCxxiiii ¶That a bysshop was .xl. yeres doynge pe¦naunce & ne ete but fruyte. lviii. d Fo. cxliii ¶Of the fastynges & abstynences of saynt Germayne. Cxxiiii. G Fo. CClx ¶Of the austeryte of lyfe of two holy wo∣men. Cxxiiii. H / I / Fo. CClxi ¶Of a monke vnto whome god sent eue∣ry day of good breed / and after that he had commytted synne he loste the sayd good breed. Ci. A Fo. CCxv ¶Another table. HEre foloweth a table for to fȳ¦de lyghtly in generall all the maters wherof the examples of this boke treateth and spe∣keth. And fyrst Of obedyence. li. A Fo. Cxxvii Of inobedyence. liiii. A Fo. Cxxx To here goddes worde. lv. A F. Cxxxvi Primum preceptum exempla. ¶Examples of ydolatry. lvii. A Fo. Cxl Of apostasye. lviii. A Fo. Cxlii Of heretykes. lix. A Fo. Cxliiii Of people out of ye faythe. lx. A Fo. Cxlv Of people in the faythe. lxi. A Fo. Cxlviii Of pryde. Quē an̄ in prīo {pre}cepto {per} tabulā. Of humilyte ayenst pryde. lxi. C Fo. cxlviii Secundum preceptum exempla. ¶Examples of blaspheme. lxii. A. Fo. Cxlix Of periuryes. lxiii. A Fo. Cli Of vowes. lxiii. D Fo. Clii Tertium preceptum exempla. ¶Examples of them yt hath wrought on ye holy dayes. lxiiii. A Fo. Cliiii Of seruyce. lxv. A Fo. Clvi To slepe in ye seruyce. lxvi. A Fo. Clviii Of slouthe. Quere ī tercio {pre}cepto {per} tabulā Of orayson. lxvi. E Fo. Clviii Of fedȳge in seruyce tyme. lxvii. A. Fo. clix To hunte on ye feestes. lxviii. A Fo. Clxi To daunce on ye feestes. lxviii. C Fo. Clxi To playe on the feestes lxii. C / G. Fo. Cl. Et. lxvii. D Fo. Clix. Et. lxiii. B Fo. Cli Of the chyrche. lxix. A Fo. Clxii Of sepultures. lxix. B Fo. Clxii Quartum preceptum exempla. ¶Examples of chyldren. lxx. A Fo. Clxiii Of correccyon. lxxii. A. Fo. Clxvii. Et lxxi. G Fo. Clxvi Of charyte. lxxv. A Fo Clxxi Quintum preceptum exempla. ¶Examples of homycyde that is vniustly done. lxvi. A Fo. Clxxiiii Of homycide doutful. lxxviii. A. Fo. clxxvii Of homycyde iustly done. Cvi. c. Fo. ccxxvi Of yre. lxxviii. D Fo. Clxxviii
Of impacyence & pacyence. Quē {per}tabulā. Of hate. lxxix. A Fo. Clxxviii Sextum preceptum exempla ¶Examples of theft. lxxx. A Fo. Clxxx Of sacrylege. lxxxii. A Fo. Clxxxiii Of tythes. lxxxiii. A Fo. Clxxxv Of rapyne. Quere ī sexto {pre}cepto {per} tabulā Of people to moche holdynge and vnmer∣cyfull. lxxxiiii. A Fo. Clxxxvi Of mercy. Quere ī sexto {pre}cepto per tabulā Of symony. lxxxv. A Fo. Clxxxviii Of vsury. lxxxvi. A Fo. Clxxxxi Of restytucyon. lxxxviii. A Fo. Clxxxxiii Of excōmunycacyō. lxxxix. A. Fo. clxxxxiiii Of maledyccyon. Quere per tabulam. Septimum preceptum exempla. ¶Exāples of lechery. lxxxx. A. Fo. clxxxxvi Of defloracyon. lxxxxi. A. Fo. Clxxxxviii Of yll counceyle. lxxxxi. F Fo. CC Of aduoutry. lxxxxii. A Fo. CC Synne in maryage. lxxxxiii. A Fo. CCii Sacrylege as to lechery. lxxxxiii. d. Fo. cciii Of chastyte. lxxxxiiii. A Fo. CCiiii Of sodomye. lxxxxv. A Fo. CCv Octauum preceptum exempla. Of fals wytnesse. lxxxxvi. A Fo. CCvi Of periuryes. lxxxxvii. A Fo. CCvii Of lyers lxxxxviii. A Fo. CCix Of detractours. lxxxxviii. B Fo. CCix Of derysers. lxvii. f. Fo. clx. & .lxx. c. Fo. clxiii Of yll spekers. lxxxxix. A Fo. CCx Of yll herers. lxxxxix. I. L Fo. CCxii Nonum preceptū exempla et decimū. Of yll thoughtes. C. a / b / c. Fo. CCxiii Of good thoughtes. Cii. a / b / c. Fo. CCxvi Penitentia. ¶Examples of penaunce. Quere {per} tabulā Eucharistia. ¶Examples of the holy sacrament of the auter. Cii. D Fo. CCxvii Perditio bonorum. ¶Examples that the synners loseth ye spy∣rytuall goodes. Cii. Y Fo. CCxxiii Finis iniquorum est pctm̄ ¶Examples that the mortal synnes ben ly¦nes or bondes. Quere per tabulam. Mors bonorum ¶Examples of the dethe of good and Iust men. Ciii. A / b / c. Fo. CCxxiiii Mors malorum ¶Examples of ye dethe of euyll and vniust men. Cv. A Fo. CCxxviii Iudicia dei. ¶Examples of the secrete Iugementes of god. Cvi. A / b / Fo. CCxxvi Iudicium ¶Examples of ye Iugement of euery man and woman. Quere per tabulam. Peni inferni. ¶Examples of the horryble paynes yt ben in hell. Cvii. A Fo. CCxxx Iesus. ¶Examples that this name Ihesus dooth many goodnesses. Cxii. a / b / c / d Fo. CCxli Natiuitas christi. ¶Examples of the natyuyte of our lorde Ihesu cryst. Cxiii. a / b / c / d Fo. CCxliii Passio christi. ¶Examples of ye passyon of our lorde Ihe¦su cryst. Cxiiii. A / b / c. Fo. CCxliiii Signum crucis. ¶Examples of the sygnes and token of ye crosse. Cxvi. A / b / c. Fo. CCxlvii Aqua benedicta ¶Examples of the vertues of the holy wa¦ter. Cxvii. A / b. Fo. CCxlix Maria. ¶Examples of the moost gloryous vyrgin
Marye Cxviii. A / b / c. Fo. CCl Innocentia. ¶Examples of people symples and inno∣centes. Cxxiii. A / b. Fo. CClvi Virtus ¶Examples of people vertuous. Quere ibi ante per tabulam. ¶Examples that a man sholde do of good dedes in his lyfe wtout abydynge his parēts after his dethe. lxxii. a / b / c / d / e / f. Fo. Clxvii Finis.
The perambule and dyuysyon of this boke. ¶Here begynneth the perambu∣le and dyuysion of this present bo¦ke called the floure of the cōmaū∣dementes of god. GOd the fader / the sone / and the holy goost ye whiche is one seul god in trynyte whome it wyll lyke to gyue vnto vs, his loue / his grace and his mercy. And ye it wolde please hȳ to enlumyne the hertes and the thoughtes of synners the whiche wyllen repent them / correct / and amende. And who so shall studye this boke (ye whi∣che is named the floure of the commaun∣dementes of god) / for that it hath ben ga∣dered amonge the bokes as the fayre vyo∣lettes ben gadered amonge the rude and vyle herbes thorow out ye feldes: in likewy¦se as a man may se by auctorytees & holy scryptures alleged & assembled for to kno∣we that / that god wylleth and commaun∣deth to thende for to go in to lyfe eternall. And in lykewyse as the hony flyes gadren the swetenes of the lytell floures for to ma¦ke ye waxe or hony / or in lykewyse as men gadren the creame and the swetenes of the mylke for to haue the fatte and butter for to nourysshe ye body. Euen so hath ben ga∣dered the floures and swetnesses of the ho¦ly scryptures for to nourysshe spyrytually the soules with vertues and goodes spyry¦tualles in accomplysshynge ye wyll of god for to haue saluacyon / and to escape dam∣pnacyon. This boke treateth pryncypally thre thynges. The fyrst declareth that all the ten commaundementes & all the holy scryptures tenden and hangen to loue god and his neyghboure / and how god defen∣deth in these two thynges here all synne / and all euyll wordes / thoughtes / & opera∣cyons / and he commaundeth al vertues & goodes espyritualles. The seconde thynge wherof this boke treateth is of the .x. com∣maundementes / the whiche ben declared one after another by chapitres as they ben here before in the table. The thyrde decla∣reth some thynges moeuynge for to kepe the commaundements of god / and many thynges noysauntes vnto them the which breketh them. Moreouer the condycyons of the pylgryme of paradyse / and of the re¦warde eternall of them the whiche well or yll haue accomplysshed these commaunde¦mentes. Creatures reasonable studye ye this boke / for it is moche prouffitable vnto all people as wel clerkes as seculyers / and plante ye and rote the commaūdementes in your hertes as yf they were wryten in a boke and god shall gyue vnto you parady¦se the whiche is a place replenysshed with Ioyes more swete than ony mylke or hony Legitur in libri moysi. Audi israel prece∣pta
domini et eain corde quasi in libro scri∣be / et dabo tibi terram effluentem lac et mel. &c. B. ¶Here foloweth the fyrst chapytre the whiche treateth in generall that it is cō¦maunded to loue god with all his herte / & his neyghbour as hymselfe. i. c. YF thou wylt do thy saluacyon benygnely thou shalt obey vn¦to god & vnto his commaun∣dementes / as here after thou shalt here. ¶God gyueth vn∣to the two commaundementes so general¦les that they comprehende vnder them all that / yt thou sholdest do and fle for thy sal∣uacyon. In lykewyse as sayen ye holy scry∣ptures in many places. Vn̄ Mathei .xxii. Marci .xii. Luce .x. Et deuteronomii .vi. Diliges dominum deum tuū ex toto cor∣de tuo / et ex tota anima tua / et ex tota mē∣te tua / & ex tota virtute tua / & hoc estmaxi¦mum primum mandatum. Secundū au∣tem simile est huic. Diliges proximum tu¦um sicut teipsum. In hus duobus manda∣tis vniuersa lex pendet et prophete. That is to say. It is commaunded the that thou loue thy lorde god with all thy herte / with all thy soule / with all thy thought / and wt al thy strength / that is to vnderstande mo¦re than all thynges / and aboue al thynges This here is the gretest commaundement and the fyrst. For it is of the dyleccyon vn¦to god the whiche comprehendeth the thre fyrst commaundementes: and the thre ver¦tues theologalles / the whiche ben faythe / hope / and charyte The seconde commaun¦dement is semblable vnto that / for is dyle¦ction the whiche gyueth them charge that thou loue thy neyghbour as thy selfe. This dyleccyon comprehendeth vnder it the se∣uen last commaundementes / all ye wer∣kes of mercy / and the foure vertues cardy¦nalles the whiche ben Prudence / attem∣praunce / Iustyce / and force. In these two commaūdements before sayd to loue god and his neyghbour all the lawe hangeth & ye prophetes. ¶For to vnderstande ryght shortly all the fayth / all the .x. commaunde¦mentes of god / and all the scryptures of ye auncyent testament and of the newe / and all that / that the prophetes and sayntes of paradyse hath spoken vnto vs and wryten for the helthe of our soules / it is a thynge certayne that all tendeth and hangeth in ye ende and cōclusyon for to loue god and his neyghbour as it is sayd. Saynt Poule sa∣yeth ad romanos .xiii. Dilectio {pro}ximi ma¦lum non operatur / plenitudo legis est dile∣ctio. The dyleccōn of thy neyghbour dooth none yll / the fulfyllynge of the lawe is dy∣leccyon. And therfore retayne wele in thy mynde these two commaundementes and them accomplysshe from poynt to poynt / in operacyon / in worde / and in thought / & thou shalte do none yll / but thou shalt ac∣complysshe all goodnes / and thou shalt be saued. C. ¶The seconde chapytre assygneth .v. reasons wherfore a man shold loue god wt all his herte aboue all thynges. IT is wryten in the .xiiii. chapytre of the gospelles of saynt Iohn yt our sauyour & redemptour Ihe∣sus sayd vnto his dysciples Qui habʐ mandata mea & seruat ea∣le est qui diligit me. That is to saye after the exposytoure. He the whiche hathe my commaundements in the ere to here them and in the herte for to thynke them / and in the mouthe for to teche theym / and in the mynde and volunte to kepe theym and to accomplysshe in operacion / he it is whiche
loueth me. Many  shold moeue vs to loue god with all our hertes & obey vn∣to his commaundementes more soner thā to all thynges. D. ¶Fyrst it is good reasō to loue hym with all our herte for the good¦nes infynyte the whiche is in hym and the whiche of hym procedeth / the whiche is so grete that it is innombrable. That is saye that he hath soo many that a manne can finde thende. Also it is good reason to loue hym / for he hath loued vs more than all ye creatures that he hath made and create in this worlde / the whiche he hath all create for to serue vs. Whan god made & create the heuen and the erthe / the sonne and the moone / the sterres / the fyrmament: the ele¦mentes / and all the beestes eche of them in his kynde / and all the byrdes euery of thē in his gree / he them made for his honour & for to serue vs and to gouerne / and with∣out them wene may lyue. Albeit of all the creatures that he hath create in this worl∣de hene hath made none vnto his semblaū¦ce and vnto his ymage to be in his compa∣ny eternally but man and woman and the aungelles. And for as moche as he hath lo¦ued vs more than all the operacyons that he hath create and for the goodnes infyny¦tethe whiche is in hȳ as it is sayd it is good reason that we loue hym aboue all thinges with al our thought ¶Example. We rede that the sonne of a ryche man loued in his youthe the vanytees of the worlde. He lo∣ued fyrst a dogge moche curyously the whi¦che deyed. Secondly he loued right moche an hauke that he bare vpon his fyst / & she deyed. Thyrdly he loued a lytel hors ye whi¦che lept and torned honestly the whiche al¦so deyed / & he was moche wrothe and she∣wed it to his moder saynge. Alas my dog / my hauke / and my hors that I dyde loue so moche ben deed / whome may I more lo¦ue that I ne shall lese that loue / & his mo∣der sayd vnto hym. Myn owne dere chyl∣de loue god and thou ne shall lese that loue go in to the chyrche and put the in orayson and praye god that he gyue vnto the his loue and his grace. He was obedyent / and as he perseuered in orayson he herd preche the gospell. Mathei .xix. Qui relinquit do¦mum vel fratres vel sorores aut patrē aut matrem aut vxorem aut filios aut agros propter nomen meum centuplum accipiet et vitam eternam possidebit. ¶He that le∣ueth all his parentes and frendes and all his possessyons for the loue of god / he shall haue an hondred double of retrybucyon & shall possede the lyfe eternall. Than ye sone came vnto his moder and sayd that he wol¦de leue her and go in to relygion for to loue god parfytely / for the sayd gospell that he hadde herd preche / and his modersayd vn¦to hym. It is that thynge that I desyred / for this worlde ne is but vanyte and ful of decepcyon / loue god therfore parfytely. Than the chylde was relygyous and par∣fyte in holy lyfe. E. ¶Secondly we shall loue god with all our herte & thought mo∣re than all the worlde / and aboue ye golde and the syluer and all the goodes the whi∣che ben in the worlde. That is to say to lo∣ue more sooner to lese the godes temporal¦les of this worlde than to breke one of the commaundementes of god / and the reasō is ryght euydent / for a man sholde loue hȳ more that gyueth than the thynge gyuen. God the whiche is full of bounte infynyte vs hath gyuen generally and partyculerly and vnto euery of vs the goodes of grace / of nature / and of fortune that we haue / & all the goodes procedeth of hym / and estu∣dy wel the scryptures in the chapytres the whiche folowen and thou shalt fynde that it is so. Vnde legitur Mathei .xxv. Domi¦nus vocauit seruos suos et tradidit illis bona sua: et vni dedit quin{que} talenta: alii
autem duo: alii vere vnum vnicui{que} secun¦dum propriam virtutem That is to say yt the lorde calleth his seruaūtes and gyueth vnto them his goodes / and gyueth fyue ta¦lentes vnto one / vnto an other twayne / vnto an other one / vnto euery of them af∣ter his vertue. By the lorde is vnderstan∣de god that gyueth vnto his seruauntes / that is that he gyueth vnto euery of vs his goodes vnto the one more than vnto an other after his wyll and after the faculte of euery of them. Et legitur ad Ephesi. iiii. Vnicui{que} nostrum data est gratia secun∣dum mensuram donationis x{pre}i. Grace is gyuen vnto euery of vs after the measure of the gyft of Ihesu cryst. Et legitur ad ro¦ma .xii. Habentes donationes secundum gratiam que data est vobis differentes si∣ue propheticam secundum rationem fidei siue ministerium ī ministrando. Et legit{ur} .i. ad Corin. xii. Vuicui{que} autem datur ma∣nifestatio spiritus ad vtilitatem / alii datur sermo sapientie / alii sermo sciētie / alii fides alii gratia sanitatum / alii operatio virtu∣tum, &c. Manyfestacyon of spyryte is gy∣uen vnto euery man vnto his vtylyte / the worde of wysdome is gyuen vnto one / & vnto another the worde of connynge / vn∣to another faythe / vnto another grace of helthe / and vnto another operacyon of ver¦tue. Et Dauid in psal. Cantabo domino qui bona tribuit michi. I shall synge vnto the lorde the whiche gyueth me of his goo∣des. Et Iob. i. ca. Si bona suscipimus de manu domini / maia autem quare nō susci∣piamus. Yf we haue receyued the goodes of the hande of god wherfore may we not in lykewyse take ye euylles. And syth that it appereth that god hath gyuen vs all the goodes that we haue. It is good reason yt we loue hym more than these goodes and aboue them. That is to saye to those more sooner to lese all the goodes of the worlde than to breke one of ye cōmaūdementes o god and to lose his loue. For it is wryten Ioh̄ .xiiii. Si quis diligit me sermonem meum seruabit. Siquit{ur}. Qui non dilig me sermones meos non seruat. That is to say. Who so loueth me kepeth my worde & he that loueth me not kepeth not my wor¦des. Verba gratia. Yf thou were in turky & that men set before the an. C. busshels of golde on the one syde / & the ydolles on the other and yt the kynge of turky sayd vnto the. I shall gyue vnto the all this golde & retayne the to be the fyrst of my palays & do sacryfyce vnto ye ydolles / thou sholdest loue god aboue the golde and honoure of ye worlde. For it is wryten .i. corin. vi. Ne{que} fornicarii ne{que} ydollis seruētes regnū m¦um possidebūt. Also who sholde laye an. C crownes in thy hande for to make a false othe in Iugement or to werke one day of a feest commaūded / or for to sle a man vn∣iustly / thou sholdest loue god & thy neygh∣bour better than the golde and the syluer / and rather wyn̄e nothynge than to breke his commaundement. It wryten Iob. xv. Manete in dilectione mea si precepta mea¦seruaueritis manebitis in dilectione mea. Dwell ye in my dyleccyon / yf ye haue kept my commaundementes ye shall dwell in my deleccyon. Also yf thou knowest well yt meane to stele the treasoure of thy neygh∣bour or to haue his herytage iniustly / it is defended / take it not vpon payne of dam∣pnacyon and to lose paradyse. Vnde .i. co∣rint. vi. Ne{que} fures ne{que} auari regnū dei possidebunt. Also who soo sholde put fyue hondred crownes in the honde of a womā for to haue her company she sholde refuse them vpon payne of dampnacōn & to lose paradyse. For to make shorte tale better it is to obey god & to lese all the goodes of ye worlde than to dāpne his soule. For yf ony loue the goodes more than god: & to leue to
obey vnto god for to haue the goodes he bȳ¦deth hymselfe vnto dampnacyon. ¶Ex∣ample of a ryche man the whiche loued to moche the worlde & brye fly he fel in to hell and all his goodes. It is wryten in the lyfe of saynt Ambrose yt as he yode on a tyme vnto Rome he came to lodge in the towne of tuscie wherin was a ryche man: & whan he sawe so moche of goodes & of seruaun∣tes he axed the sayd man of his estate. The man answered I am happy and glorious in all maners. I habounde in rychesses. I haue grete company of seruauntes / all yt euer I desyred is well comen to me / ne the¦re came neuer vnto me aduersyte. Whan saynt Ambrose herde these wordes he was moche abasshed and sayd vnto those that were of his company. Aryse and fle we for god is not in this place / haste you chyldren and make none abydynge lest the venge∣aunce comprehende vs / and that they ne wrappe vs in theyr syn̄es / and whan they were a lytell thens ye erthe opened sodayn¦ly and swalowed the sayd ryche man and all his goodes and those thynges whiche vnto hȳ apperteyned sanke into hell in su¦che maner that there ne abode no thynge apparaunt. ¶Another example how the cursed ryche man the whiche was clothed wt purple and lyued delycatyuely is buried in hell. Quere .lxxxiiii. A. ¶Another exam¦ple of a man the whiche gaue hymselfe vn¦to the deuyll to thende that he sholde enry¦che hym / and the deuyll gaue to hym trea∣sours and baptysed hym in the name of all the deuilles .lx. ¶Another example of a ry¦che vsurer the whiche loued his godes mo∣re than god of whome he demaūded ayde at his dethe .lxxxvi. f. ¶Another example of an vsurer the whiche loued to moche his goodes comaunded his soule vnto the de∣uyl at his dethe / after yt he myght no more possede theym .lxxxvi. g. F. ¶Thyrdly we sholde loue god wt all our herte more than our faders & moders & aboue all our chyl¦dren / cosyns / parentes and frendes / and the reason is good. For god is our prȳcipal fader celestyall the whiche hath made vs & create vnto his ymage and vnto his symy∣lytude. In lyke wyse as it is wryten Gene¦sis nono. Ad ymaginem quippe dei fact{us} est homo. And of as moche as ye soule that he hathe create is more dygne than the bo∣dy / of as moche more we sholde loue god & obey vnto his commaundement more so∣ner than vnto oure fader carnall. Saynt barnarde sayeth. Ecce domine quia me fe¦cisti debeo me amori tuo totum. Thou lor∣de by cause thou hast made me & create I ought to gyue all in thy loue. And it is wry¦ten eccle. xxxvii. de Dauid. De om̄i corde suo laudauit deum et dilexit dominum qui fecit illum. Dauid praysed god withall his herte and loued his lorde the whiche hathe created hym. We requyre god euery daye our fader in sayenge ye pater noster. Pa∣ter noster qui es ī celis. Of good ryght we call hym our fader in as moche as he hath vs made and created / and for as moche as he nouryssheth vs with his goodes that he maketh to growe. For he is a good fader ye nouryssheth / and in as moche as we hope to possede his herytage that is paradyse as his propre chyldren. For these thynges he∣re and many other we sholde loue god abo¦ue our parētes. We sholde loue our faders carnalles naturally and by the commaun¦dement of god / but we shold loue god abo¦ue them. Vnde Augusti. Diligendus est genitor / sed preponēdus est creator. ¶Ex∣ample of saynt Barbara the whiche loued god more than her fader Diascorus ye whi wolde haue her ydolatre / she chose more so¦ner to lose ye loue of her sayd fader & all her worldly goodes & honoures / & that her bo∣dy were beten / cut / & put vnto dethe than
as commaundemen  Accu. . I  man  sy mortal¦ly and shall go vnto dampnacyon. Vnd¦gur in  distin . Stm eniū s f capax precep de¦tur ad s  noam et obseruatonē. I that ge that a de is capable of ye commaundemente of god it is commaun∣de hym yt he kepe it. And yf the sayd chyl∣dren were not soo wyse that they myght nowe that they offende and that they dy¦de the sayd theft in obeyenge vnto theyr fa¦der carnall they do not syn̄e mortally but theyr sayd fader shall bere the syn̄e and pu¦nycyon. ¶Example that a man sholde lo∣ue god more than his chyldren & other pa∣rentes. Quere in the examplary of ye com∣maundementes .lxx a. ¶Another exam∣ple in Abraham the whiche loued well his sone Ysaac / but he loued god aboue hym in lykewise as it appered whan god cōmaun¦ded hym for to do sacryfyce. Quere in the examplary of the commaundementes .li. a ¶. ¶Another  and  good. And therfore they go vnto dampnacyon. E. ¶Fourthly we sholde loue goo with  more than our owne bodies and  hym and vnto his commaund¦mentes more sooner than vnto our own  The reason is good for that that ?  is full of ou infynyte hathe  od vs more than his owne body. For  dured that his body hath be beter crucyfyed and put  doth for to redem vs from holle where all we defended shol∣de haue descended by ye synne of Adam or forme fader. Yf thou he wylt beleue that  it true by symple worde or speche yet stud the scryptures in the chapyttes ye whiche folowen It is wryten .i. petri .i. cap. No¦er corruptionib{us} auo vel argento redēp s de vana vestra cōuersatione pater tradiionis sed preo so sanguine ag macuan christ. That is to saye. Ye be rede¦med from your vayne conuersacyon of the tradiccyon paternall not of thynges cor¦ruptybles as golde & syluer but by the pre¦cyous blode of the lambe Ihesu cryst im∣maculate. Et legitur .i. petri .iii. Christus semel pro peccaris nostris morruus est ¦stus pro frustus vt nos offerret deo. That is to say, Ihesu Cryst is deed one tyme for our synnes the Iust for the vniust to then de that he offre vs vnto god. Et legitur ad Gallarhas .iii. Christus nos redemit. Ihe¦su cryst hath redemed vs. Et Barnardus dicit. Ecce domine quia redemisti me d¦beo
me amori tuo totum et tantum debeo plusquam qu āto tu maior es me pro quo de disti teipsū. My lorde for that / yt thou hast redemed me I sholde gyue me all in to thy loue / and I sholde loue the more than my selfe of as moche as thou arte greter than I for whome thou haste gyuen thy selfe. Syth it is so that god hath loued vs more than hymselfe / it is good reason that we lo¦ue hym better than our selfe as it is sayd. Example in the appostles the whiche hath loued god more than theyr owne bodyes / for some hath endured for to be flayne / as saynt Barthylmewe / some other to be hee∣ded as saynt Poule / the other crucifyed as saynt Peter / and saynt Andrewe. And for all the paynes that the tyrauntes myght do vnto them theyne lefte the loue and ye commaundement of god. Vnde ad ro .viii. Quis separabit nos a charitate christi tri¦bulatio / an angustia / an persecutio / an fa∣mes / an nuditas / an periculum / an gladi{us} Saynt Poule sayth what is it that may separe vs frome the loue & charyte of god. Shall it be trybulacyon / anguysshe / perse¦cucyon / or honger. &c. I am certayne that dethe / ne lyfe / ne deuylles / ne sygnouryes ne may departe vs frome the loue of god. And it is wryten .i. ad corīt. xvi. how saynt Poule sayeth. Who soo loueth not Ihesu cryste be he cursed. Si quis non amat cri∣stū anathema sit. Also he sayth in an other epystle that god hathe prepayred vnto thē grete rewarde the whiche loueth hym. Vn¦de .ii. ad corin. ii. cap. Quod oculus non vi¦dit nec aures audiuit nec ī cor hominis ascē¦dit que preparauit de{us} diligētibus se. This auctoryte is declared towarde the ende of this treatyse .xlvii. a. ¶Example we rede that the herte of a vyrgyn was cutte in her body for the grete loue that she hadde vnto god. Quere in the examplary at the nom∣bre .lxxv. e. ¶Another example that Su∣sanne loued better to be slayne & dyffamed than to breke the commaundement of god whan the two harlottes dyde say vnto her Of two thynges choyse whiche thou wylt eyther that thou consent that we haue thy company at our pleasure / or that we make the to be stoned and put to dethe. Quere .lxxxxvi. c. ¶Another example wryten in ye lyfe of faders of a good yonge man ye whi∣che was bounde all naked in a fayre bedde and there was put vnto hym a fayre wo∣man impudyke all naked for to make him to doo synne with her / but for to resyste vn¦to the synne and to kepe the loue of god & to obey vnto his commaundement he bote and ete his owne tongue and spette ye blo∣de in the vysage of the sayd harlot the whi¦che fledde of horrour. ¶Example that ma¦ry magdaleyne loued moche god / wherfo¦re god pardoned her all her synnes. Vnde Luce .vii. Remittuntur ei peccata multa quoniam diliexit multum. ¶Another ex∣ample of a duchesse the whiche loued ouer moche her body and lyued voluptuously & she dyde stynke. The dyscyple recyteth in his promptuarye that a certayne duke had a wyfe the whiche lyued so tenderly and so dylycatyuely that she dysdeyned to be bay∣ned in comune waters of ryuers and foun¦taynes / but her seruauntes gadered the dewe of the skye & prepayred vnto to her a bayne. Her meetes and drynkes were so de¦lycyously dressed and made that meruay∣le it was. Her bedde also smelled odoryfe∣rously and swete / and as she lyued so / by ye Iugemente of god she was stryken with so grete stynche in her lyuynge dayes that none ne myght abyde the foule ayre of her Al her gentylmen and seruauntes left her excepte one chamberere or mayden onely / that serued her the whiche ne myght passe by her without hauynge the ayre of some spyces well smellynge / & also as in renȳge
admynystred vnto her / and in suche styn∣ke she deyed. H. ¶Fyfthly we sholde loue god with all our herte / and put our truste and hope in hym more soner & aboue all ye kynges / dukes / erles / lordes / & other men of the worlde / and the reason is euydent / for there ne is in all the worlde soo grete a lorde that may defende vs at the dethe frō our enmyes & kepe vs from dampnacyon and gyue to vs paradyse / there ne is none alonely but god the whiche is replenisshed with goodnes infynyte. And therfore the psalmyst sayeth. Bonum est confidere in domino {quam} cōfidere in homine. Better thȳ∣ge it is to put confydence in god than too put confydence in man. Iterū {pre}s. Bonū est sperare in domino {quam} sperare in principi¦b{us}. Better it is to trust in god thā to trust in prynces. Example. Saynt barbara the whiche put her loue / her affyaūce and her esperaunce in god / and not vnto the lordes temporall she was comforted at her dethe of god / and the aungelles baren her sou∣le in to paradyse / and her fader Dyascor{us} the whiche beheeded her was brent wt fyre celestyal and ye deuylles bare his soule in to hell / his rychesses ne his sygnouryes ayded hym not at nede. So it is better to put cō¦fydence in god than in prynces and men in whome is no helthe. Vnde Dauid in psal. Nolite confidere in principibus nec ī filiis hominum / in quibus non est salus. And ye prophete Iheremye sayth that the man is cursed the whiche putteth his trust in men and putteth his flesshe / his arme / and his herte / and departeth hymselfe from god. Vnde Iheremye .xvii. Maledictus est ho¦mo qui confidit in homine / & ponit carnem brachium suum & a domino recedit cor ei{us}. Helyodorus was punysshed of punycyon dyuyne for that / that he obeyed vnto kȳge Sceleni{us} more soner than vnto god whā he yode to take the treasours of ye chyrche of Ierusalem. Quere .lxxxii. b. ¶Another example how kynge Ezechyas sente to se∣ke counceyle of his sekenes vnto belzabub and he deyed myscheuously / and his messa¦geres were brent with fyre celestyall. Que¦re .ix. g. For to knowe the deference whan loue is good or ylle / or whan it is mortall synne or venyall thou shalte fynde it in the ix. commaundement. Quere .xlii. c. ¶Ex∣ample in Moyses ye whiche loued god par∣fytely and obeyed vnto his commaunde∣mentes more sooner and aboue the wyll of kynge Pharaon / and therfore god loued hym so moche that he spake vnto hym fa∣ce to face. In lykewyse as it is wryten in the thre and thyrty chapytre of Exodi. A. ¶How the commaundemēt of god cō∣prehendeth vnder it the thre fyrst com∣maundementes / and the thre vertues theologalles / the whiche ben faythe / ho∣pe / and charyte .ii. IT is wryten in the .xxiiii. chapy∣tre of the gospelles of saynt Io∣han that our lorde sayd vnto his dyscyples. Si diligitis me man∣data mea seruate. Yf ye loue me kepe my commaundements. Yf thou loue god with all thyn herte aboue all thynges thou shalte beleue in hym / thou shall wor∣shyppe hym and shalte gyue hym honour. the whiche is due vnto him / not vnto ydol¦les / ne vnto thynges create / for it is vnto the creatour vnto whome suche honour is due. Thus thou shalte accomplysshe the fyrste commaundemente of our lorde the whiche is wryten Exodi viscesimo. Non assumes nomen dei tui in vanum. ¶Mo∣re ouer yf thou loue thy lorde god aboue al thynges thou shalte sanctyfye / honoure / and kepe the feestes commaunded. And in so doynge thou shalte fulfyll and totally
accomplysshe the thyrde commaūdement of god the whiche is wryten Exo. xx. Sab¦bata sanctifices. And therfore the dyleccyō of god comprehendeth the thre fyrst com∣maundementes the whiche vs ordeyneth wel towarde the blyssed trynyte. The fyrst vs ordeyneth anenst the puissaunce of god the fader the whiche is of the mageste in∣comprehensyble. The seconde anenst god the sone the whiche is veryte and wysdom souerayne. The thyrde anenst god the ho∣ly goost the whiche is bounte and loue in∣fynyte. Yf we ben well ordeyned anenst god the fader / the sone / and the holy goost the whiche is one onely god in trynyte we shall loue hym aboue all thynges / and we shall accomplysshe the thre fyrst commaū¦dementes the whiche tendeth vnto his dy¦leccyon as it is sayd. ¶Also the dyleccyon of god comprehendeth the thre dyuyne ver¦tues theologalles the whiche ben fayth / ho¦pe / and charyte with theyr braunches and dependaūces. They ben sayd dyuynes for that / that they doo ordeyne dyuynely the herte of man anenst god. Saynt Austyn sayth in eucheridon. Fide / spe / et caritate colitur optime deus. God is ryght well ho¦noured by fayth / hope / and charite. Fayth kepeth soueraynly veryte. Hope souerayne hyghnes / & Charyte souerayne loue. And it is sayd charyte of chere / vnyte / and loue in god. We se god but by faythe / and by faythe we beleue in hym and loue hym / & we kepe his fyrst commaundement ye whi¦che is. Vnū credo de. Also we serue god to haue the good to come / and therfore we put our trust in hym / and we abstayne vs to swere by hym vaynly / and so we kepe ye seconde commaundement. Ne iures va∣a per ipsum. Also by charyte / faythe / and hope we loue / serue / and honour god / and we kepe ye thyrde commaundement. Sab¦bata sanctifices. ¶Also we loue god for thre thinges. The fyrst is for the grete and infynyte goodnes the whiche we haue her∣de say the whiche is in hym and procedeth of hym / and therto we put faythe. The se∣conde is for the grete good that we hope to haue of hym after our dethe. The thyrde is for the grete goodnes that he hath done to vs in our creacyon and redempcyon / & that he dooth cotydyally to vs of goodes that he maketh to encrease / & therfore we put our charyte within hym. By these thre thynges we haue faythe / hope / and chary∣te with god and loue hym with all herte a∣boue all thynges. The faythe is the foun∣dement of all vertues / for without faythe it is impossyble to please god. Vn̄ paulus ad hebreos .xi. Sine fide impossibile est pla¦cere deo. B. ¶Also we ne may be saued by good operacions without hauynge faythe Vnde ad galath. ii. Nō iustificatur homo ex operibus legis / nisi per fidem iesu x{pre}i. Et ad gallat. iii. Iustus ex fide viuit. The Iust man lyueth by faythe. Also for to be∣leue in god after the faythe and by baptym man is saued / and by defaute of faythe & baptym man is dampned. Vn̄ Marci. xvi. Qui crediderit et baptizatus fuerit salu{us} erit / qui vero non crediderit condempna∣bitur. How men ought to beleue in god & in the artycles of the faythe it is wryten af¦ter in the fyrst commaūdement / of faythe cometh obedyence / good desyre / and inno∣cence / relygyon / mundycyte / confyaunce / and chastyte .C. ¶Also ye synners ne may be saued without hauynge esperaunce or hope that god vnto them pardoneth theyr synnes after the artycle of the fayth ye whi¦che is. Remissionem peccatorum / and ther¦fore they shold put theyr hope in god. Cain & Iudas ben dāpned by defaute of hope. Also we sholde hope yt god shal delyuer vs from our enmyes vysybles & inuysybles in lykewyse he dyde our forne faders. Vn̄ {pre}s
In te sperauerunt patres nostri speraue∣runt et liberasti eos. Iterū{pre}s. Quoniam in me sperant liberabo eum: protegam eū quoniam cognouit nomen meum. He hath trusted in me I shall delyuer hym / for he hath knowen my name. Example whan Iob was tourmented he sayd that yf god wolde sle hym yet wolde he put his truste in hym. Vnde Iob .xiii. Example that Da¦uyd hadde good hope whan in the name of god he slewe ye proude puyssaunt man phy¦lystyen. Quere .lxxviii. Also we shold haue hope that god shall gyue vnto vs beatytu∣de and lyfe eternall. Vnde {pre}s. Beate om∣nes qui sperant in te domine. Esperaunce is a fayre vertue of the Whiche cometh pa¦cyence / moderaunce / contrycyon / cōfessy∣on / ioye espyrytuall / and contemplacyon. D. ¶Also without hauynge charyte we ne may be saued / in lykewyse as saynt pou¦le sayth .i. ad Corinthios .xiii. Silīguis ho∣minum loquar & angelorum: caritatem au¦tem non habuero fact{us} sum sicut es sonās aut cimbalum timiens. This mater of cha¦ryte is wryten here after .iiii. ca. Of chary∣te procedeth loue / pyte / grace / peas beny∣gnyte / and debonayrte. Example of chary¦te. Quere .lxxv. A. E. ¶Here foloweth the commaundement to loue thy neyghbour .ii. IT is wryten in ye gospel of saynt Iohan that our lorde sayd vnto his dyscyples. I gyue vnto you a commaūdement of newe / that is that ye loue other in lykewyse as I haue loued you / all men shall knowe in that thynge that ye be my dyscyples / yf ye haue dyleccyon togyders. Vnde Ioh̄ .xiii. Mandatum nouum do vobis vt dili∣gatis inuicem sicut dilexi vos / ī hoc cogno∣scent omnes quia discipuli mei estis si dile∣ctionem habueritis ad inuicem. ¶Also the gospel sayth that to loue his neyghbour as hymselfe is more greter thynges than sa∣cryfyces. Vnde Marci .xii. Diligere proxi¦mum tan{quam} seipsum maius est omnib{us} olo¦caustimatibus et seruictis. For to haue pa∣radyse and to escape the paynes of hell it is requysyte that thou obey vnto god / ye whi∣che commaundeth ye thou loue thy neygh∣bour. ¶Whan a kynge temporall maketh to proclame ony thynge within his realme his subgectes therto obeyeth of drede to ha¦ue domage. And god the whiche is kynge of kynges made to preche throughout al ye worlde that we sholde loue eche other vp∣on payne of dampnacyon and to lese para¦dyse. It is wryten Iohannis .xv. Hec mā do vobis vt diligatis inuicem. Et legitur Mathei .xix. Si vis ad vitam ingredi ser∣ua mandata. Yf thou wylt entre in to the lyfe eternall kepe the commaundementes Yf thou drede the furour of a kynge tempo¦rall ye whiche is transytory / by a more grea¦ter reason thou oughtest to drede ye furour of god ye whiche may sende the in to dam∣nacyon eternal. F. ¶Many thȳges ought to moeue vs to loue our neyghboure. The fyrst the whiche is moost pryncypal and fy¦nall is for to obey vnto god / the whiche cō∣maūdeth it vs. Whan a good fader gooth out of the towne he commaundeth vnto his chyldren & vnto his seruauntes yt they loue eche other. In lykewyse dyde our lor∣de Ihesus before yt he was crucyfyed / and whan he shall come to the Iugement the mater shal be dyscuted of those the whiche haue done yll vnto theyr neyghbours / and shall be sent in to the fyre of hell yf they be founde īpenytents. Vnd Athanasi{us}. Q¦mala egerūt ibunt in ignē eternum. The se¦conde thynge yt shold moue vs to loue our neyghbour is the fraternyte naturall tha ought to be betwene vs in as moche as we
ben descended of one fader and or one mo¦der / that is of Adam and Eue & that natu¦rally the generacyon procedeth the one of ye other / so nature moeueth vs to loue eche other. The thyrde thynge is the fraterny∣te espyrytuall the whiche is betwene vs in as moche as we ben broders & systers cry∣styens baptyzed of one baptym in one god onely. The .iiii. is in as moche as we ben sē¦blables the one vnto the other / made and create vnto the ymage of god. Vnde. gene¦sis .ix. Ad ymaginem quippe dei fact{us} est homo. Also the dombe beestes loueth theyr semblables. Vnde eccl. asti .xiii. Omne ani¦mal diligit simile sibi. Also ye byrdes of one selfe semblaunce slyeth / eteth / and kepeth company togyders / as pygeōs / sparowes cranes. &c. Vide eccle .xxvii. Volitalia ad sibi similia conueniunt. Syth that these be¦stes irreasonables loueth eche other by mo¦te stronge reason we shold loue eche other the whiche ben reasonables. Thre thynges pleased vnto the sage Salomon ye whiche ben approued before god and man / that is concordaūce betwene bredren & frendes / loue betwene neyghbours / and comente∣ment in marage / that is to vnderstande the man and the woman. Vnde eccle. xxv. In tribus beneplacitum est spiritui meo¦que sunt probata coram deo et hominibus concordia fratrum / amor proximo{rum} / vir¦et mulier sibi consentientes. The .v. thyng ye whiche sholde moeue vs for to loue our neyghbour is that we entende to go togy∣der in to paradyse / & thyder to come there to enioye vs. Vnde scriptura. Proximum diligimus vt cum ipso curramus et cūi{pre}o ad gloriam {per}ueniamus. Et ambrosi{us} dicit. Sicut sine via nullus peruerut quo tendit ita sine caritate que dicit{ur} via non possimus recte ire. In lykewyse without loue & cha∣ryte we ne may goo ryght in to paradyse. Also the aungelles loueth vs & kepeth for to obeye vnto the commaundementes of god / & to thende that we may come in to paradyse with them / & that we may enioy vs togyders. And therfore we sholde loue eche other & that loue sholde not be in syn̄e in lykewyse as it is wryten .i. ad corin .xiii. Dilectio proximi malum nō operat{ur}. The dyleccion of thy neyghbour ne dooth none harme. G. ¶To loue his neyghbour as hymselfe comprehendeth the seuen werkes of mercy / the .vii. laste commaundemē¦tes / & the .iiii. vertues cardynals .ii. IT is wryten in the .xxii. chapytre of the gospell of saynt Mathewe and in the .xiii chapytre of ye epy∣stles of saynt Poule vnto the Ro¦maynes. Diliges proximum tu¦um sicut teipsum. H. ¶Thou shalt loue thy neyghbour as thy selfe. To loue his neygh¦bour as hymselfe is vnderstande and ex∣pounded in two maners. The fyrst is. All the good that thou woldest ye men sholde do to the as well vnto the body as vnto ye soule yf thou haddest necestyte) thou shold do it to thy neyghbour yf he had necessyte Vnde Mathei .vi. Omnia quecū{que} vultis vt faciant vobis homines & vos facite illis hec est enim lex et prophete. That is to vn¦derstande. Yf yt thou haddest honger and thyrste thou woldest well that men sholde gyue vnto the to drynke and meet to ete. Or yf thou were seke or sore thou woldest well be vysyted. And yf thou haddest not herborowe nor lodgynge as the poore pyl∣grymes thou woldest well that men shol∣de harborowe and lodge the. Or yf ye thou were a prysoner thou woldest be redemed. And yf thou were naked thou woldest be clothed. Or also yf yu were deed yu wolde be buryed. Do in lykewyse to thy neybour yf
he haue necessyte as yu woldest he dyde vn∣to them accomplysshynge the werkes of mercy the whiche ben corporelles / & wele shall come vnto the. ¶Example of a man the whiche was drouned in the accomplys¦shynge the werkes of mercy and his soule went vnto heuen before that his body was colde .lv. B. ¶Another example how fre∣res gaue a cluster of grapes and sent it vn¦to ye moost of debilyte & weykenes .lxxv. A. ¶Other example that a man sholde do of good whyles that he lyueth without aby∣dynge vnto his heriteres .lxxii. c. d. e. f. Also yf thou haddest necessyte of counceyle espy¦rytually or of conforte / or to be chastysed & taught / or that men sholde pardon the thy defautes / or that men praye for the or sup∣porte the in thy perfeccyons. In the thyn∣ges before sayd thou woldest haue ayde & socoures in thy necessyte. Do thou in lyke¦wyse to thy neyghboure in his necessyte & thou shalte loue hym as thy selfe / and thou shalte accomplysshe the werkes of mercy as he dyde ye whiche drewe agayne his bro¦der the whiche fell into fornycacion. quere .lxxv. f. Also yu shalt accōplysshe the fourth cōmaūdement the whiche is wryten. exodi xx. Honora patrem tuum & matrem tuā. I. ¶The seconde exposycyon to loue thy neyghbour as thy selfe is suche. All the yll that thou woldest that men ne sholde doo vnto the (as wel vnto body as vnto soule) thou ne sholdest do it vnto thy neyghbour Vnde thobie .iiii. Quod alio tibi odis fieri vide ne tu aliquando alteri facias. Et Y so do. dicit. Quod non vis pati non facias {quod} nō vis tibi fieri alteri nun{quam} inferas. That is to vnderstonde. Thou woldest not that men bette the: or slewe the / ne do thou it to thy neyghbour / and thou shalt accomplys∣she the .v. commaundement of god / ye whi¦che is wryten Deutero. v. Nonoccides. ¶Example that haynours that is hateful men slewe a man within the chyrche we∣re diuynely punysshed .lxxix. b. ¶Another example of a man the whiche bette his wy¦fe and she myscouraged herselfe and dyde moche euyll .lx. I. Also thou woldest not yt men sholde stele thy goodes / or rauysshe or take it away by pyllage or otherwyse. Yf yu loue thy neyghboure ne take thou not his goodes iniustly / and thou shalt accomplys¦she the .vi. commaundement the whiche is wryten Exodi. xx. Non furtum facies. Al¦so thou ne woldest that men sholde cōmyt lechery in thy wyfe / or with thy doughter Yf thou loue thy neyghbour as thy selfe ne commyt thou it in his wyfe / and yu shalt ac¦complysshed the .vii. commaundement / ye whiche is wryten Exodi. xx. Non mecha∣beris. Also thou woldest not that men shol¦de make the to lese thy goodes or heryta∣ges / or thy good renōmee for false wytnes & reporte / ne do thou it to thy neyghbour & thou shalt accomplysshe the .viii. commaū¦dement the whiche is wryten Deutero. v. Non loquaris cōtra proximum tuum fal¦sum testimoniū. ¶Example how thre per¦sones the whiche forsware them for to im∣pose a false cryme vnto a patryarche were punysshed .lxxxxvi. A. Also thou woldest not that men sholde thynke yll vpon yt for to haue thy goodes iniustly / or for to decey¦ue thy wyfe / ne do thou it vnto thy neygh¦boure and loue hym as thy selfe / and thou shalt accomplysshe the two last commaun¦dementes. Vnde deutero. v. Non concu∣pisces vxorem proximi tui. &c. Also yf thou loue thy neyghbour thou ne shalte do hym none yll. Quia dilectio proximi malū non operatur. Vt dicit{ur} ad romanos .xiii. Two thynges ben requysyte for to kepe the dyle¦ction of thy neyghboure as sayth Ysodore in his boke of dyfference. Scʐ vt beneficii impensione foueatur et nulla malicia lede¦tur. That is to say that a man do good vn¦to
his neyghbour yf he haue necessyte / and also that he hurte hym not by ony malyce Do the thynges beforesayd and thou shalt accomplysshe the .vii. last commaundemē∣tes of god / and the werkes of mercy ye whi¦che thou shalte fynde after in the nombre .xxiiii. a. b. c. K. ¶Also for to loue thy neyghbour as thi selfe it behoueth that thou haue prudence / attempraunce / iustyce / and force / they ben foure vertues the whiche ben sayd cardy∣nalles for that / that they teche the man to gouerne hym in hym selfe / and after his neyghbour as ye pope gouerneth holy chyr¦che by the counceyle of his cardynalles / & a man ne may loue his neyghboure with∣out these foure vertues. For prudence ke∣peth a man that he be not deceyued of his ennemyes by none engyn / and hym coun∣ceyleth and ordeyneth that al that / that he dooth and sayth be in the ryght lyne of rea¦son after the ordenaunce of god ye whiche all seeth / iugeth / and knoweth. Also prudē¦ce counceyleth to wepe the synnes cōmyt∣ted and past / and that a man despyse the prosperytees worldly the whiche ben tran¦sytoryous / and that a man sholde coueyte to haue the Ioyes eternalles. Also pruden¦ce maketh to ordeyne the thynges presen∣tes for to lyue after god / & maketh to pro∣uyde for the thynges to come / & also to re∣corde of the thynges past. Vnderstande ye worde of a wyse poete the whiche sayeth. Prospice vētura / sic est prudens tua cura Cū quid vis agere / debes primo bn̄ videre An tibi conueniat / liceat simul vtile fiat. Om̄a prudēter / fac finem cerne frequēter Primo metire / que finis possit ante venire A prudent man ought to be wyle or ware to loke about on all partes that he ne be de¦ceyued of his aduersaryes the whiche ben ouer all the worlde. Quia totus mundus in maligno possitus est. It behoueth to lo∣ke about that a man be not deceyued by a∣myte carnall and socyall. Quia iam pater patrem iam filius fellit matrem: iam soci{us} socium: iam amic{us} decipit amicū. Saynt poule sayeth take hede how ye walke wyse¦ly. That is how ye lyue not as dombe fou∣les but as sages & redeme ye tyme loste vn¦prouffytably spent & wasted for the dayes ben ylle / & therfore be ye not imprudente but take ye hede what is ye wyll of god. Vn¦de Paulus ad Ephe. v. Videte quomodo caute ambuletis non quasi insipientes sed vt sapientes redimētis tempus quoniam dies mali sunt prorterea nolite fieri impru¦dentes sed intellgentes que sit volūtas dei. Attempraunce kepeth a man that he ne be corrupt by ony cursed loue / or for fere / or Ioye / or swetnes. For the man attempra∣te taketh moderacyon to loue that / that he ought to loue / how he sholde loue / & as mo¦che as he ought to loue. After he dredeth yt that he sholde drede / how he sholde drede / and as moche as he ought to drede. More¦ouer he taketh no Ioye ne delyte but in ye thynge that he ought to haue / as he sholde haue / and as moche as he ought to haue it. And also he ne taketh dolour but yt / that he ought to take / as he ought to take / and as moche as he ought to take. The man attē¦prate ne coueyteth ne yet wyll doo thynge wherof he may repent hym in ony maner ne passeth the lawe without measure / and also he putteth himselfe vnder the yoke of reason and doubteth all the coueytyses of the worlde the whiche ben deuyded in .iii. thynges the whiche are / the couetyses of ye desyres of the body / the couetyse of auary∣ce / and of the synne of pryde. In these .iii. thȳges there behoueth to put attempraun¦ce that a man be not deceyued. Of the whi¦che speketh saynt Iohn in the seconde cha¦pytre of his fyrste canonyque and sayeth. Omne quod est in mundo aut est concu∣piscentia
oculorū aut superbia vite. Force maketh the herte of the man to be lyfte vp on hye aboue the perylles of the worlde & expelleth debylyte of courage and maketh hym stronge to resyste agayne the tempta¦cyons and aduersytees of the worlde / of ye body / and of the deuylles. Vnde Augusti. Quod fortitudo est amor facile tollerans propter quod id amatur. Also the vertue of force maketh to dysprayse the felycitees and prosperytees wordely / & not to drede ony aduersytees. Facit prospera mundi despicere et nulla eius aduersa formidare. Iustyce putteth the man in ordre & ryght estate towarde his neyghboure / for it yel∣deth vnto euery man that ye whiche is his. after the ryght lyne of reason. It wylleth prouffyte vnto all & noyeth vnto no man. Iustyce is sayd of Iust. Iusticia dicitur a iusto. For the Iust man ne wyll do but rea¦son. Euery vertue the whiche is well done in operacōn is sayd Iustyce. Also all ryght and reason is sayd iustyce / but all iustyce is not ryght. For the cursed offycers peruer∣teth iustyce / somtyme by gyftes / somtyme by drede of lordes or by euyll people / or by loue or by hate. Prudence gyueth coūceyle vnto Iustyce for it aydeth it / & attempraū¦ce amodereth it. Saynt Austin sayth that vertue is an equalyte of lyfe soundinge vn¦to reason. Virtus est quedam equalitas vite vndi{que} consonans rationi. Et iohānes crisostomus dicit {quod} virtus animiest recte de deo sentire & recte inter homines agere. Et hieromimus dicit. {quod} sola apud deumli bertas est non seruire peccatis et summa a pud deum nobilitas est clarere virtutibus. ¶For to loue god and his neyghbour and for to lyue holyly in lykewyse as men shol∣de it behoueth to take the maners and con¦dycions of men parfaytes the whiche here foloweth. ¶Here after foloweth the seuen vertues. ¶Who so wyll knowe the good in lyuȳge The .vii. vertues with theyr braūches also. As ye shall se here after folowynge. In them ben reteyned wt many other mo ¶Fides. Who that beleueth is obedyent Chaste / pure / clene / and confyaunt. In desyre good and innocent Ferme in god / not varyaunt ¶Spes. The man esperaunt / is pacyent Hauynge Ioye in contemplacyon. His synnes also / he dooth repent By contrycyon / and confessyon ¶Caritas. The charytable hath pyte Grace / peas / benygnyte Debonayrte / humylyte Pardon / clemence / lyberalyte ¶Prudentia. ¶The prudent loueth god and dredeth Menynge always well and truely. By good counceyle whan hym nedeth And dysposeth all thynge goodly ¶Temperantia. The man attemprate putteth dyscrecyon In mete / and drynke / and clothynge All thynges done by moderacyon Ne yet in speche is he excedynge ¶Iusticia. The Iust man hath equyte Cyrreccyon / with seueryte Lawe / iugement / and veryte Not sweruynge from fydelyte ¶Fortitudo. The man stronge is ferme and suffraunt. Constaunt / pacient in bounte Grete in courage / perseueraunt Prompt and delygent in sayntyte ¶The auctour.
¶Who so these vertues shall lerne & con̄e And them accomplysshe in worde & dede Vnto perfeccyon they shall come And haue heuen for theyr mede. ¶It wryten in .ix. ethicorum. Virtuoso∣rum beatissima est vita. Et in scdo ethico∣rum dicitur quod virtus certior est et me∣lior omni arte. Item in eodem capitulo di∣citur {quod} oīs virtus consistit in medio. In oī¦bus medium est laudabile. A. ¶It is commaūded that we loue eche other in lykewyse as god hath loued vs iii. IT is wryten in the .v. chapitre of the gospelles of saynt Iohan yt god sayd to his dyscyples. Hoc est preceptum meum vt diligatis inuicem licut dilexi vos. That is to say. My cōmaundement is that ye loue eche other in lykewise as I haue loued you For to con expounde this dyleccyon a man ought to knowe that god hath loued vs in many maners / wherof we shall tell fyue. B. ¶Fyrst god hathe loued vs ryghtfully before that we loued hym / and not for his prouffyte ne for to haue our goodes / but of his benygnyte for to socoure vs and to sa∣ue vs. In lykewise sholde we loue our ney¦ghbours before that they do vs good / and not for to haue theyr goodes / but for to so¦coure them in folowynge god. Vnde .i. Io¦hannis .iiii. In hoc apparuit caritas dei nō quasi nos dilexerimus eū sed quoniam ipse prior disexi nos / et misit filium suum propi¦ciatorem pro peccatis nostris. C. ¶Secondly god hath loued vs dyscre∣tely. For he hath loued the persones and ye saluacion of soules and hath hated and per¦secuted the synnes / and repreued those the whiche dyde commytte them. In lykewy∣se sholde we do. For yf our neyghboure be entached or spotted with ony vyce we shol¦de hate his synne & reprehende hym dyscre¦tely. Vnde paulus ad galath. vi. Si preoc∣cupatus fuerit homo in aliquo delicto vos qui spirituales estis instruite in spūlenita∣tis considerans teipsum ne et tu temteris. ¶Example that softe correccyon prouffy∣teth more vnto euyll persones than sharpe Quere in the examplary .lxxiiii. a. ¶Ano∣ther example how saynt Iohan softly dre¦we a thefe from synne. Quere .lxxii. e. Also dyleccyon ought to be without symulacion For who so loueth well chastyseth without fayntyse. Vnde paulus ad ro. xii. Dilectio¦ne sine simulatione odientes malum adhe∣rentes bono. Thou sholdest loue thy neygh¦bours in god / and after the vertue of equy¦te / and not in yll and synne. These the whi¦che god loueth he chastyseth discretely. Vn¦de apo. iii. Ego quos amo arguo & castigo dicit domin{us}. Et pau. ii. ad thymo. iiii. Ar∣gue obsecra increpa omni pacientia et do∣ctrina. ¶A questyon. Who soo sholde de∣maunde yf the loue of theues and pyllars (were good) the whiche loueth and sustey∣neth eche other / or of lechoures the whiche loueth theyr folysshe louers as them selfe. The answere. Suche loue is nothȳge wo∣rthe / for they loue not god / ne theyr neygh¦bour / ne theyr selfe. They loue not god in brekynge his commaundementes / ne they loue not theyr neyghbour ne themselfe / for they dampne theym selfe. Vnde psalmist. Qui diligit iniquitatem odit animam su∣am. He the whiche loueth iniquyte hateth his soule. Et beatus iacobus dicit. Pecca∣tum cum consummatū fuerit generat mor¦tem. Incontynente that synne is consum∣med & done it engendreth the dethe. That is to vnderstande that it mortyfyeth spy∣rytually the goodnes of the soule / by the dethe of gylte.
D. ¶Thyrdly god vs hath loued fructu∣ously / not onely in voyce but of worde / & of operacions. In lykewyse we sholde our neyghbour in doynge the operacyon. For yf a poore man the whiche hath hunger & thyrst all to frosen demaūde the almes. It shall not suffyse to say vnto hym. A poore man thou hast hongre and arte frosen god helpe the. Saynt Iames sayeth in the .ii. chapytre of his epystle that fayth without operacyon is deed and nothynge worthe. And saynt Iohan sayeth illud .i. Ioh. iii. Filioli: non diligamus verbo ne{que} lingua sed o{per}e et veritate. Lytell chyldren / sones and doughters / loue not onely by tongue / and by worde / but by operacyon and very¦te. The tree the whiche ne hath but leues & bereth no good fruyte is not good but for to brenne. In lykewyse the persone ye whi¦che ne hath but wordes without operacy∣ons is nothynge worthe Our sauyour Ihe¦sus fyrst dyde and after shewed it agayne by worde. Capit ihesus facere et docere. And in lykewyse sholde we do / for it is wry¦ten iacobi .i. Estote factores verbi & nō au¦ditores tm̄ fallentes vosmeti{pre}os. Be ye ye doers of the wyll of god & not alonely ye he¦rers deceyuynge your selfe. The man yt is Iustyfyed by the operacyon of ye faythe & not alonely by faythe. Some ben frendes of the mouthe / some of the table / some of ye purse / & some of operacyon. The frendes of the mouthe promiseth ynough / but they do nothynge in operacion. A fructib{us} corū cognoscetis eos. The frendes of the table loueth eche other whyles yt barell of drinke & the feest lasteth / & sayeth well one of the other / but whan there is nomore meet nor drynke the loue defayleth & sayen / it is a myscheuous man yt hath all eten & wasted Vn̄. eccle. vi Est amic{us} socius mense & nō permanebit in die necessitatis. He is frēde and felawe of the table & he abydeth not in the daye of nede. Et eccle. xxxvii. Est ami¦c{us} solo noīe. He is a frende alonely by name Also the sage speketh of ye sayd frendes. Ec¦clesi. vi. Est enī amicus scdm tempus suū & non in die tribulationis / et est amic{us} qui conuertit ad inimicitiā / et est amicus qui odiū et rixā et cōuitia denudabit. The fren¦des of the purse ben cosyns as to giue or to lende / but hate and the deuyll it is to yelde agayn. The frendes of operacyon fayleth not at nede and ben sory of ye euyll of theyr frende and gladde of his welfare. In nede a man shall se what a frende is. Vnd eccle. vi. Amicus si permanserit / fixus / erit tibi quasi coequalis / et in domesticis tuis fidu∣cialiter aget / sequitur amicus fidelis fortis protectio / qui autem īuenit thesaurū / ami∣co fideli nulla est comparatio. A faythfull frende is a grete and a stronge defence / he ye whiche fyndeth hym fyndeth a treasour there is noo comparyson vnto a faythfull frende. Also the true frende ought to helpe and remembre his frende at his nede as he sholde do vnto hymselfe. Vnde ligit{ur} nono ethicorū. Amicus se debet habere ad ami∣cum sicut ad semetipsum. God hath vs lo∣ued of worde and of operacyon togyders. And in lykewyse sholde we loue our neygh¦boures. E. ¶Fourthly god hath vs loued parfyte¦ly more than his owne body as before it is sayd. Quere. G. Also {pro}arfyte men putteth theyr bodyes in daunger of dethe for to sa¦ue theyr neyghboures / as dyde a man na∣med Sanctulus. Quere .lxxv. c. Another example of two men that had so grete cha¦ryte and amyte togyder that the one wol∣de haue deyed for to saue the other. Quere lxxv. b. F. ¶Fyfthly god hath loued the saluacion of all his ennemyes the whiche wronged hym / and bette hym without that / that he defended hymselfe nor that he answered
Iniury agaynst Iniury he dyde not / but yelded the good agaynst the yl / & he prayed for his enmyes Vnde luce .xxii. Pater di∣mitte illis non enim sciunt quid faciūt. Also perfite people sholde loue theyr enmyes in folowynge god / and they shall haue grete rewarde in paradyse. Vn. math. v. &. lu. vi. Diligite inimicos vestros benefacite hus qui oderūt vos et orate {pro} persequentibus et calumniantibus vos vt sitis filii patris vestri qr benignus est super ingratos & ma¦los. That is to say. Loue your enmyes / do good to them that hateth you / & praye for your persecutours and dyspysers to thend that ye be the sones innytatoures of god your fader. G. ¶Questyon. How may I loue those ye whiche hathe bette me or made me to lose my goodes or my good renowne. The an∣swere. Thou sholdest loue the euyll wyl of thy neyghbour: but for the loue of god thou sholdest loue the persones and theyr salua¦cyon / and also yf by Iustyce thou makest them to yelde to the thy goodes and to pu∣nysshe the synne of thy neyghbour thou of tendest not. For Iustyce is founded after god and vnto god / and Iustyce appertay∣neth to do punycyon & not vnto ye. Wher∣fore thou ne sholdest venge the that god ne wrothe hym agaynst the. The grete lordes the whiche wyll not vnderstande for to do right and iustyce departeth it with ye swer¦de / and is suffred of god vnto those ye whi¦che hath good right. Vn. catho Pugna {pro} patria. The parfite people bereth al aduer¦sytees pacyently & dooth good agaynst yll for the loue of god. Example in saynt Ste¦uen yt prayed for his enmyes yt god sholde pardon theym the synne that they dyde to stone hym. And to thende yt his prayer we∣re the soner exalted he set him on his knees Vn̄ acti. vii. Positis aūt genib{us} clamauit voce magna dicēs / dn̄e ne statuas illis hoc petm̄. ¶Example yt Dauyd wept ye dethe of his enmy Saul ye whiche persecuted hȳ Also he wept at the dethe of his frende Io¦nathas in lyke wyse as it is wryten in the fyrst chapytre of the seconde boke of kyn∣ges Also we rede in the .xviii. chapytre of ye boke of kynges that Ionathas the sone of Saul loued Dauyd as his owne soule / & on a tyme he dyspoyled hym of his gowne & gaue it vnto Dauyd Also Dauyd loued hym as hymselfe. Also Dauyd wept at the deth of his neyghbour Abner. Vt habet{ur} .ii. regū. iii. Also he wept at ye dethe of his sone Absolon yt dyde hym warre. Vt habet{ur} .ii. re¦gū .xviii. & .xix. Also Dauyd wolde do none euyll to his enmye Saul whan he myght haue done it / in lyke wyse as is wryten in the xxvi. chapytre of the fyrst boke of kyn∣ges. This is an example here that we shol¦de loue our enmyes for the loue of god. By these thȳges aforesayd it apereth how we shold loue our nyghboure. H. ¶Questyon. Who is my neyghbour. BY this that god commaundeth to loue his neyghbour a man may de¦maunde. What is it yt is my neygh¦bour. The answere. That is euery man & woman / for we sholde loue the saluacyon of soules & the wele and vtylyte of all per∣sones / & not the yll. Saynt Austyn sayth. Extēde caritatē per totum orbē quia mē∣bra christi per orbem iacent. Extende chari¦te ouer al the worlde / that is dyleccion / for the membres of Ihesu cryst lyeth by the worlde. God wyll that those of scotlond / of of fraunce / & of spayne be also well saued as them of Englonde yf they deserue it: for all ben membres of god tendynge to salua¦cyon. He loueth the lytell as ye grete / he thē hath create and is theyr gouernour & pur∣ueyour. Vn. sapien. vi. Pusillū & magnū
fecit dominus equaliter cura est illi de om∣nibus. And therfore it behoueth to vnder∣stande that all ben our neyghboures / but for as moche as we ne may do almes ouer all ye worlde it suffyseth to do it vnto those ye whiche ben amonge vs after our power This mater is gyuen vnto vs by worde. Luce .x. Homo quidem descēdebat ab ihe¦rusalem in iherico qui incidit in latrones. And the euangelyst sayeth that one of the maysters of the lawe demaunded of Ihe∣su cryst who was his neyghboure / and he answered vnto hym. A man descended frō Iherusalem vnto Iheryco the whiche fel in to the handes of theues the whiche dy∣spoyled hym and bette hym so moche that he was replenysshed with woundes & left hym as halfe deed / & it befell that a preest passed by and toke none hede. In lykewise a deaken passed yt toke no hede. After a Sa¦marytane the whiche passed the countree founde hym and had pyte & anoynted his woundes with wyne and oyle & dyde byn¦de hym and after yt put hym on his mare & bare him in to a stable and gaue two pens vnto the mayster of the stable and prayed hym that he wolde heele hym / and at his retorne he sholde satysfye hym at his wyll After these wordes Ihesus demaunded of ye mayster / whiche of them semeth vnto ye that hath be moost nere vnto the seke man of the thre the whiche passed by hym. He an¦swered the Samarytan estraunger. And god sayd vnto hym thou hast sayd truely / go and do thou in lykewyse. Saynt Austȳ sayth. Omnem hominem oportet intelle∣gi esse proximum quia nemo est cū quo ope¦randum sit male. A man sholde vnderstan¦de as it is sayd yt euery man is our neygh∣bour. For to moralyse vpon this euāgelyst a man sholde vnderstāde that whan a per¦sone is baptysed he is replenysshed with al vertues and with goodes espyrytuelles as yf he descended from Iherusalem that is paradyse in to Iheryco that is in to the fel¦de of batayle in this worlde the whiche is full of theues those ben synnes the whiche dyspoyleth hym of his good vertues & stry¦keth hym with many mortall woundes yt whiche ledeth hym vnto the dethe of hell / that is pryde: auaryce / slouthe / enuy / gloto¦ny / yre / and lechery the whiche stryketh ye soules whan they consent vnto them / and by the preest and deaken the whiche passed & toke none hede ben vnderstande those ye whiche haue no pyte ne compassyon of the pardycyon of soules / and by the Samary¦tan myserycordyous ben vnderstande the¦se the whiche remedyeth vnto the helthe & saluacyon of synners as after that Adam hadde synned and was fallen amonge the theues god hadde mercy the whiche hathe so moche done that he hath be heeled by the meryte of his passyon and by the holy sacra¦mentes. And our lorde as the Samarytā made to put wyne and oyle in his woūdes. Vinum qui letificat cor hominis. That is by confessyon the whiche clarifyeth the con¦scyence of synners / and the oyle that is the laste vnccyon the whiche heeleth the seke∣nesses corporelles and espyrytuelles in ly∣kewise as sayth saynt Iames. And when the Samarytan put the seke man on the mare is Ihesu cryste the whiche bare our syn̄es on his body at his passyon / and sayd vnto the mayster of the stable that he shol¦de heele the sayd seke body. That is to vn∣derstande Ihesus gaue vnto saynt Peter the keyes of the realme of heuen and vnto prelates and pastures vnto whom he sayd Whan I shall come agayne in Iugement I shall pay you your salayres after as ye haue laboured. After the sence morall Ihe¦sus hath be our neyghbour / for he hath he∣led our gostly sekenesses as the samarytan dyde the corporelles. And those ye heleth ye
synners of theyr synne or socoureth those yt haue nede ben sayd neyghbours. A. ¶Of the vertue of charyte ye whiche ex¦tendeth in all ye cōmaundementes of god .iiii. THe mayster of the sentences sa¦yeth in his thyrde boke yt chary¦te is in suche wyse dyffynyed. Caritas ē dilectio qua diligit{ur} de{us} {pro}pter se / et {pro}ximus {pro}pter deum. Charyte is dyleccyon by the whiche god is loued for the goodnes infynyte the whiche is in hym / and the neyghbour is lo¦ued for the loue of god. All the commaun∣dementes of god tendeth for to loue god & his neyghbour as it is sayd. And charyte is none other thynge but to loue god and his neyghbour. Soo charyte is commaunded by all the .x. commaundements and in eue¦ry of them. Yf thou wylt haue of examples of charyte ye shalte fynde in thexamplary. Quere .lxxv. a. b Charite is so noble a ver¦tue that it is cause & moder of all good ver¦tues / wtout it for nothynge seche we other vertues. Vn. aug. Caritas est causa & ma¦ter oim virtutū q̄ se disit frustra habent{ur} ce¦tera si aūt ad sit habent{ur} oīa. Charyte is cau¦se of vertues / for whan we faste / or whan we do almesse / or whā we do ony good ope¦racion god is the cause & the same good de¦de is done for the charyte and loue of hym. in obeyenge vnto his cōmaundementes / to thende to be vnyed and coniunct wt him yt is that he dwell with vs & we with hym. Vnde .j. ioh̄. iiij Deus caritas est: & qui ma¦net in caritate in deo manet: et deus in eo. Et ioh̄. xv. Qui manet in me et ego in eo / hic fert fructū multū. qr sine me nichil pote¦stas facere. Also whan we loue our neygh∣bour and yt we do hȳ good in his nede god is the cause for it is for his sake / & therfore charyte is cause of vertues. The which cha¦ryte is contemned in al the cōmaundemen¦tes of god. Also charyte is moder of vertu∣es / for in lykewyse as chyldrē procedeth of the moder & haue theyr nourysshement & and techynge / euen in lykewyse ye vertues procedeth of charyte & ben done for ye loue of god / wherfore it is sayd ye moder of ver∣tues / & in ye thynge where charyte lacketh no goostly good is founde / & where it is all goodnes there resteth. Aug. Vbi est cari∣cas quid est qd possit obesse / vbi aūt non est qd est qd possit prodesset. Without charyte we ne may walke after god. Vn̄ amb. Si cut sine via nullus {per}uenit quo tendit / ita si¦ne caritate q̄ dicitur via nō possimus recte ire. Also charyte is ye fountayn of vertues. Vn̄fulgēti{us} e{pre}s dicit {quod} caritas est fōs oīm vtutūet origo bonorū munimē egregium via q̄ ducit ad celū in caritate qui ābulant nec errare poterit nec timere / i{pre}a dirigit / i{pre}a {pro}tegit / ipsa {per}ducit ad regnū eternum. Charyte is the foūtayne of all vertues for by it they ben aroused / growe / fructyfy / & encrease. It is the natyuyte of al goodnes & the garnysshȳge of noblesse. For by it mā is ryche & full of goostly goodes / & lyft vp in noblesse fast by god / it is ye way yt ledeth vnto heuen & wtout it we ne may go thider He yt walketh by charyte can not go out of the way ne drede. Charyte adresseth / defen¦deth & ledeth ye ryght way. Also charyte is ye rote of al vertues. In lykewyse as sayth saynt Austyn the wordes of the appostle .j. ad thy .vj. Sicut radix oīm malorū est cu∣piditas / ita radix oīm bonorum est caritas. The rote of the tre be it good or yll exten∣de the humour / her bounte / or malyce by ye braunches and boughes / and also maketh them to growe and to multyply after his nature. And in lykewise as couetyse ye whi¦che is rote of all euyll extendeth her maly∣ce in all synnes / in lykewyse charyte ye whi¦che is the rote of all goodnes and vertues
extendeth her bounte and valour by al ver¦tues and maketh them to growe / to mul∣teplye / and to bere fayre floures / and good fruytes. For the begynnynge / the cause / & the rote wherfore a persone dooth good de¦des as the werkes of mercy. It is by cha∣ryte for the loue of god. And yf ony suppor¦te the imperfeccyon and the pouerte of his neyghbour / yt is for the loue of god by cha∣ryte. Vn ad gal. vi. Alter alterius onera portate et sic ad īplebitis legem christi. And yf he counceyle & conforte his neyghboure that is by charyte. Vn̄ .i. ad tessallo .v. Cō¦solamini in inuicem et edificate alterutrū. And yf he do iustyce in yeldynge euery mā his owne / and yf he kepe veryte wtout lyen¦ge / & yf he be humble without pride / chaste without lechery / all is doone for the loue of god in obeynge vnto hym. Vn̄ gregorius. Amor dei nun{quam} estociosus / operatur enī magna si est / si autem operari renuit amor non est. Euery good dede ought to be done in god / & for the loue of hym / for no vertue bereth good fruyte before god yf it be not done vpon ye rote of charyte. Vnge grego. Non habet ramus aliquid viriditatis nisi maneat in radice caritatis. Et Iheronim{us} dicit {quod} alia inter fructus spūs debuit habe¦re primatum nisi caritas sine qua cetere vir¦tutes non reputabunt{ur} esse virtutes ex qua nascuntur omnia bona. B. ¶Charyte is a tre that bereth none yll fruyte / but bereth all fayre floures and all fayre fruytes so that it is moche worthy to be praysed / loued / & haūted. That is to say He the which hath charyte declyneth from all euyll & dooth all good operacyons. Iux¦ta illud psalmus. Declina a malo & fac bo¦num. We fynde no peeres in an apple tree ne crabbes or medelers in a plomme tree. for it is a good tree that bereth good fruy∣te. Vnde mathei .vi. Non potest arbor bo¦na malos fructus facere. Also there is noo thefte / lechery. &c. foūde in a good persone Also he the whiche hath charyte is not en∣uyous of the welthe of his neyghbour. For saynt Poule sayth .i. ad corin. xiii. Caritas non emulatur. Also he the whiche hath the herte enroted in charyte bereth good fruyt Vn̄ luce .vi. Ne{que} enim de spinis colligunt ficus / ne{que} de rubo vindemiant vuam. In a thorne men fynde noo fygges / for it is a bytter tree / in lykewyse as is enuye. The fruyte of a tre of enuy is bytter and euyll. For the enuyous ne dooth but euyll vnto his neyghboures. And the fruyte of the tre of charyte is swete and good / for he ye whi∣che hath charyte ne dooth but good / also he the whiche hath charyte ne speketh none yl wordes / and the enuyous is to the contra¦ry. Vnde mathei .xii. et luce .vi. Bonus ho¦mo de bono thesauro cordis profert bona & malus homo de malo thesauro profert ma¦la. Also in lykewise as men knowe a tre by the fruyte that it bereth / in lykewise dooth a man a persone by his operacyons. Vnde luce .vi. Vna que{que} arbor de fructo suo co¦gnoscitur. Et mathei duodecimo. Ex fru∣ctu enim arbor cognoscitur. Et mathei se∣ptimo. A fructib{us} eorum cognoscetis eos. A man can not say that a persone is chaste whan he is founde in doynge lechery. Vn∣de mathei duodecimo. Progenies vipera¦rum quomodo potestis bona loqui cum si∣tis mali. Also that man or woman the whi¦che hath charyte enioyeth and delyteth hȳ in all goodnes / in all welthe / in all beaute / and in all good operacyons and in veryte. Vn .i. corinthios decimotercio. Caritas concaudet veritati. Also he enioyeth hym for to to se the goodnes of his neyghboure as humylyte / pacyence / chastyte / deuocy∣on / sanctyte. &c. Also he is sory and dysplea¦saunt of the harme and afflyccyon of his neyghbours after the saynge of the appo¦stle ad ro. xii. Gaudere cū gaudentib{us} & fle¦re
cum flentibus. Also he the whiche hath charyte hath no Ioye in hym selfe that he haue ony synne: or yf he go out of ye way Vnde .i. corin. xiii. Caritas non gaudet su¦per iniquitatem. And the enuyous is vnto the contrary. Also he the whiche hath cha∣ryte thynketh non yll / for he hath good con¦scyence. Vnde .i. corin. xiii. Caritas non co¦gitat malum. He loueth his neyghbour as hymselfe / and he ne wylleth euyll vnto hȳ no more than vnto hymselfe. And therfore he ne dooth detraccyon ne mockery / and ye enuyous dooth the contrary. Also charyte ne may do none yll / for in it is nothynge cō¦trary. Vnde .i. corin. xiii. Caritas nō agit perperam / idest aliquid peruersum. For it is all good as it is sayd. Non cogitat ma∣lum. Non est ambiciosa. He the whiche ha¦the charyte is not enuyous to haue ye good of another / but yeldeth vnto euery man yt the whiche is his. Also it hath no drede ser∣uyle ne worldly / for he ne dredeth that yll come vnto him for to sustayne & to kepe ve¦ryte and bounte. He is not as the auarycy∣ous that dredeth to lese his goodes & to of¦fende the worlde. Vnde august. Perfecta caritas nec cupiditatem seculi nec timorem Per istas duas ianuas intrat et regnat īi¦micus. Et legitur .i. ioh̄. iiii. Timor non est ī caritate sed perfecta caritas foras mittit ti¦morem: quia aūt timet non est perfectus in caritate. Also he the whiche hath charite be¦reth pacyently for the loue of god aduersy∣te / sykenes / and pouerte. Vnde .i. ad corin. xiii. Caritas non irritatur oīa suffert / oīa substinet paciens benigna est. &c. Charyte is benygne vnto all in generall / for it yel∣de the good agaynst the euyll. Secundum illud luce .vi. Diligite inimicos vestros be¦nefacite his qui oderūt vos / benedicite ma¦ledicentibus vobis et orate pro calumnian¦tibus vos. Loue your ennemyes / do good vnto those the whiche hateth you / blysse them the whiche doo curse you / praye for those the whiche dyspyseth you. Et legit{ur} ad ro. xii. Benedicite persequentibus vos / bn̄¦dicite & nolite maledicere. Blysse ye those yt persecuteth you / blysse ye and curse ye in no wyse. Also he the whiche hath chary∣te is not proude for ony good that god vn¦to hym hath gyuen. Quia caritas non in∣flatur. The charitatyfe is humble / swete & replenysshed with all good vertues ye whi¦che ben kept by charite. And therfore saynt Poule sayeth illud .i. ad corin. xvi. Vigila∣te state in fide viriliter agite & confortami¦ni et omnia opera vestra in caritate fiant. Wake you and holde you in the faythe / la∣boure ye strongely and conforte you / & all your operacyons ben done in charite. Et le¦git{ur} ad ephe. iii. Caritate radicati & funda¦ti vt possitis comprehendere cū omnibus sanctis que sit latitudo longitudo sublimi∣tas et profundū. Be ye enroted & founded in charyte to thende that ye may comprehē¦de with all the sayntes what is the longe∣nes or lengthe / or the largenes and brede / or the heyght and the depenes of charyte. The largenes of the tree of charyte is to lo¦ue not onely god and our frendes but also our enmyes. Vnde {pre}s. Tatum mandatū tuū custodire nimis. The lengthe of chary¦te is perseueraunce in good operacions vn the laste ende. The hyghnes of charyte is esperaunce to haue remuneracyon in para¦dyse of good dedes. The perfundyte & de∣penes is to beleue that the goodes that we haue cometh of god occulte the whiche we ne may se. C. ¶Without charyte no good espyrituel ne may prouffyte vnto persones. For saynt Poule sayeth .i. ad corinthi. xiii. Si linguis hominum loquar et angelorum caritatem aūt nō habuero factus sum velut es sonās aut cymbalum timiens. That is for to vn∣derstande in englysshe after ye exposytour,
yf that I sholde speke as wysely as all the men in the worlde and the aungelles of he¦uen / and that by my tongue I myght con¦uerte all the nacyons of the Infydeles yf charyte lacke in me I may not be saued. My tongue is as he ye whiche stryketh vp∣on an heere or on a clocke / or as he that be¦teth the water / this prouffyteth nothynge as vnto the saluacyon. The wordes that saynt Poule speketh of hymself ben vnder¦stande of euery persone. Sequit{ur}. Et si ha¦buero prophetiam. And yf it were soo that I hadde the gyft of prophecye as Balaam the which sayd. Orietur stella ex iacob. Et si nouerim misteria omnia. And I knewe all the mysteryes and secretes of the newe and of the olde testament / and all the secre¦tes of god as dide Lucyfer. Et si habuero omnē scientiam et fidē. And yf I had all ye scyence of the bokes of the worlde / and all the faythe of crystendome. Et si distribue¦ro in cibos pauperum oēs facultates meas And yf I sholde gyue vnto the poore all ye goodes that I haue from peny to peny & yf I had an hondred. M. pownde. Et si tradidero corpus meum ita vt ardea. And yf I sholde gyue my body to soo many af∣flyccyons yt it sholde brenne as saynt Lau¦rence that was rosted / and yf I sholde fast breed and water euery day. Caritatē non habuero nichil michi prodest. All these thyn¦ges beforesayd sholde nothynge prouffyte as to the saluacyon yf I haue not charyte That is too knowe yf the loue of god or of my neyghbour defayled in me. That is to vnderstande yf I hated my neyghbour in desyrynge the losse of his goodes / as to be stollen or rauysshed / or the euyl of his body as to be bette / slayne / or other yll in brekyn¦ge ony of the commaundementes of god. Yf I sholde dye in suche estate without cor¦reccion and amendement I shal not be sa¦ued / for charyte defayleth in me. Caritas non cogitat malum. Charyte thynketh no¦ne yll. For it hathe an holy conscyence. B these thȳges aforesayd it appereth that a the lawe and the cōmaundementes of god dependeth of charite / the whiche is to loue god and his neyghbour. A. ¶How god defendeth in his commaun¦dementes all euyll wordes / thoughtes and operacyons. And there commaun¦deth all good operacyons .v. DAuid the prophete sayth in h psalter. Declina a malo & fa¦bonum. Declyne from euyll  is fro all euyll wordes / thoug¦tes / and operacions & do goo that is all good operacyons. For god it th commaundeth. Yf thou wilt knowe vnd What commaundements all euyll word ben defended. the answere. It behoueth  make dystynccyon yf thy wordes be agay¦ne ye dyleccyon of god / or agaynst yt of ma Yf they ben spoken by delyberacyon aye the dyleccyon of god a man breketh one o the thre fyrste commaundementes. For y suche wordes ben blasphemynge or swer¦ge vnprouffytably god them defendeth b wordes expresse in the seconde commaun¦demente. Ne iures vana per ipsum. An yf they ben wordes berynge honour vnt ydolles god it defendeth in the fyrste com¦maūdement. Nō adorabis deos alienos And yf they bere dyshonoure vnto the san¦ctyfycacyon of festes god them defende in the .iii. commaundement. Sabbata s¦fices. And yf suche wordes ben ayenst ye d¦leccōn of thy neyghbour. it behoueth to m¦ke dystyncyon of them. Yf they ben of fals wytnesse or lyenge god them defendeth  viii. cōmaūdemēt. Nō loq̄ris {con}tra {pro}ximi¦tuū falsum testimoniū. And yf they dysh¦nour fader or moder / god defēdeth thē in
fourthe commaundemente. Et venerare patres. And yf they ben wordes of threte∣nynge to bete or to sle his neyghboure god them defendeth in the .v. cōmaundement. Non sis occisor. And yf they ben of auary¦ce or pyllerye god them defendeth in the .vi commaundement. And yf they ben leche∣rous wordes god them defendeth in ye .vii. commaundement. In lykewyse god defē∣deth euyll thoughtes in his commaunde∣mentes. For yf they ben agaynst the dylec¦cyon of god they ben defended in one of ye thre fyrst commaundementes / in likewyse as it is sayd of yll wordes. And yf they ben agaynst his neyghour it behoueth to make dystynccōn of suche thoughtes. For yf they ben lecherous and that delectacion and de¦lyberacyon be therin of wyll for to accom∣plysshe the synne / god theym defendeth by wordes expres in the .ix. commaundement Non concupisces vxorē proximi tui. And yf they ben of auaryce / thefte / or couetyse god theym defendeth by wordes expres in the tenth commaundement. Deutero. v. Non concupisces rem proximi tui. And yf suche thoughtes be agaynst the honour of fader and moder god them defendeth in ye iiii. commaundement. And yf they wyll be¦te / slee / or do yll god them defendeth in the v. commaundement. &c. Morouer god de¦fendeth all euyll operacyōs in his cōmaun¦dementes. For in the commaundementes where as he defendeth all euyll thoughtes and wordes / by a greter reason he there de¦fendeth the cursed operacyons / & by wor∣des expres he them defendeth in four com¦maundementes. That is to vnderstande in the fyrst. Non adorabis deos alienos. & in the .v. Non sis occisor / & in the .vi. Nō furtū faties / & in the .vii. Nō mechaberis. B. ¶Also god commaundeth all good ope¦racyons in his commaundementes / & by wordes expres in two commaundemētes yt is to vnderstande in the thyrde. Sabata setifices / & in the .iiii. Et venerare patres And here a man sholde clerely vnderstāde & well note that in all the commaūdemen∣tes where god defendeth ne to de: ne to say ne to thynke euyll / he commaūdeth the op¦posyte / yt is to do / to say / & to thynke good as men may se where he defendeth. Ne wor¦shyp yu no ydoles & straunge goddes. Thā I commaūdethe yt thou worshyp one god onely. Ne sle not thy neyghbour ne hate hȳ ne do hym none yll. Than I commaunde the to loue hym. Ne do no lechery / than be yu chaste. And be thou no thefe: Than be yu lawfull. Ne loue not to moche the goodes of the worlde as doone the auarycyous / & kepe not to moche. Than be thou lyberall / & departe with theym. Be thou no lyer / ne fals wytnes berer. Than be verytable. &c. Ne speke yu none yll wordes in swerȳge ne ne lyenge / than brynge thou good wordes & true. Ne thynke thou none yll by auary∣ce / or lechery / & than thȳke wel these good thȳges. Also thou sholdest note that where god commaundeth the to do good operaci¦ons he the defendeth the contrary / yt is to do euyll operacyons. Verbi gratia. San¦ctifye and halowe the feestes commaūded Than doo thou no synnes ne operacyons wherby thou shalt dyshonour theym / loue thy faders & thy moders. Than hate thē them not / ne do them none yll. Honour thē Than dyshonour them not. Socour them Than fayle them not in theyr nede. &c. By these thynges aforesayd yu sholdest vnder∣stande than whan yu wylt not halowe the festes to go to goddes seruyce / as euen son¦ges / matyns / & masses yf it be feest cōmaū¦ded or solempnel / or whan yu wylt not go to ye holy water / to the sermons / & processyōs or whan yu wylt not honour thy faders / or do almesdedes & werkes of mercy to those the whiche haue nede / or whan thou wylte
do ne say ne thynke ye good that thou shol¦dest doo. Thou goest agaynst some of the commaundementes of god / and offendest by the synne the whiche is called obmyssy-yt is to leue a good dede vndone by slouthe And therfore thou shalte haue correccyon and punycyon / and god shall demaunde of the accompte at the day of Iugement / as it is wryten. Math. xxv. Esuriui et nō dedisti michi manducare. Sitiui et non de¦distis michi potum. &c. Ite maledicti in ignem eternum. I haue had honger and thou ne hast gyuen me to ete. I haue had thyrste and thou ne hast gyuen me to drȳ¦ke / and therfore accursed goo in to the fyre eternall. Those the whiche haue not wyl∣led to do the good operacyons / but vnto ye contrary haue done the yll shall be punys∣shed as thou shalt fynde by the example of Cayn the whiche slewe his broder Abell. Quere .lxxvi. a. Or of those ye whiche hath not wylled to brynge forthe good wordes but hath blasphemed and periured shal be also punysshed as thou shalte fynde by ex¦ample of the sone of a woman of Israell ye which was stoned for his blaspheme. Que¦re .lxii. a. Or of those the whiche haue thou∣ghte yll / as a woman the whiche was dam¦pned for a thought lecherous. Quere an hō¦dred. a. For to abredge those the whiche dys¦obeyeth vnto god by operacyon / worde / or thought shall be punysshed / in lykewyse as thou mayst se by many examples ye whi¦che be wryten here after in the examplary of the commaundementes of god. C. ¶Questyon vnder what commaunde¦mentes ben defended the .vii. deedly sȳ¦nes: and where ben cōmaunded the ver¦tues opposytes and contraryes .vi. THe prophete Ysaye sayeth in his fyr¦ste chapytre. Quiescite agere per∣uerse discite benefacere. Cease you rest you to do peruersly and ouerthwartly the syn∣nes and cursednesses / for god them defen∣deth. Lerne to do well thynges vertuous for god them commaundeth. For to vnder¦stande well the floure of that thynge that god wylleth & commaundeth / a man shol¦de know that he defendeth in his cōmaun∣dementes the seuen sinnes mortalles with all theyr braunches and dependaunces / & there commaundeth the vertues opposy∣tes and contraryes in lykewyse as it shall be declared here afterwarde. ¶And fyrst for to knowe vnder what cōmaundement is defended euery synne it nedeth to consy¦der in bryef the intencyon of god in gyuyn¦ge the sayd commaūdementes / and the in¦tencyon of those the whiche go vnto the cō¦trary. Fyrst yf thou demaunde where is de¦fended pryde thou shalt haue answer gene¦rall and after pertyculer. I answere ye ge¦rally that pryde is defended in all & in eue¦ry of the .x. commaundementes of god / for whan thou brekest ony thou commytte inobedyence / and all inobedyence is not  out pryde. Also pryde is defēded generally in all the .x. commaūdementes of god. Ve¦ba gracia. Whan thou worshyppest ye ydol¦les / or whan thou swerest vnprouffytably or whan thou brekest the feestes / or ony of the .x. commaundementes thou shewest a¦pertly that thou ne wylt so moche lowe the & humble the vnder god as to obey vnto ye commaundemente that thou brekest / so ye arte inobedient and proude togyders / and therfore pryde is defended generally in al the commaundementes. Also all mortal synne and all offence is commytted by the synnes of transgressyon or of obmyssyon And all the synnes of transgressyon or of obmyssyon be not without inobedyence / inobedyence is not without pryde as it is sayd. So euery persone the whiche cōmyt¦teth
ony mortall synne is proude and in ly¦kewyse inobedyent and soo breketh some commaundementes / but specyally pryde the whiche is anenst god is defended in the fyrst cōmaundement / and yt the whiche is anenst his neyghboure is defended in the iiij commaundement. Secondely yf thou demaunde where auaryce is defended / it behoueth to consyder the entencyon & ope¦racyon of the auarycyous / for yf he loue ye goodes more than god and aboue hym he ydolatryseth and breketh the fyrst cōmaun¦dement. And yf he werke on the holy daye by couetyse in doynge suche operacyon he ne sanctyfyeth suche holy day as he ought to do and breketh the thyrde commaunde∣ment. And whan he taketh the goodes of another vniustly in ony maner he breketh the syxte commaundement. And whan he ne taketh them in dede but by delyberacy∣on and consentement of reason them wol∣de haue he breketh the .x. commaundemēt Thyrdly of slouthe is behoueth to consider that he the whiche is slouthfull to accom∣plysshe that / that god commaūdeth / or de∣lygent to do that that he defendeth he offē¦deth in that commaundement where the sayd slouthe or contradyccion is made / as yf he be slouthfull to praye / to serue and to worshyp god after ye faythe receyued in ba¦ptysme he offendeth ayenst ye fyrst cōmaun¦dement / or yf yt sayd slouthe be aenst god or his sayntes in the dayes of the feest com¦maunded to sanctyfy the sayd feestes he of¦fendeth agaynst the thyrde cōmaundemēt And yf the sayd slouthe were agaynst the dyleccyon commaūded anenst his faders and neyghbours he shold offende agaynst the fourth commaundement. Fourthly ye synne of Yre and yt of enuye ben defended in the fyfth cōmaundement / and all theyr braunches and dependences / as shal be de¦clared in that commaundement. Fyfthly of glotony it is to consyder the cause fynall of the excesse / for whan a gredy gloton de∣lyteth and loueth his wombe and body mo¦re than god and aboue hym he cōmytteth ydolatry and breketh the fyrst commaun∣dement as in that shall be declared / and yf he breke the fastes of the solempnytees / or that he excede in drynke or in meet in the feestes commaunded he breketh the thyrde commaundement. Sabbata sanctifices. And at all tymes that he nouryssheth his body strōgely in so moche that it moeueth him to cōmyt lechery he offendeth agaynst the seuenth commaundement / for glotoni and lechery ben systers. Syxtely all ye sor∣tes and maners of lechery the whiche ben commytted in operacyon ben defended in the seuenth commaundemēt / and those of the wyll in the .ix. commaundment. And a man sholde note that in all the commaun¦dementes where god defendeth the sinnes he commaundeth the vertues opposytes & contraryes / as who wolde saye. Be thou not proude / than be thou humble. Be thou not slouthfull / than delygent. Be thou not to moche holdynge ne auarycyous / than yt thou be lyberall. Be thou not enuyous / thā charytable. Ne yrefull / than pacyent. Ne gloton / than sobre. Ne lecherous / than cha¦ste. So it appereth that god commaūdeth the vertues in his commaundementes & defendeth the synnes / the whiche synnes ben too be blamed / and the condycyons of those the whiche commytteth theym that here foloweth. D. ¶Here after foloweth the .vii. mortall synnes defended in the cōmaundemen¦tes of god.
¶Who so wyll knowe the offenders By the braunches of the seuen synnes I shall reherce them by orders And fyrst with pryde that all yll begynnes ¶Of pryde. ¶The proude man is dysobedyent Ypocryte / and grete in bostynge Apte to euery inconuenyent Contemnynge & also presumynge ¶Of auaryce. ¶The auarycyous is a thefe Full of gyle / and grete defrauder Vsury and symony to hym is lefe Sacrylege is he / and also rauyssher ¶Of slouthe. ¶The slouthfull man is also musynge Ydle / neclygent / gyuynge no force Vayne / tydeous / delytynge inslepynge Sluggysshe / vnlusty / an vnthryfty corce. ¶Of enuye. ¶The enuyous is full of hate A grete detractour and full of yll Dysposed euer to make debate Full of malyce and euyll wyll ¶Of wrathe. The enuyous is a grete thretener Iniuryous and blasphematour Also he is a murderer Dysdaynous / cryer / & full of murmour ¶Of glotony. ¶The gloton deliteth in drynke & fedȳge Encombrynge his stomacke with excesse Full seldon sobre / or yet fastynge. Puttynge his body to no dystresse ¶Of lechery. ¶The lecherous is a fornycatour ¶Aduoutrer / and defloratour Sacrylege / and rauysshour Sodomyte and incestour ¶The auctour. ¶Who so wyll do his saluacyon Fle the mortall synnes seuen In auoydynge of dampnacyon Yf he wyll enheryte heuen. ¶It is wryten ecclesiastici .xxj. Quasi a facie colubri fuge peccata si accesseris ad il∣la suscipient te dentes leonis dentes illius interficientes aīas hominum. Fle the syn∣nes as frome the face of a serpent / yf thou approche vnto them they shall take the wt lyons tethe / ye whiche ben the tethe of that serpent whiche is synne / the whiche tethe sleeth spyrytuall by dethe of gylt the soule of man. There is not a worse heed than is the heed of a serpent as sayth ye sage eccle. xxv. Non est caput nequius super caput colubri. For his tethe / his tongue / & brethe ben venymous / the whiche enuenymeth & maketh the persones to deye. Also for to speke spyrytually there is nothynge wor vnto the soule than mortal synne / the com¦pany of it is nothynge worth / for it ledeth vnto dampnacyon and perdycyon. Vnde Ezechielis .xviij. Anima que peccauere ipsa morietur. The soule the whiche hathe commytted mortall synne shall deye spy∣rytually of dethe eternall without extyn¦guysshement yf it be not medycyned by pe¦naunce. A. ¶Here foloweth the fyrst commaunde¦ment of god .vi. ONe onely god thy creatour Thou shalt serue / & in hym beleue And loue hym best with all honour As nere as grace wyll gyue the leue Vno credo deū. Beleue in one god onely and loue hym ryght parfytely. It is euyll taken to them that hath done vnto the con¦trary / in lykewyse as we may fynde by ex∣amples. Quere .lvij. c. d. e. In this cōmaun¦dement many thynges ben commaunded and defended.
B. ¶That it is commaunded to beleue in onely god in trynyte & to worshyp him .vi. IT is wryten deutero .vi. Audi Israel / dominus deus vester de{us} vnus est. O Israell your lorde god is one god. Et legitur marci xii. Vnus est deus et non alius preter eum. One god is / and there ne is none other but he. Of necessy¦te of helthe it is re¦quysyte to all per∣sones for too put theyr faythe & cre∣dēce in god ye crea¦ture / and not in y∣dolles and thȳges created. For it is wryten that without faythe it is Impossy¦ble to please god. Vnde ad hebreos vndeci¦mo capitulo. Sine fide impossibile est pla∣cere deo. And therfore he commaundeth vs too beleue in one onely god in trynyte. That is to knowe in god the fader al puys¦saunt / in lykewyse as sayth saynt Peter. Credo in vnum deum patrem omnipotē¦tem. And in Ihesu cryst his dere sone / in ly¦kewyse as sayth saynt Andrewe. Et in ie¦sum christum filium eius vnicum dominū nostrum. Also in the holy goost in lykewy∣se as sayth saynt Barthylmewe. Credo ī spiritum sanctum. These thre persones bē one onely god in one vnyte and symplycy¦te / and not many goddes / for they ben in one selfe substaunce and nature / in one sel∣fe myght / dyuynyte / and glory. Anathase sayeth. Fides autem catholica hec est / vt vnum deum in trinitate / et trinitatem in vnitate veneremur. The faythe catholy∣ke is that we honour one god in trynyte & the trynyte in vnyte. And it behoueth not to confounde the persones ne to separate ye substaunce. Ne{que} confundētes personas ne{que} substantiam separantes For they ben thre persones deuysed and dystyngued ye whiche ben in one substaunce and nature / in one vnyte and symplycyte as it is sayd the whiche ben one onely god. And therfo∣re it is here commaunded to beleue in hym to worshyp / honour / and serue hym / and to gyue the dyuyne honour the whiche ap∣perteyneth vnto hym and not to ydolles. Our blyssed sauyour and redemptour Ie¦sus gyueth it clerely by wordes to vnder∣stande the whiche ben wryten Mathei .iiij. Dominum deum tuum adorabis et illi so li seruies. Thou shalte worshyp thy lorde god and hym alonely serue. Also it is wry∣ten deuterono .vi. Dominum deum tuum timebis et ipsi so li seruies. Thou shalt dre¦de thy lorde god and hym all onely serue. ¶Examples to worshyp one onely god in trynyte and not many It is wryten in the xviij. chapitre of Genese that as Abraham was at the dore of his tabnacle he lyfte vp his eyen and sawe dyuynely thre aungels in semblaunce of thre persones the whiche de noteth the fader / the sone / and the holy goost / he ranne agaynst them and worship¦ped them in erthe and sayd. Domine sun ueni gratiam in oculis tuis ne trāseas ser∣uum tuum sed afferam pauxillum aque et lauētur pedes vestri. &c. Tres vidit & vnū adorauit. He sawe thre persones and wor∣shypped one onely god in trynyte. ¶Vn∣to the example of Abraham we shall adou¦re and worshyppe one onely god in tryny∣te. ¶Another example wryten in ye .xxiiij. chapytre of Exody that our lorde sayd vn-Moyses. Mounte in too the mountayne thou and Aaron / and Madab / and Abyn / and thre score auncyent men of Israell & ye shall worshyp a ferre of. ¶Another ex∣ample in Exody that the chyldren of Isra¦ell
vnderstode that god them vesited and regarded the tourmentes that Pharaon dyde vnto theym / than they fell prostrate on the erthe and worshypped hym. Vnde exodi. iii. Audiētes filij israel {quod} deus eos visitaret et respiceret afflictionem eorum et adorauerunt prom in terram. &c. ¶An other example wryten in the fyrste chapy∣tre of the fyrst boke of kynges that a man named Helcana departed from his cyte on the dayes establysshed too thende that he sholde worshyp & doo sacryfyce vnto god. ¶Another example wryten in the .ix. cha∣pytre of Neemie that after that ye chyldren of Israell came agayne frome the capty∣uyte of Babylon they separated themselfe from people straūgers / and also put them in fastynges / they cladde them in sackes / they put erthe vpon theyr heedes and wor¦shypped theyr lorde god. ¶Another exam¦ple wryten in the fyrste chapytre of Iob yt whan the sayd Iob had herde the wordes of the messengers the whiche came to tell hym that his goodes were lost and his so∣nes slayne / he lyft hym vp and fell prostra¦te vnto the erthe and worshypped god & sayd. Nudus egressus sū de vtero matris mee / & nudus reuerar illuc. ¶Another ex¦ample wryten in the .vi. chapytre of Dany¦ell the whiche was commaunded of kynge Dayre that none ne sholde demaunde ony thȳge of god ne of man by .xxx. dayes / but alonely of the sayd kynge Dayre. And Da¦nyell ne dyde nothynge & bowed his knees thre tymes on a daye and worshypped his lorde god. ¶Another example wryten in the seconde chapytre of ye euangelyst saynt Mathewe that whan the kynges that ca∣me fro the oryent entred in to the hous & founde the chylde and the vyrgyn Mary his moder they yode on theyr knees & wor¦shypped hym. ¶Another example in the .x chapytre of the gospell of saynt Iohn that a man yt had be blynde from his natyuy was enlumyed of Ihesus and after wo¦shypped hym. ¶Another example wryte Mathei .viij. & marci .j. that whan Iesu descended from the mountayne a mesel a lepre came to hym and worshypped him and sayd. Domine si vis potest me mun¦dare. My lorde yf thou wylte thou may heele me. ¶Another example wryten M¦thei .xxviij. that whan the appostles cam to our lorde after yt he was rysen they wo¦shypped hym. ¶Another example write in the .iiij. chapitre of the gospelles of sayn Mathewe that our lorde sayd vnto Sa¦than as he tempted hym. Thou shalt wo¦shyppe thy lorde god. Dn̄m deum tuu adorabis et illi soli seruies. ¶Another exā¦ple wryten in the .xxij. chapytre of the A¦pocalyps that after that saynt Iohan ha seen the reuelacyons of god he fell before fete of the aungell that had shewed theyr to hym to thende that he myght worshyp hym. And the aungell sayd / kepe the fro doynge yt. And afterwarde foloweth wo¦shyp god. Thou shalt be ryght vnnatura to dysknowlege thy god the whiche is t creatour of the heuen and of the erthe / g¦uerneth all the worlde and purueyeth vn¦to all creatures all thynges as to them be necessarye. Also thou sholdest be ydolat to giue vnto the ydolles and straunge go¦des the honoure the whiche apperteyne vnto the fourmer and creatoure of vs all The scryptures sayeth that the name  god is louable from the oryent tyll vnto occydent. Vnde psalm{us}. Asolis ortu vs ad occasum laudabile nomē domini. ¶A so thou sholdest be without entendemen and naturall reason for too thynke that stone or a symulacre hathe puyssaunce f to gyue the helthe in thy sekenesse or para¦dyse at the ende of thy lyfe. Also force or p¦yssaunce procedeth of the creatour as it is
wryten Iohannis .j. Omnia per ipsum fa¦ta sunt / et sine ipso factum est nichil. And therfore beleue in one onely god in trinyte and yf thou therin be ferme and stedfast yu shalte be worthy to doo myracles as dyde a preste the whiche entred within the fyre for to approue the faythe and was not brēt Quere .lxi. B. ¶Another example how a good man stedfast in god requyred hym that a mountayne myght be remoeued & chaūged frome one place in to another for to conferme the faythe / & his request was herde. Quere .lxj. a. Vnto this purpose it is wryten Mathei .xxj. Amen dico vobis si habueritis fidem et non hesitaueritis et si monti huic dixeritis tolle et iactare te ī ma¦re fiet. Certaynly I say you yf it be so that ye haue had faythe without doubtynge / & that haue sayd vnto this mountayne take the away and caste the in to the see / it shal be doone. C. ¶Secondly it is defended to beleue in ydolles & straunge goddes / in errours / and folysshe credences .vj. IT is wryten in the auncyent te∣stament that god defendeth al yl operacions / thoughtes / and wor¦des of infydelyte the whiche the∣se ydolatres speketh / & thynketh agaynst the faythe. Vnde exodi .xx. c. Nō habebis deos alienos coram me. Nō facies tibi sculpile ne{que} omnem similitudinem que est in celo desuper / et que in terra / nec oīa eorum que sunt in aquis sub terra non ado¦rabis ea ne{que} colles. That is to lay. Thou shalt not haue straunge goddes before me Thou ne shalt make ydoldes ne statues ne symylytudes what so euer it be in the skye on hye as the sonne and the mone that ma¦ny haue worshypped vnfaythfully / nor in other thynges the whiche ben on the erthe of the thynges the whiche ben in / waters / ne vnder the erthe. Thou ne shalt worshyp those thynges ne gyue vnto theym the dy∣uyne honour / that is that ye whiche is wry¦ten before. ¶One onely god with all thyn herte thou shalte serue / and in hym beleue. Thou shalte loue hym with all thyn herte and also thou shalt honour hym. Maledyc¦cyon cometh on those the whiche wyll not beleue in god / and the whiche maketh ydol¦les vnto whome they adiust and put theyr faythe. Vnde deuteronomie .xxvij. Male∣dictus homo qui facit scultilie et conflatile abhominationem domini opus manuum artificium. And it is wryten Leuitici .xix. Nolite conuerti ad ydola nec deos confla∣tiles facietis vobis: ego dominus deus ve∣ster. Conuert you not vnto ydolles / confla¦tyles and sculptures / that is that ye make no goddes by blowynges and grauynges as dyde the chyldren of Israel whan Moy¦ses yode to fetche ye commaundementes in the mountayne / they wende to haue made a god of golde and of syluer & they made a calfe the whiche they worshypped & daun∣ced about. Than Moyses was wrothe of the sayd ydolatryse and of the daunces / & he kest doune the tables wherin was wry∣ten the commaundementes and brake thē he made to cease the sayd daunces and cal¦led on his party all those the whiche were not there to consentynge vnto whome he sayd that they sholde put vnto dethe al thē the whiche hadde ydolatrised and daunced and that the sonne ne shold spare the fader ne other parent / for in so doynge they shol∣de consacre theyr handes in obeyenge vn∣to god / and so it was doone. For of the peo¦ple of god the whiche hadde so ydolatrysed and daunced there were .xxx. thousande slayne / and by the wyl of god as thou shalt fynde. Exodi .xxxij. Vocem cantantium ego audio dicit moyses. Et cum appropin∣quasset
ad castra vidit vitulum & choreas Iratus{que} valde proiecit de manu tabulas et confregit eas. ¶Questyon. To knowe yf that it be offence to make and worshyp the ymages of the sayntes of paradyse for that before it hath be sayd. Non facies ti∣bi scultile / nec omnem similitudinem que est in celo de super. &c. The answere. We sholde not worshyp the ymages in lyke wi¦se as the thynge that we adoure / for that sholde be ydlatrye / but we worshyp other thynge that the ymage representeth / as so me saynt. The ymage is alonely the token of the thynge that we worshyppe / wherfo¦re we offende not. Many folkes haue bro∣ken this commaundement and yet dooth / as ben the ydolatres the whiche worshyp∣peth and serueth vnto ydolles and gyueth vnto them ye dyuine honour / theyr faythe / esperaunce / and loue that they sholde gy∣ue vnto the creatoure. These ydolatres bē excommunycate by the sentence of ryght. It appereth also by many examples that they deyed of an euyll dethe / as Egeas the whiche made to crucyfye saynt Andrewe. Quere .lvij. c. And Dyascorus the whiche beheded his doughter saynt barbara .lvij. e ¶Also the prouoste Tarquyn / the kynge of Perse. Cosydore. Quyncyen. Maxymy¦en. &c. In lykewyse as men shall fynde in ye examplary in the fyrst commaundement .lvij. f. Also the Iewes the whiche wold not beleue in our sauyour and redemptour Ie¦su cryst / and wyll not worshyppe hym / ser¦ue hym / and honoure hym / and abydeth the cursed Antechryste transgresseth this commaundement and gooth vnto dāpna¦cyon and perdycion perdurable. Also these sarazyns the whiche worshippeth Mahou¦met the whiche was a man false and here¦tyke the whiche is dampned breketh this commaundement. Also the apostates the whiche leueth theyr crystendome / or relygi¦ous theyr relygyon / or other the whiche l¦ueth ony thȳges that they haue promysed to kepe in crystyanyte breketh this cōman¦dement. ¶Example of people the whiche hath ben apostates .lviij. a. b. Also wytches and sorceresses the whiche rideth vpon bro¦mes / worshyppeth ye bucke / and haue oyn∣tementes and thynges dyabolykes ben ex¦communycate of the sentence of right and synneth mortally and the case is reserued vnto ye bysshoppes. ¶Example of a Iewe sorcyer the whiche mysse counceyled Theo¦phyle. Quere .lvij. b. Those ye whiche vseth wytchcraftes sholde be gretely punysshe Vt habetur extra de sortilegijs. Ex tua {quod} si imperfectiones sortilegas faciunt e¦si ex celo & sole simplicitate hoc faciunt g¦uissimum peccatum incurtum. Et si sacer¦dos ex simplicitate hoc fecerit per annum debet segregari ab altaris misterio. Laic∣vero si hoc fecerit quadraginta diebus a ¦munione fidelium priuetur et excōicetur Clericus vero officio & beneficio priuari p¦test vt pm ī decreto .xxvj. Questione .v. wt dr. Non licet cristiano gentilium tradi¦nes obseruare vel elementa colore. &c. Al Inuocatours of the deuyll of hell and tho¦se the whiche of him demaūdeth helpe and ayde and wylleth his alyaunce / or the wh¦che maketh couenaunt with hym / or tho the whiche vnto hym maketh sacryfyce? honour / and those the whiche maketh hym ymages / or those ye whiche of hym demaū¦de answere of ony questyon / suche people ben excommunycate by sentence of rygh and offendeth gretely. Also chermours the whiche gyueth helthe and ayde by words incredybles / dyabolykes and folysshe ¦dences / or dyuynours the whiche demaun¦deth of ye deuyll by reuelacyon of ony thyn¦ge secrete / or ye trouthe of thynges to com¦breketh this commaundemēt. And those ye whiche gooth vnto charmours for to be
led / or vnto dyuyners to haue reuelacyon & leueth god vnto whome suche thȳges ap¦perteneth sȳneth mortally & renyeth theyr faythe / cresme / and baptisme / for they had renounced the deuyll in saynge. Abrenū∣tio sathane et om̄ibus pōpis eius. And they therto retorne. After the olde lawe the dy∣uyners were stoned and put to dethe. Vn¦de legit{ur} leui .xx. Vir siue mulier in quibus phitonic{us} vl diuinationis fuerit morte mo¦riatur lapidibus obruent es / sanguis eorū sit su{per}illos. Example of charmours ye char¦meth hogges in tyme of mast yt wolues ne¦ete them. Quere .lx. a. ¶Example of kȳge Ochozyas that sent to seke coūceyle of his sekenes at Beezebub / and euyl came vnto hym / and his messengers were brent with fyre of heuen. Quere .lx. b. Raymōde sayth that regulerly all suche dyuynement is de∣fended & cursed of god and of holy chyrche as is ydolatry & infydelyte. Vnto god alo∣nely apperteyneth to knowe the thynges secretes and to come / and suche people la∣boureth to knowe them and also graūteth the dyuyne thynges whiche apperteyneth vnto god. The prophete Iheremye sayth yt a man sholde not here suche sorte of people Vn̄ iheremie. Nolite audire prophetas ve¦stros diuinos & sonniatores & augures ma¦leficos qui dicunt vobis / non seruietis regi¦babilonis qr mendaciū prophetant vt lōge faciāt vos et pereatis. &c. Also people of fo¦lysshe beleue that putteth & adiusteth fay∣the in crye of byrdes / or in the metynge of beestes or those that holdeth paynyms cu∣stomes as those the whiche kepeth the da∣yes egypcyens or the kalendes of Ianuary in the whiche they do make gyftes the one to the other in the begynnynge of the good yere in hauynge many folysshe credences contrary vnto the faythe catholyke / suche thynges ben contrary vnto the helthe of ye soules & shold be left. Vn̄ aug. xxvj. q̄re .vij Non obseruetis dies qui dicūtur egyptia∣ci / aut kalendas Ianuarij in quibus cādel∣le et quedam cōmessationes / et ad inuicem dona donantur quasi in principio boni āni facti augurio aut reliquas menses et tem∣pora dies ve aut annos aut lune et mensis solis{que} cursus hora / et qui has quascū{que} di∣uinationes aut facta / aut auguria / aut ten¦dit / aut contendit / aut consētit obseruatio∣nibus / aut credit / aut ad eorū domum va∣dit / aut in sua domo introducit vt interro∣get / sciat se cristianam fidem et baptismum preuaricasse / et paganum et apostatam et dei inimicum / iram dei in eternum incurre re nisi penitentia ecclesia emēdatus deo re∣reconsilietur. ¶Example of a relygyous man and of a woman ye whiche put faythe in the songe of a cuckowe / and yll came to them. Quere .lx. c. d. All maner of mysbele¦uynge people sholde drede temporall puny¦cyon and eternall dampnacyon. It is wry¦ten deuteronomie .xi. Cauete ne forte de∣cipiatur cor vestrum & recedatis a domino seruiatis{que} dijs alienis et adoretis eos / ira∣tus{que} dominus claudat celum et pluuie nō descendant / nec terra det germen suū {per}ea¦tis velociter de terra optima quam domi∣nus daturus est vobis. Beware lest by ad∣uenture your herte be deceyued and that ye ne departe you from the lorde / and that ye serue not vnto straunge goddes / & that ye ne worshyp theym for drede that your lorde be not wrothe / and that he close not ye heuens / and that the rayne descende not and the erthe ne gyue his fruyte / and that ye perysshe not hastely from the londe that almighty god sholde gyue vnto you. They the whiche hath broken and froyssed this commaundement sholde not dyspayre thē but they ought for to do penaunce & they shall be saued how greuous so euer the syn¦nes ben the whiche they haue commytted ¶Example in Theophyle whiche renyed
god and he was saued by penaunce. Que∣re .lviii. b. Another example of a relygyous the whiche was apostate and harlot & she was saued by penaunce. Quere .cxiiij. a. Al¦so those ye whiche desyreth to be saued shol¦de take the condycion of the pylgrym of pa¦radyse the whiche ben wryten after .xlv. a. b. c. Also people incredibles sholde drede to be sent in to the fyre of hell there to be brēt eternally / the whiche is a tourment moost cruell as it is wrytē afterwarde. q̄re .xlix. b. ¶Example of a preest prynce of the ydol∣les the whiche is in the fyre of hell. Quere .lvij. a. A. ¶Thyrdly all the artycles of the fayth ben here commaunded to beleue in lyke¦wyse as the chyrche beleueth and hol∣deth .vii. ANathasius sayth. Quicun{que} vult saluus esse ante om̄ia op{us} est vt teneat catholicam fidem Quam nisi quis{que} integram in¦uiolatā{que} seruauerit abs{que} du∣bio ineternum peribit. Euery persone the whiche wyll be saued it is requysyte before all thynges that he holde the faythe catho¦lyke / the whiche yf euery one ne kepe hole without doubt he shal perysshe in perdura¦bylyte. Al good catholykes sholde beleue in one onely god in trynyte as it is sayd befo∣re. And who soo beleueth in god stedfastly it behoueth that he beleue in all his operaci¦ons / as in ye creacyon of heuen and of ertth and in his sanctyfycacyons / as in the holy chyrche. Wherfore ye artycles of the faythe ben here commaunded the whiche dothe fo¦lowe. ¶Saynt Peter sayeth. Credo in vnum deum. Who so wyll beleue stedfastly In the faythe of crystyente Beleue in one god alonely Thre persones in vnyte. ¶Agayne saynt Peter sayth. Patrem potentem. And saynt Andrewe sayeth Et in iesum christum filium eius vn dominum nostrum. And saynt Barthyl∣mewe sayeth. Credo in spm̄ sanctum Vnū crede deum personis hunc fore t¦num. Sunt pater nat{us} neuma sacer de¦us vnus. That is in the fader all puyssaunt And in the holy goost also And in Iesus his dere infaunt As crysten men sholde do ¶Also saynt Andrewe sayth Creatore celi et terre. And this onely god in trynyte The heuen the erthe and the see And all other thynges made hath he For the conforte of our humanyte ¶Saynt Mathewe sayth. Sanctam ec∣clesiam catholicam. In holy chyrche also beleue By stedfast faythe and deuocyon As nere as god grace the shall gyue Yf thou entende to haue saluacyon ¶Agayne saynt Thomas sayth Sctōrū cōmunionem. And saynt Symon. Re¦missiomem peccatorum. And beleue that all good crystyens Haue with the sayntes communyon Of all good dedes by the sacramentes And of theyr synnes remyssyon Saynt iude sayth. Carnis resurreccionē And whan ye aungell his horne shal blowe All that ben deed shall appere Lye they in erthe neuer so lowe In body and soule enrere ¶Saynt Mathewe sayth. Vitā eternam And those the whiche hath lyued wele In to paradyse shall ascende
The euyll also grete payne shall fele In hell euer withouten ende ¶Saynt Iames the more sayth. Qui cō¦ceptus est de spiritu sāc to natus ex ma¦ria virgine. Beleue also by grete veryte In Ihesu crystes humanyte Conceyued of the spyryte holy And borne of the vyrgyn Mary ¶Saynt Iohn sayth. Passus sub pōtio pylato crucifixus mortu{us} et sepultus. And saynt Thomas sayth. Descendit ad in ferna. After this he suffred gretely On the crosse for vs to deye And than buryed by Ioseph the good Streyght in to the helles he yood ¶Also saynt Thomas sayth. Vercia die resurrexit a mortuis. And saynt Iames the lesse sayth. Ascendit ad celos sedet ad dexteram dei patris oīpotentis. On the thyrde day he dyde aryse And in to heuen ye shall vnderstande He reascended in moost goodly wyse And sytteth on his faders ryght hande ¶Saynt Phylyp sayth. Inde venturus est iudicare viuos et mortuos. He hath promysed as we rede On domes day to come agayne To Iuge the quycke and the dede Some to blysse and some to payne Hec est fides catholica quam nisi quis{que} fideliter firmiter{que} crediderit / salu{us} esse non poterit. Who so his soule thynketh to saue Entendynge here after to come to blysse. Parfyte faythe must he haue In one artycle he may not mysse THe persone the whiche wyll be saued ought to be stedfast / sta¦ble / and immouable in ye fayth for it is the foundement vpon the whiche men edifye ye other vertues for to multyply them in goodes espyrytuelles and for to mounte in to paradyse. Vnd ad collocenses .i. In fide sitis fundati stabiles et immobiles. Be ye founded in the faythe stable and immouable. ¶Also we rede of a wyse man the whiche edyfyed his house vpon a stedfast stone / and the rayne descē¦ded and the windes and the waters strake agaynst it and it fell not / for it was so wel founded. Vnde mathei .vij. Descēdit plu∣uia et venerunt flumina / et flauerunt ven¦ti et irruerunt in domum illam et non ceci∣dit / fundamenta enim erant super petrā. The raynes descended / that is ye tourmen¦tes and aduersitees the whiche descendeth from the heyght of the ayre. By ye waters the whiche cometh ben vnderstande ye per¦secucyons of the ryche puyssauntes. And by the wyndes the whiche bloweth ben vn¦derstande the fauours of the worlde / or ye Iniuryes / thretenynges / and vniust lan∣guages ye whiche stryketh agaynst ye hous belongynge to the Iust by dyuers tempta∣cyons. And it fell not frome good purpose by delectacion / consentement ne good ope¦racyon / for it was founded vpon a stone / yt is ye faythe of god. Saynt Poule sayth in his epystles. In oibus sumētes scutū fidei ī quo possit{is} oīa tela neqissimi ignea extīgue¦re. For to resyst agaynst ye temptacyons of ye deuyll it behoueth to haue stedfast faythe And a man sholde note ye faythe wtout ope¦racyon is deed & of no value / & as the body is deed whan ye soule is departed. Vn̄. Iob ii. Sicut corpus sine aīa mortuū est ita & fi¦des sine o{per}ibus mortua est. ¶Example of some yt hath ben sure in ye fayth. q̄re .lxi. a. b B. ¶Moche people gooth to dāpnacion & perdycōn for lacke of faythe as lollers & he¦retykes that holdeth & beleueth some thyn¦ge ayenst ye artycles of the faythe / & instru¦teth ye sȳple folke so to beleue / suche people
ben excommunycate by sentence of ryght. Vt habetur extra de hereticis. Excōmu∣nicamus. And is a case reserued vnto the bysshoppes. Also all those the whiche hath put faythe and credence vnto the sayd he∣retykes in reputynge them to be good and to haue good faythe / and all those the whi∣che defendeth theym of dede and of worde ben also excommunycate. Also many here∣tykes haue ben yll reproued for that yt they haue erred agaynst the artycles of ye fayth Fyrst Manycheus erred the whiche sayd yt there were two goddes / the one good and the other badde / and that the good hadde created the thynges inuysybles and the yll the thynges vysibles. Agaynst this errour saynt Peter sayth. Credo in vnum deum patrem omnipotentem creatorē celi et ter∣re. Secondely Arryanus erred the whiche sayd that Ihesu cryst was a creature crea¦ted lesse after the dyuynyte than god ye fa∣der. Ayenst this errour Anathasius sayth. Filius a patre solo est nō factus nec crea∣tus / sed genitus. Equalis patri secundum diuinitatem: minor patre secundum huma¦nitatem. Thyrdly some grekes haue erred the whiche sayd that the holy ghoost was creature and not god. Agaynst this errour was made in the symbole. Qui cum patre et filio simul adoratur et conglorificatur. Fourthly Sabellius erred the whiche put the confusyon of the persones without to dystyngue theym and sayd that the fader was somtyme the sone and somtyme the holy goost. Agaynst this errour Anathasi{us} dooth saye. Alia est enim persona patris alia filii / alia spiritussācti vna est diuinitas. Fyfthly the Iewes and sarazyns erred ye whiche beleued not in Ihesu cryst & gooth agaynst the artycles of the faythe. Sextly Iacobyte and Nycolayte erreth / for they beleue otherwyse in the sacrament than ne dooth ye holy chyrche Romayne: Seuēthly the Grekes erreth the whiche denyeth that the holy chyrche Romayne ne is the chyefe and the maystresse of al chyrches. Agaynst this errour was put in the symbole. Apo¦stolicam ecclesiam. Many other heretykes haue erred agaynst the faythe the whiche I leue by cause of shortnes. ¶Examples of heretykes. And fyrst example that ye de¦uylles kepte an heretyke from brennynge: but whan the body of Ihesu cryste was brought they ne myght kepe hym .lix. a. ¶Another example that a cautelous here¦tyke was brent of a fole .lix. c. A. ¶Fourthly of the effecte of the .vii. sa∣cramentes the whiche ben comprehen∣ded vnder the artycles of the faythe .viij. IT is wryten that our lorde sayd vnto his dyssyples that they shol∣de go through out the worlde to preche ye gospell yt is all holy after our faythe. He the whiche hath be¦leued in god after the faythe and hath ac∣complysshed that the whiche is wryten in the gospell and hath ben baptysed shall be saued. And he the whiche hath not beleued shall be condampned. Vn. mar. xvi. Eun¦tes in mundum vniuersum predicate euā∣gelium omni creature. Qui crediderit & ba¦ptisatus fuerit saluus erit / qui vero nō cre¦diderit condempnabitur. After the lawe catholyke and the holy scryptures we bele¦ue that these synners haue remyssyon and pardon of all theyr synnes by the grace & mercy that god hath gyuen and instytued vnto those the whiche worthely and holy∣ly receyueth the holy sacramentes instytu∣ed and ordeyned in his chyrche / the whiche holy sacramentes ben conteyned and hole
comprehended vnder these artycles. Cre¦do sanctam ecclesiam catholicam / sancto∣rum communionem remissionem peccato∣rum. And they ben seuen the whiche folo∣wen. That is to knowe Baptysme / penaū¦ce / confyrmacion / vnccyon / ordre of preste¦hode / eucarystie / and maryage. After the scryptures these sacramentes ben Insty∣tued for to hele those yt ben seke by the In∣feccyon of synne. The chyrche is an apoty¦cary or as the hous of a prudent phesycyen the whiche is furnysshed with all good me¦dycynes agaynst all sekenesses for to gyue helthe. The seke man is the synner / the phe¦sycyen is Ihesu cryst / the mynyster of the medycyne is the preste / the entrayte the le∣ctuary / and apotecareryes is the vertues of the sacramentes. The sȳner hath many sekenesses / the fyrst that cometh in to this worlde is synne orygynall / agaynst ye whi∣che is the sacrament of baptysme for to he∣le it. The seconde sekenes is venyall synne agaynst the whiche is instytued the oyle of ye last vnccyon. The thyrde sekenes is mor¦tall synne / agaynst the whiche is instytued the sacrament of penaunce. The .iiii. seke∣nes is debylyte or weykenes of faythe / a¦gaynst the whiche is instytued confyrmaci¦on. The fyfthe sekenes is ygnouraunce of thynges verytables / agaynst the whiche is instytued the sacrament of the ordre of prestehode / for he the whiche receyueth it ought to be a clerke & sage for to instructe. The syxte is the concupyscence carnall of voluptuous people / agaynst the whiche is instytute the sacrament of maryage. The seuenth is affeccyon dysordynate in thyn∣ges blynde and defaylynge / agaynst the whiche is the sacramente of eucharystye. or body of our lorde. Also the seuen sacra∣mentes gyueth grete grace vnto synners / for they do bere effecte. By the grete grace that almyghty god hath gyuen within the effecte of the sacrament of baptysme well receyued all gylte is effaced & put awaye. that is orygynall & all synne actuall mor∣tall / and venyall. And this sacrament gy∣ueth grace and also all vertues as wel theo¦logalles as moralles / and yf it ne gyueth them as vnto the vsage / yet it gyueth thē as vnto the habyte. Si non dat quantum and vsum ad minus dat quantum ad ha∣bitum. Ista est sentencia consilii generalis Vt habetur in constitutionibus domini cle¦mentis extra de sūma trinitate et fide. ca. c Fidei catholice. Also the effecte of the holy sacrament of baptysme gyueth an affyny∣te espyrytuall the whiche is so ryght parfy¦tely grete that it letteth maryage / soo that the baptysant and the godfaders and god moders and gosseppes ne may haue in ma¦ryage ye baptysed. Also baptysme openeth the gates of paradyse and maketh hym to possede / and maketh hym to be perteyner in the passyon of our sauyour and redem∣tour Ihesu cryst. Quia omnes qui in chri¦sto baptizati sunt christum induunt. Vt di¦cit paulus in suis epistolis. This sacramēt of baptysme is requysyte of ye necessyte of helthe. For it is wryten Iohannis tercio. Nisi quis renatus fuerit ex aqua & spiritu sancto non potest introire in regnum dei. Who so hath not be goten agayn / or newly borne / regenerate / or wasshed from synne orygynall by water and by the holy goost ne may entre in to the realme of god. Also as sayth the holy euangelyst saynt Marke It is requysyte that we be all baptysed in lykewyse as it hath ben sayd and declared here tofore. B. ¶The effecte of the sacramente of pe∣naunce well taken in contrycyon / confessy¦on / satysfaccyon and purpose noo more to retorne vnto synne dooth many goodnes∣ses vnto ye soule of euery man and woman contryte for theyr synne. The fyrst is that
it wassheth / puryfyeth / and maketh clene the soule from the fylthe of synne. The se∣conde that it effaceth / adnychylleth / & ma∣keth to put in forgetfulnes all venyall and mortall synnes. The thyrde that vnbyn∣deth and lowseth the lynes of the deuyll & of synne / and taketh ye soule from her vyle seruitude. The fourth goodnes that the sa¦crament of penaunce dooth is that it ma∣keth the appoyntement of the dyscorde ye whiche was betwene god & man by synne. The fyfthe that it maketh man to be the sone of god and of grace that was by syne the sone of yre and of the deuyll by Imyta∣cion. The syxte goodnes yt penaunce dooth is that it recouereth and maketh to come a¦gayne the good vertues and operacions ye whiche had ben done in thestate of grace ye whiche were put in forgetynge and lost by mortall synne. The seuenth goodnes that penaunce dooth is that it maketh a man to be the membre of god and of the chyrche & maketh hym to be pertener and gadred in the good dedes of sayntes / for by mortall synne the man is separate frome god and from his sayntes. The .viij. goodnes that the sacrament of penaunce dooth is that it vnbyndeth and dyschargeth man from dā¦pnacyon and perdycyon. The nynth good¦nes is that it openeth paradyse vnto ye syn¦ner and maketh hym to haue the lyfe eter∣nall and to reygne with god. All synners sholde receyue this sacrament in grete fay¦the / humylyte / and reuerence / for by ye gre¦te grace that is in it all synnes ben pardo∣ned / in lykewyse as sayth holy scryptures in many places. It is wryten Mathei .iij. Facite fructum dignum penitentie. Ma¦ke ye fruyte dygne of penaunce. Et legitur Ezechielis .xviij. Si autem impius egerit penitenciam ab omnibus peccatis suis que operatus est et custodierit vniuersa prece∣pta mea et fecerit iudicium et iusticiam vi∣ta viuet / et non morietur / omnium iniqu¦tatum eius quas operatus est non recorda¦bor. That is to say. Yf the synner wyl do pe¦naunce of all his synnes that he hath com∣mytted / and after that he hath kept all my commaundementes / & that he hath doone Iugement and Iustyce whiche is to yelde vnto euery man that the whiche vnto him apperteyneth he shall lyue in lyfe eternall and shall not deye in dampnacyon / nor I shall neuer recorde ne remembre none of ye synnes that he hath commytted. And it is wryten Eyechyelis .xxxiij. Nolo mortem impii sed vt conuertatur a via sua & viuat. Sequit{ur} post iusticia iusti non liberabit ei in quacun{que} die peccauerit / & impietas īp non nocebit ei in quacun{que} die conuersus fuerit ab impietate sua. That is to say. I wyll not the dethe of the euyll synner / bu that he be conuerted from his cursed way and yt he lyue / and it foloweth. The Iust¦ce of the iust shall not delyuer hym in o daye that he hath synned / and the synne of the wycked man shal not noye hym in on daye that he cōuerteth hym from his euyl¦nes: and therfore the synners ben not to be dyspysed. For suche one shall be this day euyll the whiche peruauenture shall be t¦morowe a good penytent and of the nom¦bre of the saued. ¶Example in of the syn¦ner publycan ye whiche in shorte tyme was Iustyfyed and better than the pharasee whiche dyspysed hym / in lyke wyse as it is wryten in the .xviij. chapytre of the gospe¦les of saynt Luke. ¶Another example  the thefe zacheus the whiche at the begyn¦nynge was euyll and in shorte tyme wa conuerted and a good man in lykewyse as it is wryten in the gospelles of saynt Lu Also Theophyle. Thais. Mary magdale¦ne in shorte tyme conuerted them / and ma¦ny other examples semblables shall be fo¦de by the table of the examplary in the ty¦tre
of penaunce. It is wryten in the .xviij. chapytre of ye gospelles of saynt Mathewe that yf a man hadde an hondred shepe and that one of them were lackynge / he wolde leue the .lxxxxix. too seche that one / and yf he may fynde hym he wyll enioye more of that shepe than of the other whiche hathe not gone out of the way. Also Ioye shal be made in heuen vpon a synner the whiche hathe done penaunce. Vn̄ Luce .xv. Gau¦dium erit in celo super vno peccatore peni¦tentiam agent {quam} super nonaginta nouem iustus qui non indigent penitentiam. Also the publyke synners and the manyfest har¦lottes the whiche cometh vnto penaunce and reknowlege theyr defautes shal be mo¦re sooner saued than ye deuout people that Iustyfyeth themselfe and reknowlege not theyr synnes. Vnde. Math xxi. Amen di¦co vobis quia publicani et meretrices prece¦dent vos in regno dei / venit enim ad vos iohannes in via iusticie et non credidistis ei / publicam autem et meretrices credide∣runt ei. &c. By theffect of the sacrament of confyrmacyon well taken the venyall syn∣nes ben pardoned. The holy goost fortyfy∣eth the persone in the faythe and assureth hym from fere. Grace newly therin is gy∣uen / and the auncyent therin is augmen∣ted. By theffect of the sacrament of vnccy¦on well taken the venyall synnes ben for∣goten / and the mortalles ben pardoned. This sacrament gyueth medycine & helth vnto the body and vnto the soule / & perse∣ueraunce in good operacyons / it multyply¦eth and augmenteth grace goten and gy∣ueth grace of newe / also it defendeth from the enemye. Of this sacrament it is wrytē Iacobi .v. Infirmatur quis ex vobis indu¦cat presbiteros ecclesie vt orent super eum vnguentes cum oleo sancto & alleuiabir eū dominus a languoribus suis et si in pecca∣tis sit dimittentur ei. Yf ony of you be seke call for the prestes of the chyrche to thende that they praye ouer hym in anoytinge hȳ with the holy oyle and our lorde shall lyght hym of his lāgoures / that is of his sekenes And yf he be in synnes they ben forgyuen hym. And the psalmyst in the persone of ye synners sayth. Miserere mei domine quo∣niam infirmus sum sana me domine quo∣niam conturbata sunt ossa mea. Lorde ha∣ue mercy vpon me whiche am dyseased he¦leme / for all my bones ben troubled. The sacramēt of ordre is of purete / clennes / scy¦ence / prudence gyuen vnto preestes for to Instruct the people / for admynystre the sa¦cramentes / to bynde and to vnbynde ye sȳ¦ners. The sacrament of eucaristie that is ye sacrament of the auter is god in fourme of breed and of wyne the whiche gyueth gra∣ce vnto all folke and lyfe eternal in lykewi¦se as it is requysyte. Vnde ioh̄ .vi. Hec est panis de celo descendens / vt si quis ex ipso manducauerit non morietur. Here is ye bre¦de descendynge from heuen to thende that who so eteth of it shall not deye. Iterum legitur in eodem capitulo. Ego sum panis viuus qui de celo descendi / si quis mandu∣cauerit ex hoc pane viuet in eternum / & pa¦nis quem ego dabo caro mea est pro mun∣di vita. That is to say. I am the breed of ly¦fe that am descended from heuen / who so eteth of this breed worthely & in suche wise deyeth shall lyue in pardurabylite / and the breed that I gyue is my flesshe for the ly∣fe of the worlde. ¶Example that a vyrgin sawe a preest clere / fayre / and shynynge in grete glory as he songe masse. quē .lxxxxiiij a. ¶Another example that a bysshop sawe vpon an ester day some men confessed the whiche were meruaylously whyte / and ye other blacke .lxxxxiiij. c. It is a grete thyn∣ge to receyue his creatoure in the estate of grace for it is vnto the saluacyon of the sou¦le. And those ye whiche receyueth it vnwor¦thely
it is to theyr dampnacyon. Vnd. j. ad corin. xi. Qui enim manducat et bibit indi¦gne iudicium sibi manducat et bibit. ¶Ex¦ample Iudas receyued it vnworthely too his dampnacyō. ¶Another example / two prestes receyued theyr maker vnworthely & they were punysshed dyuynely .xxxvii. E ¶Another exāple of a preste fornycatoure ye whiche deyed sodaynly as he wolde syn∣ge masse .lxxxxiii. D. ¶The sacrament of maryage is the coniunccyon of man & wo∣man for to multyply ye worlde / for to auoy¦de synne / and for to loue and prayse god in heuē and in the erthe. Some kepeth theyr maryage and they shall haue in paradyse retrybucyon / and those the whiche breketh it shall haue punycion / in lykewyse as men shall fynde by the scryptures .xxxvi. a. And by examples .lxxxxj. a. b. The sacramentes beforesayd bereth in them grete effecte / for without them these synners ne may be vn¦bounde of syn̄e nor saued / and therfore we sholde receyue them worthely and holyly. The ben sayd holy also for by theym these synners ben sanctyfied in lyke wyse as we beleue. &c. ¶Example that a curate sholde not tary to adminyster the sacramentes of the chyrche whan his parysshens ben seke and call for them. C. ¶It is wryten in the ende of the fyrste boke of the dialogue of saynt Gregory that a fader of an housholde was seke nygh vn¦to the dethe & he sent to fetche the rectour of ye parysshe a worshypfull preste named Seuerus the whiche was founde occupy∣ed in cuttynge his vyne. And the messen∣gers sayd to him yt theyr mayster prayed hī yt he wolde come ryght hastely to hym to ye ende that he myght pray for hym / that he myght cōfesse hym / & that he myght do pe¦naūce or he deyed. The whiche preste sayd to the sayd messengers. Go ye before I wyl come after you / & he taryed a whyle or he departed to make an ende of a lytell thyn¦ge the whiche was lefte of his operacyon whan he had ended he put hym on ye wa to goo vnto the sayd seke man / and in the way he founde the sayd messengers ye wh¦che ranne towarde hym: and vnto hȳ say▪ A preste why haste thou taryed soo longe trauayle the no more for he is departed: whan he herde them say so he was moch sory / and so all wepynge he came to ye say body that was deed and there he fell pro∣strate vnto the erthe in wepynge and wa¦lynge and saynge that he was homycyd of the sayd deed body. And as he wept th soule of ye sayd deed man came agayne v¦to the sayd body. And whan they the wh¦che were present sawe that of grete Ioy and admyracyon that they hadde they t¦ke them to wepe / the whiche hym deman¦ded where he hadde ben and how he wa comen agayne. He answered the deuyll ledde me the whiche were as men ryght ¦deous and blacke from whome yssued o of theyr mouthe and nosethrylles fyre an flambe soo that myght not endure / and a they ledde me by derke places sodaynly fayre vysyon an aungell as a fayre you man came agaynst them the whiche led me vnto whome he sayd. Brȳge hym aga¦ne for the preest Seuerus hath be wepth our lorde hathe gyuen hym vnto hym  his teeres. Than ye sayd man reuyued ar¦se vp sodaynly frome the erthe / confesse hym / dyde penaunce by seuen dayes / a on the .viii. daye Ioyously he departed o of this worlde. After this example a pre sholde neuer deffer too admynyster the s¦cramentes of the chyrche to ony person that theym nedeth. Also a persone sho not tary to confesse hym / to corecte / and mende tyll he be nere his dethe / whan is veray aeged / and whan he may no lo¦ger prolouge ne delaye. Audi scriptur
Legitur ecclesiastici quinto. Non tardes conuerti ad dominum et ne differas de die in diem subito enim veniet ira illius & in tē¦pore vindicte dis{per}det te. Et eccl. xvij. Nō demoreris in errore impiorum ante mortē confiteri. &c. Et ad romanos .xiiij. Abijcia¦mus opera tenebrarum .i. opera peccati. Et ysaie .j. Lauamini mūdi estote auferte ma¦lum cogitatione vestrarum ab oculis meis dicit dn̄s: quiescite agere peruerse discite be¦nefacere. Ecclesi. xvij. Viuus et sanus con∣fiteberis et laudabis dominum / & glorifica¦beris in miserationibus illius. Et eccl. xviij Ante languorem adhibe medicinam et an¦te iudicium interroga teipsum / et in con∣spectu dei inuenies propiciationem. A. ¶Fyfthly it is commaunded here to lo¦ue god aboue all thynges / and defended to loue other thynges more than hym .ix. IT is wryten in the .xiiij. chapitre of the gospelles of saynt Iohan Si quis diligit me sermonem me¦um seruabit. etc. Sequit{ur}. Qui nō diligit me sermones meos nō seruat. ¶Who so loueth me he kepeth my worde: and he the whiche loueth me not ke¦peth not my wordes. It is a thynge ryght reasonable to loue god the creatour and to obey vnto hym aboue all thynges created in lyke wyse as it is declared before. Quere i. d. e. f. For to vnderstande this dyleccyon saynt Thomas of Aquin gyueth a rule ge¦neral saynge in this wyse. In the thought of man there is euer some thinge that he lo¦ueth soueraynly aboue all thynges / and in it he ordeyneth his lyfe. And that / that he loueth in suche wyse is the last ende and in¦tencion. Yf it be god he is in thestate of gra¦ce / and yf he deye in suche wyse he shall be saued. Yf it be a creature he is in thestate of dampnacyon. Saynt Austyn sayth. Pec¦catum mortale est libido siue amor volupta¦tis supra deū vel equaliter ei. Mortall sȳne is lechery or loue of volupte aboue god / or egall vnto hym. Et peccatum veniale est libido siue amor voluptatis citra deum. Ve¦nyal synne is lechery or loue of volupte vn¦der god. B. ¶Many sortes of people there bē that loueth other thȳges better than god. Fyrst these auarycyous men the whiche loueth ye golde and the syluer and the other goodes of ye worlde aboue god / and putteth theyr loue / fyaunce / and hope more in the helpe of goodes than in the ayde of god / they bre¦ke this commaundement & synneth mor¦tally. Quia proponunt ceeaturam creatu¦ri. They loue the thynge created aboue the creatour / the whiche is ydolatry. Vnde ad ephe. v. Auaricia est ydolorū seruitus. Vn̄ augustinus dicit. Hoc est homine colitur / quod preceteris diligitur. That thynge is honoured of man the whiche he loueth abo¦ue all thynges. Et psal. di. Simulachra gē¦tium argentum et aurum opera manuum hominum. The ydolles of people is syluer and golde / the operacions of the handes of man. For to wynne an halfpeny the auary¦cyous swereth and forswereth hymselfe / breketh the feestes and leueth to serue god and to saye his seruyce / for his herte is on the goodes more than on god. And he may not serue vnto god and vnto the deuyll. Vnde mathei quinto capitulo. Nemo po∣test duobus dominis seruire. &c. Sequitur Non potest deo seruire et mammone. ¶Example of an auarycyous vsurer the which axed helpe of his golde & syluer whā he sholde dye. Quere .lxxxvi. F. ¶Another example of an auarycyous man ye whiche commaunded his soule vnto the deuyll at his gate for that / that it wolde noo lenger abyde with his treasoures & goodes. Que¦re.
lxxxvi. G. C. ¶Secondely these glotons the whiche loueth theyr wombes more than god and the whiche serueth vnto the preparacyons of meetes for to nouryshe the bely more so¦ner than to do seruyce vnto god in his chyr¦che / or the whiche obeyeth vnto theyr wō∣bes whan they wyll ete more sooner than vnto god whan he is commaunded to fast and to abstayne hym / they breke this com∣maundemēt / and make theyr god of theyr wombes the whiche is a maner of ydolatri wherof speketh saynt Poule ad philippē .iij. Quorum deus venter est & gloria in cō¦fusione eorum. Of the whiche glotons the bely is theyr god and glory vnto theyr con¦fusyon / vnto ye whiche bely or wombe they make theyr oblacions & sacryfyces. Theyr chyrche is the kechyn where they say theyr matyns & deuiseth of theyr seruyce. Theyr preste is the coke the whiche maketh the sa¦cryfyce for to gyue to the bely the whiche is the god / and the sacryfyce ben the meases of the metes / the awter is the platter / the ensence is the odour of wynes and metes. the laudes of the matyns that ben sayd at the table where the wyles / mockeryes / & detraccōns ben reherced. For to make shor¦te that / that a persone loueth & honoureth moost is his ydoll or god. Vnde Isodorus. Cui{que} qd magis colit vel diligit hoc ydo∣lum vel deus est illi. This synne of glotony draweth a man gloton vnto apostasy. Vn̄ ecclesiasti .xix. Vinum et mulieres aposta∣tare faciūt sapientes et arguent sensatos. The wine and lecherous women: brȳgeth in apostasy the wyse men / and repreueth ye wytty. Also it ledeth in to dampnacyon. Vnde paulus and roma. viij. Si enim se∣cundum carnem vixeritis moriemini. Yf ye lyue after ye body or the flesshe ye shall dye. that is ye shall be dampned. ¶Example of a woman dampned the whiche vsed her lyfe in glotonyes / dronkenesses / and leche¦ryes .lxxxxij. A. ¶Another example of  gloton named Vodo the whiche yode vnt the tauernes whan he sholde go vnto the chyrche .lxvij. E. The ydolatry of the pay¦nyms is euyll / for they honoure the ydolls and gyueth vnto them the dyuyne honou¦re the which apperteyneth vnto god. The ydolatrye of the auarycyous is wors / for they loue and worshyp golde & syluer mo∣re than god. The ydolatrye of glotons  yet wors and worst of al the whiche hono¦reth theyr wombe and maketh it theyr g as it is sayd. Thyrdly the lechours louet theyr folysshe louer more than god / and o¦beyth more sooner vnto her than vnto go that is to say / they loue better to breke the that god commaundeth than to do ayen the wyll of theyr sayd loue / and by yt the dampne theyr soule / and they neyther lo god ne themselfe. Vn̄ {pre}s. Qui diligit in¦tatem odit animam suam. He the which loueth inyquyte hateth his soule. ¶Exa¦ple by that Sychen loued Dygne ye doug¦ter of Iacob by loue lecherous he was sla¦ne & his fader also. Que. lxxxxi. d. Fourth¦ly those the whiche loueth faders and ¦ders more than god breketh this cōmaun¦dement and offendeth in it as it sayd be¦re. Quere .j. F. Fyfthly those the whiche l¦ueth ony persone of an euyll loue as dyd Adam anenst Eue / for drede that theyr anger suche persones dyspryseth to do an to accomplysshe the commaundemente god and dothe the pleasure & desyre of th sayd persone. D. ¶Syxtely those the whiche loueth to ryche people and grete lordes / as kynges prynces more than god / and the which obeyeth vnto theym sooner than vnto go breketh this commaundemēt in lykewy as it is sayd before. Que. i. H. Finably th the whiche for drede of ony persone as se¦uaūtes
towarde theyr maysters leueth to obey vnto god and to do his commaunde¦ment for to please the sayd persone breketh this commaundement. Qr preponūt crea¦turam creaturi. &c. The remedy for those the whiche hath broken this commaunde∣ment is that they do penaunce the whiche maketh to put in oblyuyon the synnes com¦mysed in lykewyse as it is declared here be¦fore .viii. B. And afterwarde to take the cō¦dycyons of the pylgryme of paradyse the whiche ledeth all ryght in to ye lyfe eternall in lykewyse as thou shalt fynde here after Quere .xlv. A. E. ¶Syxtely the pryde ye whiche is ayenst the dyleccyon of god is defended in this fyrst commaundement / & that whiche Gayenst the dyleccion of his neyghbour is defended in the fourth / and humyly∣te is commaunded .ix. IT is wryten in the .iiij. chapytre of the epystle of saynt Iames ye god resysteth agaynst the proude men and women. Deus super bis resistit. For they dysobey vn∣to his commaūdemētes and vnto his wyll A man is moche proude whan he gyueth or wyll haue the honour the whiche apper∣teyneth vnto god / or whan he sayeth that the goodes of nature cometh of hym / as is youthe / beaute. &c. Or the goodes of fortu¦ne as golde / syluer. &c. Or ye goodes of gra¦ce as wytte / reason / memory / engyn / deuo¦cyon. &c. Saynt Poule sayth .i. ad corī. iiij. Quid habes quod non accepisti. What go¦des hast thou in this worlde that yu ne hast taken theym of another. Whan thou was borne thou brought nothynge with the / & al the goodes that thou hast cometh of god and all the euyll that thou hast procedeth of thy selfe. Also thou arte proude and bre∣keth this commaundement yf thou loue ye honoures of the worlde more than god or yf thou take hede more gretely to haue thē and to gete them than the loue of god. Or whan dysordonatly yu gloryfyest thy selfe of the dedes that yu doost / or of the goodes that thou hast of god in sayenge that they come of the or by thy merytes / or yt there is none but thou that is worthy too haue it. By suche pryde a man becometh apposta∣te. Vn̄ eccle. x. Initium su{per}bie hoīs est apo∣statare a deo. Also a proude man appeteth to haue the honours worldly / the precyous clothynges or ornamētes. He wylleth that euery man prayse hym & honour / bowe vn¦der hym / call hym lorde / and that he trede other vnderfote / and yt he be superyoure. ¶Example how Dauyd slewe the proude Golias. Que. lxxviij. C. ¶Another exam¦ple how the deuyll drewe the soule from ye body of a cursed ryche man wt a hoke. Que. c. v. A. Also a proude man wyll not obeye / but wylleth that men obey vnto hym / he wyll not serue but he wyll be serued / he dre¦deth nothynge and wyll be dredde / he wyll be reputed a good man & holy and yet wyll he not do the operacions. &c. For to knowe a proude persone a man shall wete whan he hath an appetyte dysordonate to haue honour / excellence / dygnyte / noblesse / lord¦shyppe / domynacyon ouer and aboue the good that god hath hym gyuen and ordey¦ned / but a man sholde knowe that the no∣blesse of abyllementes is not defended vn∣to euery man after his estate. It is the su{per}¦fluyte of the pryde the whiche may be ta∣ken in those abyllementes the whiche is de¦fended. Also a man shall knowe a proude man whan he wyll not put him vnder god and his superyoures in obedyence / drede / seruyce / and reuerence. Pryde hath many cursed braunches the whiche ben / bostȳge inobedyence / ypocrysy / contempcyon / per∣tynacyte
/ dyscorde / presūpcyon / arrogaun¦ce in pryde / excedynge elacōn. &c. The whi¦che braunches shall not be here declared be¦cause of shortenes / but note well that the sinne of pryde noyeth in many maners vn¦to those the whiche commytteth it. Quere post ad numeum .xliiij. b / c / d / e / f / g. & cete. ¶Example in the byble of some ye whiche hath ben proude / and fyrst Adam & Eue cō¦mytted pryde in as moche as they appety¦ted to be semblable vnto god in knowinge the good and the euyll. Eritis sicut du sciē¦tes bonum et malū. Alsoo in as moche as they brake the commaundement of god in bytynge the apple. Quere in thexamplary liiij. A. ¶Another example of those of Ba∣bylon that commytted pryde wyllynge to edyfye a toure to reche vnto heuen / & god resysted agaynst them and chaūged theyr languages. &c. as it is wryten. G. xi. Agar was proude and dyspysed her maystresse / but the aungell of god meked her as it is wryten. Genesis .xvj. ¶Another example that Pharao was proude the whiche wol∣de not obey vnto god and vnto his seruaūt Moyses / and he was drowned as it is wry¦ten in Exode. Quere .liiij. F. ¶Another ex¦ample that Chore. Dathan / & Abyron we¦re punysshed for theyr pryde / inobedyence and murmure. Quere in thexampl .liiij. H. ¶Another example that ye kynge Anthyo¦gus was proude ouer puyssaūce humayne Quere .lxxxv. D. ¶Another example yt a man was so proude that he wolde that all men sholde bowe the knee before hym and he was hāged on a gybet as it wryten / Hester .vij. ca. F. ¶God alsoo dooth commaunde humy∣lyte in all his commaundementes where he defendeth pryde. Men knoweth a per∣sone humble whan voluntaryly he obeyeth vnto god and vnto his superyours / and yt he put hymselfe vnder to serue / to drede / and to honour another. ¶Of humylyte is somwhat spoken in the .iiij. commaunde∣mēt in the fyrst maner how chyldren shol∣de honour theyr faders. Quere .xxj. B. Hu¦mylyte dooth many good dedes. Primo maketh to exalte the oraysons of the meke folke. Vnde psalmus. Respexit in oratio∣nem humilium et non spreuit precem eo{rum} Secundo it maketh god to abyde with the humble folke. Vnde Ysaie. penultimo. Su¦per quem requiescet spiritus mens nisi su∣per humilem et quietum et trementem ser¦mones meos. Et bernardus. Si maria hu¦milis non esset super eam spiritussanctus non requiesceret. Tertio humylyte delyue¦reth hym from his enmyes. Vnde psalm{us}. Humiliatus sum et liberauit me. Iterum psal. In humilitate nostra memor fuit no∣stri. Quarto humilyte maketh to haue gra¦ce. Vnde .j. petri .v. Oīs enim inuicem hu¦militatem insinuate qr dominus superb resistit humilibus autem dat gratiam. Ex¦ample in the gloryous vyrgyn Mary. Lu¦ce .j. Aue gratia plena. Quinto humylyte lyfteth the persone vnto god / and in gret goodes espyrytualles. Vn̄ luce .xiiij. & .xvi & mathei .xxiij. Omnes qui se humiliat e¦altabitur. ¶Example of the synner publ¦can the whiche humbled hym was lyft v and Iustyfyed. Luce .xviij. Descendit h iustificatus ab illo scilicet phariseo. Sext humylyte maketh to possede paradyse. V prouerbiorū .xxix. Humilem spiritu sus¦piet gloria. Et Iob .xxiij. Qui enim humi¦liatus fuerit erit in gloria et qui inclinau¦rit oculos suos ipse saluabitur. et psal. H¦miles spiritu saluabit. ¶Examples of hu¦mylyte / & fyrst of a nonne the whiche wa∣shed the pottes / wyped the disshes / and d¦de all humble thynges. Quere in thexam¦plary .lxj. C. ¶Another example that t prynce the whiche humbled hym before H¦lye and prayed hȳ mekely was not bren
with the fyre celestyall as the other were ye whiche spake proudly. Quere in thexāpla∣ry .lx. G. ¶Another example in the glory∣ous vyrgyn Mary the whiche made her selfe handmayden vnto god. Luce .j. Ec∣ce ancilla domini. &c. ¶Another example of the humylyte of Ihesu cryst in his na∣tyuyte and in his his his lyfe the whiche was∣shed the fete of his dysciples and was hum¦ble as it is wryten Math. xi. Discite a me quia mitis sum et humilis corde. &c. A. ¶Here foloweth the seconde cōmaun∣dement of god the whiche treateth of swerynges and blaspheminges .x. The name of god thou shalt not swere by Nor yet by his sayntes in vayne For yf thou do so certaynly Thou shalt suffre eternall payne. ¶This commaundemēt is wryten Exodi xx. ca. Non assumes nomen dei tui in va∣num. Thou shalt not take the name of god in vayne. And it is wrytē deuterono. v. ca. Non vsurpabis nomen dei tui frustra qr non erit impunitus qui super re vana no∣men ei{us} assumpserit. Thou shalt not vsur∣pe the name of thy god for nought. For he the whiche hathe taken his name vpon a vayne thȳge shall not abyde vnpunysshed ¶Examples of them the whiche hath ben punysshed for theyr swerynge cursedly. Quere in the examplary .xlij. A.B. And it is wryten Leuitici .xix. capitulo. Non per iurabis in nomine meo nec pollues nomen dei tui ego dominus. Thou shalte not for∣swere the in my name / and thou shalt not soyle the name of thy god by cursed & vyo∣lent wordes. &c. In this cōmaundement many chapytres ben wryten. B. ¶And fyrst that god defendeth all swe¦rynges vayne and vnprouffytable vn∣der this worde / vanum .x. NEiures vana per ipsum. Swe¦re thou not without nede and in vayne of a thynge wherof thou arte not certayne. ¶For to vnderstande all this com∣maundement in fewe wordes it behoueth to holde for a rule generall that as many tymes and as ofte as a man dooth make othes / sermentes / and swerynges the whi¦che ben vayne & vnprouffytable / without necessyte / without cause good and vtylyte so often taketh he the name of god in vay¦ne. Or whan a man maketh lyenge othes / and vowes without trouthe the whiche bē euyll or deceytfull / or execrables / and dete¦stables he taketh also the name of god in vayne and breketh this commaundement Or whan a man maketh Iust vowes and accomplyssheth theym not accordynge to his promysse he taketh the name of god in vayne. And for bycause that men do swere in so many of wyse maners that it is mer∣uaylous: and that these generalytees suffy¦seth not vnto the people of lytell entende∣ment it behoueth here afterwarde to goo more largely to recyte and declare the ma∣ners therin to offende. This worde here va¦num is sayd in scrypture in thre maners. Vanum aliquādo dicitur falsum: aliquā∣do inutile / aliquando peccatum iniustum. ¶Primo this forsayd worde vanum is ta¦ken for a false thynge. Thou shalte not ta∣ke the name of thy god in vayne / that is to knowe berynge recorde in wytnessynge & testyfyenge for a false thynge agaynst thy neyghbour wherof speketh the psalmyst▪ Vana locuti sunt homines vnusquis{que} a proximūsuum. These men speketh vayne
thȳges euery of them vnto his neyghbour whan ony wyl deceyue his neyghbour by ony falsenes / fraude or malyce he maketh serment and othe in callȳge god vnto wyt¦nes for to conferme his malyce the whiche is to take the name of god in vayne / so he dooth Iniury vnto god. For forswerynge is none other thynge but to call hym vnto wytnes for to afferme and conferme that that a man swereth / as swore saynt poule Testis est michi deus. And to cal god vn¦to wytnes for to conferme ony false thȳge is a grete iniury doone vnto hym / for in yt maner there it is to beleue that god ne kno¦weth the veryte ne the falsenes of the thyn¦ge that a man swereth / soo man apposeth on hym ygnouraunce the whiche is ayenst the holyscrypture. Vnde paulus ad hebre∣os .iiij. Omnia nuda et apperta sunt ante oculos eius. Al thynges that ben open and and naked ben openly sene before the eyen of god. Et legit{ur} ecclesia. Oculi dn̄i multo plus lucidores super solem circūspiciētes om̄es vias hominum et {pro}fundum abyssi & hominum corda intuentes in absconditas partes terre. &c. The eyen of our lorde ben moche more clerer than the sonne beholdȳ¦ge all the wayes of men and the profundy¦te and depnes of the hertes of men behol∣dynge in the partyes hyden of ye erthe. &c. Also whan in swerynge ony calleth god to wytnes he imposeth on hym that he loueth lesynges / or that he is a lyer the whiche is a thynge that he hateth. Vn̄ psal. Dilexisti iusticiam et odisti iniquitatem. Thou hast loued Iustyce and hast hated synne / also yu hast loued veryte. Vnde psal. Ecce enim veritatem dilexisti. So to impose vnto god that he loueth lesynge / or that he is a lyer is a thynge yt moche dysprayseth his boun∣te and imposeth on hym grete iniury. And therfore a forsworne persone is worthy of punycyon. ¶Secundo / this worde vanū is taken somtyme in ye scrypture for a thy¦ge vayne and inutyle. Vnde psal. Domi¦nus scit cogitaciones hominum quonia vane sunt. Our lorde knoweth the though¦tes of men / for they ben vayne and vnpro¦fytable / as whan a man confermeth a thī¦ge vayne & vnprouffytable the whiche is a¦gaynst the thought. God the whiche kno¦weth the thoughtes as it is wryten prim regum .xvj. seeth well that man taketh his name in vayne. In the auncyent testame it was defended that men sholde not swe¦re false. But Ihesu cryst defendeth in th newe lawe that men ne swere but in nece¦syte for a thynge vtyle. And the reason  suche / for that / yt the tongue is the memb and partye of the man or of the woman is moost frayle / tendre / and lyght applye¦ge for to swere and to vttre language n¦yenge vnto his neyghboure. Et qui iura de minimo de leui cadit. He the whiche s¦reth for a lytell thynge falleth lyghtly / an who soo lyghtly falleth ryseth not agayn whan he wyl. And therfore swere not va¦nely agaynst thy conscyence in saynge o thynge and thynkynge another for to de¦ceyue thy neyghbour / and leue the accus¦maunce of swerynge by god and his say¦tes that punycyon doo not come vpon th ¶Example of two yonge men the which forswore them and the one of them becam lepre / and the other seke of the fyre of sayn Anthony. Que. lxxxxvij. d. ¶Tertio / th worde vanum is taken somtyme for sin and for thynge inutyle the whiche is ma¦gnyte / or inequalyte or Iniustyce / wher speketh the psalmyst. Hilij hominum d¦gitis vanitatem et queritis mendatiū. S¦nes of men wherfore loue ye vanyte and ¦che lesynges. Those the whiche swereth they shall doo euyll and synne vnto the neyghbours / as homycyde / robberyes. & for to venge theym they loue vanyte th
is synne / and seketh lesynges and swereth the name of god in vayne. Saynt Austyn assygneth two partyes of Iustyce / that is to declyne from yll & to do good. And those the whiche swereth that they shall do euyll as homycide swereth agaynst the cōmaun¦dement of god and ayenst Iustyce / so they take ye name of god in vayne. In lykewise he the whiche swereth that he shall doo no good / as not to doo almes dedes he gooth agaynst the commaundement of god and agaynst Iustyce / so he taketh the name of god in vayne / and he sholde not accōplys∣she suche an othe as it is wrytē here after. God commaundeth that all the wordes yt men speke of him or of his sayntes be in his dyleccyon / in his honour and reuerence / & that he ne be called but in al veryte bounte loyalte / & vtylyte / or punycyon shall come vpon them the whiche dooth vnto the con¦trarye. ¶Example that euyll came vnto Chore. Dathan: and Abyron the whiche to¦ke the name of god in vayne in spekȳge yll wordes agaynst the commaundement of god / and sanke in to hell all quycke. Quere liiij. H. ¶Another example of a relygyous that spake wordes murmurynge agaynst the dyleccyon / loyalte / & reuerence of god / and euyll came to hym. Quere .liiij. I. A. ¶The maners of forswerynge by the othe affermynge / and by the othe pro∣mettynge .xi. THe wyse man sayeth. Lete not thy mouthe be accustomed for to swere / many cases ben in yt accustomaunce / for who soo of∣ten swereth often is forsworne And who so lyeth often / often sȳneth mor¦tally. The name of god ne be accustomed in thy mouthe as he the whiche sayeth oftē by god I shall do thus / or by god I shall not do thus. And entremet the not to swe∣re often by the sayntes of paradyse / for yf thou swere by them in vayne thou ne shalt be quyte towarde them / they shal haue ma¦ter to accuse the before god. Vnde. ecclesia∣sti .xxiii. ca. Iurationi non assuescat os tu∣um multi enī casus sūt in illa / nomīatio ve¦ro dei non sit assidua in ore tuo et in nomi∣nibus sanctorum non admiscearis: quoniā nō eris īmunis ab eis. This is that whiche is wryten before. The name of god nor his sayntes for nought ne in vayne thou shalt not swere by / thou dampnest thy selfe be thou in certayne yf thou in swerynge for∣swere the. We fynde in scrypture two ge∣nerall kyndes of periury or forswerynge by the whiche men synne in contempnyn∣ge or despysynge wetyngly the dyuyne ve¦ryte. The fyrst kynde is by the serment or othe affermynge. The seconde is by the ser¦ment or othe promysynge. Nam aliud est iuramentum assertorium vt quando iura∣tur de presenti vel preterito sic esse vel non esse fuisse vel non fuisse. Aliud est promisso∣rium vt cum iurat aliquis se daturum vel facturum aliquid in tempore futuro. &c. B. ¶Fyrst a man forswereth hym by the serment or othe affermynge whan he kno∣weth or beleueth stedfastly that ony thyn∣ge is fals / euyll / and dysloyall / and that by delyberacyon he swereth affermatyuely wt intencyon to deceyue that it is good / he the whiche in suche wyse swereth synneth mor¦tally and ryght greuously as it is wryten .xxii. q. ij. Homines. Ryght greuously he syn¦neth for he affermeth his lesynge by othe. Quia periurium est mendatium iuramen to firmatum. Et dicit{ur} periurium quasi per¦uersū iuramentū. Periurement or forswe∣rȳge is as to afferme a lesȳge by othe. And it is sayd periurynge also as peruers othe. Et scotus in tercio suo. d. xxxix. Quicū{que} scienter iurat falsum siue iocose: siue seriose peccat mortaliter. ¶Also who so sholde de¦maunde
what it is of the seruaunt the whi¦che swereth a false thynge vnto his know∣lege by the admonycyon of his mayster as yf the sayd mayster hadde cause or quarel agaynst ony man and for to winne that he maketh the seruaunt to forswere him. Ray¦monde sayth that they ben bothe forswor∣ne and synneth mortally. Dominus quia precepit seruus: quia plus dominum tem∣poralem {quam} deum vel animam dilexit .xxii. q. v. Qui compulsus. The mayster is for∣sworne for that he commaunded / & the ser∣uaunt is also for that he loueth his lorde tē¦porall more than god or his soule. In lyke¦wyse yf the fader and moder make theyr chyldren to be forsworne wyttyngly bothe twayne shal be forsworne / yf the sayd chyl¦dren were capables of the commaundemē¦tes of god. That is yf they vnderstode wel that they sholde dysobey vnto god / & that they sholde synne. And yf the sayd children were not capables of the commaundemē∣tes of god they doo not cōmyt synne / but the fader and the moder the whiche com∣maundeth them synneth double / and dou∣ble penaunce and punycyon vnto them ap¦perteyneth. ¶Alsoo a man may make a questyon to knowe yf he ye whiche constrey¦neth a persone too swere synneth or not. Saynt Austyn sayeth that it behoueth for to make dystynccion yf he knowe or vnder¦stande yf he sholde be forsworne or not. Yf he knoweth nothynge and he hym cōstray¦ne for to haue certyfycacyon of the doubt it is no synne / but it is humayne temptacyō. But yf he knowe well that he shall be for∣sworne and he hym cōstreyn to swere. The answere after saynt Austyn and after a doctour named Galazius. Quod talis vī¦cit homicidam. That suche a persone vayn¦quyssheth and surmounteth an homycyde For an homycyde de sleeth the body. And he the whiche constreyneth a man too swere sleeth the soule of the dethe of gylte. More¦ouer it sleeth two soules / that is the soule  hym that is forsworne / and the soule of h the whiche constrayned hym to swere. As it is wryten .xxij. q. v. Ille qui prouocat ho¦minem ad iurationem. Et .xxii. q. v. qui e∣git. And that the whiche is sayd that he sur¦mounteth an homycyde is to vnderstande in the domage gyuen. For it is greter do¦mage of the losse of one soule than of body¦es Infynyte Magis damnum est in a¦sione vni{us} anime {quam} corpora infinita .xxxii. q. ij. Si habes. And soo an homycyde syn¦neth not soo greuously .xiij. di. Duo mala ¶Example of a man the whiche constray∣ned another to forswere hym / and yl cam vnto him .lxxxxij. g. ¶Also yf a march a¦swere affyrmatyuely vnto ony persone yt he shall sell vnto hym his ware at suche  pryce / and yf he haue Intencyon too gy it vnto him for a lesse pryce and swereth  in lyenge agaynst his thought. Quia mo¦tire est contra mentem ire. And afferm his lye by delyberacyon he synneth morta¦ly by as many tymes as he so swereth / ¦rehe an hondred tymes on the daye. And he the whiche byeth yf he swere by god I ne shall gyue more than soo moche for the thynge / or I wyll gyue nomore and yf ye he haue Intencyon to gyue more and the he speke agaynst his thought and swere ī in lyenge by delyberacyon he synneth als mortally by as many tymes as ye case hap¦peneth. ¶Also after that the marchaunt hathe sworne affyrmatyuely that he shal sell his ware for so moche yf he bye it / and after that the other withholdeth it and e¦presseth hym so moche that he maketh him forsworne they synne bothe two. For in ly¦kewyse as we ne wolde lese paradyse and be dampned we ne sholde desyre that our neyghbour be harmed. Mathei. xxij. D¦peccat mortaliter. ¶Also who so sholde ¦ges
{pro}ximum tuū sicut te ip sū. Thou shalt loue thy neyghbour as thy selfe. ¶Exam¦ple that two marchaūtes sayd vnto theyr curate that they coude not sel wtout lyenge & swerynge .lxxxxix. K. ¶Also who so shol¦de demaūde yf they yt swereth couertly by wordes deceyuable synneth or not. The mayster of the sentences answereth in ter∣tio libro. d. xxxviij. q. xv. whan ony persone swereth by arte or cautele of wordes not en¦tēdables for to deceyue that god ye whiche is wytnesse in the conscyence taketh in su∣che wyse the othe as he it entendeth or vn¦derstondeth vnto whome a man swereth by suche wyse he is doubly culpable for he taketh the name of god in vayne / and he deceyueth his neyghbour by cautele ye whi¦che is contra illd thobie .iiij. Quod ab alio tibi odis fieri / vide ne tu aliquando alteri facias. The thynge that thou hatest to be done vnto these that thou ne doo it at ony tyme vnto another. Suche people that in suche wyse forswereth theym abydeth not vnpunysshed as we may se by example of a crysten man the whiche sware cautelou∣sly vpon the auter of saynt Nycholas for ye syluer yt a Iewe had lent to hym .lxxxxvi. a ¶Also what is it of hym that hereth ony swere fals / and is certayne that he shall be forsworne and holdeth his peas) to vnder¦stonde yf he synneth or not. Raymonde sa∣yeth that ye / and allegeth illud Leuitici. Amma que auderit vocē iurantis fallum et testis fuerit {quod} aut ipse vidit aut consci{us} est nisi indicauerit portabit īiquitatem suā. The soule the whiche hereth the voyce of one swerynge fals and hath be wytnes yt he hath seen or that he is culpable he shall bere his synne yf he shewe it not. But that is to vnderstande yt he hym sholde reprehē¦de they two beynge al alone without to pu¦blysshe it & manyfest vnto all folke / or he it sholde tel secretely to hȳ yt is his souerayne for to correcke hym yf the synne be secrete. Quia qui crimē occultum manifestat nō est corrector erroris: sed proditor / sicut dicit augustinus .ij. q. j. Si peccauerit. He ye whi¦che manyfesteth the synne secrete or hydde he ne is correctour of the errour but he is a waster or proditor. Also yf he manyfest the periury openly peraduenture he sholde be punisshed corporally or slayne by the Iuge or by the parētes of him ayenst whome he is so forsworne: or {per}aduenture he ye whiche sholde publysshe yt sayd case lyghtly might be slayne. So it appereth that he ye whiche hereth another to be forsworne sholde hol∣de his peas / and also he ne sholde publisshe it. ¶Also a man forswereth hym by the af¦fermynge whan he swereth of a thynge doubtous / that is to say whan he knoweth not yf it be true or not / or yf suche thynges apperteneth vnto suche one or vnto suche one / and so by delyberacyon swereth affyr∣matyuely yt it appertaineth vnto suche one he synneth mortally. In suche a case a mā sholde speke of credence and not of certay∣ne scyence. But yf by lyghtnes of tongue without delyberacion he swereth / it sholde be venyall synne / so that anone he repent hym and be sory. &c. ¶Also men forswere theym by the serment or othe affermynge whan they beleue that ony suche thinge is true / and that it apperteyneth vnto suche one / and swereth affyrmatyuely for true without intencyon to deceyue / and al be it they ben deceyued for it is fals. I put the case he the whiche so swereth & incontynēt after the othe made enquyreth of the dede and repenteth after that he knoweth & ap∣perceyueth the falsenes he synneth but ve∣nyally / but yf he were slowe & gyue no for¦ce to enquyre of his ygnouraunce how he hath sworne he synneth mortally / as it is wryten .xxij. q. v. qi {per}iurat. Also a man for∣swereth hym by othe affermynge whā ony
swereth affermatyuely that ony thynge is true and that it apperteyneth vnto suche one / the whiche thynge really is true / but he that swereth beleueth stedfastly that it is false and swereth it for true vpon inten∣cyon to deceyue / in suche maner he sinneth mortally as it is wryten .xxij. q̄. ii. homines Periurium est ergo vel iurando loqui fal sum cum intentione fallendi / vel iurando loqui falsum sine intentione fallendi: vel iu¦randi loqui verum cum intentione fallēdi. ¶Than forswerynge is too speke false in swerynge with intencyon to deceyue / or to speke false in swerynge without intencion to deceyue / or to speke true in swerynge wt intencion to deceyue. It is wryten primo regum .xvi. ca. Homo videt ea que parent dominus autem intuetur cor. A man seeth and knoweth the thynges the whiche appe¦reth / but the sauyour and redemptour be∣holdeth the herte and the thought. C. ¶Secondly a man forswereth hym by ye othe promysynge in many maners. And fyrst whan ony promyseth by othe volun∣tary that he shall gyue or paye vnto suche a persone suche a thynge at suche a terme / or within suche a terme / yf after yt he chaū¦ge his purpose or yt he passe the sayd terme by reason dysposed he synneth mortally & is forsworne. But yf he chaūge not his pur¦pose and that before the sayd terme he fall in to pouerte or necessyte in so moche that he hath not wherof to fournisshe and accō¦plysshe the sayd othe / & that he is dysplea∣saunt that he may not accomplysshe it / in suche wyse shall he be of forswerynge excu¦sed. Quia necessitas non habet legem. The nedenes hath no lawe. Also whan ony pro¦myseth by othe that he shal paye within su¦che a terme / and that in swerynge he hath intencyon not for to paye for peraduentu∣re he knoweth wel yt he can pay for he hath not wherof / soo he is forsworne. But yf he swere I shall paye yf I may he shall be ex¦cused of the periury. Also of reason natu¦rall it is too vnderstonde that as often ty¦mes as a man swereth that he shal do our thynge yf he purpose in that houre that he swereth that he wyll not doo it ne accōply¦she / incontynent that he maketh the say othe he is periured. ¶Example of a ma the whiche wolde forswere hym for mone¦lent and he lost his speche .lxxxxvij. c. Also it is clerely to vnderstande that those and they the whiche gyueth theyr faythe solem¦pnely in the sacrament of maryage yt the shall do loyalte of body and of goodes th one vnto the other / Yf in makynge ye say othe / or after yt theyr wyll is chaunged & they defayle vnto theyr promesse they be periured and synneth mortally. Also wha ony swereth that he shall saye or doo ony thynge dampnable as theft / sacrylege / ¦chery / to bete or slee / or whan he swereth yt he ne shall do thynge the whiche is lefull prouffytable / as not to gyue almes / or n to loue his neyghbour / or neuer to pardon hym / or that he shall neuer faste the four tymes that is the ymbringe dayes or such thynges semblables lefull and good. He those the whiche swereth agaynst chary synneth mortally and in swerynge and  accomplysshynge the dede / but yf they re¦pent them and that they accomplisshe no the operacyon it shall be well done / for su¦che othes ne sholde be accomplysshed as it is wryten .xxii. q. iiij. Isido. Quod inca¦te vouisti non facias impia est promissio scelere ad impletur. ¶Example that He¦de synned to slee saynt Iohan baptyst f to accomplysshe his othe .lxxvi. E. Also y a woman made an othe vnto her lemma in gyuynge hym her faythe for to lye wit hym whan he wyll / that sholde be an oth full of synne the whiche she sholde not hol¦de. And yf she sholde swere that she shold
swere that she sholde not go vnto another she sholde holde that othe / for yf she sholde go vnto another harlot or ribaude she shol¦de be forsworne and that sholde be wors. Also yf a thefe swere vnto his felawes yt he shall departe lawfully the theft done amō¦ge them / yf he departe it lawfully it is an euyll othe and full of synne / and yf he de∣parte it not lawfully it is yet wors. Also yf ony hath sworne that he shall neuer be bys¦shop or that he shall neuer ētre in to relygy¦on / yf after it befall that it were prouffyta∣ble vnto the chyrche that he were bysshop or to entre in to relygyon he sholde not be bounde vnto the fyrst othe. Also I put the case that some be seased and taken of his enmyes or robbers the whiche by grete fe∣re maketh hym to swere or to promyse to paye a thousande pounde the whiche he ne can paye / or to gyue or delyuer a towne or a castell / to knowe yf he be bounde to accō∣plysshe yt sayd serment or othe. Vnto that sayth Raymonde sayth nay / and taketh ye wordes of saynt Austyn the whiche sayth {quod} iuramentum non potest esse vinculū ini∣quitatis. An othe ne may be the lyne & bon¦de of iniquyte as it is wryten .xxii. q. iiij. in∣ter cetera. & .xv. q. vi. c. Si sacerdotib{us}. &c. Et dominus per Ysaiam. Dissolue colliga¦tiones impietatis. Vnbynde ensemblemen¦tes or gadrynges togyder of cursed impye¦te that is wyckednesse. Howbeit these do∣ctours make dystynccion betwene the othe promysed and ye othe affermed / and sayth that the feere excuseth the othe promysed / and excuseth not the othe affermed. For a persone sholde more soner suffre all euylles than to afferme a false thynge / as it is wry¦ten .xii. q. v. Iuramenti. Some other do∣ctours sayth whan he consenteth hym vn∣to an othe what drede so euer he haue yf it be an othe the which may be done without mortall synne and without losynge of pa∣radyse he is bounde to accomplisshe ye sayd othe. Also a man forswereth him by yt othe promysynge whan he swereth that he shal do or say ony thynge lefull the whiche is wt solempnyte / albeit that he do indyscretely and without necessyte yet ought he to kepe it / or elles he synneth mortally yf there be none excusacyon the whiche hym excuseth ryght lefully as it is wryten .xxii. q. iiij. Si aliquod. ¶Example that a doctour accom¦plysshed not a vowe lyke as he had made it lost his syght: lxiii. G. Also a man forswe¦reth hym whan he maketh ony othe that he shall do a thynge lefull the whiche is wt∣out solempnyte / as to swere by god I shal go to morowe vnto the chyrche / or I shall faste / or I shall gyue atmesse / or to do ony semblable thynges. Yf suche of propre dely¦beracyon do vnto the contrary of his pro∣messe whan it is so that he may doo it he is forsworne and sinneth mortally. But yf he hath sworne to gyue almes and sone after he falleth in to pouerte he sholde be excused of periury for ye necessyte. Also it behoueth to make dystynccyon of othes quotydyens the whiche they make without solempnyte of thynge lefull by hastynes and lyghtnes of tongue and euyll custome as many do∣ne whan they do swere they knowe not yf they haue sworne or not / whan suche othes ben made without delyberacion or dylecta¦cyon / or consentement of reason they veny¦all synnes .xxv. di. c. Criminis. But whan in swerȳge they apperceyue well that they fayle and repenteth them not & take plea∣sure therin suche othes torneth them in to mortall synnes. Vnde Augustin{us} .xxii. q. ij. Nequis. Nullum peccatum a deo venia∣le quod non fiat criminale dum placet & idē si scientes ducit in consuetudinē. No synne is venyell vnto god but that it may be mor¦tall whan it pleaseth hym / and the same yf yf it be done wyllyngly in custome.
D. ¶Foure maners ben foūde in scryptu∣re that a synne the whiche of ye nature is ve¦nyall may be transmuted and chaunged to be mortall. ¶The fyrst is whan the con¦scyence Iugeth yt the othe is cursedly made and repenteth hym not of the sayd yll. Vn̄ scriptura. Quicquid sit contra cōsciētiam edificat in gehennā. What thynge so euer be that is done agaynst the conscyence edy¦fyeth in the fyre of hell. The seconde is whā the conscyence delyteth in it & taketh plea∣sure in the othe euyll made as before is alle¦dged. Nullū pctm̄ a deo veniale. &c. The thyrde is by that / yt a man is fallen in dele∣ctacyon of venyall synnes he dysposeth hȳ ofte tymes to come vnto mortall synnes / wherof speketh saynt Gregory the whiche sayeth. Vitasti gaudia / vide ne ebruaris arena. He sayth so for that often tymes fro small synnes men come in to grete. In ly∣kewyse as by a lytel sparkle of fyre there ry¦seth a grete flambe. Wherof ye sage speketh in his prouerbes saynge. Qui minima ne¦gligit paulatim decidit in maiora. He that dyspreaseth the small thynges falleth in to grete. The fourth whan yt venyall synnes ben not repelled comynly procedeth after the synnes mortall. As it appereth in the fyrst mouementes the whiche ben deputed amonge the venyall synnes whan the dele¦ctacyon hathe conualescence in soo moche that the consentement also approcheth / so sourdeth incontynent mortall synne. Also the accustomaunce to swere is daūgerous for who so swereth often often him for swe¦reth / and who so often lyeth often synneth mortally. Therfore sayth the holy Ysodore Vsus iurandi periurū ducit. The vsage to swere maketh forswerynge. Et legit{ur} hie remie .xiij. Si ethiops mutare pōt pellem suam et pardus varietates suas: & vos po¦teritis benefacere cū didiceritis malū. Yf ye ethyopyen that is blacke myght chaunge his skyn̄e / and the leoparde her varyete yt is whyte & blacke / and ye may do well  lykewyse as ye haue lerned & accustome yll. Also of lytell cornes men may make grete somme or burden & lade an hors so moche that he ne may bere it. Also of lytel venyall synnes men make grete mortal si¦nes the whiche ladeth & dampneth the pe¦sones. Vn̄ mgr̄ alanus. De minimis gra¦nis fit maxima sūma cabali / de breuib{us} m¦dis non veniale malū. So it appereth th the venyall synnes and the accustomaū to swere ben to fle as it is sayd before. E. ¶To the regarde of othes a man shol¦de vnderstande that some ben more horry¦ble / greter / solempnell / and byndynge the the other. For he the whiche swereth gods well bounde / but he yt swereth by god & b the euangelyst he is yet more bounde / and so of other swerynges whan the solemp¦te groweth the oblygacyon groweth. B what is it of one yt swereth by god & ye othe by the euangelist. Iohn̄ Crysostome say that he the whiche swereth by god is mo bounde than he yt swereth by the euāgely agaynst some yt beleueth ye contrary. S ti scripture propt{ur} deum fctē sunt non deu {pro}pter scripturas .xxij. q j. Aliqua. Foles scryptures ben made for god and not go for the scryptures. Also the doctours sayt that ye one othe and other solempnely m¦de the one and the other egally byndeth /  be it yf the one be solempnely made and other not / that the whiche is solempne made byndeth more as vnto the chyrche more penaunce vnto hym ought to be  ioyned the which transgresseth / but as ¦to god they ben egally bounde. extra. qu dei. vel vo. Yet agayne vnto the contrary the holyer that a thynge is wherby a ma swereth of soo moche is he more worthye greter payne that soo forswereth hȳ / th sayth saynt Austyn. Than more bound
xxii. q. i. Mouet te. Yf yu be forsworne repēt the / do penaunce the whiche effaceth ye syn synnes as it wryten before. quē ante .viij. b Also kepe the from swerynge vaynely and vnprouffytably or yu shalt lose the Ioyes of paradyse ye whiche ben grete / quere .lxvij. a Also thou sholdest drede to be sent in to the fyre of hell the whiche is a cruell tourment as it is wryten after. Quē. xlix. b. ¶Exam¦ples shal be founde by the table in the ende of thexamplary. quere .C. vii. A. A. ¶The maners to blaspheme god / and that the blasphematours ben ryght cur¦sed and euyll .xij. IT is wryten eclesiastice .xxiij. ca. Vir multum iurans implebit{ur} iniquitate & non discedet a domo illi{us} plaga. ¶A man moche swe∣rynge as he the whiche blasphe∣meth god / or the whiche forswereth hym shall be replenysshed with inyquyte and ye plage shall not departe from his hous. To blaspheme god is a ryght grete synne & de¦testable the whiche a man commytteth in many maners. Fyrst in gyuinge vnto god ony thinge that apperteyneth not vnto hȳ as to say that god is a lyer. Secondly whā a man taketh from god that thynge ye whi apperteyneth vnto hym / as to say that he is not Iust and good. Thyrdly whan man graunteth or gyueth vnto ony creature yt thynge the whiche apperteyneth vnto god the creatour / as to saye suche a man or su∣che an ydoll is god. Or as dyde ye seruaun∣tes of the kynge of Assyryens the whiche graūted vnto theyr kynge that the whiche apperteyned vnto god / for they sayd vnto the kynge Ezechyas. Whiche ben the god∣des of all the erthe the whiche haue power to delyuer theyr regyons from the handes of our kynge / there is none. And whiche is the god that may delyuer Iherusalem frō his honde. &c. This blaspheme dyspleased so moche vnto god that the aungell of our lorde stroke ye people of the army of ye sayd kynge & slewe an .C. lxxxv. M. as it is wry¦ten in the .xix. chapytre of ye .iiij. boke of kyn¦ges. Fourthly whan a man bryngeth forth towarde god contumelous moeuynges to debate or stryfe. Vnde mathei .xii. Hic nō ei cit demones / nisi in belzebub principe de moniorū. Et luce .xi. In belzebub principe demoniorum ei cit demonia. Some Iewes sayd that they had founde hym subuerty sȳ¦ge the people / and defendynge to gyue the trybute vnto cesar / and they lyed. Vn̄ luce xxiij. Hunc inuenimus subuertantē gentē nostram et prohibentē tributa dari cesari. Also some wende for to haue sayd Iniury vnto hym that he receyued the synners & that he eate and dranke with them. Vnde luce .xv. Hic peccatores recipit et mandu∣cat & bibit cum illis. Also some sayd that he was good / and other sayd that he was not good but that he seduced the people in yll. Vnde Ioh̄ .vii. Quidam dicebant bonus est / alu dicebant non / sed seducit turbas. Fyfthly in the swerynge cursedly / execra∣bly / and irreuerently as whan ony cursed crystyens ben angry anenst god / and by yt maner of Iniury and of vengeaunce swe∣re by the vertue of god / by the blode / by the guttes / by the lunges / by the herte / by the fete / by the heed / the eyen / the tethe / or ony of his membres. The persone yt so swereth by delectacyon & delyberacyon obstynatly yf he be a clerke he ought to be deposed / & yf it be a lay man he ought to be excommu¦nyed as it is wryten .xxij. q. i. Si quis per capillum. We rede that saynt Poule thap∣postle cursed some blasphemers. Of whō were Hymeneus & Alexander whome he betoke vnto Sathan to thende yt they shol¦de lerne no more to blaspheme / as it is wry¦ten.
thymo .i. ca. Also them the whiche swe∣reth by the fyue woundes of Ihesu cryst / or by his dethe / his passyon / & his blode / su¦che othes and swerynges ben to fle and to defende / for they often blaspheme / and do irreuerence vnto god and vnto his passion of whome is proceded our helth. Vnde cry¦sostomus super matheū. Oīs salus homi∣num in christi morte posita est. All ye helth of men is put in the dethe of Ihesu cryst. Also to blaspheme god is a synne moche to drede / for it maketh the blasphemers yl in many maners. B. ¶Fyrst they ben wors than the Iewes for the Iewes crucyfyed our lorde but one tyme / but a crysten man blasphemer crucy¦fyeth hym and beteth him wt his tongue as many tymes as he swereth. Vnde aposto∣lus ad heb. vi. Rursum crucifigentes semet i{pre}os filium dei. Et aug. dicit su{per} ioh̄. Fla∣gellat{us} est christus flagellis iudeorum / fla∣gellatur blasphemijs falso{rum} christianorum Ihesu cryst was whypped & scorged by ye Iewes scorges: and is now sore scorged by ye blasphemes of false crystyens. Also saynt Austyn sayth that the blasphemers sȳneth not lesse than the Iewes the whiche hym crucyfyed. Vnde august. illud mathei .xxii. Blasphemauit. Non minus peccant qui deum blasphemant regnantem in celis {quam} iudei qui crucifixerunt eum ambulantem ī terris. Also in as moche as they sinne of ve¦ray malyce and scyence they offende more than the Iewes dyde that crucyfyed hym ygnourauntly. Vnde paulus .i. corint. Si cognouissent nun{quam} regē glorie crucifixissēt Yf the Iewes had knowen hym they had not crucyfied the kinge of glory / albeit that theyr ygnouraunce excuseth them not / for he tolde them many tymes that he was ye sone of god and they wolde nothynge bele¦ue. But the crystyens blasphematours the whiche hym knoweth wel and beleueth in hym sinneth more greuously. Vn̄ glosa s psal. Grauius peccat contēnens sedenti celo {quam} qui crucifixerūt ambulantē in te Et bērnard{us} dicit. Plus peccant qui de blasphemant regnantē in celis{quam} illi qui pr¦prus manibus eū crucifixerūt pergentem terris. Our lorde prayed for the Iewes crucyfyed hym ygnourātly. Vn̄ luce. xxi Pater dimitte illis non eī sciunt quid fac unt. But he prayed not for the blaspheme¦tours the whiche swereth by hym wyty¦ly of propre malyce / and therfore they sh be more tourmented in hell than ye Iewe vn̄ luce .xii. Ille autem seruus qui cogn¦uit voluntatem dn̄i sui / & non se prepara et non fecit scdm voluntatē eius plagis ve pulabit multis. &c. The seruaunt ye which hath knowen the wyll of his mayster an is not prepayred and hath not doone after his wyll shall be betē of many. ¶Example that the fals crysten men ben more, cru brente in hell than the Iewes & paynym Quere .lvii. A. Secondly these blasphema¦tours ben wors than dogges / for dogges byteth not theyr mayster the whiche th nouryssheth / but the blasphematours by¦teth theyr mayster with the mouthe ye whi¦che eteth and drynketh the breed and ye ¦ne that god vnto them hath gyuen. Vn psal. Retribuebant michi mala pro bons They rewarde me agayne euyll for good Also the sage sayth. He shall fede and gyu drynke to the vnkynde / & yet shall he he bytter thinges. Vnde in libro eccl. Pasce et potabit ingratos & adhuc amara aud Thyrdly these blasphematours ben wo thā all creatures / for euery creature loue his creatour. Vnd psal. Bestie & vniuer pecora serpentes et volucres pēnate / reg¦terre et omnes ppliprincipes & oēs iudice¦terre / iuuenes et virgines senes cū iuruor bus laudent nomen dn̄i. Iterū psal. A s lis ortu vs{que} ad occasū: laudabile nomē dn̄i
And the sayd blasphematours loueth him not / but dyspyse hym / renounce hym / beet hym / & rent him with theyr intoxycate ton¦gues replete with venym mortall Vnde ia¦cob .iij. Ligua inquinatū malū plena mor¦tifero veneno. The euyll tongue without rest is full of venym mortall. All these blas¦phematours hath affyled theyr tōgues as a glayue or swerde / venym of the adder is vnder theyr tongues. Et psal. Exacue∣rūt vt gladium linguas suas venenū aspi∣dum sub labijs eorū. Also god hath not gy∣uen speche vnto beestes as vnto man & wo¦man to thende they prayse hym. Vn̄ Aristo¦teles dicit. Qd nullum animal naturaliter habm sermonē nisi homo. And for as moche as the sayd blasphematours maketh noyse and irreuerēce vnto god of the speche that he vnto them hath gyuen they ben worthy of grete punycyō. ¶Fourthly blaspheme is a language infernall that these blasphe∣matours lerne in this worlde. For ye dam∣pned the whiche haue spoken & vttred cur¦sed speche / & hath not wylled to prayse god with theyr tongues shall haue so grete do∣loure and punycyon yt they shall byte and ere theyr sayd tongues of rage and anguys¦she / and shall blaspheme god for the vehe∣ment and intollerable dolours & woūdes yt they shall haue. Legit{ur} appoc. xvi. Man∣ducauerūt linguas suas pre dolore et blas∣phemauerunt deū pre doloribus & vulneri¦bus sius. Also we rede that the deed bodies the whiche gone vnto dāpnacyon by synne prayse not god / ne all they the whiche des∣cendeth in to hell for to be there eternally. Vn̄ psal. Non mortui laudabunt te domi¦ne ne{que} omnes qui descendunt in infernū / sed nos qui viuim{us} benedicimus deo. And therfore whyle that we liue we sholde pray¦se god and leue the blasphemes for drede to descende with the sayd dampned. Also blas¦pheme is a vyce dyabolyke the whiche ma∣keth the tongue of the blasphematour too speke / lyke as ye good & holy goost speketh by the tongue of a good deuoute persone / of whome it is wryten. Math. x. Non enī vos estis qui loquimini sed spūs patris ve∣stri qui loquitur in vobis. It is not you the whiche speketh / but the speryte of your fa∣der the whiche speketh in you. Also ye deuyl speketh by the tongue of ye blasphematour And therfore whan a man seeth a persone the whiche blasphemeth god he may say su¦rely that he is not gouerned of the good & holy goost / for it ne techeth but to say well / but that he is gouerned of the cursed spyry¦te the whiche speketh euyll. Legit{ur} mat. vii. A fructib{us} co{rum} cognoscetis eos. By theyr fruytes ye shall knowe them. Et legitur lu¦ce .vi. et math. xii. Bon{us} homo de bono the sauro cordis sui profert bonū / et malus ho∣mo profert malum. &c. The good man pro¦ferreth good wordes / & the euyll man pro¦ferreth cursed wordes. Whan a man seeth smoke and sperkles come out of an hous it is a token that there is fyre in it / also whan a persone proferreth blasphemes it is a to∣ken that he is euyll. &c. And for as moche as these blasphematours speketh ye langua¦ge infernall of the dampned the whiche is the language that the deuyl theyr mayster techeth them & maketh them to speke / they goo not in to paradyse with god / but in to hell with the deuyll & with al the dampned Quia legit{ur} Iob .xxxvi. Qd deus non sal∣uat impios. God saueth not the euyll / that is to knowe yf they deye Impenytent and without contrycyon / confessyon / and satys¦faccyon. Vnde Luce .xiii. Nisi penitenti∣am habueritis omnes simul peribitis. Yf ye doo not penaunce ye shall all perysshe. ¶Fyfthly blaspheme is so grete a synne yt it is agaynst the goly goost / for it is ayenst his bounte / and therfore it is irremyssyble as vnto ye payne. Vn̄ legit{ur} mat. xii. Spūs
blasphemie nō remittet{ur} in hoc sclo: ne{que} in futuro .i. vix remittet{ur}. The spyryte of blas∣pheme shall not be pardoned in this worl∣de ne in the other. Et legit{ur} marci .iij. Qui blasphemauerit in spm̄ setm̄ non habet re∣missionem in eternū sed reus erit eterni de¦licti. He the whiche hath blasphemed ayēst the holy goost hath no remyssyon in perdu∣rabylyte. That is to vnderstande that he hath not playne punycyon in this worlde or in the other as vntoo the payne / for his synne is not commytted by fragylyte or bi¦ygnouraūce / but by certayne knowlege & malyce / wherby he hathe none excusacyon in his synne / and therfore vnto hym apper¦teyneth playne punycyon without remyssi¦on / not yt one sholde vnderstande yt yf the blasphematour wolde repent hym that ab¦solucyon to him sholde be denyed & that he ne may be saued and haue grace and mer∣cy as to the gylte. But a man sholde vnder¦stande that it shal be with grete payne / for vnto hym apperteyneth playne punycyon & playne penaunce as vnto the payne but yf he haue mercy. So it appereth & note it well that the sȳnes agaynst the holy goost be not pardoned in this world ne in ye other as to the payne as it is sayd / but they may be pardoned as to the gylte / and therfore ye blasphematours shold not dyspayre them: but do penaunce & absteyne them fro syn̄e Vnde ezech. xviii. Si autem īpius egerit penitenciam vita viuat. &c. Men fynde in wrytynge dyuers sortes of penaūce ye whi∣che apperteyneth vnto blasphematours. ¶Fyrst theyr penaunce ought to be of .vii. yeres in lykewyse as for the other mortall synnes / as it is wryten .xxii. Predicādum. But a man sholde consider the maner of ye othe / the qualite of the persone and ye other cyrcumstaunces for to gyue vnto hym pe∣naunce / eyther sharper or lyghter & easyer as it is wryten. R. i. De penitentijs et. c. se∣quenti .v. The othe the whiche is made  delyberacyon is more to punysshe than  the whiche is made by hastines. Also the p¦naunce of a publyke blasphematour is ¦uen by the bysshoppes / the whiche is suche That he ought to be at the chyrche dore s¦me sōdayes or solempne feestes bare fo¦bare heded / vngyrded / with a tapre in his hande. &c. Also the penaunce of the blasph¦matours after the auncyent lawe was they sholde be put to dethe / as it appere Leuiti. xxiiij. Of one of the sones of Israe the whiche had blasphemed god he was ¦ned and slayne by the commaundements god. And it is wryten in the sayd chapyt yt god cōmaunded Moyses in shewyne hym what punycyon the blasphematour shal haue / saynge. Loqueris ad filios  el / homo qi maledixerit deo suo portabit pe¦catū suū / et qui blasphemauerit nomē di¦morte moriet{ur} / lapidib{us} obruet eū oīs mu¦tudo ppli Moyses spake vnto the childre of Ysraell saynge. That man ye whiche sa¦yeth yll vnto his god shal bere his synne he the whiche hath blasphemed yt name our lorde shall deye of dethe / all the multi¦tude of people shall stone hym & sle hym stones. And the gospell sayth. He ye which hathe sayd yll vnto his fader or to his m¦der shall deye of dethe. Vn̄ math̄. xv. Qu¦mala dixerit patri vel matri morte mo ¶Syxtly these blasphematours bē dys¦sed to speke contumelyous wordes / inu and rebuke vnto theyr lorde and mayster And meruayle is it none yf they ben in h¦te and lose his loue / his grace and his com¦pany. For in lykewyse as god dwelleth  grace in the conscyence of the good catho¦lyke. Vt habet{ur} .i. ioh̄ .iiii. Qui maneth in¦ritate in deo manet: et deus in eo. Vnto the contrary. God departeth hym from the ¦scyence of the blasphematoure the which is a ryght yll catholyke. Qui nō manet
caritate deus non manet in eo. And also as men say of the good catholycke. Ioh̄ .xiiii. Si quis diligit me sermonē meum serua∣bit / & pater meus diligit eū et ad eū vena∣mus et mensionē apud eū faciemus. Who so loueth me he shall kepe my worde / & my fader shall loue hym & we shall come vnto hym / and we shall make our dwellynge in hym. Also a man may say of ye cursed blas∣phematour. Apud eū non veniem{us} & mē¦sionem apud eū faciemus. That is to saye. that the blyssed trynyte shall not come to dwell ne rest by grace in the conscyence of the cursed blasphematour as in the conscy∣ence of the good catholyke. ¶Seuenthly blaspheme chaseth the vertues / letteth the good dedes spyrytuall / and maketh many euyls in the soules of the blasphematours the whiche ben declared afterwarde. Que¦re .xliiij. b. c. d. e. f. g. h. i. k. ¶Examples of ye blasphematours. Quere in thexamplary .lxii. b. c. d. h. i. k. A. ¶Questyon yf a man commytte synne at euery tyme that he swereth .xiii. NOn assumes nomen dei tui in vanū. Vpon this cōmaunde∣ment a man may demaūde yf ony may swere without com∣myttynge synne. The answer A man may swere without sinne whan ne¦cessyte is / the whiche is verytable / Iust / le∣full / and for good ende / as whan a mā swe¦reth for to afferme Innocency whan ony cursed cryme is brought vp / or for to con∣ferme ye alyaunces of peas / or for to shewe or persuade vnto ye herers that the whiche is vtyle for ye helth of theyr soules. To swe¦re for these thynges it is none euyll synne. for it is necessary and lefull. Albeit that the swerynge of it selfe is not good / and neuer¦theles it is not yll whan it is necessary / & yet it is not to appetyte as is the good. Mo¦re ouer it is not to fle as an yll thynge whā it is lefull / but he defendeth the appetyte / ye dylectacyon / and the accustomaūce to swe¦re vaynely & vnlefully / as a thynge ydle / vayne / and peruers. Saynt Poule the ap¦postle knewe the commaundementes of god / and neuertheles he sware as it is wry¦ten in his epystles. Vestis est michi deus. By that it is to vnderstande that sweryn∣ge is lefull & necessary whan by the same a man thynketh vnto yt welfare of his ney∣ghbour after the commaundement of god the whiche sayth. Diliges proximū tuū si∣cut tei{pre}m. And the psalme. Dn̄e quis ha∣bitabit in tabernaculo tuo aut quis requies¦cat in monte sancto tuo. Lorde who shall dwell in thy tabernacle / or who shal rest in holy mountayne. The answer. Qui iurat proximo suo et non decepit eum. He ye whi∣che swereth vnto his neyghbour & decey∣ueth hym not shal mounte in to heuen. &c. Also the aungell yt saynt Iohan sawe stan¦dinge on the see as it is wryten in the appo¦calyps. Teuauit manum suā ad celum & iurauit per viuentē in secula seculorum. He lyft vp his hande & sware by the lyuȳge in ye worldes. Also our lorde sayth in ye gospel Amen / amen / dico vobis. Also we rede yt our lorde sware in the olde testament. Iu¦rauit dn̄o et nō penitebit eū. & agayne. Iu¦rauit dn̄s vitatē. &c. Our lorde sware true yet he commaunded in ye olde lawe. Red∣de dn̄o iuramēta tua. &c. Yelde thyn othes to our lorde. By these foresayd auctorytees a mā may swere wtout syn̄e at a nede. And for yt god sayth in the gospell that our wor∣de sholde be / it is so / it is not so. Math̄. v. Sit aūt sermo vr̄ est / est / nō / nō / qd autem his abundāti{us} malo est. The answer yt ye af¦fyrmacyon or negacyon yt is in the hert ou¦ght to be in ye mouthe / but for yt malyce is so growen yt they wyll not beleue by sȳple
worde / and therfore god hathe put to pru∣dently. Quod amplius est malo est. That the whiche is more than ynough is yll / not euyll vnto those the whiche swereth for the welfare of theyr neyghbour / but yll vnto those the whiche ne wyll beleue wtout swe¦rynge / theyr incrudylyte is sōtyme of pay∣ne and of culpe / and therfore he sayeth not malum. Yll vnto hym the whiche hȳ vseth moche in swerynge. But he sayth a malo / from the euyll of hym the whiche otherwy¦se beleueth not / that is of his syn̄e ne depar¦teth from hym the whiche is somtyme pay¦ne / and somtime payne and gylte / thā god defendeth the othe the whiche is yll. He cō∣maundeth to speke well in saynge. Sit ser¦mo vester est / est / non / non. It is soo / it is not so / and he graunteth the swerynge the whiche is necessary. Also whan a man wyl not beleue the trouthe but by swerynge / he the whiche swereth in good and Iust cause syn̄eth not / but he sholde offende yf he swa¦re not. For it sholde befall sōtyme yt a good man sholde lese his good and Iust cause yf veryte were not approued by good men. And therfore sayth saynt Austin. Quisqis meru cuiuscū{que} potestatis veritatem ocul∣tatiram dei super se prouocat: quia magis timet hominem {quam} deum. Yf ony hyde very¦te by the drede of puyssaūce he prouoketh the yre of god vpon hym / for he dredeth ye men more than god. In suche wyse to swe¦re by necessyte is no synne as it is sayd. Al∣so albeit that god hath defended othes inu¦tyles / neuertheles by especyall he defēdeth the swerynges the whiche ben made by the creatures to thēde that man ne do honour vnto creatures the whiche apperteyneth vnto the creatour. Ne honorificētia crea∣toris transferetur ad creaturas. Or yt man beleue not that ony dyuyne thynge be in hȳ wherby reuerence vnto ought to be done. And therfore after yt god had said in ye gos. (tild). Mat. v. Nō iurare oīno. Hastely  putteth after. Ne{que} per celū qr thron{us} d est / ne{que} per terrā qr scabellum pedū ei{us} . ne{que} per hiero solimam qr ciuitas est reg¦magni ne{que} per caput tuū quia non pot¦vnum capillum tuū facere albū vel nigri. Swere thou neuer aboue all thynge / ney¦ther by the heuen for it is the throne of g¦ne by the erthe for it is the stole of his fe¦ne by Iherusalem for it is the cyte of ye gr¦te kinge / ne by thy heed for yu can not ma one of thy heeres whyte ne blacke. Also  rede yt saynt Iames defended that no sholde swere. An̄ oīa fr̄es mei nolite ¦re The glose sayth yt he defendeth not sȳ swerȳge / but he defendeth the wyll to ¦re. And therfore he sayd vygylātly (no for the affeccyon & wyll sholde not dra vs to swere / but the necessyte & oportum te sholde drawe vs there vnto for ye helt and welfare of our neyghbours. And th yt saynt Iames putteth. Nec per celū /  per terrā / nec per quodcū{que} aliud iuram¦tūiurare vetat. Whan nede is to swere man sholde swere by god in callynge hy to wytnesse / not by the creatures as it sayd. In lyke wyse as the wyne is not y of it selfe. And all be it saynt Poule defe¦deth men to drynke superfluously / for it cureth dronkenes & lechery. Nolite īe¦ri vino ī quo ē luxuria. Ad eph. v. Also s¦rynge in superfluyte is defended. All the thynges beforesayd ben expounded & sp¦ken by saynt Austyn / & by Inno. & by m¦ny other .xxii. q. i. Nō ē {con}tra dei{pre}ceptū. & iiii. sequētib{us}. Sipctm̄ extra. e. si e{pre}s. A how be it yt swerȳge is defended / not¦dynge some ben except wherby a mā ¦swere whā nede is / yt is by ye euangelyst ye auter wherupon ye body of cryst is con¦crate. Also by ye relykes of sayntes / by  holy crosse. Also a man may swerein ye h¦de of the bysshop lyke as it is wryten. x
q. i. Si aliqua causa. ca. Habemus. B. ¶What is requysyte for to swere leful¦ly without ony synne .xiij. THre thinges ben requysyte or yt a man swere without commyt∣tynge ony synne. That is to vn¦derstonde / veryte / iugement / & iustice. Vnde Hieremye .iiij. Iu¦rabis viuit dominus in veritate et in iudi∣cio & in iusticia. Et habetur .xxii. q. i. Et iura bunt. Yf these these thre thynges defayle or ony of theym it is periury / as it is wryten .xxii. q. ii. Animaduertendum. ¶The fyrst thynge the whiche is requysyte or yt a man may swere without synne is veryte in the conscyence / that is that a man knowe the thynge stedfastly for to be soo as he it swe∣reth. For who so sholde thynke one thynge and swere another sholde be periured. Or who so sholde beleue that ony thynge were true / and knoweth it not too be all true for certayne: he sholde swere of credence & not of veryte / for that sholde be agaynst yt the whiche is sayd (iurabis viuit dn̄s in verita¦te). ¶The seconde thȳge requysyte to swe¦re wel wtout ony synne is that a man shol∣de swere by dyscrete delyberacyon / ye whi∣che is in the party of reason / that is that a man sholde dyscerne yf there were ony ne∣cessyte to swere or not. For albeit that a thȳ¦ge be true yet he sholde not swere yf there ne were necessyte. As who so sholde swere by our lady I am in the chyrche. &c. How∣beit that the othe be verytable yet is there synne / for there is noo necessyte to swere yt. Iurabis in iudicio. Whan a man swereth it behoueth that he there haue good Iuge∣ment / that is dyscrete delyberacion as it is sayd / to dyscerne and aduyse yf the thynge be requysyte and necessary for to swere / as whan a man warneth or counceyleth to be¦leue some good thynge the whiche is expe∣dyent and prouffytable vnto some slouth∣full and peruers persones the whiche wol∣de not beleue by simple wordes and speche he may swere in callynge god to wytnesse that in suche wyse he sholde be without of∣fence in swerynge. Iurabis ī iudicio. Also whan a man swereth by good dyscrecyon it behoueth to regarde .vi. thynges / that is quādo / quale / cui / quomodo / vbi / et de quo. Fyrst it behoueth too regarde (quando) in what tyme it is that a man swereth / for in seculer causes nor in other a man ne sholde swere / ne constreyne to swere in the solem∣ne feestes / ne to holde Iurysdyccyon. Se∣condly (quale iuramentū) / what othe it is that a man swereth / for some of theym or one of them ben greter than another & mo¦re to drede. Thyrdly (cui): to whome it is yt a man swereth / for a persone of the chyrche sholde not be coarted to swere to seculer / ne in court seculer but in some case / for the∣re myght folowe irregalyte / as in case of cryme. Fourthly (quomodo) how it is yt a man swereth / by what maner / by what de¦lyberacyon / by what constraynte / and by what hastynes / or necessyte. Fyfthly (vbi) where it is that a mā swereth / in what pla¦ce / in holy place / or in place not holy / as in the chyrche or chyrche yarde. Syxtly (de quo) / of whome / of what thynge it is that a man swereth / of a thynge good or yll / yf it be of an yll thynge a man sholde not swe¦re. ¶The thyrde thynge the whiche is re∣quysyte to swere lefull is to regarde yt the thynge wherfore a man swereth be iust le∣full & to do good and accomplysshe / for the othe the whiche is not iust sholde not be ac¦cōplysshed. And for yt offended Herode for the othe yt he had made vnto his doughter whan he made saynt Iohan baptyst to be heded. Vn̄ Ysodo. Impia est {pro}missio q̄ sce¦lere adīpletur. The promys is yll ye whiche
is accomplysshed by syn̄e / yf the othe haue these thre thynges before sayd a man may swere without synne. C. ¶That a man sholde accomplysshe ye vowes Iustly made. xiij DAuyd ye prophete sayth. Vowe ye lefully by deuocyon. And af¦ter that ye haue vowed soo yel¦de ye and accomplysshe ye sayd vowe to your lorde god. Vnde daujd in psalmo. Vouete & reddite dn̄o deo vestro. And note well that after yt he hath sayd (vouete) there foloweth incontynent reddite). In this seconde cōmaundement god defendeth that a man ne breke the vo∣wes the whiche hath be made Iustly / & le∣fully by delyberacyon and by Iuste cause. They ye whiche accomplyssheth them not and leueth them / and the whiche dooth vn¦to the contrary of that / yt they haue vowed and promysed / or the whiche them dyspyse taketh the name of god in vayne and doth vnto hym irreuerence & vnto his sayntes. And they sholde vnderstande that they bē charged and bounde to accomplysshe thē / or elles they commyt mortall synne. Ysodo¦rus dicit. Multum deo reus eris si nō red¦das quid voueris / deo displicent qui vota sua non īplent. That is to say. Thou shalt be moche culpable vnto god yf thou yelde not / that is yf thou accomplysshe not that yt thou hast vowed. Those the whiche accō¦plysshe not theyr vowes dyspleaseth vnto god. ¶Example of a woman the whiche vowed chastyte and after wolde be mary∣ed. Quere in thexamplarye of the seconde commaundement .lxiij. E. Also it is better doone not to vowe than not to holde ye pro¦mysses after yt the vowe is made. Vn̄ eccl. v. Multo{que} meli{us} est nō vouere {quam} post vo¦tū {pro}missa nō reddere. Et Ysodo. dicit. Me¦lius est enī non {pro}mittere {quam} fide {pro}missiōis non soluere. That is to saye. Better is not to promyse than not to pay the faythe of ye promesse. Also it is grete Ieopardy to tary to accomplysshe the vowe after it is made yf a mā hath tyme & space to accomplysshe it. Vnde deuteron̄ .xxiij. Cū votū voueris dn̄o deo tuo non tardabis reddere: qua re∣quiret illud dn̄s deus tuus et si morat{us} fue¦ris reputabitur tibi in peccatū. That is to saye thou ne shalte tary to yelde vnto thy lorde god whan thou hast vowed a vowe for thy lorde god shall requyre it of the / & yf thou hast made taryenge to accomplys∣she it vnto the it shall be reputed in synne. And it is wrytē ecclesiastes .v. Si quid deo vouisti ne moreris reddere displicet enim ī∣fidelis et stulta promisso. Yf yu haste vowed ony thynge vnto god ne tary thou to yelde promesse / vnfaythfull and folysshe pro∣messe him dyspleaseth. ¶Example that it is a grete peryll to deffer to accōplysshe his vowe. Quere in ye examplary .lxiij. H. Ma∣ny other examples of vowes there shall be founde & cete. Also a man sholde note that those the whiche accomplyssheth theyr vo¦we ben in the loue & grace of god. For they sheweth them selfe loyall and faythfull in there {pro}mysses / & god vnto them accordeth in there prayers and oraisons. ¶Example that Anne vowed vnto god that yf he wol¦de sende her a sone that she sholde gyue hȳ vnto the seruyce of god all his lyfe / she con¦ceyued Samuell the whiche was a pro∣phete & accōplysshed her vowe as it is wry¦ten .i. regū .i. ca. ¶Another example yt the kȳge Aza accōplysshed ye vowe yt he made of his fader & bare hym to goddes hous: as it is wryten .ii. paral .xv. ¶Another exāple yt after that ye chyldren of Ysrael had vycto¦ry of Holofernes they yede to worshyp god in Iherusalem / & al they kept theyr vowes & promesses / as it is writen. Iudith .xvi. ca.
D. ¶What thȳge is a vowe how is it dyf¦fynyed. Vowe is concepcyon of ye best pur∣pose of delyberacion of stedfast courage to god or vnto his sayntes wt entēcyon hym to oblege. Vnde secundū magistrū in quar¦to di .xxxviii. & tho. et alios theologos. Qd votum est cōceptio spontanea melioris pro¦positi animi deliberatione deo vel sāctis ei{us} firmita cum intentione se obligandi. And it is to be noted that many thynges ben re¦quysyte vnto lefull vowe & accomplysshed the whiche ben touched in the sayd dyffyni¦cion. ¶Fyrst it is requysyte concepcyon of some made in the entendement by the holy goost. ¶Secondly it is requysyte that the vowe be not yll. And therfore the dyffyny∣cyon sayth (melioris). Yll and synne desor∣doneth vs towarde god. Vnde legit{ur}. Qd votum non est vinculū iniquitatis. Vowe is not the lyen and bonde of inyquyte. And therfore it is wryten. Dissolue vinculū ini¦quitatis. Vnbynde or louse the lyen of iny¦quyte. Et legit{ur} .xxxij. q .iiij. Ysodo. In ma∣lis promissis rescīde fidē / in turpi voto mu¦tu decretum / quod incaute vouisti nō faci∣as / impia est promissio que scelere adimple¦tur. In cursed wordes rescyndeth ye fayth chaunge thy wyll in that vowe the whiche is foule and euyll / do not the thynge ye whi¦che yu hast vowed vnwysely. The promysse is euyll the whiche is doone & accomplys∣shed by synne. ¶Example wryten in the .xxiij. chapytre of the dedes of the appostles that .xl. Iewes vowed that they sholde ney¦ther eete ne drynke tyll they hadde slayne saynt Poule / theyr vowe was euyl and in synne / and they myght not accomplysshe it. &c. ¶Thyrdly it is requysyte yt he there haue concepcyon fre in as moche as ye dyf∣fynycyon sayeth (spontanea) / that is that euery man may vowe the thynges ye whi∣che ben in his lyberte and in his ryght and not otherwyse / and therfore seruauntes / chyldren / relygyous prisoners. &c. in some thynges may not vowe. Quia non sunt sui iuris. ¶Fourthly it is requisyte that he there haue delyberacyon and therfore the dyffynycyon sayth / animi deliberatione) vnto the dyfference of those the whiche vo¦weth sodaynly without delyberacyon and consentement of reason. ¶Fyfthly vowe ought to be made vnto god or to his sayn¦tes and not vnto men for many thynges the whiche abydeth bycause of shortenes. ¶Syxtely with entencyon to bynde hym for loue bereth oblygacyon to do some thȳ¦ge or to loue it. &c. E. ¶Vowe the whiche is lefully made of ryght ought too be accomplysshed as it is sayd / but in .ix. maners a man is not boun∣de to accomplysshe his vowe. ¶The fyrst is whan ony hath vowed vnder condycy∣cyon as to say. I shall do suche a thynge yf suche one haue his helthe / or yf he lyue not or yf he deye not of suche a sekenes / whan the condycyon hathe none effecte a man is not bounde to accomplysshe ye sayd vowe. ¶The seconde is whan it hath be made so¦daynly and without delyberacyon. ¶The thyrde is ye vowe of them the whiche hath lost theyr wytte / or ye whiche ben furyous. ¶The fourthe is whan by infyrmyte / po∣uerte / or other lefull lettynge a man may accomplysshe the sayd vowe. ¶The fyfth is whā a man voweth by yre / or other passi¦on so grete yt they leue true delyberacyon. ¶The .vi. whan it sholde be to the hurt of ony grete good or comyn welfare. ¶The vij. is whan ye vower is subgect to another as yonge people / a mayde vnder .xiij. yere / a man chylde vnder .xv. yeres / a relygious a wedded woman / a seruaunt yf the vowe sholde be lettynge of the seruyce that he o∣weth whan the souerayns beforesayd ben not so content / or gaynsayeth there vnto ye subgectes ben not boūde to theyr vowes
of saynt Iohan in the floode of Iourdayn Nono / on the sondaye our lorde made his fyrst myracle to chaunge the water in to wyne at the weddynge. &c. Decimo / on ye sondaye our lorde Ihesu cryst fedde fyue thousande men with fyue loues of breed / and with two fysshes. Vndecimo / on the sondaye our lorde Ihesu was honoured with palmes the whiche is the sonday be∣fore Eester daye. Duodecimo / on the son∣daye the redemptoure of the worlde rose frome dethe to lyfe. Terciodecimo / on the sonday the holy goost descended vpon the appostles the daye of penthecost or whyt-sonday. Quartodecimo / the clerkes presup¦poseth that god shall holde his Iugement on the sonday / but for certayne no persone knoweth ony thynge but all myghty god onely. By these thynges beforesayd it ap∣pereth that the sonday is establysshed for to be kepte / sanctyfyed / honoured / and lau¦dably feested amonge all the pryncypall fe¦stes. Vnde secundumius canonicum. Cō¦stat diem dominicū inter summas et preci¦puas festiuitates contineri. & dicitur in de∣creto. In dominica die nichil est agendum nisi soli deo vocandum. de consecratione di¦stinctione. tercie. Ieiunia. Noo thynge is to be doone on the sonday / but to be besyed towarde god / hym for to honoure and his gloryous sayntes. And by this the whiche is before wryten. Sabbata sanctifes). A man sholde vnderstande that in the aun∣cyent testament men kepte and sanctifyed the saterdaye. But for the mysteryes befo∣resayd the whiche hathe ben doone on the sondaye / and to thende that we do not as the Iewes dooth the whiche kepeth the sa-saterday we shall kepe and solempnyse the solempnyte the daye of the sondaye. ¶Ex∣amples of dyuers people the whiche hathe wrought on the sonday. And fyrst of a mā the whiche wrought on the sonday and his handes claue vnto the wood. Quere in the examplary .lxiiij. C. ¶Another exāple of a man the whiche ledde haye on the sonday and he was thretened dyuinely to be brent Quere in thexāplary .lxiiij. D. ¶Another example of two women the whiche baked on the saterday after ye sonne goynge dou∣ne / & one of them became drye / and the pe¦le of the ouen cloue to the handes of the o∣ther. Quere .lxiiij. G. ¶Another example of a mowyer the whiche left werke on the saterdaye / & his felawes wolde not do soo: and he founde some golde. Quere in the ex¦amplary .liiij. M. ¶Secondly it is good reason to sanctyfy the festes of god and of the gloryous vyrgyn Mary for the myste¦ries of theyr solempnytees the whiche shol¦de be longe for to declare by the whiche our redempcyon hathe ben made. ¶Thyrdly mayster Wyllyam of Anserre techeth .vi. reasons in the somme of the offyce wherfo∣re it was establysshed that we make solem¦pnyte of the sayntes of paradyse. The fyrst is for the honoure of the dyuyne mageste / for whan we doo honour vnto sayntes we honoure god in his sayntes / and we saye yt he is meruaylous in theym. He the whiche dooth honour vnto sayntes he honoureth specyally hym the whiche theym hath san∣ctyfyed. The seconde for to haue ayde in our humayne fragylyte / for we ben so fray¦le vnto synne that by our selfe we may not haue helthe / and for as moche as we haue nede of the helpe & prayers of sayntes we do them honour in theyr feestes to thende yt we may deserue theyr helpe. The thyrde is for the encreasynge of our suerte / for by the honoure that is doone vnto sayntes in theyr solempnytees our hope & suerte is en¦creased soo yt the mortall men semblable to vs may be in suche wyse reysed in so grete honoure by theyr merytes / it is certayne yt soo it it may be of vs / for the power of god
is not lessed. The fourthe is for the exam∣ple of our folowynge / for whan ye feestes of the sayntes is recorded euery yere we bē called to folowe them / so that by thexam∣ple of them we dysprayse the thynges erth¦ly and desyre the celestyalles. The fyfth is for that that the aungelles and sayntes of paradyse haue Ioye and exaltacyon whan we the whiche ben synners conuert vs vn¦to god. Vnde luce .xv. Gaudiū erit in celo super vno peccatore penitentiā agente. &c. And therfore it is reason syth yt they make feest of vs in heuen yt we make feest of thē in erthe. The syxte is for the procuracyon of our honour / for whan we honour ye sayn¦tes we procure our honour / theyr solēpny∣te is our dygnyte / whan we honoure our broder we honour our selfe. Charyte ma∣keth all thynge to be comyn / and our thyn¦ges ben celestyalles / erthly / and pardura∣bles. C. ¶Questyon / who so sholde demaunde at what houre a mā sholde begynne to cele¦bre the feestes. The answer / regulerly men saye that from the one euensonge vnto ye other euensonge the chyrche maketh solem¦pnyte. It is wryten extra de ferus & de con¦secratione distinctione .i. capitulo. Missas. Om̄es dies dominicos a vespera in vespe∣ram cum omni veneratione decreuimus obseruari. We haue decrete to kepe in al ho¦nour all the dayes of the sondayes from ye one euensonge vnto the other euensonge. For to cease on them for to doo ony werke and for to make holy ye feestes a man shol∣de consyder the qualyte / and the quantyte of the feest / what ye custome is of the regy∣on / and of the place where a man is. And after the gretenes of the feest and custome of the place a man sholde more sooner be∣gyn / and the more late for to make an ende In lykewyse as sayth the scrypture in ma¦ny places. Vnde {quam}uis scriptū sit a vespe¦ra in vesperam celebrabitis sabbata vestra verumtamen initium festorum & finis iux¦ta eorum qualitatem et regionum consue¦tudines seruari debent / & sicut magnitudo eorum exigit prios incipere / et tardius ter∣minati extra .e. quoniam. This scrypture repreueth the foly of some symple men the whiche reputeth not to be synne to labour and worke late on the saterday at nyght / and weneth that it is synne to worke erly on the monday in the mornynge. Of this mater thou shalt finde many examples in the examplary. D. ¶Questyon / who so sholde demaunde wherfore is it that men make holy / and ho¦noure some feestes more solempnely in so∣me countrees than they of other countrees done / or that some feestes in some bysshop ryches ben kept of whome no mencyon is made in other countrees. Vnto that it be∣houeth to answere that a man ought for to do after the custome of the regyon whe∣re as he is. For it is wryten extra de ferrijs Qd in festis celebrandis vel non / vel quis dicatur esse festiuus vel non consuetudo regionis debet obseruare. Dicendum est etiam cum hieronymo {quod} vnaque{que} prouī∣cia abūdat in suo sensu. distinctione .lxxvii. Vtinam in omni tempore ieiunare posse∣mus. Et augustinus interroganti. Respō. Ambrosius. Cum romam venio ieiuno sab¦bato / cum mediolanum sum non ieiunio sabbato / sic et tu quamcun{que} forte ecclesi∣am veneris eius mora serua si cui{quam} nō vis esse in scādalum nec quem{quam} tibi. One and euery prynce haboundeth in his beynge. And therfore yf thou come to Rome and that they faste there on the saterdaye faste thou also in lyke wyse as they doone. And yf they haue in custome to kepe or sancty∣fy ony feest kepe it with them. And yf thou aryue in ony chyrche kepe theyr customes the whiche ben not agaynst god / or elles
they shall sclaunder the. A. ¶How in syxe maners men sanctyfye the feestes commaūded / the whiche ma¦ners shall be put by psalmes / and some ben necessaryes for the sanctyfycacyon of those feestes / and the other ben cery∣monyalles for the augmentacion of god and of vertues .xv. FYrst men sanctyfy the feestes commaunded by abstynence / and to cease to do operacions erthly and seculers / as to goo to the plough. Exodi vicesimo Non facies omne opus in eo. And it is to thende that we cease and refrayne the aua¦ryce and couetyse of the worlde / and for to take hede and entende vnto the vtylyte & prouffyte of the soules. Yf on the workinge dayes we take hede for the labour of the bo¦dyes god wyll that on the holy dayes com∣maunded we entende vnto the vtylyte of the soules. At the begynnynge of the worl∣de god created spyrytuall thynges as aun∣gelles / and corporall thynges as ye beestes and the byrdes / and of these two thynges togyder he made man / that is of a thynge spyrytuall as the soule / and of a thynge cor¦porall as the body. In lykewyse we haue nede of two refeccyons. That is of the re∣feccyon of the body the whiche we do gete on the werkynge dayes / and of the refeccy¦on of the soule the whiche we seche on the holy dayes. How be it that euery daye we ought for to gyue refeccyon vnto the soule. For it is wryten in the gospelles how that a man lyueth not onely by etynge of breed for to mayntene ye body / but in euery wor∣de the whiche procedeth frome the mouthe of god / wherby the soule is refeccyoned. Vnde Mathei. iiii. capitulo. Non ī solo pa¦ne viuit homo / sed in omni verbo quod pro¦cedit ab ore dei. And therfore god hath or∣deyned werkynge dayes to laboure on all holy to nourysshe the body. And also com∣maundeth to cease of operacyons worldly on the holy dayes for to sanctyfy them and for to nouryssh the soule as before is sayd. Deuteronomie .v. Obserua diem sabbati vt sanctifices deum / sex diebus operaberis et facies omnia opera tua / septimus dies non facies in eo quic{quam} operis. &c. B. ¶A questyon to vnderstande yf a man may worke on the holy daye without com∣myttynge mortal synne. The answer. We fynde in wrytynge that in foure maners some may do worke on the holy daye with∣out commyttynge mortall synne. Prima est propter operis vel laboris modicitatem Secunda est propter temporis necessitatē. Tercia propter cordis pietatem. Quarta est propter publicam vtilitatem. The fyrst is whan a man dooth so lytell thynge that the rest of the thought ne may be letted to¦warde god / that is anenst the sanctyfyca∣cyon of the solempnyte it be not dymynys∣shed or lessed / as to hewe a logge ye whiche is in the courte for to dresse the dyner and not to lose the seruyce. But who that shol∣de do soo grete operacyon that the rest the whiche is commaunded in the sayd feest. Sabbati sanctifices were pertourbed and letted sholde do mortall synne / in lykewyse as sayeth the glose vpon this worde ye whi¦che is. Exodi xxxi. Qui polluerit sabbatū. Glosa. Turbādo quietem anime morte mo¦riatur / scilicet anime & corporis. Ex quo pa¦tet {quod} solum ille labor qui turbat quietem & spiritus libertatem causat peccatum mor∣tale. The seconde is for the necessyte of la∣bour ye whiche is in way of perdycion in su¦che maner that a man ne may deferre it / or prouyde for the impetuosyte of ye rayne tyme of August / or for the grete colde in ye
tyme of wynter. &c. Whan a man presup∣poseth of the perdycyon of the sayd labour the necessyte may be soo grete that a man sholde be excused of mortall synne. Quia necessitas nō habet legem / si malum sequi∣tur potestea de. con. distinc. i. Sicut etiam patet extra de consuetudine .ca. iiii. A sure thynge it sholde be to doo by thexample of his curate or prelate of the chirche. For it is wryten prouerbiorū .xi. & .xxiiij. Qd salus erit vbi sunt multa consilia. Helthe shal be where as ben many counceyles or councey¦lers. To the whiche thȳge a mā sholde vn∣derstande that the chyrche may dyspence in these thynges here by one reason ye whi∣che is that the chyrche ne vseth alonely of the puyssaunce humayne also as the reason supposeth / but also of the puyssaunce dyuy¦ne. And therfore the chyrche dyspenceth by that puyssaunce in the commaundement dyuyne that god hath gyuē. Of the whiche thynge it appereth that who soo dyspyseth the puyssaunce of the chyrche or the keyes of the chyrche he dyspyseth the puyssaunce of god. Vnde luce .x. Qui vos audit me au¦dit / et qui vos spernit me spernit. He ye whi¦che hereth you hereth me / and he ye whiche dysprayseth you dysprayseth me. The thyr¦de is for pyte / for in some feestes determy∣ned the chyrche promytteth without mor∣tall synne that men laboure for the loue of god to helpe vnto the poore people / but so that it be the after masse and without ho∣pe of retrybucyon. &c. The fourth is for to thynke and to ayde on the necessyte of the comyn welthe / as after the masse to helpe or repayre a brydge / or an euyll passage / or a chyrche dystroyed / and semblable thyn∣ges / so that a man doo it without coueryse of lucre or wynnynge. Also it is well for to be noted that it is extra de ferijs / that al be it that the sondaye and many feestes that ben vnder ben commaūded for to be kepte How be it whan the herynges also enclyne them towarde the landes in ye season that they ought to be fysshed a man may fysshe for theym on the sondayes and other holy dayes for the necessyte of the comyn welth So that they of that thynge that they ta∣ke they dystribute and gyue vnto ye poore chyrches and other good places by & ouer the dysme. C. ¶How a man sholde take hede to here the seruyce and predycacyons on the fe∣stes commaunded .xv. SEcondly for to sanctyfy the fe∣stes a man sholde go by deuoci¦on vnto the chyrche to here the seruyce the whiche therin is do¦ne. As masse / matyns / & euen∣songe. &c. And for to here to deuyse of the feestes / of the fastynges and commaunde mētes the whiche there ben made. Also for to here ye predycacyons and wordes of sal∣uacyon / of the whiche procedeth all bene∣dyccyon as it is wryten Luce .xi. Beati qi audiuut verbum dei / et custodiunt illud. Blyssed be they the whiche hereth the wor∣de of god and kepeth it. In lykewyse as it is declared more largely in the fyfth condy¦cyon that the pylgryme of paradyse sholde haue .xlv. F. Many sortes of peope there be the whiche sanctyfyeth not the feestes for that they take no hede to here the dyuyne seruyce the whiche is done in the chyrche / and the predycacyons. Some there ben ye occupieth them in the mondanytees & plea¦saunces temporalles whan they sholde ta∣ke hede to the seruyce of the chyrche / suche people doth breke this commaundement. ¶Example of a ryche man ye whiche fled the seruyce and the predycacyons / & lepte on hors backe and yede vnto the mondani¦tees whan men ronge to masse on the holy
dayes commaunded / and the deuyll toke hym and bare hym away Quere in thexā¦plary .lxv. A. Also some wyl not cease them of worldly operacions the whiche werketh whan they sholde take hede vnto the serui¦ce / suche people synneth mortally. ¶Exā∣ple how that a woman was dyuynely pu∣nysshed for that that she cercled and closed her felde on the daye of saynt Iohan bap∣tyst whan the other were at masse. Quere lxiiij. B. Also some there ben the whiche ta¦keth hede to drynke and to ete durynge ye masses and the seruyces of the chyrche / & suche people sanctyfye not the feest com∣maūded but yf they haue excusacyon lefull ¶Example that euyll came vnto a smyth the whiche toke hede to ete and to drynke whan the other people besyed them vnto ye seruyce of the chyrche.. Quere in the exam¦plary .lxvii. C. ¶Another example of a mā the whiche went to playe and to drynke at ye tauerne with his felawes whan he shol∣de haue be at the seruyce of the chyrche / & at laste he was dampned. Quere .lxvii. D. ¶Another example that euyll came vnto a man named Vado the whiche went vn∣to the tauernes to drynke and to ete whan he sholde goo vnto the chyrche / & after his dethe he had a foule drynk. Quere in thex. lxvii. E. ¶Also some there ben the whiche taketh hede to play on the feestes commaū¦ded whan they sholde be at the seruyce / su∣che people offendeth gretely. For they san∣ctyfy not the feestes and dysobeyeth vnto god. And also many tymes they commytte many synnes in playenge / the whiche ben operacyons / not of sanctyfycacyon / but of dampnacyon. ¶Example that the heed of a sweter was founde that that was before was behynde / and the cattes cryed vpon his graue. Quere in thexamplarye .lxiii. C. Other examples there ben wryten in thex¦amplary of the seconde commaundement of people vnto whome there came euyll in playenge and blasphemyng. &c. Also some there be the whiche slepeth in theyr beddes or in the chyrche whan the dyuyne seruyce and predycacions ben in doynge on the fee¦stes commaunded / suche people sanctyfy∣eth not the feestes. For the cōmaundement of god sayth. Thou ought for to dyspose ye to serue god all the sondayes & the feestes. ¶Example how the deuyll gaue hote pyt¦che vnto a monke for to drynke as he slept in doynge the seruyce of the chyrche. Que∣re in thexamplary .lxvi. C. ¶Another ex∣ample how the deuyl smote a monke with the knotte of a strawe as he slept in the ser¦uyce tyme .lxvi. b. Other examples of these maters ben wryten in the examplary of ye thyrde commaundement. Also some gone not to here the seruyce and predycacyons by slouthe / neclygence / and indeuocyon / & suche people sanctyfyeth not well the fee∣stes. The realme of heuen is not promysed vnto iedeous / neglygēt / and slouthful per∣sones / but vnto theym the whiche wyeth to take hede vpon commaundementes of god / and the whiche them accomplyssheth vertuously. Vnde scriptura. Non enim te pidis & negligentibus promittitur regnum celorum / sed in mandaris domini vigilan∣tibus at{que} strennue operātibus. Also note well in especyall of the heedes of an hous the whiche leseth the masse on the sondaye or on a feest solempnell by slouthe without excusacyon leful.. Yf reason were dysposed to it suche slouthe sholde be mortall synne / and breketh this commaundement / wher∣of it is wryten de consecratione distinctio∣ne .i. capitu. Missas. And yf a persone that is chyefe of an hous were thre dayes with∣out goynge vnto his masse perochial of his chyrche and yf he hadde not excusacyon le∣full he sholde be excomunycate in lykewy∣as he putteth in a decretall. And they the
whiche kepeth the hous and the chyldren that they perysshe not whyle the other ben at the masse on the sonday and feest solem¦nell / yf they ben excused in seruynge god ye daye of ye sayd solempne feest. The answer is suche / that yf they haue excusacyon not for to be at the chyrche corporally for to ser¦ue god / where yf they ben not they ben ex∣cused so that they serue god within ye hous in saynge the good thynges that they can For the commaundement of god speketh vnto euery man and woman. And to ser∣ue god yu sholdest dyspose ye euery sondaye and the other holy dayes commaunded in what place soo euer it be. ¶Example of a mayden seruaunt the whiche desyred for to goo vnto the masse and vnto the prechȳ¦ge and her maystresse wolde not suffre her but our lorde appered vnto her vnto who∣me he shewed her helthe. Quere in the ex∣amplary .lxxxxix. B. D. ¶And they the whiche ben enoyed to do well / and dyspyseth to saye well and to here it. As they the whiche leueth the con∣gregacyon of the chyrche / the seruyce / the masse / and the sermon without lefull excu¦sacion for to go vnto the vanytees / as daū¦ces / playes / tolyes / and dysportes / they ou¦ghte for to be excommunyed / as it is wry∣ten De consecratione distictione .i. capitu. Qui die solempni pretermisse ecclesie con∣uentu ad spectacula vadit excōmunicetur. &c. Of the whiche thynge it foloweth that they synne mortally / for excommunycacy∣on sholde not be gyuē but for mortal synne Quia excommunicatio non nisi pro mor∣tali culpa infligi debet. Vt habetur .xi. que∣stio .iii. capi. Nemo episcoporum. Those ye whiche ben of the party of god with good wyll they here his seruyce / and his worde / and the opposytes it dyspyseth. Vnde iohā¦nis .x. Oues mee vocem meam audiunt & ego cognosco eos / et cognosco me mee / et ego vitam eternā do eis et non peribunt in eternum / et non rapiet eas quis{quam} de manu mea. My shepe those ben the good perso∣nes herynge my voyce / and I knowe them and myn knowe me / and I vnto theym shall gyue the lyfe eternall / and they shall not perysshe / and none shall take them fro my hande. ¶Example that it hath wel ta¦ken vnto many for herynge the worde of god. Quere .lv. A. B. C. And it foloweth af¦ter. Alias oues habeo qui non sunt ex hoc ouili. &c. Other shepe I haue the whiche ben not of this flocke / those ben the cursed persones the whiche haue not wylled to he∣re the worde of god. And it is wryten in an other gospell that on the day of Iugement god shall put his shepe on the ryght hande Vnde Mathei .xxv. Oues suas statuet a dextris / hedos autem et sinistris. And he shall put the kyddes or gotes on the lyfte hande the whiche haue dyspysed his worde he theym hathe compared vnto a kydde or gote the whiche is a beest stynkynge / foule and vnclene / wherof the company is no∣thynge worthe. Also they ben compared to an ape the whiche sleeth the chyrche and lo¦ueth gladly the tauerne / for to go vnto the chyrche he halteth / and towarde the tauer∣ne he renneth. Also he loueth better a quar¦te of wyne than a potell of holy water. Al∣so these people the whiche ben enoyed to do well resembleth vnto the deuyll in thre pro¦pryetees. Primo the deuyll wyll neuer doo no good dede. Secundo he wyll neuer here no good. Tercio he perturbeth and letteth them the whiche wolde do ony good dede. ¶Example how the deuyll ennemye vnto mankinde gaue in charge to a woman fou¦re thynges / of the the whiche the one was that she sholde trouble and lette those the whiche were in deuocyon and prayers in the chyrche / ye seconde was that she sholde not confesse her. &c. Quere in thexā .lxv. F
In lykewyse dooth these cursed people the whiche ben slouthful to serue our lorde god on the holy dayes and to do good ye whiche gooth frome the masse and wyll here noo good thynge and brynge other in to vany¦tees and out of the chyrche / the whiche is a token of euyll. Quia sicut signum euiden∣tissimum electorum est audire verbum dei ita signum euidētissimum reproborum est nole audire. &c. And also it is a token ryght euydent of the chosen to here the worde of god. In lykewyse it is a token ryght euy∣dent of the reproued to haue no wyl to here it. ¶Example of a monke that the deuyll drewe oute of the chyrche whan the other waked in prayer. Quere in the examplary .lxv. g. The good seruauntes of god hereth with good wyl his seruyce / his worde / and his commaundementes: and taketh the cō¦dycyon of the pylgryme of paradyse. Que¦re post .xlv. A. B. And god theym shall re∣warde in the Ioyes of paradyse in lykewy∣se as it is wryten after .lvii. A. The cursed seruauntes the whiche wyll not go to here the seruyce and to sanctyfy the feestes in ly¦kewyse as it vnto theym is commaunded sholde drede to be sent vnto the fyre of hell the whiche is a tourment ryght cruel. Que¦re .xlix. B. A. ¶How a man sholde take hede to serue god and his sayntes on the feestes com∣maunded .xvi. THyrdly for to sanctyfye the fee∣stes a man shold serue god and his sayntes with herte / wt mou¦the / & operacyon. Saynt Pou∣le sayth in the .xvi. chapytre of ye seconde epystle to the corynthyens. In oī¦bus exhibeamus nosmetipsos sicut dei mi∣nistros. Shewe we our selfe in all thynges as the mynysters of god. Et alibi seruire deo regnare est. To serue god it is too rey∣gne with hym. Euery good crysten man sholde enforce him to serue god on the holy dayes after his scyence and faculte / & shol¦de put hym in deuocyon and orayson for to gyue praysynges vnto god & vnto his sayn¦tes / as Dauyd the whiche sayd. Semper laus eius more meo. The clerkes sholde sȳ¦ge with hert / with mouthe / and operacyon for to serue god. Vnde ecclesiast. xxxix. In omni corde et ore collaudate et benedicite nomen domini. Prayse ye and blysse ye the name of our lorde in all your hert & mouth Also a man sholde serue humbly and reue∣rently vnto the preest in thynges ye whiche vnto hym ben necessaryes / as to gyue him the water / to torne the boke / to bere ye paxe to lyght and to put out the candell. &c. Da¦uyd sayth. Seruite domino in timore & ex∣ultate ei cū trimore. Serue ye vnto god & vnto his vycars in drede. To serue god in drede is the begynnynge of wysdome. Vn¦de prouerbiorum .i. Initium sapientie ti∣mor domini. Also the good and diligent ser¦uauntes haue euermore the aduauntage / and of good as wel in this worlde as in the other / and they ben beloued of god and of grete lordes before the slouthfull. Wherof speketh the wyse man. Prouerbiorum .xxii Vidisti virum velocem coram regib{us} sta∣bit / nec erit coram ignobiles. Et prouerbio rum .xxi. Cogitationes robusti sūt semper in abundancia / omnis autem piger in ege∣state est. The thoughtes of a mā boystous and coueytous ben euer in habundaunce of goodes / and all slouthfull people ben in nede and in pouerte. All the good seruaun¦tes shall be in paradyse with god moche ho¦noured and praysed. Vnde in euangelium. Si quis michi ministrauerit honorificabit eum pater meus qui est in celis.
Item euangilium. Volo pater vt vbi ego sū illic sit et minister meus. Ihesu cryst sa∣yeth I wyll fader where as I am that my mynister be / that is that his seruauntes be with hym parteners in his realme and his glorye. Of the seruauntes the whiche ben good and faythfull / and of those ye whiche ben euyll and vnfaythfull is somwhat spo¦ken in the chapytre of Sacrylege. Quere .xxx. C. Also god called the good persones swetely his seruauntes. Vnde Mathei .xi. Venite me ad oēs qui laboratis et onera∣ti estis et ego reficiam vos. Also god vnto them shall gyue a grete rewarde. Vn̄ mat. xxv. Euge serue bone et fidelis / quia su{per} pauca fuisti fidelis / supra multa te {con}stituā intra ī gauduim domini tui. Good seruaūt and faythful enioye the / for that thou hast ben faythfull vpon a lytell thynge I shall ordeyne the vpon a grete thynge / entre in to the Ioye of thy lorde. For to make shorte euery persone sholde enforce hym to serue and honour god and his sayntes eche after as his scyence and faculte is. And also shol¦de take hede vnto the vtylyte of theyr fren¦des and they shall haue grete rewarde in the realme of paradyse. Of the whiche is wryten towarde the ende of this presente treatyse .xlvii. A. B. ¶How a man sholde besy hym in pra∣yer on the feestes commaunded .xvi. FOurthly for to sanctyfye the feestes or holy dayes we shol∣de pray to god in orayson and saye all the good thynges that we can more besyly than on ye werkynge dayes. Saynt Austyn sayth {quod} oratio est oranti presidium aduersario in∣cēdium / angelis solacium / deo gratum sa∣crificium. Orayson or prayer is defence vn¦to hym that prayeth agaynst all euyll / vn∣to the deuyll aduersarye. Ioye and solace vnto aungelles. sacryfyce vnto god moche agreable. That orayson kepeth a persone from all euyll it appered by thexample of a woman the whiche wolde haue hāged her selfe by dyspayre / and as she apparayled ye corde in herynge a bell rynge vnto the sa∣crynge she went on her knees in orayson & incontynent the temptacyō ceased and she was delyuered. Also on ye feestes commaū∣ded we sholde thynke on the euylles yt we haue done on the werkyng dayes / and we sholde repent vs and hertely crye god mer¦cy / and put our selfe in orayson for to requy¦re of hym myserycorde. &c. ¶Wherfore is it that god wyll that we requyre hym oray¦son. For foure thynges pryncypally. Fyrst to thende that we reknowlege hym to be our god / lorde / and mayster / creatoure / & benefactour / the whiche for vs hath made and created all thynges. Vnde. iohannis .i. appoc. Adorate eum qui fecit celum & ter∣ram mare et omnia que in eis sūt. Et psal. Quoniam deus magnus dominus et rex magnus super om̄es deos. It is good rea∣son that a persone worshyp and pray vnto his god / lorde / and benefactour in reknow¦legynge the good that he vnto vs hath do¦ne. Secondly god wyll that we hym requy¦re in orayson to thende that we repute vs to be his seruauntes & obedyentes vnto hȳ It is reason that a seruaunt obey vnto his mayster / serue / honour / & pray him. For as moche as Lucyfer wolde not be as a ser∣uaunt in praynge god but enpryded hȳ of the good yt his god vnto hym had gyuen in so moche that he wolde haue sytten by him & haue ben semblable vnto hym. Vn̄ ysaie xiiij. Sedebo in mō te testamēti in laterib{us} aquilonis ascendā su{per} altitudinē nubiū si∣milis ero altissimo. And for yt he wolde not pray god / ne reknowlege to obey vnto him
but wolde shewe hymselfe as mayster / so he lost all the good that he had and is now the foulest deuyll in helle. And therfore we sholde praye vnto god and confounde the synne of pryde in vs / in shewynge vs to be his seruauntes obedyent vnto him. Thyrd¦ly our lorde wyll that we requyre hym in orayson in knowlegynge our poore fraylte as of our selfe we may nothynge doo / and that all cometh and procedeth of god. Vn∣de iohannis primo. Omnia per ipsum fa∣cta sunt et sine ipso factum est nichil. Item Iohannis .xv. Sine me nichil potestis fa∣cere. For to vnderstande well whan we re¦quyre one of the sayntes of paradyse that we may haue helthe of our sekenesse / it is not the saynt of hym selfe that heleth vs / but it is god / and the saynt that ye doo re∣quyre prayeth vnto god for you / and god heleth you in exaltynge the request and in¦tercessyon of the sayd saynt. In lykewyse all the good puyssaūce that all the sayntes of paradyse haue god it vnto theym hathe gyuen. And therfore we sholde praye god in orayson in reknowlegynge our fragyly¦te that of our selfe we may nothynge doo / and that all procedeth of hym. Fourthely god wyll that we hym requyre in orayson for too doo hym honoure. For orayson is a sacryfyce the whiche is moche agreable vn¦to god. Also the encense the whiche is put within the fyre casteth a good odour and a smoke the whiche mounteth on heyght vn¦to god. In lyke maner orayson enbrased vpon the coles of deuocyon casteth a smo∣ke and a swete odoure the whiche moun∣teth vp before god / the whiche vnto hym is moche agreable. And therfore sayeth the psalmyst. Dirigatur domine oratio mea sicut incensum in conspectu tuo. We rede thobie duodecimo. That Thobye was mo∣che deuout the whiche occupyed hym selfe to do the werkes of mercy. And on a tyme the aungell of god appered vnto hym vn∣to whome he sayd. Whan thou prayest god in orayson with teeres / and whan thou bu¦ryest the deed bodyes I present thyn oray¦son before god. Also we rede. Actuum deci∣mo / how Cornelius was on a tyme about the houre of noone in orayson the whiche made his request vnto god. And inconty∣nent an aungell of god in lykenes of a fay¦re yonge man clothed in whyte appered vnto hȳ vnto whome he sayd. Thyn oray∣son is exalted / and thyn almesdedes ben remembred before god. We ought for to ser¦ue god in orayson for to doo hym honoure and sacryfyce the whiche vnto hȳ is agrea¦bled / and vnto vs vtyle and prouffytable. Also as a noble man sholde do honour vn¦to the kynge on his knees the whiche is cal¦led homage / in reknowlegynge that he hol¦deth his sygnourye of hym / and that he is seruaunt obeyssaunte vnto hym. In lyke∣wyse we ought to do to god in orayson. Or in lykewyse as the seruaunt is bounde for to serue his mayster / in semblable maner ben we bounde vnto god the whiche is our mayster. Or in lykewyse as euery mā shol¦de bere and pay his rente and his trybute vnto the lorde of whome he holdeth. In ly∣ke maner sholde we doo honour vnto god of our bodyes and of our goodes vnto our power. C. ¶A questyon / how sholde a man make orayson vnto god for to haue that the whi¦che is necessary. Answer. Hym behoueth to say his pater noster / for he requireth of god that all euylles and synnes ben put awaye and that he haue vnto body and vnto sou∣le al goodes temporalles and spyrytualles the whiche ben necessaryes and vtyles / Our lorde made the pater noster and sayd vnto his dyscyples that they sholde saye it whan they wolde pray vnto almighty god In lykewyse as it is wryten in ye gospelles
Mathey sexto / et Luce vndecimo. ¶Here after foloweth the orayson domy∣nycall or pater noster the whiche our lorde taught to his dyscyples / and the requestes and fruytfull petycyons conteyned in the same. Our fader that art in heuē sanctified be thy name thy kingdom come to vs / thy wyl be done in erth as in heuen / our dayly brede gyue vs to day & for¦gyue vs our dette as we forgyue our detts. & lede vs not in to tēptacōn. but delyuer vs frō euyl. amē PAter noster qui es in celis. ¶Our fader celestyall almyghty. Lorde / god / and creatour Syttynge in heuen potencyally Exalte me thy seruytour Sanctificetur nomen tuum. ¶Thy name be euer sanctyfyed In our fayth catholyke. Aboue all praysed and gloryfyed Without errour dyabolyke Adueniat regnum tuum ¶More ouer lorde we the requyre That we may come and haue saluacyon Vnto thy kyngdome and empyre In the ende and conclusyon Fiat volūtas tua sicut in celo & ī terra ¶Thy wyll be also done Of vs in erthe truely As is of thy sayntes echone In heuen ryght Ioyously Panē nr̄m cotidianūda nobis hodie. ¶Gyue vs lorde our dayly fode Of soule and of body eke Amende vs all and make vs gode In spyryte also to be meke Et dimitte nobis debita nr̄a sicut. etc. ¶Pardon vs lorde our syn̄es & trespāces. As we forgyue our offences and dettes Louse vs also out of the deuylles laces And kepe vs from fallynge in his nettes Et ne nos inducas in temptationē And suffre vs lorde not to be ledde In euyll thoughtes and temptacyon Wakynge / ne slepynge lyenge in bedde By the deuylles persuacyon.
Sed libera nos a malo. ¶Delyuer vs from all yll Of body and soule also Gyue vs grace yf it be thy wyll To ouercome our mortall fo. Amen. ¶Amen / amen for charyte Graunt vs lorde our petycyon Thy blyssed face for to se And of thy goodheed the fruycyon ¶Explicit. ¶The requestes that a man maketh vnto god in saynge the pater noster. THe petycyon of Sanctificetur no∣men tuum taketh away pryde and putteth in vs the vertue of humylyte / and requyreth the gyft of drede / and the beaty∣tude of the gospell. Beati pauperes spū. And the rewarde foloweth. Quoniam i{pre}o rum est regnum celorum. The petycyon of Adueniat regnum tuū taketh away enuy / and putteth in vs the vertue of charyte / & it requyreth the gyft of pyte / and the beaty¦tude of the gospell. Beati mites. And the rewarde foloweth. Quoniam ipsi posside∣bunt terram. The petycyon of Fiat volun¦tas tua sicut in celo & in terra taketh away yre and putteth in vs the vertue of pacyen¦ce / and requyreth the gyfte of scyence / and the beatytude of the gospell. Beati pacifi∣ci. And the rewarde foloweth. Quoniam filij dei vocabuntur. The petycyon of Pa∣nem nostrum cotidianum da nobis hodie taketh away slouthe / and putteth in vs ye vertue of dylygence / & requyreth the gyft of strength and the beatytude of the gospel Beati qui esuriunt et sitiunt iusticiā. And the rewarde foloweth. Quoniam ipsi sa∣turabuntur. The petycyon of Et dimitte nobis debita nostra sicut et nos dimittim{us} debitoribus nostris taketh away auaryce / and putteth in vs the vertue of largesse / & requireth the gyft of counceyle / and the bea¦tytude of the gospell. Beati misericordes And the rewarde foloweth. Quoniam ip∣si misericordiam consequentur. The pety∣cyon of Et ne nos inducas in temptationē taketh awaye glotony / and putteth in vs the vertue of abstynence / and requyreth ye gyft of entendement / and the beatytude of the gospell. Beati mundo corde. And the rewarde foloweth. Quoniam ipsi deum vi∣debunt. The petycyon of sed libera nos a malo taketh away lechery / and putteth in vs the vertue of chastyte / and requyreth ye gyft of sapyence / and the beatytude of the gospell. Beati qui lugent. And the rewar∣de foloweth. Quoniam ipsi conselabūtur. A. ¶How a man sholde yelde graces and thankes vnto god of the good & welthe the whiche he vnto vs hath doone with out beynge vnkynde .xvii. FYfthly for to sanctyfy the fee∣stes we sholde goo vnto the chyrche on the sayd dayes of ye feestes for to yelde thankes & praysynges vnto god for the grete goodnesses that he vnto hath done the whiche ben soo many and grete that it is soo Impossyble as vntoo vs that we ne may yelde nor gyue theym agayne in ony thynge that we may doo. And euery man ought for too vnderstande that god vnto hym hath doone more good and benefayte than he is worthy / ne than he hathe deser∣ued. Saynt Barnarde sayeth. Agamus fratres gratias factori nostro / benefactori nostro / redemptori nostro. My broder yel∣de we graces vnto hym the whiche hathe
made vs / that is vnto god our fader cele∣styall Vnde mathei. xxiii. Vnus est pater vester qui est in celis. The whiche hath crea¦ted our soules of nothynge vnto his symy¦tude. Vnde gene .ix. Ad ymaginem quip∣pe dei factus est homo. And the psalmyst. Ipse fecit nos & nō ipse nos. Yelde we gra¦ces vnto our benefactour that is vnto god the whiche maketh the cornes and the fruy¦tes to growe and to come / & all that wher∣of we lyue. Vnde iohan .i. Omni per ipsum facta sunt / et sine ipso factum est nichil. Yel¦de we graces vnto our redemptour / that is vnto the sone of god the whiche is borne of the vyrgyn Mary the whiche hathe suf∣fred dethe and passyon for too redeme vs from hell where we sholde haue descended Vnde ad gal .ii. Dilexit me tradidit semet ipsū pro me nesim ingratus de gratie. God hath gyuen the thy body with all thy mem¦bres. He gyueth the thyn eyen to see / thyn eeres to here / thy fete to go. &c. Yf thou had¦dest not syght ne herynge thou sholde not knowe what good it is to here and too se. And yf he gyue the lyght thou sholde than¦ke hym all thy lyfe / he the graunteth now syght and heringe and al thy membres for nothinge without thy merytes. Moreouer he gyueth the nourysshement / vestement hous / felde / cornes / oxen / kyen / shepe / and bestyall. Vnde paulus in epistola and co. Quid habes quod non accepisti. What go¦ode hast yu of thyn owne that thou ne hast fyrst taken of another: whan thou was bor¦ne thou brought nothynge with the / ye goo¦des cometh not of the / thou reknowlegest not the goodes here / and soo thou thankest not god. Saynt Austyn sayth in the boke de ciuitate dei. Quisquis beneficia dei non vidit cecus est / nec laudat ingratus est / qis∣quis in laudādo reluctatur insanus est. He the whiche seeth not the benefaytes yt god vnto hym hath doone he is blynde / and yf he prayse not god he is vnkynde / and the whiche is worse he is not hole. He is seke ye whiche impugneth god with his gyftes / & vseth of those gyftes agaynst the honoure of god and agaynst his propre helthe / that is to vnderstande whā he maketh folysshe lokes wt his eyen / whan he bryngeth forth cursed wordes with his mouthe / and so of other membres / or whan he mysuseth the goodes / that is to vnderstande whan he ta¦keth clothes proude and pompous / whan he eteth excessyuely / whan he drynketh vn¦to dronkenesse / and so of other. And as oft tymes as ony abuseth in suche wyse ye gyf∣tes of god after true Iustyce / he sholde be put from that gyft / that is to vnderstande from the syght or the herynge. &c. And it is all for his vnkyndenes. Vnde Bernardus super canti. Ingratitudo inimica est ani∣me / exmanictio meritorium virtutū disper¦sio / benefactorū perditio. Suche a man ye whiche is so vnkynde is indygne and vn∣worthy to take many gyftes of god. Vnde bernardus. Non est dignus dādis qui nō agit gratias de datis. That mā is not wor¦thy to haue thynges gyuen vnto hym the whiche yeldeth no thankes of the thynges gyuen / a man may knowe it in hym selfe. Yf thou haddest done good vnto a persone by thre or foure tymes / and that at euery tyme he were to the vnkynde thou wolde cease to do ony more good vnto him. What shalt thou than say of god the whiche hath doone good vnto the more than a thousan¦de tymes / and thou vnto hast be euermore vnkynde without reknowlegynge ye good that he to the hath done. ¶Example that the .ix. lazers that our lorde heled were vn∣kynde for they went not to yelde hym than¦kes after that they had helth. He had heled x. but there was but one the whiche rekno¦weleged the good that he vnto hym hadde doone / the whiche retorned hym to yelde
thankes. Vnde. luce .xvii. Nonne decē mū¦dati sunt / et nouem vbi sunt / non est inuē∣tus qui reddiret et daret gloriam dei / nisi hic alienigena. ¶Another example how ye man vnto whome the lorde pardoned ten thousāde talentes was vnkynde for he ne wolde pardon the small debte / and for his vnkyndenes he was betaken to the hang∣man and put in prysone. Quere .xxvii. H. ¶Another example contrary of a knyght the whiche pardoned hym that had slayne his fader / and god pardoned hym all his syn̄es. Quere .xxvii. I. The scryptures vs warneth to yelde graces and praysynges vnto god for to fle vnkyndenes. Vn̄ pau. i. ad thessal. v. In omnib{us} gratias agite. Yel¦de thankes vnto god in all the thynges yt ye doo. Et ad colloscenses .iij. Omne quod cū{que} facitis in verbo aut in opere oīa in no¦mine dn̄i nostri iesu christi facite gratias a¦gentes deo et patri peri{pre}m. In euery thyn¦ge what so euer ye do in worde or in opera¦cyon / do all thynges in the name of our lor¦de Ihesu cryst in yeldynge thankes vnto god. &c. Et legit{ur} .i. ad corin .x. Siue mandu¦catis / siue aliquid aliud facitis omīa in glo∣riam dei facite. Do ye all thynges in the glo¦ry of god yf ye ete or yf ye drynke / or yf ye doo ony other thynge. All the aungelles & sayntes of heuen loueth god / and yeldeth hym graces of his benefaytes / and so shol∣de we do. Vnde apo. vii. Vide hostium ap¦pertum in celo / dicit btūs iohānes ecce tur∣ba magna quā dinumerare vt nemo pote∣rat. &c. Saynt Iohan sayth in the apoca∣lypse that he sawe the dore open in heuen / and soo grete turbes of holy persones that no man myght nombre them / and they cry¦ed with hye voyce. Salute vnto our lorde god the whiche sytteth vpon the throne / be¦nedyccion / clerenes / and sapyence and acci¦on of graces / honoure / vertue / and force vnto our lorde god in secula seculorū. Amē Also all the creatures gyueth prayse vnto the creatoure. That is to vnderstande the beestes and the serpentes / the byrdes ye kin¦ges / the prynces / the Iuges / the vyrgyns / the auncyent with the yonge prayseth the name of our lorde / for his onely name is ex¦alted. Vnde psal. Bestie et vniuersa peco∣ra: serpentes et volucres pennate. Reges terre et omnes populi: principes et om̄es iu¦dices terre. Iuuenes et virgines senes cū innioribus laudent nomen dn̄i: quia exalta tum est nomen eius solius. Iterū psalm{us}. A solis ortu vs{que} ad occasum laudabile no¦men domini. B. ¶Example of a good chylde the which yelded graces and praysynges vnto god in all aduersytees that came to hym. ¶We fynde by wrytynge that a chylde was soo perfyte that he sayd deo gracias in all thin¦ges. And it be befell soo that after that his fader and his moder were departed men of warre came vnto his hous / the whiche ta∣sted of a tonne of eygre sydre / the whiche a none they brake & shedde the sayd sydre / & whan the chyld sawe that he sayd. I yelde graces vnto god I dranke eygresydre / & now I shall well drynke good water. Af∣ter that the men of armes brake his house and warmed them with the tymbre. And whan the forsayd chylde sawe that he sayd Deo gracias. I yelde graces vnto god. I was wonte in fore tymes to be lodged in this grete house: and now I shall make me a lytell lodge and therin I shal abyde. And the sayd men of warre yode in to his gar∣dyn and brake and pulled vp al the herbes as cooles / lekes / borage / onyons / {per}cely / le∣tuse. &c. Than the chylde sayd agayne deo gracias / ye haue broken ye lekes and other herbes I yelde graces vnto god / it me be∣houeth to take wylde leues of the feldes / & to go & frye them wt a lytell pot of butter yt ye haue left in suche a corner. And whan ye
men of warre sawe that they hadde done soo moche harme vnto the sayd chyldren sayd vnto themselfe / we ben ryght cursed the whiche haue doone so moche harme to this chylde the whiche is not wrothe ne ne¦uer euyll worde vnto vs he hath sayd / and vnto vs dooth the best that he may in doyn¦ge good agaynst euyll. For to make shorte they repented them and conuerted theym vnto good by his example. E. ¶To wake in contemplacyon and to do the werkes of mercy at the feestes cō¦maunded .xvii. SYxtely to kepe the feestes gar∣dables or that ben to be kept a man sholde employe the tyme wakynge in operacyons spyry¦tualles / as to occupye hymsel∣fe in the lyfe contemplatyue the whiche be¦longeth vnto the dyseccyon of god / that is to serue / to honoure / and to worshyp hym as it is sayd. And to thynke on thynges ce∣lestyalles and spyrytualles to mounte on heyght with god and his sayntes / and to reygne with theym eternally in the Ioyes of paradysethe whiche ben so grete yt they ben infynyte and inenarrables. This lyfe contemplatyue vnto vs is gyuen in fygu∣re of the blyssed Mawdeleyne the whiche sette her oft at the foote of our sauyour & redemptour Ihesus and herde his worde as it is wryten. Luce .xi. Sedens secus pe¦des domini audiebat verba illius. Another example of the contemplacion of two rely¦gyouses the whiche were fro crystmas tyll mydsomer spekynge of god wtout enoyen∣ge theym / & they wende to haue ben there but two houres. Quere .lxxxxiiii. b. And af¦ter that the soule hath taken her refeccyon and the body his nourysshement it is good after dyner on the sayd dayes of the feestes to take hede also to ye dyleccyon of his ney∣ghbours indygentes and nedy / as to gyue almesse to vesyte the seke / to counceyle thē that lacke counceyle / to cōforte them that ben heuy / sorowfull & seke / and also to doo all other werkes of mercy. This lyfe acty∣ue is gyuen vnto vs by fygure in Mary marthe hostesse of our blyssed sauyour and redemptour Ihesu cryst the whiche prepa∣red him his meet and toke hede vnto ye wer¦kes of mercy the whiche is the lyfe actyue Also by this Marthe is vnderstande ye de¦uocyon by the whiche we ben accōpanyed by charyte with our neyghboure. And by Mary magdaleyne is vnderstande the in¦tencyon relygyous of ye thought. The lyfe actyue gyueth the breed corporell vnto hȳ the whiche hath hōgre / and doctryne vnto the ygnouraunt and vnlerned. It correc∣keth the synner errant / and calleth agayne the proude man vnto humylyte. Also it my¦nystreth vnto euery one yt the whiche is vn¦to hym expedyent. The lyfe contemplaty∣ue reteyneth the charyte of god and of his neyghbour / but it resteth it of the accyon wt¦outforth / & at the onely desyre of the condu¦ctour to Ioyne soo vnto hym. And all her∣tes erthly fouled and put vnder fote is em¦braced to se the face of the creatour and de¦syreth to medle / that is to be with the cyte∣zyns of the hye regyon enioyenge them in the beholdynge of god of the incorrupcyon eternall. The lyfe actyue vnto the pertur∣bacions of the worlde. The lyfe contempla¦tyue the whiche extendeth to god is moost sure. And therfore our lorde sayd to Mar¦tha. Illud luce .x. Martha martha solicita es et turbaris erga plurima: maria optimā partē elegit que non auferetur ab ea. D. ¶How the reuerence and sanctyfyca∣cion of al holy thȳges is brought in this thyrde commaundement .xvii.
SAynt Ysodore sayth in his bo∣ke. Secundum dignitatē red¦de cui{que} honorē. Yelde honour vnto euery man after his dyg¦nyte. Many thynges ben holy wherunto we owe honoure / for theyr san∣ctyfycacyon is conteyned vnder this com∣maundement. Sabbata sanctifices. Of yt whiche holy thynges we shall tell foure. ✿ Fyrst the tyme of the dayes of the feestes commaunded sholde be sanctyfyed in lyke¦wise as is before declared. Secondly a mā sholde bere honour and reuerence vnto the holy places / as vnto the chyrches. Vn̄ psal. Domū tuā decet sanctitudo. And of good ryght a man sholde honour the chyrches / for they ben the places the whiche ben blys¦sed / the holy seruyce is doone therin / the bo¦dy of our sauyour is therin consecrate / the whiche there resteth nyght and daye in the custode. Also in the chyrche we ben bapty∣sed / confessed / purged / and made clene of al our synnes. Also we ben thyder borne af¦ter yt we ben dysceased and deed. It is the hous of orayson in the whiche we make our prayers and oraysons / and there ben made the good predycacyons. Also the chyrche is the saufgarde of the crymynalles and for banysshed people. It is the place wherto they renne the whiche them kepeth frome dethe / from euyll and punycyon. Also in ye chyrche & in ye chyrcheyarde ben the holy bo¦dyes of our faders / and moders / and fren∣des departed and deed. And for these thyn¦ges here with that / that god it wyl the holy places ought to be honoured. ¶Example of hatefull men the whiche slewe a man in ye chyrche were punysshed dyuynely. Que¦re .lxxix. B. ¶Another example how helio¦dorus was punysshed dyuynely in ye chyr∣che as he toke the treasours .lxxxii. B. Ma∣ny other examples ben wryten in the thyr∣de commaundement of ye examplary how euyll came vnto them the whiche haue not borne honour vnto the holy places / as vn∣to the chyrche and chyrcheyarde / and how people accursed sholde not be buryed there lxii. G. Our blyssed sauyoure and redemer Ihesu cryst shewed ryght clerely yt he wol∣de that the chyrche be honoured and reue∣renced whan he put out the sellers and by¦ers the whiche there made theyr marchaū¦dyses and seculer occupacyons / he shewed that it dyspleased hym / for he dyde make a whyppe with the whiche he chased theym out rygorously / theym and theyr oxen and kyen / and marchaundyse / and kest & ouer threwe theyr stalles vnto the erthe / and vn¦to theym he sayd. My house shall be called ye house of prayer / & ye haue made it a pyt or denne of theues. Vnde mathei .i. Do∣mus mea domus orationis vocabitur / vos autem fecistis illam speluncam latronum. ¶Syth that our lorde sayd that they ma∣de a denne vnto theues / it foloweth well ye theues were there within. Also a man may say that those the whiche there maketh su∣che marchaundyse and negocyacyons secu¦lers ben theues / or the whiche is wors they ben sacryleges / in as moche as they soyle and hurte the place sanctyfyed and holy / the whiche is a dependence the whiche pro¦cedeth of sacrylege. Sacrum ledens: sacrū violans et deturpans. This thynge here was the moost gretest rygoure that euer our lorde shewed in this worlde / wherfore it behouth to say that it is grete synne and that there a man sholde not speke of taxes of processe of detraccyon / of lawes and ex∣accyons / nor of ony thyng seculer. Agayne many persones the whiche dooth the con∣trary / and the whiche gooth vnto the chyr∣che on the dayes of the sayd holy feestes for to speke and to treate of suche thyges mo¦re than for to praye vnto almyghty god. The blyssed saynt Austyn them repreueth
the whiche sayth. In oratorie nemo aliqid agat nisi ad quod factum est vnde & nomē accepit. No man ne dooth ony thynge in ye oratory but that thynge wherunto it is ma¦de / wherof it bereth his name. The oratory is not made to do ne say the seculer thȳges beforesayd / but it is made to praye vnto god / and for to do and to say thynges salu∣taryes / the whiche ben of sanctyfycacyon. The collectours of taxes and sergeauntes or other the whiche ben charged to puruey vnto the thynges seculers sholde go in to place prophane not halowed out of ye chyr∣che and chyrcheyarde / and there to prouo∣ke and to bringe those with whome they ha¦ue besynes whan they haue longe maters seculers to treate / for euyte synne and offē¦ce of the holy place. For in spekyng of suche maters there aryseth somtime noyses and cursed wordes in aggreuaunt the synne for bycause of the holy place / and it in lesse synne in vnhalowed grounde than in holy grounde. Also the gospell sayth that whan two or thre persones ben assembled in the name of god for too speke good wordes yt god is in the myddle of theym. Vnde ma∣the .xviii. Vbi sunt duo vel tres congrega¦tim nomine meo ibi sum in medio eorum. Also a man may say that whan two or thre persones bē assembled at the chyrche for to speke there euyll wordes that the deuyll is in the myddle of them / the whiche wryteth that / yt they speke. ¶Example how saynt Bryce sawe the deuyll the whiche wrote ye euyll wordes that was spoken in the chyr∣che. Quere .lxv. E. Of this mater it is wry∣ten in the decrete. Nemo debet in loco ora¦tionis intendere fabulis ociosus. distīctiōe .xxv. Qui in aliud. No man ought to take hede vnto ydle fables in the place of oray∣son. Et poeta dicit. Ve vobis gentes in tē∣plo vana loquentes. Demone scribuntur / que in templo vana loquntur. Maledyccy¦on vnto you people spekynge vayne thyn∣ges in the temple / the vayne thȳges ye whi¦che ben spoken in the chirche ben wryten by the deuyll / and those the whiche talketh of vayne thynges fableth with the deuyl. Vn¦de poeta. In templo fari / diccum demone fabulari. ¶Also after the ryght wrytynge men put out of the chyrche people excom∣munyed the whiche ben not buryed tyll yt they ben assoyled and reabled. Also people the whiche ben homycydes and manquel∣lers of themself ne ben buryed in holy groū¦de / for that / that is appereth that they ben dampned. Also men fynde in scrypture ma¦ny examples how the deuylles haue vnbu¦ryed many cursed people out of the chyrche and chyrcheyarde. Quere in the exampla∣ry .lxix. B. By these thynges aboue sayd it appereth that euery man and woman shol¦de bere honoure and reuerence vnto the ho¦ly places. Thyrdly a man sholde gyue ho∣nour and worshyppe vnto the bones and relykes of the sayntes of paradyse. For sith that god commaundeth that theyr feestes be sanctyfyed honoured and kept for theyr holy and deuoutenes yt they haue ledde in this presente lyfe / it foloweth that he wyll that theyr bodyes the whiche haue done ye good operacyons for his loue be honoured. The whiche bodyes shall be at the dredeful daye of Iugement assembled and come a∣gayne with theyr soules / and shal lyue eter¦nally in the Ioyes of paradyse with almy∣ghty god. Legitur ecclesias .xliiij. Corpora sanctorum in pace sepulta sunt / et viuent nomina eorum in generatione & generatio¦nem. Fourthly the sanctyfycacyon of the seuen holy sacramentes is brought in this thyrde commaundement / for we sholde be¦re vnto them honoure and reuerence for yt they ben holy. And for as moche that the sȳ¦ners by theym ben purged and made clene of the stynkynge ordure and fylth of synne
and ben sanctyfyed and of the nombre of sayntes of paradyse. In lykewyse as the tyme and places ben sanctyfyed / also shol∣de the seuen sacramentes the whiche vnto vs bē ryght necessaryes for our helthe. Of these sacramentes is spoken in the fyrste commaundemente of god. Quere .viij. B. And therfore it suffyseth of that the whiche is spoken vnto people of good entendemēt and reason. A. ¶The maners how men breke the fee∣stes commaunded .xviii. IT is writen Exodi .xxxi. ca. Qui polluerit sabbatum morte moria¦tur. Qui fecerit in eo opus petibit anima illius de medio populi sui. Who polluteth or soyleth the son¦daye / the feest commaunded shall deye of dethe. The soule of hym the whiche theron hath wrought shall perysshe. The feestes ben euyll kept in many maners of ye which we shall saye thre generalles. The fyrste is for to do theron operacyons worldly / ma∣nually / and by hande. And this also is deui¦sed in many braūches after the dyuers sor¦tes of people the whiche on the dayes of ye feestes there done many operacions. Fyrst for to goo vnto the plough / or to mowe / or to sowe / or to make grete werkes. Also the mysterys of the persones the whiche dooth ye operacyons is defended as it is sayd. exo¦di .xx. Non facies in eo opus. The feestes kepe and honour / be theron deuout and la¦bour not. Euyll cometh vnto them the whi¦che on them werketh. ¶Example of carle the whiche yode vnto the plough on ye day of the feest commaunded / and ye wood cla∣ue vnto his hande / & two yeres after was heled .lxiiij. F. ¶Another example of a wo¦man the whiche wrought on ye day of saynt Iohan baptyst and she was punysshed dy¦uynely Quere in the exampl. lxiiij. B. Se¦condly men breke the feest to cary on it / & to bere burdens in cartes / or vpon horses / for the commaundemente of god sayeth. From labour thou sholdest rest the / thy sel¦fe / thy housholde / and thy bestes. Vnde the remie .xvii. capitulo. Nolite pondera por∣tare in die sabbati et nolite eicere de domi∣bus vestris in die sabbati et omne opus nō facietis in eo dicit dominus. ¶Example of one of ye chyldren of Ysraell the whiche was slayne and stoned by the commaundement of god and of Moyses for that / that he ga∣dred and bare wood on the day of the feest Quere in the examplary .lxiiij. A. ¶A que¦styon / yf those the whiche bereth cornes vn¦to theyr lordes on the dayes of the feestes offenden. A doctoure answereth that they ben not excused yf other necessyte ne cause and constrayne them therunto. And more ouer the lordes the whiche them cōmaun∣deth or gyueth occasyon that to do ben par¦teyners of theyr synnes. And sayeth after∣warde that they the whiche bereth lyuyn∣ges or vytayles ferre in to the countree or marchaundyses and may not do otherwy∣se without grete domage or hurt / suche peo¦ple ben excused as he beleueth / so that they be fyrst at the masse and at the seruice. And semblable thynge it is of pylgrymes and vyagers. ¶Example of a man the whiche bare wheet in to his graunge or barne vpō the daye of the feest / and the sayd graunge & wheet were brent. Quere in ye exampla∣ry .lxiiij. E. Thyrdly forgers or smyths the whiche shoeth hors on the feest commaun∣ded by couetyse of wynnynge breketh the commaundement of god. And yf it be for to thynke on the necessyte of pylgrymes or vyagers they ben excused. Fourthly men breke the feeste commaunded for to make theron marchaundyses by auaryce and co∣ueytyse of gayne without goynge to here
masse and the seruyce the chyrche for to ser¦ue god and to sanctyfy the feestes as done many marchauntes the whiche ben more wakynge and erlyer rysen on ye sayd festes for too renne vnto fayres and markettes than they ne done on the workynge dayes Suche people the whiche ne thynketh but on the goodes temporall and leueth the go¦des spyrytuell sanctyfyeth not ne kepeth ye feest commaunded / by ye whiche they syn̄e mortally / and gone vnto dāpnacyon. But those the whiche after the masse and after the seruyce bereth vytayles or other thyn∣ges necessaries for to sell / and the other the whiche gooth thyder for to bye theyr prouy¦syon of vytayles or other thȳges necessary¦es may be excused. Quia necessitas nō ha∣bet legem / nisi malū inde sequeretur. de cō. di .i. Sicut. Necessite hath no lawe / yf euyl sholde folowe after. ¶Example of the by∣ble how it is offence to doo marchaundyse on the holy day / for the marchauntes were reproued in Iherusalem. Quere in thexam¦plary .lxiii. N. Fyfthly the feestes ben bro∣ken for to holde on them pledȳges / assyses and Iurysdyccions. Vnde legitur in decre. In festis diebus a iudicijs et placitis est ab¦stinendum .xv. q. iiij. Placita. And the glose sayth vpon this that on the day of the feest men may treate of peas. And it is wryten. Extra de ferijs et de cō. di. iii. Rogationes / in primo passu dicitur. Quod omnes dies dominici sunt seruandi: & omnibus festiuis diebus cessandum est ab opere seruile ne{que} placitum fieri ad mortam vel penam san∣guinis. &c. Syxtely the feestes ben broken for to do operacyons on the vygylles of the the sayd feestes / as those the whiche werke the saterdaye at nyght. Suche people san∣ctyfyeth not wel the feestes / as thou mayst se by many examples in the examplary. Al¦so all sortes of people of what vacacyon yt they ben also sholde cease to do worldly ope¦racyons the dayes of the feestes for to re∣streyne auarice / for to take hede vnto theyr sanctyfycacyon / and also for to obeye vnto god And it semeth yt those the whiche them breketh haue loste the mynde of them / and therfore techyngly it is wryten. Memēto vt diem sabbati sāctifices. Remembre the. &c. All beestes appetiteth ye rest after theyr labour. Also after that all thynges vegeta¦bles haue borne floure and fruyte and la∣boured in somer they rest them in wynter. Also after that god had laboured to cōpo∣se and make the worlde he rested hym on ye seuenth daye. But ye auarycyous forgeteth the reste / they laboure .vi. dayes for to nou¦ryssh etheyr bodyes / and they labour the se¦uenth day for the dampnacyon of theyr sou¦les / & so remembreth of it. Also many peo∣ple dare not werke on the holy daye for ye sclaunder & language of people: but yf they haue in some places to werke / or with some persones to speke / or yf they wyll borowe corne or syluer. &c. Or they wyll fynde to to wynne in marchaūdyse / to sell or to bye or yf they wyll fynde meanes for to aduaū¦tage them. Suche people putteth theyr ter¦me on the daye of the feest for to take hede vnto suche thȳges / & they leue or lose theyr masses / euensonges / and the seruyce of the chyrche / they sanctyfye nor the feestes / but breketh it. Also those the whiche dooth vn∣to the contrary of that thynge that god thē commaūdeth that is the whiche dooth ope¦racyons on ye sayd feestes by reason dyspo¦sed synneth mortally / and putteth theym from paradyse as a man may se by many examples wryten in thexamplary. Quere .lxiiij. A. B. C. ¶Also these logycyens it pre¦ueth by reasons in forme and argumentes thus. All they the whiche on the sondayes or feestes commaunded go to ye plough. &c to werke dysobey this. Sabbata setīfices / om̄e opus. &c. The synne mortally and by
consequence they put them fro paradyse. For it is wryten Mathei .xix. Si vis ad vi¦tam ingredi serua mandata. Et psal. dicit. Tu mandasti mandata tua custodiri ni∣mis. Vel sic. All mortall syn̄e putteth a mā or a woman from paradyse. For it is wry∣ten Ezechiel. xviij. Anima que peccauerit ipsa morietur. And they the whiche done ye grete werkes on the feestes commaunded synneth mortally / for they dysobeye vnto god / than they put themselfe from parady¦se. The solucyon is suche. True it is that al mortall synne / and al inobedyence putteth frome paradyse those the whiche in suche wyse it trespasseth without penaunce. For it is wryten luce .xiij. Nisi penitēciam ege∣ritis omnes simul peribitis. But those the whiche dooth penaunce in theyr lyfe & the whiche ceaseth them of synne in obeyenge vnto god. Iuxta illd ysaie. Lauamini mū¦di estote auferte malum cogitationum ve∣strarum ab oculis meis quiescite agere per¦uerse discite bn̄facere. They shall haue gra¦ce and mercy and theyr synnes shall be put in forgetfulnes. Vnde ezechie .xviij. Si au¦tem impius egerit penitentiam ab omnib{us} peccatis suis. &c. Vita viuet et non moriet{ur} omnium iniquitatum eius non recordabor &c. The seconde maner how men breketh the feestes / is for to dyspyse to go vnto the seruyce and to here it / and the predycaciōs also as not to put hym in deuocion / and as not takynge hede vnto the helthe of his sou¦le as is before declared. The thyrde maner generall how men breke the feestes is for to commytte the mortall synnes / as dron∣kennesses / glotonyes / blasphemynges / le∣sȳges / iniuryes / noyses / stryues / murdres and so of other mortall synnes. That is to saye that at euery tyme that a man cōmyt∣teth mortall synne on the feest commaun∣ded. It is not in suche wyse sanctyfyed / but vnto the contrary to dyshonour by yt whi∣che it is broken. Also the feestes ben often tymes broken by daunces vnduely doone / as by pryde / vanyte / or concupyscence car¦nall / or in the tyme of the seruyce of ye chyr¦che / or in a place not conuenable / as ye chyr∣che or the chyrcheyarde / or with persones sclaundred / or whan a persone hath not o∣portunyte to daunce / or whan a man ma∣keth dyshonest sygnes / as to kysse / to wrin¦ge the fyngers / to trede vpon the fote. &c. ¶Example of this mater of a mayden the whiche was rauysshed in the daūce and af∣ter vyoled & hanged herselfe. Que. lviii. F. ¶Another example how the deuyll wolde haue borne away a mayde the whiche daū¦ced on the sonday. Quere .lxviij. C. Syth yt god defendeth on the feest to do none ope∣racyon vtyle as vnto the body as to go vn¦to the ploughe it foloweth well by a more stronger reason that he defendeth operacy¦on euyll & vnprouffytable as to do lechery. Yf yt ony went vnto the plough on the son∣daye he sholde be reputed yll / by more strō∣ger reason he the whiche dooth lechery / for the plough is a good operacyon of it selfe / ye whiche lechery is not: & therfore men breke the feest for to commyt on it deedly synne. They yt them haue offended lete thē be re∣pentaunt in suche wise to haue offēded god yt is full of all goodnes / & for fere to be sent to the fyre of hell whiche a cruell tourment as shall be declared here after. A ¶How those yt breke the feestes ben pu∣nysshed ofttimes in this-worlde / & they apperceyue not fro whens suche puny∣cyon procedeth. xix THe prophete Ysaye sayth in the xvii. chapytre of his boke. Vni¦uersa mala venerunt su{per} te pro¦pter mltitudinē malificiorū tuo¦rū. All euyls shall come on the
for the multytude of thyn euyll dedes. Yf yu breke ony of the sondayes or of the feestes commaunded for to doo ony operacyons the whiche taketh away the sanctyfycacy∣ons / or yf thou dysobey vnto ony of the cō∣maundementes of god / or yf thou cōmytte ony mortall synne / be thou all in certayne that thou arte bounde vnto payne and pu¦nycyon be it in this worlde or in the other. For the psalmyst sayth. Iniusti punientur et alibi dicitur quia nullum malum rema∣nebit impunitum. The vniust shall be pu∣nysshed. Also all euyll shall be punysshed. And often tymes god punyssheth in this worlde those the whiche breketh the feestes commaunded by the same selfe operacyōs that they do make on the dayes of ye festes but they perceyue not wherof the sayd pu∣nycyon cometh. Vnde Ysaie .xlvii.c. Veni et super te malum et nescies ortum eius et irruet super te calamitas quam non pote∣ris expirare / veniet super te repente mise∣ria quam nescies. &c. Euyll shall come vpō the / and thou shalte not can tell wherof it shall procede / and pouerte shall fal vpon ye the whiche thou mayst not auoyde: and my¦sery that thou knowest not shall hastely co¦me vpon the. &c. ¶For to vnderstāde this mater it behoueth to pertycularyse vpon ye cases the whiche happeneth. There ben so∣me labourers the whiche gooth vnto the ploughe on the dayes of the feestes com∣maunded for aduaunce them and to enry∣che in habundaunce of cornes / and it dry∣eth somtyme / whan August cometh theyr cornes ben full of drake / of deruell / and of myldewede / of stynkynge corne or of other infeccyons. Who so sholde demaunde of ye sayd labourers wherof such mysfortune or punycion cometh / for theyr feldes hath ben well composted / well sowen with good se∣de / harowed and done in good season and fayre wether. The prophete Yasaie before alleged gyueth the answer in saynge. Vni¦uersa mala venerūt super te. &c. vtsu. The sayd punycyon {pro}cedeth to you by aduentu¦re. Nescio / de{us} scit. I can not tel / god kno¦weth for yt / yt ye made your sayd cornes on the feestes commaunded. &c. ¶Example of a punycyon the whiche came vpon ye cor¦nes of flyes ye whiche deuoured them / & in one of the wynges of the sayd flyes there was wryten (ira) / and in the other wynge was wryten (dei). That is to say the Yre of god the whiche was vpon the people for theyr synnes .lxiiij. K. Vel sic. Thou labou∣rer thou hast in august good cornes in thy felde / and doost grete dylygence the day of saynt sauyour / or of saynt Laurence for to repe them / bynde / and cary in to thy barne or peraduenture thou tythest euyll ye sayd corne. &c. And for to punysshe ye of thy syn god suffreth that ydle people as souldyers and hunters come vpon thy grounde and deuour and wast thy breed and thy cornes with theyr houndes and horses. &c. Or god shall sende baylyfs / sheryfs / or comyssary∣es yt whiche shall arest / take / or sell thy cor¦ne the whiche shal be gyuen for nought / be it for taxes / debtes / fortune or losse / and af¦ter thou shalte haue honger or indygence. Thou haste the eyen of thy soule blynded. Legitur in libro sapientie. Malicia eorum excecauit eos. For thou cōsyderest not that god the punyssheth for that thou werkest and labourest to repe the sayd corne on the daye of the feest commaunded. Vel sic. Or after that the sayd corne shall be rype / re∣ped / bounde / and engraūged the fyre shall take within it / and enbrase it with flambe and smoke tyll it be all brente and consu∣med in to asshes. Veniet super te maium et nescies ortum ei{us}. vt supra. ¶Example of a man the whiche caryed his corne on ye daye of the feest / and the fyre brente all vp. Quere in the examplarye .lxiiij. E. Vel
sic Or peraduenture ar that thou hast laboured on the feest there shall come soo grete drought that thy sayd corne ne may growe / or soo grete waters that it shall be drouned / or suche tempest of hayle & weder that it shall be shrōken and wasted / & thou shalte not apperceyue wherfore it shall pro¦cede vnto the as it is sayd. These thynges here ben wryten in many places in scryptu¦res. Vnde deutero. xi. Cauete ne forte de∣cipiatur cor vestrum et recedatis a dn̄o ira tus{que} domin{us} claudat celum et pluuie non descēdant / nec terra det germen suum. &c. Beware lest peraduenture your herte be deceyued: and that ye ne departe you from god / & that he wrothe hym not ayenst you that he ne close the heuen and that the ray∣nes ne descende / and that ye erthe ne gyue ye bryngynge forthe of fruyte. Et leui. xxvi Si non feceritis oīa mādata mea & si spre∣ueritis leges meas vesitabo vos velociter in egestate et ardore frustra feretis semen¦tē que ab hostib{us} deuorabitur ponam faciē meam contra vos. &c. Yf ye haue not done all my commaundements / and yf ye haue dyspysed my lawes I shall vesyte you ha∣stely in pouerte and brennynge / ye shall be¦re for nought your corne and your sede the whiche shall be deuoured of ennemyes / I shall set my face ayenst you. &c. Thou mar¦chaunt the whiche sanctyfyest not the fee∣stes after ye commaundement of god (sab∣bata sanctifices) he shall permette that an euyl thefe or a knaue shall by thy marchaū¦dyse the whiche shall deceyue and begyle ye and also shall not paye the well / or yu shalte lenne it hym vnto credence / and peraduen¦ture shall cost the in processe and debate ye value of the debt / where god the wolde ha¦ue sent a good marchaunt the whiche shol¦de bye well and paye well / but he wyll not do that vnto the / but he wyll do it vnto hȳ the whiche hath sanctyfyed the feestes. Al∣so he the whiche wyll bye marchaundyse & leue the sanctyfycacyon of the feest for to renne thyder is often tymes begyled and deceyued by fraude and falshede. For yf he bye oxen / kyen / shepe / or hors they shall be peraduenture seke or deye of moreyne. &c. by the whiche he shall lese all suche thȳg & he shall not apperceyue that it vnto hym procedeth for the euyll sanctyfycacion of ye feest. Veniet super te malū & nescies ortū ei{us}. vt supra. ¶Example in the byble how the sellers on the feest daye were reproued and made cease. Quere .lxiiii. n. Also crafty people and werkers with theyr armes the whiche lyueth by ye payne of theyr werkes oft tymes breketh the feestes for to gete or wynne a thȳge of nought / as an halfpeny or a ferdynge. And also god vnto them sen¦deth some sekenes / for the whiche they mu¦se and may do nothynge after in more thā xv. dayes. and putteth that / that they haue in medycynes. Suche people apperceyue not that god them punyssheth for brekyn∣ge of ye sayd feestes / and how that god suf¦freth men of warre to pylle them for theyr synnes / ete theyr hennes / & theyr bacon. &c For one peny that they wynne on the sayd feest they lese mo than .xx. Also the punyci¦on of this worlde is nothinge in regarde of that of hell the whiche is eternall / in ye whi¦che euery man shall be punysshed after his deseruynge. Vnde psalmista. Tu reddis vnicui{que} iuxta opera sua. Thou shalt yelde vnto euery persone after his operacyons. ¶Example of two cordweners / the one yt whiche kept the feest and yode to the seruy¦ce of the chyrche haboūded in goodes / and the other ceased not to werke and was po∣re. Quere in the examplarye / and many other examples. &c. B. ¶Of slouthe that god defendeth .xix.
THe wyse man sayeth in his pro∣uerbes. O ye slouthfull people go vnto the ampte or pysmyre and consyder his wayes and ler¦ne wysdome / the whiche ampte prepareth his meet in somer / & assembleth in heruest that that he wyll eate in wynter. How be it that he ne hath leder / ne cōmaun¦der / ne prynce. Vnde prouerbiorū .vi. Va¦de ad formicam o piger & cōsidera vias ei{us}: et disce sapientiam que cum non habeat du¦cem / nec preceptorem: nec principem parat in estate cibum sibi / et congregat in misse quod comedat. &c. That is to vnderstande Labour ye in somer / that is do good opera¦cyons whyles that thou arte lyuynge / and that thou hast the tyme / the place / and the oportunyte / and assemble in the fayre ver∣tues to thende that in wynter that is after thy dethe thou haue to eete / that is to be re¦feccyoned in the glory of god. Vnde psal∣mista. Saciabor cū apparuerit gloria tua. The prophete Ysaie sayth that the seruaun¦tes of god the whiche haue well laboured in this worlde shall haue to drynke and to ete. That is they shall be refeccyoned with the glory of god / and the cursed slouthfull persones shall haue hongre & thyrste. Vn∣de Ysaie .lxv. Ecce serui mei comedent et vos esurietis / ecce serui mei bibent et vos sitietis. &c. Also the dampned shall crye. Il¦lud Iheremie .viii. capitu. Transsijt mes∣sis sinita est estas et nos saluati non sum{us}. The heruestis past somer is ended and we¦ne ben saued. ¶Man reasonable it is defē¦ded the bi this commaundement that thou be not slouthfull to go vnto the seruyce of the chyrche / and to sanctyfy and kepe ye fe∣stes in lykewyse as they ben commaunded Yf thou hast ben heuy to sanctyfy them / or to do the good espyrytual the whiche is dy¦uyne what good dede so euer it be vnto the whiche thou were holden of necessyte / that is to vnderstande yf by consentynge of rea¦son thy body hath domynacyon and lorde shyppe of thy soule in suche maner that it hath in hate and in dyspleasaunce the dy∣uyne goodes / and that he hath eschewed & left to do it and to accomplysshe it in suche wyse as it was commaunded. It is here a¦gaynst charyte and mortall synne. Quia accidia secundum sanctum thomam est tri¦sticia de spirituali bono in quantum est di∣uinum ad quod quis de necessitate tenetur Slouthe is to haue trystesse of spyrytuall goodnes in as moche as it is dyuyne wher¦vnto some is holden of necessyte. To tary / to withdrawe or to fle the goynge to euen∣songe / masse / matyns / predycacyons / pro∣cessyons and all other seruyces. Yf he san∣cyfy not well and honour god and his sayn¦tes in theyr solempnitees. And by this ben reproued the slouthfull late comers / negly¦gentes / people not carynge / forgetefull / ydle / weyke in spyryte / soft / tendre / ennoy¦full / sluggardes / and dyffaylers / in so mo∣che that they ne wyll obey to serue god & his sayntes after the commaundement ye whiche vnto theym is gyuen. ¶Example how that god reproued the ydle people the whiche ne dyde no good operacyon. Vnde mathei .xx. Quid hic statis tota die ociosi: ite in vineam meam. Also those the whiche ben ydle and slouthfull to go vnto seruyce of the solempnytees ben to be reproued as these beforesayd. Legitur luc .xii. Ille ser∣uus qi cognouit voluntatē dn̄i sui / et nō se {pre}parauit: et non facit scdm voluntatē eius vapulabit mltis. That seruaūt yt knoweth the wyl of his mayster or lorde & prepareth not hymselfe / ne dooth after his wyll shall be moche beten. Also they shall be sent in to the fyre of hell. Wherof it is wryten luce. iii et math. vii. Oīs arbor que nō facit fructū bonū excidetur & in ignem mittet{ur}. That is to saye. Euery tree / that is euery persone
the whiche ne maketh good fruyte that is good operacyons shall be cut and sente in¦to the fyre of hell / wherof it is spoken after Quere .xlix. b. A tree the whiche bereth no fruyte ne dooth but occupye ye erthe wher¦in it is / and therfore men cutteth it & bren∣neth it. In lykewyse shall the slouthfull be the whiche dooth noo good dede shall be ta¦ken out of this worlde and sent vnto the fy¦re of hel / in the whiche they shall be cōstrey¦ned to abyde eternally / and so to holde thē wyl they or not without euer to haue ayde ne socoures. C. ¶Example of a relygyous that wolde doo no goodnesses. It is wryten in ye dyalogue of saynt Gre∣gory of a frere the whiche came vnto a re¦lygyon more by necessyte thā by wyl vnto whome it was grefe whā men spake vnto hym of his helthe / he ne wolde do ne here ye good / and to all goodnes flouthfull he was to do it. Whan he was seke and at ye dethe all his brethren came thyder / and as he la∣boured at the laste ende he cryed and sayd vnto his bredren. Departe you / go you hēs for I am gyuen to a dragon for to deuour me / yt whiche ne may englout me for your presence / my heed is now plunged in his mouthe / gyue hym place to swalowe me / and that he tourment me no more / and yt he do that thynge that he sholde do. Yf I be gyuen vnto hym for to be deuoured / wher¦fore shall I suffre to tary for you. Than ye bredren vnto hym sayd. Broder what thin¦ge is that / yt thou spekest / make the token of the crosse. He answered I wolde make it but I may not for the scales of this dra¦gon. Than his sayd brethren fell flatte vn¦to the erthe in orayson and wepynge for ye ayde and delyueraunce of hym / & by theyr prayers he was delyuered. He thanked thē and correcked hymselfe / for he was no mo¦re slouthful but prompte and dylygent vn¦to all goodnesse / and after ended well his dayes / and yf he had not correcked hymsel¦fe he had be dampned and put from para∣dyse. ¶Another example of a man yt whi∣che was dampned for that he wolde do no good dede. D. ¶We fynde by wrytynge how a holy man beynge in deuocyon herde by the per∣myssyon dyuine the voyce of a soule ye whi¦che cryed horrybly alas / alas / alas / and yt sayd holy man hym demaunded what he was / he answered I am a soule dampned and he agayne demaūded / what hast thou doone wherfore thou arte dampned. He an¦swered for that / yt I was slouthfull to doo good operacions / sayd not the good that I knewe / nor I yode not vnto the chyrche in time and place / and & dyde not the good that I was holden to doo / and therfore I am dampned. By this example men shol∣de vnderstande that it suffyseth not to de∣clyne frome euyll for to be saued / but with that it behoueth to doo good dedes. Vnde psalmista. Declina a malo et fac bonum. The sayd man was not dampned for the theftes / ne fornycacyons. &c. but for that yt he loste the tyme of grace without doynge of good dedes / and without confessyng hȳ & after his dethe he myght neuer confesse hym ne do good operacyons / for he hadde loste ye tyme of grace / and also he was not in the place where he myght doo it. Nichil preciosus tempore / sed heu hodie nichil vili¦us. ¶Another example of a preest the whi¦che taryed too mynyster the sacramentes vnto his parysshen the whiche departed & deyed. This example is wryten here before in the fyrst commaundement / quere .viii. c Dylygence is agaynst the synne of slouthe for good seruauntes sholde be prompt and dylygent to serue god and his sayntes in ly¦kewyse as it is declared here before .xvi. A and they shall be praysed / and shall haue grete rewarde in lykewyse as it is wryten
in the chapytre of sacrylege. Quere in ye .vi commaundement .xxx. C. A. ¶Here foloweth the fourth commaun∣dement of god the whiche treateth that we sholde loue our faders .xx. ¶Faders and moders thou shalt honour And them socoure in necessyte To helpe thy neyghbour in euery houre Be thou dylygent in all equyte THis commaundement is wryten / Exo. xx. ca. Math. xix. & Marc. vii. Honora patrem tuum et matrem tuam. Honour thy fader and thy moder or euyll shall come vnto the / in lykewyse as it is co∣men vnto many. Quere in thexam .lxx. b, d. And it is wryten. Math. xxii. Et adroma. xiii. Diliges proximum tuum sicut tei{pre}m Thou shalt loue thy neyghbour as thy self. in lykewyse as it is wryten here before. que¦re .ii. f. g. h. ¶For to declare this commaun¦dement it behoueth to se and knowe many thynges. ¶And fyrst. B. ¶Whiche ben the faders that we shol∣de honour .xx. VEnerare patris. Honour thi fa¦ders. Foure pryncypall faders there ben vnto whom honour is due. That is to vnderstan∣de. Our fader creatour / he the whiche hath engendred vs / the fader spy∣rytuall / and the fader temporal. ¶The fa¦der fyrst that we sholde honour is god the creatour that we require euery day in our orayson domynycall. Pater noster qui. &c He is sayd our fader for he hath created our soule vnto his lykenesse. Also he loueth vs as a good fader dooth his chyldren / & nou¦ryssheth vs wt his godes that he maketh to growe. He is the fader the whiche nourys∣sheth / he purueyeth vs to that the whiche is necessary. Moreouer he wylleth that we haue herytage and possession in his realme that is paradyse / and therfore we sholde lo¦ue hym fylyally / that is to say chyldely / for we ben his chyldren in lykewyse as sayeth the holy scrypture. Vnde dd in psal. Dn̄s dixit ad me filius meus es tu. Et paulus di¦cit ad thessal .v. Om̄es enim vos filii lucis estis et filii dei non simus noctis ne{que} tene brarū. Et ad roma .viii. Quicū{que} enim spū dei aguntur hi sunt filij dei. Et. i. ioh. iii. ca. Videte qualem caritatem dedit nobis pa¦ter vt filij dei nominemur et simus. &c. Et math. xxii. Simile est regnum celo{rum} hoī re¦gi qui fecit nuptias filio suo. &c. God so mo¦che loueth his chyldren that obeyeth vnto hym / and vnto them gyueth so moche goo¦des in paradyse that they ben decored as goddes. Vnde legit{ur} in biblia. Ego dixi dii estis et filij excel si om̄es. ¶The seconde fa¦ders that we sholde honour ben the fader and moder that vs hath engendred / borne loued / gyuen souke / nourisshed / and socou¦red / or they ben those the whiche hathe not engendred vs but haue the charge to nou∣rysshe vs / to clothe and to hose & sho vs / & to puruey temporally & spyrytually / wher¦fore men say in comyn language / he is a fa¦der that nourissheth. Vnto these faders he¦re we ne may yelde the good that they vn¦to vs haue done / wherof speketh the phylo¦sophre in (nono ethico{rum}) where he sayeth. Magistris dominis et parentibus non po¦test reddi equiualens. After that thou we∣re borne thy fader and moder haue borne yt tenderly betwene bothe theyr armes / for thou was feble without ony strength for to helpe thy selfe. Whan thou cryed and yt thou vnto theym dyde harme and anoye they supported thyn vnwysenesse and shre¦wednesse / and voluntaryly pardoned the.
Whan thou befyled the in thyn owne ordu¦re and sylthe they made the clene and ser¦ued vnto thy necessyte. Whan thou hadde honger they gaue the souke / and the good morcelle out of theyr owne mouthes for to nourysshe and fede the. They haue takē moche payne and trauayle / and thought for the as well by nyght as by day / and ha¦ue put themselfe in grete daunger for too gete the goodes and herytages. &c. For to make shorte thou canst not restore to them the good the whiche they haue vnto the do¦ne. And therfore sayth the sage. Ecclesiasti¦ce. vii. Honora patrem tuum et gemitum matris tue non obliuiscaris memento qm̄ nisi per ipsos non fuisses. That is to saye. Honour thy fader and forgete not the way lynge of thy moder / remembre that thou haddest not ben yf they ne had ben. ¶Ex∣ample of the doughter the whiche forgate not her moder in necessyte / and nourisshed her in a toure with the mylke of her brestes Quere in the exampl .lxxi. C. By this pre¦sent commaundement god wylleth and cō¦maundeth vnto chyldren that they do in ly¦kewyse vnto theyr faders and moders wt herte and mynde / and with operacyō whā tyme and place it shal requyre / as the sayd faders vnto them hath done at the begyn∣nynge of theyr chyldehode as before is de∣clared. ¶Example how the two sones of Noe Sem and Iaphet mocked not theyr fader as dyde Cham / and they ben pray∣sed. Quere in thexamplary .lxx. C. ¶Ano∣ther example of sone the whiche wolde not shote at his fader as his bredren dide. Que¦re .lxxi. A. By the whiche a man sholde vn∣derstande that a good chylde loueth his fa∣der and may not endure that a man vnto hym do ony euyll / neyther at dethe nor at lyfe. ¶Another example of the sone of A∣braham. Quere .li. A. ¶The thyrde bē our faders espyrytualles or goostly the whiche haue the puyssaunce of god to regenerate and to reforme oure soules spyrytually by the admynystracyon of the holy sacramen¦tes of the holy baptysme and penaunce. &c The whiche vnto vs ben necessaryes and prouffytables as it is wryten in the before in the fyrst commaundement. Quere .viii. a. b. Of the whiche the pope is heed and so∣uerayne fader of all crysten people / ye whi∣che hath the puyssaunce that god gaue vn∣to saynt Peter. The whiche is wryten. ma¦thei. xvi. Tibi dabo claues regni celorum et quodcū{que} ligaueris super terram erit li∣gatū et in celis / et quodcū{que} solueris super terram erit solutum et in celis. After our ho¦ly fader the pope our spyrytuall faders bē¦vycares the whiche haue prelacion and pu¦yssaunce vnder god and vnder hym / eue∣ry of them in pertyculer in the countree ly∣mytted where his sayd prelacyon extēdeth and not in other countrees. As euery bys∣shop is the fader spyrytuall vnto theym of his bysshopryche / euery curate vnto his pa¦rysshens. &c. As men say / here is my fader of confession / or goostly fader / or god fader &c. Also euery mayster of the scole is a fa∣der of doctryne vnto his scolers. And eue∣ry precher of them vnto whom he precheth for to do thinges salutaryes. Wherof saynt Poule maketh compte the whiche sayeth. Illud. i. ad. corinth. v. Ego per euangeliū genui vos. Vnto euery of these faders here we sholde bere honour and reuerence after his dygnyte / as sayth saynt Ysodore Secū¦dum dignitatem redde cui{que} honorē. And vnto theym we ought to obey in that / that we haue promysed in baptysme. Also in yt / that god and the chyrche vs commaūdeth and in thynges the whiche ben after god / for the helthe and salute of our soules tou∣chynge good maners / and to fle & eschewe synne. ¶The fourth faders the whiche we sholde honoure / ben the myghty prynces-lordes
chyeftaynes and maysters ye which haue domynacyon and puyssaunce seculer vpon other. As a kynge in his realme is fa¦der / heed / and mayster of them of his sayd realme as vnto the secularyte / and he and hye offycers haue the gouernement as vn¦to the Iustyce seculer. Also euery duke and lorde in his duchy and sygnourye. Also eue¦ry man the whiche is mayster of his hous is the fader of the housholde of those of his sayd hous / as well chyldren as seruauntes and is called in scrypture (pater familias) fader of the housholde. Wherof we rede in the auncyent testament that the seruaun∣tes of a lorde named Naaman sayd vnto theyr mayster. Fader yf the prophete hath tolde the grete thynge certes thou sholdest do it. Vnde .iiij. regum. v. Pater si rē grā∣dem dixisset tibi {pro}pheta: certe facere debue¦ras. He murmured agaynst ye prophete He liscus. &c. Vnto these faders seculers here euery man sholde bere honour and reuerē¦ce by this commaundement whan ye tyme the place / and the oportunyte it gyueth / & after the dygnyte of euery man. Vnde .i. pe¦tri. ii. Omnes honorate fraternitatem dili¦gite deū timete / regem honorificate. That is to say / honour all folke / loue fraternite / drede god / honour the kynge. And it beho∣ueth them to obey vnto thynges ye whiche toucheth the gouernement of theyr realme or sygnourye in god and after hym for the helthe of soules / and not otherwyse. Legi∣tur mathei. xxii. Reddite que sunt cesaris cesari / et que sunt dei deo. Yelde vnto cesar the thynges the whiche ben due vnto cesar and yelde vnto god that the whiche apper∣teyneth vnto him. That is to vnderstande that men sholde yelde vnto the temporall lorde suche honour and the thynge the whi¦che vnto hym apperteyneth. And for to yel¦de vnto god ye dute & magnyfycence ye whi¦che belongeth vnto his soueraynte. And saynt Peter sayth. Be ye subgectes vnto all humayne creatures for the loue of god or vnto the kynge also as vnto the super∣latyfe the whiche is aboue the other / or vn¦to the dukes as sent of the kynge vnto the vengeaunce of the euyl / and vnto the pray¦synge and laudacyon of the good. Vnde .i. petri. ii. Subiecti estote om̄i humane crea∣ture propter deum / sine regi quasi precelen¦ti: siue ducibus tanquam ab eo missis ad vī¦dictam malefactorum / laudem vero bono¦rum. And how be it that oure lorde com∣maundeth that a man honour / serue / and loue his faders it behoueth for to vnder∣stande as it is sayd that god is the soueray¦ne fader. Vnde mathei. xxiii. Vnus est pa¦ter vester qui est in celis. Vnto god apper∣teyne the souerayne honour / for what per¦sone that honoureth / prayseth / loueth / ser∣ueth / or putteth his hope or truste in perso∣nes / as in prynces more than in god he of∣fendeth in lykewyse as it is declared befo∣re in the fyrst commaundemente. Quere .i. H. Moreouer ye scryptures sayth yt ye aun¦cyente people ben our faders in aege. Vn∣de paul .i. ad thimo. v. Seniorē ne in crepa¦ueris: sed obsecra vt patrem. Thou shalte not blaspheme the auncient / but prayse hȳ also as fader. And it is wryten. Leuiti. xix. Coram cano capite surge et honora perso¦nam senis / et time dominum deum tuum. That is to say. Aryse thou before the balde heed / and honour the auncyent persone / & drede thy lorde god. The auncyent hathe seen passed / and can / and knoweth / wher∣fore a man vnto hym sholde bere honoure and reuerence. And whan the yonge presu¦meth to speke / to knowe / or to do ony thyn¦ge before the auncyent men they ben prou∣de presumptuous / and ought gretely to be reproued. Also it is wryten. Ecclesiastice .xxxii. In medio magnatorum loqui non presumas / et vbi sunt senes non multa lo∣quaris.
Glosa. Si vis interrogatus fueris habeat caput tuum responsum / et multis esto quasi inscius et auditacens simul et lo¦quens / et pro reuerentia accedet tibi bona gratia. That is to say. Presume not to spe¦ke amonge the grete / and where the aunci¦entes ben speke but lytell. Yf thou be que∣styoned two tymes than answere. And be thou in many thynges as not knowynge and herken in scylence. And sōtyme speke / and good grace shall come to the for to do reuerence. Also this worde here (pater) the whiche is here of the masculyne gendre is taken in .iiii. maners after Grecisme. Est pater hic cura / pater est alius genitura. Est pater etate / pater ille vocatur honore. Ad summum regem facit illa creatio patrem. The fyrst after Grecisme is he the whiche hath the cure to baptyse / to confesse / and to admynyster the sacraments. The seconde fader is he the whiche hath engēdred. The thyrde fader is the auncient of aege ye whi¦che is called the fader of honoure. The .iiii. fader the whiche ought to be the fyrst is ye creatour souerayne kynge. ¶Of these fa∣ders before sayd many examples shall be founde in the fourth commaundement of the examplary. Quere ad numerum .lxxi. A. B. C. A. ¶The maners how these chyldren shol¦de loue theyr faders. xxi HOnora patrem tuum et ma∣trem tuam. Honour thy fader and thy moder. After the cō∣maundemente of god a man shold bere reuerence vnto his faders in many maners / of the whiche we shall tell .vii. B. ¶Fyrst a man sholde do honoure vnto his faders whan he passeth before theym / or that he speketh vnto theym / or that he bowe the knee / and vncouer and bowe his heed in humylyte / drede / and loue. This maner of doynge is comune in all honest persones & moche praysed. For it is wryten luce .xiiii. & mathei .xxiii. Omnis qui se hu¦miliat exaltabitur. All men the whiche hū¦bleth them and boweth downe shal be ex∣alted. The more that a tree is charged wt fruite / or an ere with corne / the more they bowe downe and enclyne towarde ye erth Also a persone the more that he is replenis¦shed with vertues and with grace / ye mo∣re gretely he humbleth hym. Vnde iacobi iiii. ca. Deus superbis resistit / humilibus autem dat gratiam. God resisteth vnto ye proude people / and to ye humble he gyueth grace. Also the persone the whiche boweth doune and humbleth hym more lowe than he ne sholde he offendeth not as to passe in at a dore. And yf he rayse hymselfe hygher than he sholde he hurteth hym selfe and of¦fendeth. Our lorde had humylyte in al ma¦ners. That is to vnderstande in his naty∣uyte / and whan he wasshed the fete of his dyscyples / and whan he put hymselfe vn∣der saynt Iohan for to be baptysed. &c. Vn¦de mathei .xi. Discite a me quia mitis sum et humilis corde. Lerne of me / that is take ye example of me for I am soft and hum∣ble of herte. Yf our lorde hath so moche bo∣wed doune and humylyed hym vnder his dyscyples as to wasshe to theyr fete / by a more greter reason we sholde humble vs and bowe vnder our fader and moder. Al¦so it is wryten that euery man drede his fa¦der and moder. Vnde leuitice .xix. Vnus∣quis{que} patrem suum et matrem suam t∣meat. And whan that ony ne humbleth hȳ and boweth doune before his faders whan tyme and place it requyreth it is pryde and gooth agaynst thiq commaundement. Se¦condly a man dooth honoure and pleasure vnto his faders whan that a man speketh
vnto theym swete wordes / good and cur∣teys / symple and amyable vnto god and vnto them. Wherof speketh the sage Eccle¦siastice .xx. capitul. Sapiens ī verbis ama¦bilem se facit. And the sage maketh hym a¦myable in wordes. Et legitur ecclesia .vi. Verbum dulce multiplicat amicos / et ini¦micos mitigat. That is to say / swere wor∣des multyplyeth frendes / and asswageth or lesseth ye enemyes. And the phylosophre sayth in the .ix. boke of ethyques. The amy¦te of the good folke shall be encreased by ye good languages. Et legitur prouerbiorum xxv. Lingua mollis confringet duriciam cordis. The soft tongue breketh the hard∣nes of the herte Et legitur prouerbiorum. xv. Respōsio mollis trangit iram: sermo¦duris suscitat furorem. Soft answer bre∣keth yre / and harde wordes reyseth furour Yf thou speke swete wordes vnto thy pa∣rentes they ne may be wrothe agaynst the and also thou doost vnto theym honoure. ¶Example how Ysaac the sone of Abra∣ham spake swete wordes vnto his fader whan he wolde haue made sacryfyce of hȳ and slayne hym. Quere .li. A. Vnto the con¦trary yf thou blame them or speke rigorou¦sly thou doost vnto them dyshonour. Also to curse them therof foloweth terryble pu¦nycyon. Wherof it is wryten. Marci. vii. Honora patrem tuum et matrem tuam / et qui maledixerit patri aut matri morte moriat{ur}. Honoure thy fader and thy moder and he that hath cursed his fader shal deye of dethe / and his lyght shall be put out in ye myddle of derkenesses. Vnde prouerbiorū .xx. Qui maledixerit patri suo vl matri sue extinguetur lumen ei{us} in medus tenebris. We rede genesis .ix. capitul. that one of the sones of Noe named Cham mocked his fa¦der as he laye and slepte vncouered / and therfore his sone was cursed and is repro∣ued euyll / he and all ye lygnage of hym. &c. ¶Example how .x. chyldren trembled by punycyon dyuyne for that they hadde of∣fended theyr moder. Quere in thexampl .lxxiii. E. ¶Another example of a chylde yt ye deuyll bare away. Quere in thexampla∣ry .lxx. G. B. ¶Thyrdly men do vnto theym pleasu∣re and honour whan men loue them natu¦rally in sekynge and desyrynge theyr helth and prosperyte corporall & spyrytuall. Va∣lerian sayeth. Quod prima lex nature est amare parentes. The fyrst lawe of nature is to loue his kynnesmen & parentes. And god commaundeth illud. Mathei .xxii. Di¦liges proximum tuum sicut te ipsum. Thou shalt loue thy neyghbour as thy selfe. The moost nerest neyghbour that thou hast is thy fader and thy moder / for thou arte pro¦ceded and comen of them. Loue them than as thy selfe in god / and after hym and not otherwyse. ¶Example of a doughter that nourysshed her moder in a pryson with ye mylke of her brestes / and by her charyte & loue her moder was delyuered the whiche sholde haue deyed. Basilius dicit / parētes nostros vt propria viscera diligamus si ac∣cedere nos ad seruitutem christi non prohi∣buerint / si autem prohibuerīt ne sepulchra illorum a nobis debentur aspici. Loue we our parētes as our owne bowelles yf they defende vs not approche vnto the seruytu¦de of Ihesu cryst / and yf they defende it vs we sholde not beholde theyr sepultures. Our lorde Ihesus loued so moche his mo∣der that he forgate her not at the houre of his dethe & recommaunded her vnto saynt Iohan ye euangelyst. Vnde ioh̄. xix. Dixit discipulo / ecce mater tua. &c. And in dede the contrary whan a chylde hateth his fa∣der or his moder in requyrynge that they haue an euyll dethe or aduersyte for to ha∣ue theyr goodes / honours / and herytages they ben ryght vnnatural / peruers / & euyl
wors than a beest. Quia legitur ecclesiasti¦ce .xiii. Quod omne animal diliget sibi si∣mile. Eueri beest loueth his semblable. And of those the whiche theym tourmenteth it is wryten in this maner. Prouerbio .xxviii Qui subtrahit aliquid a patre suo vel a ma¦tre et dicit hoc non est peccatum particeps homicide est. And of those ye whiche them beteth it is wryten: Exodi .xxi. Qui percus¦serit patrem suum aut matrem suam mor¦te moriatur. He the whiche smyteth his fa∣der or his moder shall deye of dethe. ¶Ex∣ample of two sones the whiche slewe theyr fader. Quere .lxxii. D. ¶Another exam∣ple of a sone the whiche dyshonoured his moder / & his chyldren deyed shortly .lxx. E E. ¶Fourthly men do honour vnto theyr parentes whan that wyllyngly and beny∣gnely they submyt them in theyr subieccy∣on and seruyce to socour them in theyr ne∣des and necessytees corporalles and spyry¦tualles / wherof speketh saynt Peter .i. pe∣tri. ii. Serui subiecti estote in omni tempo∣re dominis / non tantum bonis & modestis sed etiam discolis hec est enim gratia. Be ye subgectes that ben seruauntes vnto your lordes and maysters in all drede / and not alonely vnto the good and moderate / but vnto the euyll. And the sage sayth. Ecclesi∣astice .iii. Qui timet deum honorat paren∣tes / et quasi dominus seruiret his qui se ge¦nuerunt. &c. And here those that ben prou∣de sholde well vnderstande that theyr fa∣der and moder theym serued swetely after that they were borne / wherfore the chyldrē sholde humble them to serue them and ho¦nour theym. Also god theym commaun∣deth it. We rede yt the good holy man Tho¦bye taught his sone that he sholde do seruy¦ce vnto hym / not alonely in his lyfe / but wt that whan he sholde be deed / and vnto hȳ sayd. Illud thobie .iiij. Cum acceperit de{us} animam meam corpus meum sepeli / et ho¦norem prebebis matri tue omnibus diebus tuis. Whan god hath taken my soule bury my body / and thou shalt gyue honour vn∣to thy moder al thy lyfe. Also we rede that our sauyour and redemptour Ihesu cryst humbled hymselfe and put hym vnder Io¦seph / and vnto his glorious moder the blys¦sed vyrgyn Mary / as it is wryten. Luce .ii Erat subditus illis. Thou chylde wherfo¦re seruest thou not thy fader and moder / & wherfore shalt thou not be in theyr subgec¦cyon. Arte thou greter mayster than god the whiche put hymselfe vnder his paren∣tes and frendes. Those the whiche ne wyll serue and appetyteth that men them serue or those the whiche ne wyll be in subgeccy∣en but appetyteth that other be subgectes vnto theym ben proude and inobedyentes vnto god theyr creatour / wherfore it can not be well with them. ¶Example how a woman was blynde for that she fayled to goo to serue in the place where the body of saynt Martyn rested in lykewyse as she had vowed. Quere .lxiii. H. ¶Another ex∣ample of a man the whiche serued & dyde humble thȳges & fledde vayne glory .lxi. c. F. ¶Fyfthly a man dooth honoure to his faders whan that a man obeyeth vnto thē in thynges vtyles and lefull after god and good maners / and it is ryght straytly com¦maunded to obey vnto fader and moder in the thynge famylyer prouffytable vnto ye body or vnto the soule. Wherof saynt Pou¦le speketh Ad ephesi .vi. Filii obedite parē¦tibus vestris in domino / hoc enim iustum est / sequitur patres nolite ad iracundiam prouocare filios vestros. Faders prouoke ye not vnto yre your chyldren that they ne ben stryken of lytell courage. Sed educa∣te illos in disciplina et correctione domum. But lede ye them in dyscyplyne and in the correccyon of god. Also in eodem capitulo ad ephesi .vi. Serui obedite dominis car∣nalibus
cum timore et tremore et in simpli¦citate cordis vestri sicut christo non ad ocu∣lum seruientes quasi hominibus placētes sed vt serui christi facientes voluntatē dei. sequitur. & vos domini eadem facite illis re¦mittētes minas scientes quia illorum et ve¦ster dominus est in celis et personarum ac¦ceptio non est apud deum. That is to saye Ye that ben seruauntes obey vnto your lor¦des carnalles with drede and fere and in ye symplenes of your hertes in lykewyse as vnto Ihesu cryst / not as seruauntes with the eye also as pleasynge vnto men / but al¦so as the seruauntes of Ihesu cryst in do∣ynge the wyll of god. And ye lordes do ye vnto them in lykewyse forgyuynge al thre¦tenynges in knowlegynge that your god & theyrs is in ye heuens / and accepcyon of persones is not anenst god. Et legitur ad collos .iii. Serui obedite per om̄ia dominis carnalibus non adoculum seruientes / qua si hominibus placentes sed in simplicitate cordis timentes dominum. ¶A questyon that is to vnderstande yf a man shold obey vnto his fader in all thynges. The answer is that naye. A man sholde not obey vnto them in thynges the whiche ben agaynst god as sayd the holy appostles whan they were reproued for that / that they kept not the commaundementes of the prynces of the paynyms. They answered to suche re∣proues. Illud actuum .v. Obedire oportet magis deo quam hominibus. It behoueth to obey vnto god more than vnto men. In some thynges a man sholde accomplysshe & obey vnto his faders. Vnto the prelate a man sholde obey in as moche as the ryght of his prelacyon therto extendeth. The fa∣der carnall hath prelacyon vpon his chyl∣dren as in conseruacyon and kepynge of ye hous. The fader of the housholde is in his hous as the kynge in his realme. The sub∣gectes of the kynge oweth vnto hym obedi¦ence in thynges the whiche apperteyneth vnto the gouernement of the realme. Also in lykewyse the sones and the seruauntes of the housholde ben holden to obey vnto ye fader of the hous in thynges the whiche ap¦perteyneth vnto the dyspences and costes of the housholde. The fader oweth vnto his chylde correccyon and techynge / and ye chyldren therto sholde obey humbly. As in other thȳges the whiche sholde be agaynst god they sholde not obey. And whan they vnto them dysobey in suche case they ne do vnto them none irreuerence: how be it that the appostle sayth. Ad colloscenses .iii. capi. Obedite parentibus vestris per omnia / hoc est enim placitum domino. This worde here (omnia) intelligitur ad que se ius pre∣lationis extendit et non aliter. &c. That is to vnderstande that a man sholde obey vn¦to his parentes in all thynges where as ye ryght of theyr prelacyon extendeth / and not otherwyse. For yf they commaunded ony thynge the whiche were agaynst god or good maners a man sholde not obey as it is sayd. God wylleth and ordeyneth that we lyue in this presente worlde vnder obe∣dyence / and we sholde clerely vnderstan∣de it. For as soone as he hadde created and fourmed Adam he gaue hym commaun∣dement the whiche he trespassed and trans¦gressed and therfore he was punisshed / as it is wryten. Genesis .ii. & .iii. Also we rede in the boke of Moyses that yf a chylde had be stoborne and inobedyent vnto his fader and moder that his sayd fader and moder sholde lede hym vnto the auncyent men of the cyte and that they wytnessed and tolde vnto them the synnes of theyr sayd chylde and that he wolde not be corrected by them ne by theyr admonycyon here foloweth ye punycyon of the sayd chylde so inobedyent as it is wryten. Deuter .xxi. Tapidib{us} eū obruit pplus ciuitatis & moriet{ur} vt auferat{ur}
malum de medio populi vestri / et vniuer∣sus israel audiēs pertimescat. Lete the peo¦ple of the cyte caste stones at hym and lete hym be slayne to thende that the euyl be ta¦ken awaye from the myddes of the people and that all the people of Ysraell that shall here it be in drede. Also we rede that Absa∣lon the ione of Dauyd made warre and {per}∣secuted his sayd fader and by punycion dy¦uyne he was hanged by ye heere of his heed and had his herte perced with four speres and was slayne. Also relygyous people ou∣ghte to obey vnto theyr prelates after the vowe that they haue made to kepe relygy∣on touchynge the rule and constytucyons of theyr monasterye / where yf they go vn∣to the contrary they sholde be greuously pu¦nysshed. In thinges the whiche ben not af¦ter god and good maners they sholde not obey. Saynt Poule sayth ad hebreos vlti∣mo capitul. Obedite prepositis vestris vt subiacete eis / ipsi enim peruigilant quasi ratione pro animabus vestris reddituri / vt cum gaudio hoc faciunt et non gemen∣tes. Obey ye vnto your prouostes / that is vnto prelates and be ye vnder them. Cer∣taynly they wake also as too yelde reason for your soules / to thende that they do that with Ioye and not in waylȳges. Also saynt Poule sayth / yf there be ony that wyll not obey vnto our worde by ye epystole marke ye hym and accompany ye not with hym / to thende that he be confounded Vnde .ii. ad thesall. iii. Si quis non obedierit verbo vestro per epistolam hunc notate / & non cō¦misciamini cum eo vt confundatur. Also whan these prelates sheweth the helthe of soules as good doctryne a man sholde here them and lerne the good that they saye / in lykewyse as yf god it commaunded from heuen. Vnde luce decimo. Qui vos audit me audit / et qui vos spernit me spernit. He the whiche hereth you hereth me / and he the whiche dyspreyseth you dispreyseth me sayeth our lorde god. Also our lorde sayeth that a man sholde doo that the whiche the prelates ypocrites commaundeth / and not to do theyr cursed synnes and operacyons Vnd mathei. xxiii. Super cathedram moi si sederunt scribe et pharisei omnia quecū{que} dixerunt vobis seruate et facite / secundum autem opera eorum nolite racere / dicunt enim et non faciunt. Obedyence is the lad∣der for to ascende in to heuen / and it is re∣quysyte of necessyte of helthe. In lykewy∣se as it is wryten in the begynnynge of the examplary where the examples of obedy∣ence ben wryten. Quere .li. A. G. ¶Syxtely a man dooth honoure vnto his parentes and fader whan a man hel∣peth them by operacyon of body and of go¦des in theyr necessyte after theyr abylyte and puyssaunce. Also it is wryten primo to hannes tercio. Filioli mei non diligamus verbo ne{que} lingua / sed opere et veritate. My chyldren loue we not by worde ne by tongue / but in wecke and in trouthe. Doo vnto thy fader and vnto thy moder in sem¦blable maner as the haue doone vnto the in thyn infancy and chyldhode as it is sayd before. Quere before in this sayd commaū¦dement .xx. B. And saynt Ambrose recoun¦teth in his boke exameron in the fyfth cha¦pytre that the byrdes the whiche ben called storkes putteth theyr parentes as fader & moder whan they ben fallen in aege into a nest and in dede theym nouryssheth and kepeth duely and dylygently there / and yf ony of the sayd olde foules haue loste theyr feders by aege or otherwyse / fauourably & kyndely they couer theym and fayle them not vnto the tyme that they be deed. In ye the same maner by greter reason natural∣ly and of the commaundement of almygh¦ty god we sholde helpe / socour / and confor¦te our faders and moders & other parētes
Be ye not as the enfantes of serpentes ye whiche byteth and renteth the wombe of theyr moders / and sleeth them. Example of a sone the whiche defaylled vnto fader and vnto moder / and he bare a tode thre yeres in his vysage. Que. lxx. B. Another example of two doughters the whiche put out theyr fader in his age. lxxiii. H ¶Seuenthly men dothe honoure vnto theyr faders whā they thē supporte in age feblenes / in sekenes / and haue no wytte / and yf they excede somwhat to pardonne them. Wherof speketh saint poule ad gal. vi. Alter alterius onera portate: et sic ad implebitis legem christi. Bere ye the bur∣dens or dedes one of another. And so shall ye accomplysshe the lawe of Ihesu cryste Et legitur eccle. tertio. ca. Fili suscipe se∣nectam patris tui et non contristes eum ī vita illius: et si defecerit sen{us} veniam da illi. Sone receyue the auncyente of thy fa¦der / and be not wrothe with hym in his ly¦fe / and yf his wytte defayle pardon hym / Et legitur ad ephe. iiii. Estote autem in¦uicem benigni: misericordes donantes in∣uicem sicut er deus in christo donauit vo¦bis. Be ye togyders benygne mercyful gy¦uynge togyders in lyke wyse as god hath gyuen vnto you in Ihesu chryste. Exam∣ples how a man sholde bere honoure vn∣to his fader and moder and fyrste. Exam∣ple how the wyse salamon honoured hys moder. It is wryten in the seconde chapy¦tre of the thyrde boke of kynges howe the kynge Salamon sawe one tyme his mo∣der Barsabe come vnto hym / and he rose vp and came to mete her and worshipped her / and set hym vpon his throne / and ma¦de his moder to sytte on his ryght syde by hym / in doynge her honoure in lyke wyse as a good childe sholde do vnto his moder Agayne tho children the whiche setteth fa¦der and moder whan they ne may nothin¦ge more do / not at the hye ende in doynge them honoure / but at the corner of ye ch∣neye. And yf there be a boone it is gyuen vnto the fayre fader the whiche hathe no mo tethe. Another example wryten in the fourth chapitre of the boke of thobie / how the auncyente thobye sayd vnto his sone / Whan god hathe taken my soule bery my body / and bere honour vnto thy moder all ye dayes of thy lyfe. And in lyke wyse shol¦de good chyldren do. Another example. It is wryten that whan the vyrgyn Marye departed Ihesus forgate her not / and the¦der made to come and be borne all the ap∣postles. And he hymselfe came theder for to do her honoure and seruyce. &c. And al∣so set her on his ryghte hande in paradyse in doynge her honoure. Wherof speketh ye psalmyst the whiche sayeth. Astitit regi∣na a dextris tuis in vestitu deaurato cir∣cumdata varietate. Another example of a man the whiche was fell and harde vn∣to his auncyente and his sone hym repre∣ued and of good ryght. For a man sholde bere honoure vnto his faders by cōmaun¦dement of god. Quere .lxxi. F. I ¶The thynges mouyng for to honour theyr faders. Ca. xxi. IT is wryten ecclesia. tertio. Si∣cut qui thesaueim at / ita qui hono∣rificat patrem suum. In lykewy¦se as is he ye whiche wexeth ryche In lyke wyse is he the whiche ho¦noureth his fader & his moder with due reuerence. Many thynges there is ye whi∣che sholde cause and stere the persones of this worlde to honoure theyr faders & mo¦ders / of the whiche we shall tell. iiii. The fyrst is to haue honoure & preyse as wele
before god as the worlde and for to fle dys∣honour. For the wyse Salamon sayth in ye ecclesiastes. Gloria enim hominis ex hono¦re patris sui et dedecus filij pater sine hono¦re. The glory of the man is of the honoure of his fader / and vnto the dyshonoure of ye sone whan the fader is without honour / yf the fader haue honour or dyshonour in ly∣kewyse hath the sone / and the good or the euyll of the fader redoundeth vpon ye sone It was none honoure vnto Absolon for to make warre agaynst his fader Dauyd. Also euyll came vnto hym. Quere .lxx. A. The seconde thynge the whiche moeueth vs to honour our faders is to thende to ha¦ue benedyccyon or blyssynge. Wherof spe∣keth the sage. Ecclesiastic. iii. Honora pa∣trem tuum et subueniet tibi benedictio a deo / & benedictio illius in nouissimo manet That is to say / honour thy fader that bene¦dyccyon come vpon the from god. And the benedyccyon of hym abydeth in the last en∣de. ¶Example in Ysaac the sone of Abra∣ham the whiche had benedyccyon. Quere .li. A. The two sones of Noe Sem and Ia¦phet the whiche honoured theyr fader had benedyccyon. As it is wryten. Genesis. ix. c Benedictus dominus deus sem sit chana∣an seruus eius / dilatet deus iaphet et habi∣tet in tabernaculis sem: sit{que} chanaan ser∣uus eius. The thirde is of drede to haue ma¦ledyccyon / for it dooth dyscende vpon the chyldren the whiche wyll not honour theyr faders. Wherof it is wryten. Deuterono∣mie. xxvii. Maledictus qui nō honorat pa∣trem suum et matrem suam / et dicet om̄is populus. Amen. He the whiche honoureth not his fader and moder shall be accursed / and all the people shall saye. Amen. ¶Ex∣ample of Cham the sone of Noe the which mocked his fader / and called his two bre∣dren Sem and Iaphet for to mocke hym also / for that that his naturall thynges we¦re vncouered and he had maledyccyon in his lygnage. Quere in thexamplary .lxx. C ¶Another example of chyldrē the whiche hadde the maledyccyon of theyr moder. Quere in the example .lxxiii. E. ¶Another example of a fader and of a sone the which cursed eche other in helle. Quere .lxxi. G. ¶Another example of a chylde that the de¦uyll bare away. Quere .lxx. G. The fourth is to thende to lyue the more longely / and of drede to shorten the lyfe and to deye cur¦sedly. Wherof it is wryten. Exodi. xx. et ad ephesios. vi. Honora patrem tuum et ma¦trem tuam vt sis longeuus super terram quā dominus deus tuus dabit tibi. Et deu¦terono. v. Honora patrem tuum et matrē tuam sicut precepit tibi dominus deus tu{us} vt longo viuas tempore et bene sit tibi. Et eccclesiastic. iii. Qui honorat patrem suum et matrem suam vita viuet longiore. For as moche as Asolon honoured not his fa∣der he abreged his lyfe. Quere in thexam∣plari. lxx. A. ¶Many other examples shal be founde in thexamplary of the commaū¦dementes of god. As of a man whose ber∣de grewe longe after that he was hanged. Quere .lxxi. E. A. ¶The thynges that a fader oweth vn∣to his chylde. xxii. IT is wryten prouerbiorum vice simoseptimo capitulo. Diligen¦ter agnosce vultum pecoris tui: tuos{que} greges considera / non ei habebis iugiter potestatem. &c. Knowe thou dylygently the face / the ma∣ners / and condycyons of thy people / and consyder the defautes of thy subgectes / for thou shalte not haue euermore puyssaunce vpon theym. ¶A good fader oweth duely
vnto the chylde foure thynges / the whiche ben nourysshynge correccyon / techynge & good examples shewynge. B. ¶Fyrst the fader sholde nourysshe his chylde / for god hym commaundeth to loue his neyghbour as hym selfe / and the nerest neyghbour that a mā may haue is his chyl¦de the whiche he sholde loue and it puruey after his puyssaunce or elles he shold be vn¦naturall and inobedyent vnto god. ¶Exā¦ple of a good moder the whiche loued natu¦rally her chylde and myght not endure yt he were slayne ne that he hadde euyll. Que¦re. lxxiii. D. The byrdes nouryssheth theyr yonge ones / and theym purueyth tyll that they may purchase for theym selfe / as the henne her chekyns / and the other euery of them in theyr degree. In lykewyse sholde the fader do vnto his chyldren / for yf they de fayle to gyue them drynke and meet in theyr necessytees / or yf he lete theym deye of honger / of colde / of pouerte / or of other thynge by defaute of kepynge / he sholde be deputed mankyller / as it is declared in the fyfth commaundement where as is spokē the maners of manslaughter. Quere post .xxiiii. D. C. ¶Secondly the fader oweth vnto his chylde correccyon / for yf he se that he be ino¦bedyent and rebell agaynst god and good maners / or that he habandon hym to com∣mytte synnes and cursednesses he him shol¦de reproue and correcke and punysshe wy∣sely and dyscretely in takynge example at god our fader celestyall the whiche loueth ye persones and reproueth the vyces. This thynge is declared before in the fyrst com∣maundement. Quere .iii. C. Also take exā∣ple at the fader spyrytual the whiche repro¦ueth and correcketh the vyces and synners in predycacyon and confessyon / and in gy∣uynge penaunce for punycion after ye coun¦ceyle of the appostle .i. ad thessal .v. c. Cor∣ripite inquietos / consolamini pusillanimes suscipite infirmos / pacientes estote ad oēs. Correcke ye them the whiche haue no rest / comforte ye them the whiche haue lytel cou¦rage / receyue ye the seke be ye pacyent vn∣to all. And a man sholde well note that cor¦reccyon is one of the werkes of mercy that god commaunded. And somtyme he defen¦deth that men bete not. Quere .xxv. B. Al∣so correccyon is one of the partes of Iusty¦ce that the Iust sholde euer haue in theym and do it vnto other. Iustus dicitur a iusti¦cia. The Iust is sayd of Iustyce. Thou fa∣der thou sholdest desyre the helthe of thy chylde / and he shall not be saued yf he ne be correked of his synnes. The sage sayth. Il∣lud. prouerbiorum. xxiiii. Noli subtrahere a puero disciplinam si enim percusseris eū virga non morietur. Tu virga percuties cum et animam eius de inferne liberabis. Kepe the from withdrawynge dyscyplyne from thy chylde / yf thou stryke hym with the rodde he shal not deye. Thou shalt stry¦ke hym with the rodde and thou shalte de∣lyuer his soule from hell. And saynt Poule sayth. ad titum .ii. Loquere et exhortare & argue cum om̄i imperio. Speke and exhor¦te and reproue with al sygnoury. ¶Exam¦ple of two relygyous of the whiche the ab∣bot corrected one incontynent that he fay∣led / and ye other he spared. Whan they we∣re departed and deed he that was correc∣ted yede into the Ioyes of paradyse / and ye other vnto the paynes of purgatory. Que¦re in thexāplary .lxxiiii. C. Also thou fader yf thou loue thy chylde yf he be in synne yu sholdest threten hym / and thou sholdest af∣ferme vnto hym that he shal be beten yf he correcke not hym selfe. Vnde ecclesiastice. xxx. Qui diligit filium assiduat illa stagel∣la. ¶Also it is wryten in the sayd chapytre Curua ceruicē filii tui iniuuētute et rēde latera eius dū infans est ne forte induret &
non credat tibi et erit tibi dolor anime. Bo∣we doune the heed of thy chylde in youthe & smyte his sydes whyles that he is a chyl∣de that he waxe not harde vnto the / and yt he beleue the not whan he shall be grete. The wande boweth and wryeth whan it is yonge / and whan it is olde a man may not twyne it / no more may men the chyldrē Wherfore they must be plyed and daunted in youthe. ¶Example by the good correcci¦on that was doone vnto a yonge chylde he yode in to paradyse incontynent yt he was deed / as it is wryten in thexamplary .lxxiiii b. Also the fader that loueth that his chyl∣de be wyse / prudent / and fulfylled wt good maners hym beteth and chastyseth / for ye rodde gyueth wysdome. Vnde prouer. xxix Virga at{que} correctio tribuit sapientiam. Alibi legit{ur}. Sepe facit pueros aspera vir∣ga bonos. A sharpe rodde maketh often ty¦mes good chyldren. And mayster Alayne sayth. Currere cogit equum sub milite cal∣car actum. Et puerum studio virga vacare suo. That is to say. The sharpe sporre con∣streyneth ye horse to renne vnder yt knyght And the rodde constreyneth the chylde for to take hede vnto his studye. And it is wry¦tē prouer. xxii. Stulticia colligata est ī cor¦de pueri / et virga discipline fugabit eū. Fo∣ly is in the hert of the chylde / and the rodde of dyscypline chaseth it away. ¶Example of a monke that the deuyll drewe out of ye chyrche and ledde him vnto vanytees whā the other waked in orayson / but inconty∣nent that saynt Benet had beten hym and chastysed the deuyl fledde / & after the sayd monke was deuoute. Quere .lxv. G. Also whan the fader is not curyous of the salua¦cyon of his chylde and to correcke hȳ of his synnes and defautes it is a token that he lo¦ueth hym not. Vnde prouerbiorū .xv. Qui abijcit disciplinam despicit animā suam. He that putteth away dyscyplyne dysprey¦seth the saluacyon of his soule. Also yf by de¦faute of correccion the chylde commytteth synnes the fader is deputed an homycyde spyrytuall of the soule of his chylde of deth of gylte as sayth saynt Gregory / and in ly¦kewise as it is wrytē distin. xliii. Pastor qi non corrigit ouem occidit. The herdman ye whiche dooth not correcke his shepe: that is his subgect / sleeth hym spyrytually. ¶Ex∣ample of a chylde blasphematour of the ae¦ge of .v. yeres that the fader ne corrected & the deuylles slewe hym in his fader lappe, Quere in the examplary .lxii. B. Also in ye hous where defaute of correccion is ye chyl¦dren and the seruauntes behaue them yll / for euery of them wyll be mayster / and be∣twene them aryseth noyses / and dyuysyōs by the defaute of the superlatyfe. Vnde se∣neca. Iudex qui dubitat vlcisci multos im¦probos facit. The Iuge the whiche douteth or draweth backe to venge or to punysshe the malefactour dooth many cursednesses ¶And here sholde be noted by the fader of the housholde that he shall yelde accom∣pte before god of all his chyldren / seruaun¦tes / and subgectes the whiche ben remay∣nynge in his house / yf he teche theym not / correcke / and thynke on theyr helthe. In ly¦kewyse as wrote saynt Austyn vnto an er∣le his frende. Vnde augustinus. Que somi frater omnibus tibi subiectis in domo tua a maiore vs{que} minimum amorem et dulce∣dinem regni celestis amaritudinem & timo¦rem gehenne annuncies et de eorum salute sollicitus ac vigil existas / quia pro omnib{us} tibi subiectis qui ī domo tua sunt rationem reddes. ¶Example of Hely the whiche cor¦rected not well his chyldren of theyr syn̄es and therfore he is blamed in scrypture and in doubt of perdycyō. Quere in thexampla¦ry .lxx. F. Some chyldren ben wyse ye whi¦che loueth the fader that them correcketh / and the other ben foles proude and inobe∣dyent
the whiche wyll not be corrected ne reproued / and they ben wrothe whan men them correct. Vnde scriptura. Corri¦pe sapientem et amabat te / stultus si corri¦pitur irascitur. ¶Example of a woman dampned the whiche dyspraysed those that reproued her of her synnes and defautes. Quere in the examplary .lxxj. H. The wy∣se man sayeth in his prouerbes. Qui dili∣git disciplinam diligit scientiam / qui autem odit increpationes insipiens est. That is to saye. He the whiche loueth dyscyplyne lo∣ueth scyence / and he the whiche hateth bla¦mes is a fole. Also the wyse man sayth in ye xxviii. chapytre of his prouerbes / that he the whiche correcteth ony man shall fynde grace and loue towarde hym more sooner than he the whiche hym deceyueth by fla∣terynges. Also the fader and the moder ye whiche correcteth not theyr children in yon¦gthe shall fynde them in aege rebell / stobor¦ne / proude and inobedyent / and also shall confounde fader and moder in language or otherwyse. Vnde prouerbiorū. xix. Pu∣er qui dimittitur voluntati sue confundit matrem suam. Et seneca dicit. Qui nutrit puerum suum in inuentute nimis dilicate indubitanter in senectute ipsum inueniet contumacem et superbum. ¶Example of a chylde the whiche bote of the nose of his fader at the galowes as men wolde haue hanged hym. And for as moche as they yt were present blamed he answered. I haue well doone / for yf my fader had corrected me in my yongth I hadde not ben hanged now. Quere in thexamplary .lxxi. D. Also the wyse man sayth that he the whiche nou¦ryssheth his seruaunte dylycatyuely in yon¦gthe shall apperceyue hym afterwarde sto¦borne and boystous. Vnde prouerbiorum .xxix. Qui dilicate a puericia nutrit seruum suum .i. corpus vel seruum postea sentieteū contumacem. ¶Example it is wryten in the byble that Helye suffred his sones to ly∣ue dylycatyuely / and he apperceyued after¦warde that they were synners. Moreouer euyll came vnto them for they were slayne in batayle. Quere in thexamplary .lxx. G. Other examples shall be founde in ye four∣the commaundement of thexāplary. Que¦re .lxx. G. D. ¶Thyrdly the fader oweth vnto the chylde techynge / for he ought to instructe hym in ye faythe / in scyences / and good ma¦ners. Also he shold lerne hym the cōmaun¦dementes of god. Vnde ecclesiasti. vii. Si filij tibi sint erudi illos / et curua illos a pue¦ricia illorum. Yf thou haue chyldren teche them / and bowe them doune in theyr infan¦cy and chyldehode. Et legitur prouerbiorū xxix. Erudi filium tuum & refrigerabit te et dabit delicias anime tue. Teche thy chyl¦de and he shall refresshe and gyue daynty∣es vnto thy soule. Et legitur ecclesiastice. xxx. Qui docet filium suum laudabitur in illo et in medio domesticorum in illo lauda∣bitur. He the whiche techeth his sone shall be praysed in him of his housholde and shal saye this is a good chylde / also he hathe a good fader and patron. Yf thou lerne him scyence and good maners thou shalte be Ioyous in this worlde and in the other / And to the contrary yf thou lerne hym no¦thynge thou shalt be sorowfull and dolent therfore. ¶Example of a sone the whiche cursed his fader in helle for that yt he hadde taught hym nothynge but euyll. And of an other sone the whiche was saued and pray¦sed and blyssed his fader for the good that he had hym lerned. Quere .lxxi. G. ¶Ano∣ther example how Cathon gaue good in∣struccyon vnto his sone. Also Thobye tau∣ghte his chyldren that they sholde obey vn¦to hym. The poete sayeth. Disce puer dū tempus habes euo iuuenili. Ne doleas si pauca scias etate seuili. Chylde lerne why∣les
that thou hast tyme in the aege of yon¦gthe that thou repent the not in aege whā thou shalte conne but lytell thynge. &c. Al∣so the faders spyrytualles as prelates / cu∣rates / and prechers sholde instructe theyr subgectes. Vnde .ii. ad Thymotheum .iiij. Predica verbum / iusta oportune / impor∣tune argue / obsecra / increpa in omni patiē¦tia et doctrina / erit enim tempus cum sa∣nam doctrinam nō sustinebunt / sed ad sua desideria conceruabunt sibi magistros pru¦rientes auribus et a veritate quidem audi¦tum auertent ad fabulas autem conuerten¦tur. That is to saye. Preche vnto synners and maynteyne thou it opportunatly / un∣portunately repreue / pray / blame in all pa¦cyence and doctryne / the tyme shall come that they ne shall sustayne / that is they ne wyll haue holsome doctryne. They shall as¦semble prechours and maysters for to tell theym pleasaunt thynges for to here / they shall take away the herynge whan a man shall speke of the trouthe / and they shall ap¦proche to here fables / toyes / and mockery∣es. It is a grete thynge vnto a fader cura∣te or precher to shewe the worde of god & to conuert a synner / and to put hym from the errour of his way / for he saueth his sou¦le and couereth the multytude of his syn∣nes. Vnde iacobi. v. Scire debet quoniam qui conuerti facerit percatorem ab errore vie sue / saluabit animam eius a morte / et cooperit multitudinem peccatorum. ¶Ex¦amples of many the whiche haue ben sa∣ued for theyr worde of god. Quere in thex¦amplary. And vnto the contrary it is a gre¦te daunger vnto curates and superlatiues to lete the soules of theyr subgectes be loste by defaute of theyr shewynge of good do∣ctyne / for they ben deputed as homycydes of theyr soules. Vnde Ezechielis .iii. Si nō annunciaueritis impio ne{que} locutus fueris vt auertatur a via sua impia / et ipse impi{us} in iniquitate sua morietur sanguinem aute eius de manu tua requiram. &c. Et legitur prouerb̄. xi. Vbi non est gubernator popu¦lus curruet. The people falleth where as is no gouernour / that is of capytayne or of mayster. Also the curates the whiche pre∣cheth not ne correcteth theyr parysshens shall answere before god of all theyr synes Vnde iohannes chrisostomus dicit. Vnus¦quis{que} enim christianus pro suo peccatored det rationem / sacerdos autem non tantum pro suis sed et pro omnium subditorum pec¦catis. Also they ben called dombe dogges the whiche can not barke ne baye / that is they can not preche ne shewe the worde of god. Vnde Ysaie .lvi. Canes muti non va¦latrare videntes vana dormientes et amā¦tes somnia. &c. ¶Example that he yt pre∣cheth the worde of god shall haue grete re∣warde in paradise / and that many curates gooth vnto dampnacyon for that they go∣uerne them euyll. Quere .lxvi. g. E. ¶Fourthly the fader shold shewe good example vnto his chyldren. Saynt Poule sayth. Ad titum .ii. capi. Inomnib{us} teipsū prebe exemplum bonorum operum / in do∣ctrina / in integritate / in grauitate verbum sanum irreprehensibile vt is qui ex aduerso est vereatur nichil habens malum dicere de nobis. Gyue thyselfe example of good operacyons in all thynges / in doctryne / in integryte / in grauyte / thy worde be hole wt out reprofe to thende that he the whiche is vnto the contrarye haue shame / and haue not ony euyll thynge to saye of vs. A man sholde note that the fader is deputed homi¦cyde of his chylde spyrytually of dethe of gylte whan he dooth operacyons of sȳnes before hym / and that by his example he ha¦bandon hym vnto euyll and syntull wer∣kes. The blyssed man saynt gregory sayth in his pastoryall. Scire debent prelati qd tot mortibus sunt digni / quot perditionis
exempla ad subditos transmittunt. Et le∣gitur mathei. xviii. Ve homini per quem scandalum venit. Wo vnto that man by whom sclaunder cometh. ¶Example of a man & of his chylde the whiche cursed eche other in helle / and sayd by the I am dam∣pned. &c. Quere in the examplary .lxxi. G. Also in this fourthe commaundemente a man sholde vnderstande that god there cō¦maundeth that a man loue his neyghbour as hym selfe. This dyleccyon is declared largely in the begynnynge of this presente boke. Quere .ii. e. f. g. A. ¶Here foloweth the werkes of mercy the whiche ben here commaunded to ac¦complysshe anēst our faders and neygh¦bours indygentes and nedy. xxii. ¶Who so with god wyl make his accorde Whan he shall come vnto the Iugement The werkes of mercy cōmaūdeth our lord The to accomplysshe vnto the Indygent. SAynt Poule sayeth in his epy∣stle that he wryteth .i. ad Thy∣motheum .iiij. capi. Pietas ab omnia vtilis est promissionem habens vite: que nunc est et fu¦ture. Pyte is prouffytable in al thynges ha¦uynge promesse of the lyfe the whiche now is and of that for to come. Also these scryp¦tures sayeth. Yf thou wylt be in the loue & in ye grace of god / and that thy case be well borne vnto the Iugement partyculer and generall the whiche shall be doone of the it behoueth that thou be mercyfull to gyue & to lende vnto the poore indygent. That is to vnderstande. Yf ony of thy bredren cry∣sten men be comen to pouerte thou shalte not harden thyn herte ne withdrawe thyn hande / but thou shalte labour and gyue vn¦to hym the lone in the thynge the whiche yu seest that he hath necessyte. Vnde deutero∣nomie .xv. Si vnus de fratribus tuis ad paupertatem venerit non obdurabis cor¦tuum nec contrahes manuum sed apecies eam pauperi et dabis mutuum quo eum in digeri prospexeris. And yf thou do vnto hȳ ony almesse and charyte thou shalte haue way and ouerture for to come surely befo∣re god. For the gate of paradyse shal be ope¦ned vnto hym the whiche hath doone mer∣cy and almesse / in lykewyse as men open ye gates and make waye vnto hȳ the whiche bryngeth a fayre present or gyft vnto a lor¦de / and yf he brynge nothynge men shytte the gates ayenst hym. Vnde ecclesiastice. xvi. Omnis misericordia faciet vnicui{que} locum secundum meritum operum suorum et secundum intellectum peregrinationis illius. All almesdedes and good operacyōs that the Iust hath doone shall appere vpō hym before al at the Iugement. Vnde Eze¦chielis .xviii. Iusticia iusti erit super eum. The Iustyce of the Iust shall be vpon hym And the sage sayeth that in the ende of the man his operacyons shall be made open. Vnde eccle. xi. In fine hominis denudatio operum illius. Et legitur Ysaie .xxix. Erit vobis visio omnium sicut verba libri signa¦ti. The vysyon of all thynges shall be vnto you in lykewyse as the wordes of the boke wryten / & god shall call with hym the good people the whiche bereth vpon theym the werkes of mercy that they haue accōplys∣shed / the whiche he shall put on his ryght hande / and shall lede them with hym into paradyse. And the euyll shall be put on the lyfte hande and sent vnto the fyre of helle. It is wryten prouerbiorum .xxi. Qui obtu¦rat aurem suam ad clamorem pauperis cla¦mabit ipse et non exaudietur. He ye whiche stoppeth his eeres vnto the clamours of ye poore / he shall crye and he shall not be her∣de.
Item sequitur prouerbiorum. xxi. Qui sequitur iusticiam et misericordiam inueni¦et vitam et gloriam. Alibi vincit cuncta da¦re / da si vis superare. Per dare regnare po¦teris / celos{que} valere. B. ¶To gyue breed and drynke. ¶Vnto the poore loke that thou gyue. Bothe breed and drynke in tyme of nede Yf thou so do / veryly beleue Thou shalte be saued / be out of drede GOd wyll that thou breke and gy¦ue thy breed vnto the poore / not the breed the whiche is moulde / infecte / or corrupt / ne breed the whiche is comen of thefte or of pyllery / but of breed the whiche is thyne / & of that the whiche thou etest. Vnde Ysaie. lviii. Frange esurienti panem tuum. Et le∣gitur prouerbiorum. xxii. Qui pronus est ad misericordiam benedicetur de panibus enim suis dedit pauperi. He the whiche is enclyned vnto mercy shall be blyssed / of his breed he hath gyuen vnto the poore. Et le¦gitur prouerbiorum. xxviii. Qui dat pau∣peri non indigebit / qui dispicit deprecantē sustinebit penuriam. He the whiche gyueth vnto the poore shall haue no nede / he that dysprayseth the besecher shall sustayne po∣uerte. Et legitur prouerbiorum. xi. Qui ab¦scondat frumenta maledicetur in populis He the whiche hydeth his whete in tyme of famyne shall be cursed amonge the people And note wel that it is vnto the poore and indygent people that thou sholdest gyue and not vnto the ryche. Vnde Luce. xiiii. Cum facis conuiuium voca pauperes de¦biles claudos. &c. et non diuites ne faciat ti¦bi retributio. &c. ¶Example by this how saynt Eustace was an almesman / god wol¦de not that he were dampned / and hym cō∣uerted. Quere .xliii. b. ¶Another example how that a barly lofe prouffyted moche vn¦to a ryche man the whiche keste it vnto a poore man by furoure. Quē. xliii. c. ¶Ano∣ther example that the cursed Dyues bren∣neth and broyleth in the fyre of helle / for he hadde no pyte of the poore lazare. Quere .lxxxiiij. A. ¶Another example of a ryche man mercyfull. Quere in the examplary. lxxxiiij. C. And of duke Durande .lxxxiiij. b Also god wyll that thou gyue drynke vnto poore folke that ben thyrsty / and thou shal¦te haue rewarde in paradyse / and yf thou ne gyue but one dysshe with colde water. Vnde mathei. x. Quicun{que} potum diderit vini ex minimis istis calicem aque frigide tā¦tum in nomine discipuli. Amen dico vobis non perdet mercidem suam ¶Example of a man mercyfull the whiche was drowned as he wende to take the water for to gyue it vnto a poore man / and he yede in to pa∣radyse or his body was colde. Quere in the examplary .lv. B. C. ¶To lodge and to clothe. ¶The poore people that lodgynge wante In to thy house receyue them gladly Yf they of clothes haue verey scante Prouyde that nedeth as semeth the sadly. GOd wyll that the poore pylgry∣mes and people passynge by the way the whiche haue not where to lye ne to lodge / that thou ga∣der them and brynge theym in to thy hous. Vnde Ysaie .lviii. Egenos va¦gos{que} induc in domum tuam. Et paulus ad hebreos. xiii. Hospitalitatem nolite obliuis¦ci. ¶Example by that / yt Abraham kepte hospytalyte / and that he lodged the aungel¦les / he had a sone the whiche had benedyc∣cyon. Genesis. xviii. Sara sterilis erat con∣ceptret
et peperit Ysaac. Sara the wyfe of Abraham was barayne and auncyent the whiche conceyued and chylded ysaac. Que¦re. li. A. ¶Another example. Saynt Gre∣gory sheweth in his omelye of the monday in Ester weke that there was a fader of an housholde the whiche serued by grete study vnto hospytalyte with them of his hous / & he receyued euery day at his table the pyl∣grymes / and on a day thyder came many pylgrymes the whiche he receyued / amon¦ge the whiche there was one whom he wol¦de haue wasshed as he was accustomed to serue them in humylyte / and as he ne dyde but take the lauer he ne wyst where ye sayd pylgryme became whome he wolde haue serued. And as he meruayled hym of ye de∣de in that nyght god vnto hym sayd by vy¦syon. Thou haste receyued me these other dayes in my membres and yesterday thou receyued me in my propre persone. Vnto this purpose it is wryten Mathei. xxv. how god shall say at the Iugement. Quod vni ex minimis meis fecistis michi fecist{is}. That that ye haue done for the loue of me vnto one of my leest ye haue done it vnto mysel∣fe. And god wyll that yf thou fynde ony na¦ked persone frosen for colde that thou co∣uer him / and yf thou be of power that thou gyue hym a vestyment. Vnde ysaie .lxviii. Cum videris nudum operi eum. Et legit{ur} luce. iii. Qui habet duas tunicas det vnam non habenti. ¶Example saynt Gregory sheweth in his fyrst boke of his dyalogue yt saynt Bonyface was so mercyfull that frō his chyldehode he gaue oftentymes vnto ye poore his gowne and his sherte. And on a tyme in ye absence of his moder whan the¦re was a derthe he gaue and dystrybuted vnto the poore people all the cornes of the garners. And for as moche as the sayd mo¦der was wrothe he prayed vnto god / and the sayd garners were replenysshed with cornes. ¶Another exāple how saynt Mar¦tyn gaue the halfe of his mantell vnto a poore man. And the nyght folowynge he sawe god amonge the aungelles couered with the sayd mantell the whiche sayd in this wyse. Martinus ad huc cathecumin{us} hac me veste contexit. Martyn yet cathecu¦myn that is not baptysed but in wyll to be hath couered me in this vestement. D. ¶Of the seke and prysoners. ¶The seke and poore thou shalte vysyte And with good herte also them ayde The prysoners eke as is requysyte That lye in chaynes shrewdly arayde AFter ye scryptures thou ne shol¦dest be slouthefull / ne take for thynge in grefe too vysyte the seke. For as to ayde and confor¦te them a man is confermed in the dyleccyon of god and of his neyghbour Vnde ecclesiastice. vii. Non te pigeat visi∣tare infirmum ex hijs enim in dilectione fir¦maberis. ¶Example of a Samaritan the whiche vysyted and made to heele a man the whiche was in the handes of theues. Quere in the fyrst commaundement .iii. H God shall say at the Iugement. I haue be seke and in pryson and thou haste vysyted me. E. ¶Example how saynt Gregory she∣weth in the omelye of this gospell. Vidēs ciuitatem fleuit super illam. There was a worshypfull man a monke named Mar∣tyr the whiche by grace of vysytacyon par¦ted from his monastery in the whiche pre∣ceded a fader spyrytual. And as he yede his way he founde a mesyll or lepre in the way the whiche was so deformed and replenys∣shed with woundes and sores of the seke∣nes
elephantyne as he myght be / he wolde go in to his hospytall / but he ne myght soo moche do / he was so wery / and intended to go the way of ye sayd Martyr monke. And the man of god hadde pyte and compassy∣on of the sayd wery mesyll and thought to helpe and socoure hym in his nede / he toke his owne mantell and spredde it on the er¦the and wrapped the sayd lepre in it and lyf¦te hym vpon his sholders and bare hym. and whan he approched nygh to the gates of the sayd monastery the fader spyrytuall of the sayd monastery began to crye with an hygh voyce vnto his seruaūtes. Renne ye renne ye and open the gates of the chyr∣che for broder Martyr is comen the which bereth god on his sholdres. And whan he aryued at the gate he the whiche he hadde thought to be a lepre lepte frome his backe in the fourme of our sauyour and redemp¦tour Ihesu cryst the whiche was god and man mounted in to heuen before the sayd frere Martyr in saynge. Martyr thou hast hadde no shame of me vpon the erthe / and I shall haue no shame in heuen of the. And whan the holy man was entred in to ye chir¦che the fader of the monastery hym demaū¦ded sayenge. Broder Martyr where is he that thou barest ryght now. He answered Yf I had knowen hym I sholde haue hol∣den hym by the fete. Than Martyr tolde ye case / and sayd that as he bare hym he felte no weyght. &c. F. ¶Another example how saynt Elyza∣beth serued a mesyll foure dayes. ¶Men fynde in wrytynge that in an hospytall the whiche saynt Elyzabeth hadde do to be ma¦de there came a mesyll or lepre so foule / hor¦ryble and lothely to beholde that the cham¦berers and seruauntes of the sayd hospy∣tall had horrour and ne wolde mynyster & serue hym of suche necessytes as were re∣quysyte. And whan saynt Elyzabeth sawe that he was in suche wyse dyspised of other she came vnto hym for to mynyster his ne∣cessytees in all humylyte and dylygence. She wasshed his heed / bathed him / and ba¦re hym vpon her sholdres / and made hym to rest in her lappe / and she dyde hym this seruyce foure dayes. and than the sayd seke man departed. The fyfth day as saynt Ely¦zabeth was makinge her deuout oraysons our sauyour Ihesu cryst appered vnto her and sayd. I am Ihesu cryst the sone of the vyrgyn Mary / vnto whome thou hast my¦nystred at suche dayes. And for as moche as thou haste purueyed me in fourme of a lepre thou shall haue with me eternall lyfe and Ioye. &c. G. ¶Another example of a seke body the whiche was vysyted of an aungell. It is wryten in the lyfe of the faders that an an∣cyent man solytary was seke by the space of thyrty dayes the whiche hadde neuer a persone that hym vysyted / nor the whiche vnto hym dyde ony seruyce in his sekenesse the whiche he bare paciently. And after the sayd .xxx. dayes god vnto hym sent an aun¦gell the whiche vnto hym admynystred by seuen dayes his necessytees / for no persone hym vysyted. And after that some freres remembred theym of the sayd man ye wh sayd togyders. Suche one our broder co∣meth no more forthe lete vs god vysyte hȳ lest peraduenture he be seke / and they aro∣se incontynent and wente towarde hym. And whan they came to knocke at the do∣re the aungell of god departed from hym / and the sayd seke man began to crye with an hye voyce in the sayd hous. Go hens bre¦dren / goo hens / and in wepynge they yode and toke the dore of the hokes and entred vnto him / and than they demaunded hym wherfore he hadde in suche wyse cryed / & he vnto them answered. For I haue labou¦red by .xxx. dayes in sekenesse and noo ma∣ner
of persone hath vysyted me / and here these seuen dayes god hath sent an aungell the whiche hath minystred vnto me my ne¦cessytees / and whan ye were comen vnto the dore he departed fro me. And whan he hadde sayd these wordes he deyed / and all they praysed our lorde god. &c. ¶Another example how many freres gaue a clustre of grapes vnto the moost weykest. Quere in the examplarye .lxxv. A. ¶Another ex∣ample of a curate the whiche vysyted a ry∣che man at his dethe / and wolde not vesy∣te a poore woman wydowe the whiche dey¦ed .cv. A. ¶Another example of a curate ye whiche taryed to longe or wente to myny∣ster the sacramentes to his parysshen the whiche deyed. Quere before .viii. C. ¶Ano¦ther example how two men became lepres for that / that they hadde horroure and dy∣spysed lepres. Quere in the examplarye. lxxxiiij. E. H. ¶To bury the deed. ¶The deed bodyes yt lye aboue ye grounde Hauyng not wherof in erthe to be brought To bury them all crysten men ben bounde Specyally those yt of thēselfe haue nought IN scriptures we rede yt the good man Thobye left his dyner and ranne for to haue the bodyes of them that hadde ben slayne and by nyght entered & buryed them agaynst the wyll of the kynge / for he fered and loued more god than the kynge. &c. Al¦so we rede. Eccclesiastice .xliii. Corpora sā¦ctorum in pace sepulta sunt / et viuent noīa eorum in eternum. That is to say. The bo∣dyes of those that ben holy ben buryed in peas / and the names of them lyueth in per¦durabylyte. I. ¶To counceyle and to conforte. ¶Confort them that ben confortlesse And counceyle them yt no counceyle haue Of suche good dedes thou do not cesse Yf thou thynke thy soule to saue. A Grete werke of mercy it is as too gyue good counceyle vnto those the whiche haue synned folyed / or gone out of the way or the whiche haue many dou∣btes and dyffycultees. The wyse man say∣eth that helthe shall be in the thynge where as ben many counceyles. Vnde prouerbio∣rum .xi. & .xxiiii. Salus erit vbi sunt multa consilia. A man sholde take the counceyle of god and of the good men and not of the euyl. Vnde thobie quarto. Consilium sem¦per a sapientie perquire. The euyll people ne counceyleth but euyll and synne / & ther∣fore take not theyr counceyle. Vnde ecclesi¦astice .xxxvii. A consiliario malo serua ani¦mam tuam. ¶Example / euyll came vnto Theophyle to take the counceyle of a sorcy¦er / for he made hym to renounce vnto god and vnto the vyrgyn Mary. Quere .lviii. b Also euyll came vnto Amon the whiche de¦floured and had to do flesshely with his sy∣ster Thamar by the counceyle of Ionadab for he was slayne after. Quere in thexam∣plary .lxxxxi. C. ¶Another example how euyll came vnto the kynge Ochozyas for sendynge too seke counceyle at the deuyll / for he deyed myscheuously / and his messen¦gers were brente with the fyre celestyall. Quere in thexamplary ad numerum .lx. g ¶An other example also how by the cur∣sed counceyle of Balaam .xxiii. thousande men of the chyldren of Ysraell were brente for commyttynge fornycacyon. Quere in thexamplary ad nume{rum} .lxxxx. d. Also it is
a grete relygyous werke as too conforte those the whiche ben seke and in trybulacy¦on. Vnde iacobi. i. Religio munda et im∣maculata apud deum et patrem hec est vi¦sitare pupillos et viduas in tribulatione eo¦rum. ¶Example in god the whiche confor¦ted the thre chyldren the whiche were in ye fornayse. Quere .lviii. B. Also god confor∣ted Susanne in her trybulacyon. Quere in the examplary .lxxxxvi. Also it is wryten in the fyrste chapytre of Thobye that the sayd Thobye yede by al those of his know¦lege for to conforte them. And he gaue me¦te vnto theym that hadde honger and clo∣thed them that were naked / and those that were frosen of colde. &c. K. ¶To chastyse and to teche ¶Chastyse those ryght wysely That thou hast in gouernaunce & kepinge With soft wordes also swetely Teche all those of symple vnderstandinge THe mater of chastysement & techȳ¦ge is wryten here before. Quere .xxii. C. D. L. ¶To pardon and to praye ¶Of charyte and pyte pardon all those That the hath offended in worde & dede For his loue that deyed and arose Pray for thyn ennemyes quycke and dede HOw those the whiche hateth sholde pardon and pacyfye to gyders the Iniuryes and of∣fences doone and spoken yf yt they wyll that almyghty god pardon theym theyr synnes. Quere hanc materiam. xx. G. ¶Example in eodem lo∣co. Also it is an holy thynge and saluable as to pray for them that ben deed the whiche haue honger and thyrste to se god / the whi¦che ben seke in the pryson of purgatory / na¦ked and vnpurueyed of all goodes. Vnde ii. Machabeorum. xii. Sancta et salubris est cogitacio pro defunctis exorare / vt ea peccatis soluantur. Also grete rewarde fo¦loweth to praye for the quycke the whiche hath necessyte. Vnde mathei. v. et luce. vi. Orate pro persecutoribus et calumnianti antibus vos / et erit merces vestra multa et eritis filij altissimi. &c. M. ¶To supporte. ¶Thou sholdest sagely the sȳple supporte And helpe to ease them of theyr charges The folysshe folke aduyse and exhorte Than eche wyll prayse thy boūtees larges AFter the lawe of god thou shol∣dest supporte and helpe thin aū¦cyent faders and the imperfec∣cyon and pouerte of thy neygh¦bours / in lykewyse as it is wry¦ten here before. Quere .xxi. H. ¶Thus leueth to speke of the werkes of mercy. ¶It is a thynge ryght accordynge And moche it pleaseth god almyghty Vnto the soule also grete helpynge To excercyse the werkes of mercy AFter the holy euangelyst god shall say to the good at the day of Iugement. Come ye blyssed of my fader / and possede you the eternall realme the whiche
vnto you is apparayled and made redy frō the begynnynge of the worlde. I haue had honger and thyrst / and ye haue gyuen me to ete and to drynke. I haue ben seke and in pryson / and ye haue vysyted me. Vnde mathei. xxv. Venite benedicti patris mei possidete paratum vobis regnum a consti∣tutione mūdi. Esuriui et dedistis michi mā ducare / situi et dedistis michi potum. & cet{ur}. This sentence conteyneth .vi. clauses. The fyrst is vnderstande by this worde (venite the whiche denoteth a Ioyous callynge in an assocyacyon amyable. The seconde clau¦se is vnderstande by this worde (benedicti) the whiche denoteth dyuyne benedyccyon. That is that the good shall receyue the be∣nedyccyon of god / and they shall be of the nombre of the blyssed sayntes of paradyse. The thyrde clause is vnderstande by these two wordes (patris mei) the whiche deno∣teth dyleccyon paternall / that is that they shall haue the dyleccyon and benedyccyon of god the fader as of god the sone. The fourthe is vnderstande by (possidite) ye whi¦che denoteth that the good shall be put in possessyon and saysme of the Ioyes and of the good dedes that they haue deserued. The fyfth is vnderstande by (paratum vo¦bis regnum) the whiche is the assygnacion of the place and of the herytage the whiche is apparaylled vnto ye good the whiche vn∣to them shall be denounced and gyuen at ye daye of Iugement. The syxte clause is vn∣derstande by (constitutione mundi) that is predestynacyon the whiche is that god we¦re predestynate to be saued. By the whiche the sayd Ioyes of paradyse vnto them we∣re made redy. And vnto the contrary ye yll people the whiche haue not wylled to excer¦cyse mercy / as the cursed Dyues: and to do good operacyons shall haue this sentence vpon theym the whiche our lorde shal cast at the dredefull daye of Iugement. Disce¦dite a me maledicti in ignem eternum qui paratus est diabolo et angelis eius. Esuri∣ui et non dedistis michi manducare. &c. Vt legitur mathei. xxv. ¶That the pryde the whiche is agaynst the dyleccyon of his fa∣ders and neyghboures is here defended / & humylyte is here commaunded: Quere an¦te .ix. E. F. ¶Here leueth of the .iiij. commaūdement. A. ¶Here foloweth the fyfthe commaun∣dement of god the whiche defendeth ho¦mycyde vniust. xxiiij. ¶God the defendeth to beet and to kyll Yre / hastynes / and wrathe intyerly All malyce / rancour / and euyll wyll Punysshed shall be full bytterly THis commaundemente is wry∣ten. Deuteronomie. v. ca. Nō occides. Thou shalte not kyll ne slee. Alibi dicitur. Non sis occi∣sor. By the of wyll ne of dede be none homycyde / or euyll shall come vnto ye in lykewyse as it hathe doone vnto many. Quere in thexamplary .lxxvi. A. B. C. For to vnderstande ryght shortly this cōmaun¦dement in generall / a man sholde vnder∣stande that god in it defendeth all man slau¦ghter vniust of wyll and of dede as vnto ye body and as vnto the soule / and all yre / fu∣rour / vengeaunce / stryfe / enuy / and hate. And therein commaundeth for to loue his neyghbour by charyte / and to doo hym no harme agaynst ryght and Iustyce. In ly∣ke wyse as shall be founde here after by ye chapytres.
B. ¶And fyrst that god defendeth dethe corporall and spyrytuall. xxiiij. NOn sis occisor. Ne slee not the soule of thy selfe ne of thy ney¦ghboure for too greue hym by swerde. And slee not thy soule ne that of thy neyghboure by mortall synne. In this commaundement two sortes of dethes bē defended. The one is corporall and the other is spyrytuall. A man sleeth the soule spyrytually of ye dethe of gylte by mortall synne / the whiche is a dysobeysaunce so venymous / full of infec∣cyon and of sekenes mortall that it morty¦fyeth and quencheth charyte and the ver∣tues and separeth god / his loue: & his grace the whiche gyueth lyfe vnto the soule. Vn∣de augustinus. Sicut corpus moritur rece¦dente anima a qua est eius vita / ita anima recedente a deo a quo est eius vita mortua est. That is to vnderstande. In lykewyse as the body deyeth whan the soule depar∣teth / in semblable maner the soule is deed of deeth of gylte whan god is departed by synne. For god is ye lyfe the whiche maketh the soule to lyue. Vnde. Ioh̄. xiiij. Ego sū via veritas et vita. And a man sholde not vnderstāde that the soule defayled is deed and quenched / for it is immortall. But a man sholde vnderstande that the soule is deed spyrytually of the dethe of gylte as it is sayd / and deputed for to descende in to ye tourmentes infernalles of hell with all the deuyls / the whiche is ye seconde dethe / whe¦re as the dampned hath dethe without dy∣enge / and lyfe without lyuynge. Saynt Bernarde sayeth. Non viuit qui superbia inflatur / qui luxuria sordidatur / qui ceteris peccatis inficitur / quoniam non est hoc vi∣uere / sed vitam confundere et appropin∣quare vs{que} ad portas mortis. That is too saye. He the whiche is blowen with pryde the whiche is soyled by lechery / and ye whi∣che is infecte by other synnes he lyueth not For it is no lyfe to lyue so. It is to confoun¦de his lyfe and to approche vnto the gates of dethe. Et paulus dicit .i. ad thymotheum v. Vidua que in delicis est viuens / mor∣tua est. Glosa. Quia si viuat natura / mor∣tua est culpa / vel si viuat mundo mortua est deo. The wydowe the whiche is lyuyn∣ge in delytes of synnes is deed spyrytually for all be it that ye nature lyueth she is deed by gylte. Or yf she lyue to the worlde she is deed vnto god. Et legitur appocalipsis. iii. Scio opera tua qui nomen habes {quod} viuas et mortuus es. &c. The begynnynge of cor¦porall dethe and spyrytuall procedeth by ye synne of our fyrst fader Adam the whiche brake the commaundemente of almyghty god. Our lorde hym defended that he shol∣de not ete of the truyte and vnto him sayd In what houre that thou etest of it thou shalte deye. That is for to vnderstonde of double dethe / for thou shalte be mortall as vnto the body to deye one daye the whiche shall come / and also thou shalte deye spyry¦tually of dethe of culpe or gylte / for grace and vertues shall departe theym from the And the deuyll came after the whiche is ye grete murderer and enuyous hangeman of the soule and insacyable ennemye of hu∣mayne creatures the whiche counceyled & prouoked vnto our fyrst moder Eue that she sholde ete of the fruyte. And he temp∣ted her fyrste for that the woman is more frayle and apte to conuerte than the man by fayre language and flateryes. And she answered / god hathe sayd vnto vs that in what houre that we ete of it we shall deye. no the deuyll sayd vnto her. It is not so ye shall not deye. God hathe sayd soo for that that he knoweth that in what houre that ye ete of this sayd fruyte your cyen shall be
opened and ye shall be as goddes knowyn¦ge the good and the euyll. So Eue consen¦ted her vnto the deuyll and dyde ete of the apple / and made Adam to ete agaynst the commaundement of god / and anone they were bounde vnto the dethe corporall and spyrytuall. God had created theyr soules fayre / & clere / shynynge in innocency / full of charyte / of vertues / and of spyrytual go¦des / and hadd put them in a place delecta∣ble that is paradyse terrestre / and they we¦re immortalles / but after that they hadde synned they were bounde vnto dethe as it is sayd and were adnychyllate / and theyr spyrytuall goodes forgoten. Quia legitur ezechielis. xxxiii. In quacun{que} die peccaue¦rit iustus omnes iusticies ei{us} obliuioni tra∣dentur. Before synne the soule was fayre / but after it was vyle and foule and pryued from grace and frome vertues and taken out of paradyse terrestre and put in this present worlde the whiche is the londe of la¦bour and of mysery / and deputed to descen¦de in to the regyon infernall that is hell. &c. Who so sholde well consyder ths example he sholde kepe hym from commyttyng of mortall synnes the whiche mortefyeth the lyfe of the soule and his spyrytuall goodes as it is sayd. A man sholde note here that all the good operacyons that a man dooth in mortall synne ben deed & of none effecte for they ben doone without grace and cha∣ryte. Quere post .xlv. B. And therfore he ye whiche commytteth mortall synne is cul∣pable of a grete cryme worthy of punycion to slee in suche wyse his soule and his vertu¦es by the dethe of gylte. ¶Example how filius prodigus was deed of dethe of gylte by synne whan his fader sayd vnto his aun¦cyent sone. Illud Luce. xv. Gaudere opor¦tebat quia frater tuus hic mortuus fuerat et reuixit / perierat et iuuentus est. ¶Ano¦ther example of a thefe the whiche saynt Iohan conuerted whan he hym demaun∣ded of the bysshop the whiche sholde haue kepte hym. He answered. Parer mortuus est deo. That is to say. Fader he is deed vn¦to god of dethe of gylte / he is prynce of the theues. ¶Another example how Susan̄e sayd that dethe was in her yf she commyt∣ted the lechery that the two auncyent men wolde haue hadde her commyt. Vnde Da∣melis. xiii. Si enim hoc egero mors michi est. si autem non egero non effugiam man{us} vestras sed melius est abs{que} opere incidere in manus vestras {quam} peccare in conspectu domini. For a good cause Susanne wolde not commytte synne / for incontynent that it is consummed and doone it engendreth the dethe / as sayth saynt Iames in his epy¦stle. Peccatum cum consummatum fue∣rit generat mortem. And the soule the whi¦che hath synned shall deye of dethe. Vnde ezechielis. xviii. Anima que peccauerit ip∣sa morietur. For too vnderstande well the scriptures god defendeth the dethe corpo∣rall / and dethe spyrytuall as it is sayd. It is a thynge clere syth that god defendeth yt thou sle not the body / by a more greter rea¦son he defendeth that thou slee not the sou∣le spyrytually. For it is nothynge as of the body the whiche is transytoryous as to ye regarde of the soule the whiche is perdura∣ble and eternall. &c. C. ¶The maners how a man commyt∣teth homycyde. xxiiii. NOn occides. Thou shalte not slee. Homycyde is commytted corporally and spyrytually in many maners. ¶Fyrst a man commytteth homicide spūally
by euyll thoughtes whan a man consen∣teth hym by delyberacyon to do ony mor∣tall synne. In lykewyse as it is wryten in¦depenitentie distīctione .l. c. Siquis volū∣tarie. Yf by delyberacyon thou desyrest the dethe of ony of thy kynnesmen and fren∣des for to haue theyr goodes and heryta∣ges. Or yf thou haue hate with ony of thy neyghbours in desyryng to bete hym or to kyll hym / or to do hym ony euyll in his per∣sone or in his goodes or herytages thou ar¦te deputed homycyde of thy soule spyrytu∣ally. Vnde .i. iohannis .iiii. Qui odit fratrē suum homicida est. &c. This mater shall be declared hereafter in the chapytre of the synne of hate. Quere post .xxvii. c. And in the two laste commaundementes of god. ¶Secondly a man commytteth homycy∣de spyrytually whan a man gyueth so euyl example vnto his subgectes that they ha∣bandon them to synne as it is declared he∣re before in the fourth commaundemente Quere .xxii. E. Or whan the subgectes go vnto perdycyon by defaute of correccyon. Quere .xx. C. Or by defaute to shewe and to teche the worde of god. Quere .xxii. D. Versus. Exemplum / mens / lingua / ma∣nus / substractio victus. Corporis ac ani∣me dici possunt homicide. ¶Thyrdly a mā commytteth homycyde spyrytually by the tongue whan a man maketh lesynges for to noye his neyghboure. Vnde sapientie .i. Os quod mentitur occidit animam. Also whan a man blasphemeth or whan a man swereth vaynely agaynst the dyleccyon of god a man sleeth the soule of the dethe of gylte. The wyse man sayth that the dethe and the lyfe ben in the handes of ye tongue Vnde prouerbiorum .xviii. Morset vita sunt ī manibus lingue. ¶Examples how the deuylles dyde slee the chylde of a ryche man in blasphemynge god. Quere in the examplary ad numerum .lxii. B. Also a mā dooth homycyde by the tongue whan a mā accuseth falsely ony persone for too make hym to deye / as the Iewes whan they ac∣cused falsely the Iust lambe that is our sa∣uyour and redemptour Ihesu cryst vnto Pylate the Iuge crymynall by lesynges & after cryed as vnreasonable beestes. Cru¦cifige / crucifige eum. They were homycy∣des and culpables of his dethe. And Pyla∣te the whiche hym Iuged and condamned wrongfully / they commytted homycyde how be it that they stroke not the nayles. ¶Another example how Iudas yt whiche solde our lorde for .xxx. pence sayng. Quid vultis michi dare. &c. was homycyde / tray¦tre / and thefe too delyuer his mayster / and euyll came vnto hym for he lost the dygny¦te to be an appostle and another was elect and put in his place / as it is wryten in the dedes of the appostles. Hiat habitacio er{us} deserta / et episcopatum eius accipiat alter Also he was accursed of god / and he hadde ben better neuer to haue ben borne. Vnde mathei .xxvi. Ve homini illi per quem fili{us} hominis tradetur / melius esset illi si natus nō fuisset homo ille. And at the last he han∣ged hymselfe and is dampned. Also a man dooth homycyde by the tonge whan a mā commaundeth vniustly for to do homycy∣de. In lykewyse as it is wryten distinctio∣ne .i. Si quis viduam. Et de peniten. disti. i. capitul. Periculose. ¶Example in He∣rode the whiche commaunded that saynt Iohan baptyst sholde be beheeded / he was homycide albeit that he gaue not the stroke ¶Other examples there ben of them that hath commytted semblable homycydes as of Egeas the whiche made saynt Andrew to be crucyfyed. And Tarquyn made Thy¦mothee to be slayne. And Hyrace yt whiche made to kyll saynt Mathew. And Quyn∣cyen saynt Agathe. And Neron saynt Pe∣ter & Poule. They were homycydes of thē
how be it that they ne deden the operacy∣ons. Quere ista exempla .lvii. f. g. h. i. Also they the whiche counsaylleth or cōmaun∣deth to excercyse warres ye whiche be not iuste after god / or ye whiche that to do ben moued / by auaryce or vengeaunce more than for the loue of Iustyce ben homycy∣des and culpables of the murdres the whi¦che therof comen. Also those ye whiche coū¦saylleth to do ony homycyde breketh thys cōmaundement / as it is wryten. di. i. cap. Si quis viduā & de pe. di. i. c. hominum. & ca. Omnis iniquitas. These baudes the whiche counsaylleth to do lechery / or these yll knaues thefte ben homycydes of ye sou¦les spyrytuelly. &c. Also those ye whiche sus¦teyneth the quarell of warre vniuste put∣teth themself in daunger. Quia agentes et conscientes pare pena punientur. That is to vnderstonde those ye whiche maketh warre / the whiche it susteyneth / & the whi¦che also consenteth shall be punysshed of semblable payne. &c. Fourthly a man do∣the homycyde by the hande and by cursed operacyon. Yf it be wyll dysposed vniustly that is a greate synne moche enorme and reserued vnto the bysshop or vnto the po∣pe after the persone slayne. Vt habetur. di l. ca. Si quis voluntarie. It is that ye whi¦che is spoken before. Crysten / man / & crys¦ten woman to hate / to bete / & to kylle vn∣to the is defended entyerly. Yf thou holde rancoure thou shalt be punysshed bytterly This synne bydeth vnto grete punycyon Example howe the aungell shewed vnto tongdalus in helle a valee replenysshed wt coles of fyre in the whiche were put these homycydes. Quere .lxxvii. g. Another exā¦ple how leueresse made saynt beatryce to be slayne. And the deuyll posseded her and slewe her .lxxvii. a. Another example how iesabell made Naboth to be slayne / & she was slayne & the houndes eate her .lxxvi. b. They shall be sent vnto the fyre of helle the whiche is a torment ryght cruell. Que¦re .xlix. b. Also whan by charnalite or other cursed gouernement a man is cause that the fruyte of a woman perysshe before the baptysme or after / he is homycyde & case reuersed. Also empoysonners / and enueni¦mers / or women the whiche drynketh her¦bes for to make the fruyte of them to deye suche people ben homycydes & transgres∣sours of this cōmaundement. Also a man homycyde by the hande / and of that it be∣houeth to make dystyncyon. Whan the iu∣ge maketh ony persone to deye for his de∣merytes by ryght iustyce. And that he and the hangman done execusyon for to punys¦she alonely the synner by iustyce / the iuge ne synneth in cōmaundynge it / ne ye hang man in doynge execusyon / but it maye be merytorye for the conseruacyon of the co∣mune welth / and of the thynge publyke / as approueth saynt poule in a pystle whe¦re he sayth ad romanos .xiii. Omnis ani∣ma potestatibus / sublimoribus subdita sit Sequitur si malum feceris time non enī¦line causa portat gladiū minister dei. vin¦dex est in iram ei qui malum agit. That is to vnderstonde. Euery soule is subiecte to the haulte puyssaūces. Certes the mynys∣ter of god bereth no swerde without cause he is venger in ire vnto hym ye whiche do¦the yll. And yf the iuge or ye hangman ma¦ke the synner to deye / not vpon entency∣on to accomplysshe iustyce / but vpon en∣tencyon dysordynate to shedde the bloode humayne of the crysten people and crea∣tures of god / or by vengeaunce or cursyd∣nes / they ben deputed homycydes for the entencion was corrupte and enfecte with malyce and cruelte / all be it that the syn∣ner hadde well and iustely deserued it. In lyke wyse as it is wryten in the droit. Al∣so whan a man sleeth by necessyte it beho∣ueth
to make dystyncyon of the necessyte / yf it may be auoyded or naye / as here ben people the whiche wyll slee me vniustely / it behoueth that I slee them / or that they slee me. Yf that I may escape so that they slee me not / nor I them I sholde auoyde For yf I go to slee them and that I may escape I sholde be homycyde & transgres∣soure of this cōmaundemente. But yf I may not auoyde but that I muste go tho¦rowe them and that I do homycyde with¦out hate ne wyll to slee. I shall not be de∣puted homycyde ne transgressour of this cōmaundement. How be it good thynge it is to make conscience to be comen vnto su¦che necessyte. Bonarum enim mēcion est timere culpam vbi culpa non est. Vt habe¦tur in decreto extra de homicidio. Interfe cisti. Also whan a man sleeth by case of for¦tune it behoueth to make dystyncyon whā the fortune happeneth yf a man do opera¦cyon lefull or not lefull. Yf it were operacy¦on lefull as to cut a tree / or that he caste ye sheuys from the carte. &c. And that he ta∣ke hede to beholde aboute and to crye hye and clere / and the houre. In suche wyse ye yf there were persone and that he myght wele auoyde ne sholde be deputed homycy¦de. Vt probatur. di. l. ca. Sepe cotingit: et extra de homicidio capitu. Quidam. But yf he dyde operacyon vnlefull as to caste stones where as the people haue of custo∣me to passe. &c. he sholde be homycide and transgressour of this cōmaundement. Al∣so yf a man laye to slee ony in iuste batayl he is not deputed homycyde as it is wry∣ten. xxiii. q. Quid culpatur. D ¶Fyfthly a man dothe homycyde for to withdrawe the lyuynge of ony persone as whan faders & moders ne gyueth noo meate vnto theyr lytell chyldren / or that ye moder gyueth them no souke / whan a byr¦de ne bereth meate vnto her lytell byrdes they deye. In lyke wyse faders & moders ben homycydes. Also whan the syege is be¦fore a towne it behoueth to make dystyn∣cyon yf ye warre be iuste or not / yf they be iuste for to famysshe theim & to make thē deye for hongre yf they yelde not the place I trow to punysshe them it is no homycy¦de / how be it yt the thynge is daungerous For many bereth punycyon the whiche ha¦ue nothynge to do. And yf ye warre be not iuste / it is homycyde to make them dye of hongre Also whan rauisshers taketh awa¦ye the substaunce of the poore people vn∣iustely they take awaye theyr lyfe / & ther∣fore they ben deputed homycydes. Vnde eccle. xxxiiii. Panis egentiū vita paupe∣ris est qui defrauldat illum homo sangui∣nis est: qui aufert in sudore panē quasi qui occidit proximū suum. That is to vnder∣stonde / the brede of the hongrye and nedy is the lyfe of the poore / he ye whiche taketh it from hym or begyleth is a man of blode he the whiche taketh awaye in swete the brede is also as he ye whiche sleeth his ney∣ghbour. But people of armes the whiche gothe agaynst theyr aduersaryes in iuste warre for to defende the countree and the comune welthe ye whiche haue no wages maye take of lyuynges curteysly without exces ne to greue the poore it is suffred of the kynge / and the lawe suffreth it for the grete necessyte of the comune welth. Ne∣cessytas non habet legem: si malum inde sequeretur postea. Vt habetur de consecra¦di .i. Sicut etiam patet extra de consuetu¦dine. ca. iiii. But those ye whiche haue wa∣ges and taketh vniustely the goodes of an other by force openly without mocyon of warre breketh the cōmaundement of god the whiche is wryten exodi. xx. Non fur∣tum facies. et deutero. v. Non concupis∣ces rem proximi tui. Also god commaun∣deth yt thou loue thy neyghbour as thy self.
and that thou do vnto him none yll no mo¦re than thou woldest that he dyde vnto ye Vn̄ thob. iiii. Quod ab alio odis tibi fieri vide ne tu aliquando alteri facias. Also af¦ter the scrypture pyllerye is more greate synne than the theft. For he that steleth ta¦keth secretely with drede. And he the whi∣che pylleth taketh apertely before all gre∣dely and without drede. vnto bothe twaȳ it behoueth to make restytucyon. Quia non dimittitur peccatum nisi restituatur ablatū. xiiii. q. vi. ca. Sires. Exāple howe a knyght was beten of the deuylles for yt that he toke awaye the cowe of a woman wedowe. Quere .c. ix. e. Another example of a rauyssher in paynes for that / that he toke the gote of a woman wedowe. Que∣re. c. ix. f. Another example how one mony¦er sawe in helle a rauyssher in paynes. que¦re. c. x. a. Also those the whiche haue haboū¦daunce of goodes and by auaryce letteth theyr pore neyghbours to deye for hongre be it by scarsete / syknes / or other necessyte ben deputed homycydes & transgressours of this cōmaūdement. Vt habetur. de. pe. di. lxxxvi. ca. Pasce fame moriētem et si non pauisti occidisti. Example how ye cur∣sed diues was dampned and sent in to the fyre of helle / for he had no pite of the pure lazar the whiche coueyted to haue of ye crō¦mys the whiche fel from the table. Quere lxxxiiii. c. Another example .lxxxiiii. b. ¶How homycyde is a synne ye whiche as∣keth vengeaunce of god. ca. xxv NOn scis occisor. Be thou noo murderer. It is greate hor∣rour & cruelte to cōmytte ho¦mycyde / to vndo that yt god hathe made to his owne sem¦blaunce to murdre and slee his semblable and brother crystyen. Amonge other syn∣nes it is a vyce the whiche demaūdeth of god vengeaunce that homycide. We haue by example in Cayn after that he hadde slayn his broder abell god came vnto him & him demaunded where his brother abel was / he answerde am I the keper of my broder. And god sayd vnto hym. Here is ye voyce of the blode of thy broder Abell the whiche cryeth vnto me from the erth and demaūdeth vengeaunce. vn̄ge. iiii. Ecce vox sanguinis fratris tui abel clamat ad me de terra. This mater shall be declared in the examples where he speketh of ye ho∣mycyde of Cayn. Quere .lxxvi. a. Also af∣ter that the cursed massacre herodes had slayne the innocentes / the voyce of ye said innocentes cryed for vengeaūce vnto god as it is wryten in the legende. Sub alta∣re audiui voce ocioso{rum} clamatiu et dicen∣cium vindica sanguinē nostrū de{us} noster. And god theym answerde. Abyde ye yet a lytell whyle tyll vnto ye tyme that ye nom∣bre of your brederne be accōplysshed. Ex¦pectate ad huc modicū tēpuis donec īplea¦tur numer{us} frat{rum} vestrorum. Than ye syn of homycyde demaundeth vengeaunce / & in the ende the innocentes were venged / And the sayd herodes deyed myscheuously In lyke wyse as it is wryten in the exam¦playre. Que. lxxvi. d. Euery persone be he kyng / prynce or labourer sholde fere to do homycyde vniust. For incontynent that it is cōmytted / the sayd persone is boūde vn¦to payne and punycion in suche wyse that he ne may escape but that he haue punycy¦on in this worlde or in the other. The sayd kynge herodes whiche slewe the innocen∣tes was punysshed by lytell wormes that slewe and ete hym. &c. Also Pylate ye whi∣che made wrongfully our lorde Ihesus to dye / he slewe himself with his owne knife
And the iewes by whome he was slayne / god was venged / for some deyed by famy¦ne / the other by swerde / and all deyed mys¦cheuously. By the whiche it appereth that by the synne of hate and homycyde there foloweth punycion and vengeaunce. And therfore sayd god vnto saynt peter whan that he cutte of malcus ere in his passyon. Illud mat. xxvi. Conuerte gladium īlo∣cum suum: omnes qui acceperint gladium gladio peribunt. Who soo sleeth with the swerde shall deye of a swerde. That is to saye of the swerde corporelly or spyrytuel∣ly yf he ne do grete penaūce. Item legitur gene. ix. Sanguinem enim animarū ve∣trarū requiram de manu hominis / de ma¦nu viri / & de manu fratris eius requiram animam hominis. Quicū{que} affuderit hu¦manum sanguinem fūdetur sanguinis il∣lius. Certaynly I shall demaūde of ye han¦de of man the blode of our soules. That is to vnderstonde how god shall demaunde of the hande of the murderer the blode of his broder crystyen that he hath slayne. It is so grete synne that by the ryght of Ius∣tyce the sayd murderer ought to be slayne & therfore of good ryght god sayeth / what so euer persone hathe shedde the blode hu∣mayn of the man his blode shall be shedde Et legitur apoca. xiii. Qui gladio occide∣rit oportet eum in gladio occidi. &c. B ¶Whan it is lefull to bete / and whan it is defended. Ca. xxv. DAuyd the prophete sayth in ye psalter. Irascumini et nolite peccare. Wrathe ye or be ye wrothe agayne your synnes / & agayne those of your neygh¦bours and chyldren & kepe you from syne That is to trouble your entendement by passyon of ire to the ende that thou ne do correccyon vniuste. Nolite peccare / that is to saye yf there come the a sodayne ire / ne gyue thy consentement to do vengeaū¦ce without the boundes of iustyce. Ne stri¦ke thou not / ne murdre thy neyghbour vn¦iustely / god it defendeth and soo cōmaun∣deth the to loue hym / & that thou ne hate hym. It is that thynge the whiche is spo∣ken in the begynnynge of this cōmaunde¦ment. Crysten man or crysten woman / to hate / bete / or kylle to ye is defended entyer¦ly / yf thou wylte holde rancour thou shalt be punysshed bytterly. To bete his neygh∣boure is somtyme cōmaunded of god and somtyme defended. God cōmaūdeth that a man bete by charyte and fayre correccyō the chyldren synners mobedyentes vnto god and vnto good maners. It is a grete werke of mercy to saue a soule / to correcte an yll persone ye whiche gothe vnto damp¦nacyon / more grete than to gyue grete al∣mes. The sage sayeth sapien. i. Probata virtus corripit insipientes. That is to say the vertues prouued correcteth the fooles vnlerned / vnwyse / and synners. Those ye whiche haue subgectes in theyr correccion them sholde correcte and instructe in good maners. And yf they ben rebelles inobedy¦ent and synners they sholde bete them / pu¦nysshe and correcte saigely and dyscretely by loue and charyte without hate ne ven∣geaunce. This matere is declared in the fourth cōmaundement. Quere. xxii. c. Ex∣ample how saynt benet bette a monke by fayre correccyō. Quere. lxv. g. In another maner god defendeth by this cōmaunde∣ment that a man ne bete nor murdre vn∣iustely his neyghbour by ire / furoure / cou∣rage moued / & by cursed wyll. In the aun¦cyent testament the chylde that bette his fader / or his moder by yll wyl / was put to
dethe. Vn̄. exodi. xxi. Qui percusserit pa∣trem suū & matrē suā morte moriat{ur}. Also in ye same chapytre it is wryten. Qui {per}cus serit hoīem volēs eū occidere morte moriat{ur} Also whan ony bete a persone yf he deyed he was slayne. exodi. xxi. Si mors fuerit subsecuta reddet aīam pro aīa. And yf he put out the eye of his neighbour / men shol¦de a put out his eye. And yf he had broken his neyghbours tothe / men sholde a pluc∣ked out one of his / yf he had cutte an han¦de / his hande sholde a be cutte / or fote for fote / or brennynge for brennynge wounde for wounde. &c. Vn̄. ex. xxi. Beddet oculū pro oculo / dentē {pro}dente / manū {pro} manu / pedē {pro} pede / &c. whan ony bete his neigh¦boure agayne the cōmaundement of god It is a thyng reasonable that he be beten Vn̄. psal. Scdm̄ opera manuū eo{rum}tribue illis. God cōmaundeth vnto euery person that he ne do vnto another more than he wolde another dyde vnto hym / and none ne wolde be beten ergo. &c. It is wryten thobie. iiii. Quod ab alio tibi odis fieri vi¦de ne tu aliquando alterifacias. The syn of betyng is more grete in some persones than in some other / for to bete a clerke or a preest / it is a case reserued to the pope / to bete fader or moder is case reserued vn¦to ye bysshop. Also to bete his parentes of eche degree by yll / ye nerer they be the gret¦ter is the sȳne. Also those the whiche bete theyr wyues and chyldren / or ye scolemays¦ter his clerkes by ire & furour & not by cor¦reccyon offendeth this cōmaundement / & yf they doo it by fayre correccyon / it is the werke of charyte. Also those the whiche de¦fende them in betynge and kyllynge more by ire than to defende them iustely offen∣deth agaynst this cōmaundement. Exam¦ple how a knyght was gretely tormented in purgatorye for yt that he fyled the chir∣che yerde / & hurt one wtin it. Que .lxxvii. f Another example of a man the whiche ¦te and tormented his wyfe soo often y• she renyed the fayth / slewe her chylde / & con∣sented vnto the wyll & temptacyon of the deuyll .lx.i. A ¶How god defendeth all ire vniuste a yenst his neyghbour. xxvi. SAynt Iames sayth in his epys¦tyl l. Be euery man swyfte to here / late to speke / and late vn¦to ire. Certaynly the ire of the man ne dothe the iustice of god Vn̄. iacobi. i.c. Si aūt oīs homo velox ad audiendū / tard{us} autē ad loquendū / & tar∣dus ad iram. Ia enī viri iustitiā dei opera¦tur. Ire furoure / noyse / hate / dyuysyons they cōmytte & reyse amonge neighbours brederne and frendes for many thynges. ¶The fyrste is to gayne or to haue to go∣des or herytages the one of the other. The seconde is for the losse of the goodes or he∣rytages the whiche is done for the one or for the other. ¶The thyrde is for ye dimy∣nucyon of the renōmee of ony / & iniuryes spoken betwene theym. ¶The fourth is whan ony smyteth or sleeth ony of theym ¶The .v. is whan ony ymaginacion true or false that ony hurte hym in ony thynge or yf that his persone be dyspysed or ful ly∣tel praysed. For to vnderstonde shortly: ire spryngeth vp whan ony hathe dōmage of another in his body / or hathe renōmed hȳ or in his goodes or herytages. And suche ire is somtyme kepte and enclosed in the herte without apperynge it without forth somtyme it is shewed in worde / and som∣tyme in operacyon. The fyrst is yll. The se¦conde is wors. The thyrde is worste of al. B ¶The fyrste ire the whiche is in herte maketh a man sorye / dyspleasaūt agayne his neyghboure in awaytynge the oppor∣tunyte
whan he may be auenged on hym and to do hym dyspleasure & dōmage. Yf it be by delyberacyon / delectacyon & consē¦tement of reason there foloweth dampna¦cyon & puttynge from paradyse. Vn̄. ma. v.c. Oīs qi irascit{ur} fratri suo reus erit iudi¦cio. Euery man ye whiche is wrothe with his broder shall be culpable of iugement & shall be cyted vnto the iugement of god / & it behoueth wyll he or not yt he there ap∣pere after his dethe. Where he shall be de∣maunded how he hathe kepte this cōmaū¦dement ye whiche is to loue his neighbour as hymselfe. What may he answer whan he hathe hated hym and desyred his yll & wolde do vengeaunce. Euery persone the whiche is in suche estate yf he dye in suche wyse he is sente vnto dampnacyon. The prophete sayth {quod} in tempora vindicte dis∣perdet te deus. ¶Example of a woman dampned the whiche kepte her ire in her herte without wyll to pardon .lxxviii.d. C ¶The seconde ire ye whiche is shewed by sygne or token is whan ony man hath the harte so full of yre & wrathe agayn his neyghboure that he sheweth the sayd ire without forth by ony wayes / or by ony to∣kens or maners. Of whome speketh the euangelyst of him the whiche sayth racha the whiche is an interieccyon shewynge ire and indygnacyon wtout beynge inter∣pretee / or as he ye whiche enclyneth his e∣yes hauynge no wyll to beholde hym / or ye whiche maketh clene his mouthe & make the spyttynge / or the whiche ne wyl speke in metynge one with another / or ye whiche gothe by another waye for drede to mete hym that he hateth & semblable thynges / Yf thou therin hast offended by reason dis¦posed in wyllynge hym yll thou arte culpa¦ble of coūsayl dygne of punycion. Vn̄. ma. v.. Qui dixerit fratri suo racha: reus erit consilio. The counsayll of the blyssed trini¦te is that in suche mesure and manere of ire as thou hast had ayenst thy neyghbour that thou shalte fynde it and haue it in su¦che maner ayenst god / the vyrgyn marye & the sayntes of paradise. Vn̄ su{per} illud lu. vi. Eadē mēsura qua mēsi fueritis reme¦cit{ur} vobis vbidicit basili{us}: q̄ mēsura vnus qis{que} peccat: aut bene agit eadē {pre}mīa: aut penā sumet. God shall shewe the his ire in suche wyse that thou shalte neuer se hym ioyously by ioyous face / & that he shall ne¦uer haue mercy on the / & shall neuer dely∣uer the from paynes & tormentes yf yu de∣parte or deye in suche ire. And prayers & oraysons yt men done for ye shall neuer ser¦ue the of nothynge. Wherof it is wryten hie. vii. Tu noli orare {pro} populo hoc nec assumas laudē & or̄em et nō obsistas mi∣chi qia nō exaudiā te. God sayd vnto saynt Hiereme / pray yu not for this people for I shall not gracyously here the. The token of ire of ye virgyn marye & of the sayntes of paradyse is yt they shal neuer make pra¦yers ne suffrages for a man dampned. Ex¦ample of cursed dyues the whiche demaū¦ded a droppe of water / he was not herde. The token of ire of the aungels shall be yt they shall seuer & departe the good frome the yll / & shall sende them in to the chemy¦ne of the fyre. In the whiche they shal we¦pe & grynde theyr tethe of rage and of an∣guysshe / & they shal be put from glorye. vn̄ math. xiii. Exibūt angeli et seperabunt malos de medio iustorū & mittēt eos ī ca∣minū ignis: ibierit fletus et stridor dētium And ye prophete Ysaye sayeth. Tollatur impius ne videat gloriā dei. D ¶The thyrde ire the whiche is shewed in worde is whan ony hathe ye herte so fu∣ryous heuy & angry ayenst his neyghbour that he ne can holde it wtin but yt it muste nedely forth in wordes / sygnyfyenge iniu¦ryes / blames / shames / noyses: reproches /
as to saye that thou arte a thefe / pyller / or murdrer &c / or a lyer / to dyspyte / to mena¦ce / as to saye I shall bete the / or I shal sle or I shall do suche a thynge and suche / su¦che people ben culpables of the fyre of hell as sayth the gospell math. v. Qui dixerit fratri suo fatue: reus erit gehenne ignis. This matere shall be declared in the .viii. cōmaundement of god. E ¶The fourth ire is shewed in yll opera¦cyons / for the furoure and ire ye whiche is in the herte oftymes maketh vengeaūces by the hande leyed and of dede / as to bete to slee / to murdre beestes / or people / or to dōmage by proces / iuges / sergentes / men of lawe / offycers / men of war / or by other false thinges iniuste / yll / & vnlawfull. Su¦che vengences and operacyons ben defen¦ded in this .v. cōmaundement & ben right yll. For they put from paradyse & maketh to haue dampnacyon. legit{ur} math. v. Di∣ctum est antiqis nō occides: qi enī occiderit reus erit iuditio. &c. You haue in your law Slee thou not thy neyghbour / he the whi∣che hathe slayne shall be culpable of iuge∣mente. That is to be iuged vnto sembla∣ble payne yt whiche is dethe corporell. But I tel you euery persone yt is wrothe or an¦gry in his herte agaȳst his brother in wyl¦lynge hym yll vniustely by delyberacyon / he is culpable of iugement / that is to be ac¦cused before god vnto dampnacyon & per¦diciō. And that ye god sayth after / qui dixe∣rit racha / yt is whan the hatered appereth without forth as it is sayd that the synne is the more grete / & to saye / fatue / it is yet more grete synne and to do the operacion It is the synne vnto the whiche appertey¦neth more grete punycyon and dampna∣cyon. ¶Example of diascorus the whiche by grete ire & furoure bete iniustely saynt barbara / and after beheded her / & he was brente with the fyre celestyall. Que. lvii. e. Many other examples ben wryten in the fyrste cōmaūdement of the exemplayre of prynces & tyrauntes the whiche haue ma∣de to slee and martyr the crystyeus by gre¦te ires and furours. And they shall deye of yll dethe .lvii.d. f. And after ye scryptures all men and women shall yelde accompte at the daye of iugement of one and euery of them and of all the yll operacyons that they haue done in this worlde yf they dye impenytentes without contrycion / confes¦syon & satysfaccion vnto god & vnto their neyghbour after the offense done. Yf thou wylte not byleue that it be true by symple worde than put to fayth vnto the wytnes of the holy scrypture yt whiche varyeth not Vn̄. athanasius in psal. Quicū{que} dicit {quod} ad aduentū christi oēs hoīes reddituri sūt de factis {pro}priis / rationem & qui bona ege¦rūt ibūt in vitam eternā: qui vero mala in ignem eternū. At the comynge of Ihesu cryst al men shal yelde reason of theyr ow∣ne dedes / and those the whiche haue wele done and wrought shall goo in to the ioye eternall. And those the whiche haue yll do¦ne shall go in to ye fyre eternell. Et paul .ii. ad. co. v. Oēs enī nos manifestari oportet ante tribunal christi vt referat vnusquis{que} {pro}pria opera corporis prout gessit siue bo∣num siue malum. It behoueth vs al to ap¦pere before the charyte of Ihesu crist whe¦re euery man shall reporte his owne ope∣racyons of the body as he them hathe do∣de ben they good or yll. Et. hie. xxv. Reddā eis secūdum opera corum & secundū facta manuum suarū. I shall yelde vnto them sayth god after theyr werkes / and after ye dedes of theyr handes. Also they shall goo in to the place that they haue deserued af¦ter theyr operacyons and werkes / the whi¦che they shall bere with them. Et psal. Se¦cundum opera manuum eorū tribue illis redde retributionem eorum ipsis et cetera.
Et apo. xiiii. Opera enī illorum sequūtur illos. Thou irous or wrathful man ye whi¦che haste had thy thoughtes yll to auenge the on thy neyghbour / or the whiche haste wronged / and menaced / or beten / or slayn yf thou wylte be saued repente the and ta¦ke the condycyons of the pylgrym of para¦dyse the whiche ben wryten here after q̄re xlv. a. Also obey vnto god and vnto his cō¦maundementes to thende that thou pos∣sede the Ioyes of paradyse ye whiche ben grete in lyke wyse as they shal be declared here after .xlvii. a. Also leue ire / furour / re¦pente the and obeye vnto god of drede / to be sente in to the fyre of helle the whiche is a torment ryghte cruell in lyke wyse as it is declared afterwarde. Quere. xlix. b. Vn̄ legitur apoca. xxi. De homicidis / fornica¦toribus / beneficis / ydolatris / & oībus men dacibus / pars illorum erit in stagno ardē∣ti igne et sulphure quod est mors secunda ¶In the sayd chapytre he speketh of ho∣mycydes / fornycatours / enuenymours / ydolatryes / and also lyars / the whiche de¦ye impenytentes / the place and the partie of those shall be in a ponde of fyre brynnin¦ge in helle the whiche is the seconde dethe where the dampned shall be and shall ha∣ue dethe without deyenge and without en¦dynge and default withoute defayllynge. Example of a man dampned the whiche spake of ye fyre wherin the dampned ben. Quere. lvii. a. F ¶How god defendeth ire agayne hym∣selfe. Ca. xxvi. NOn contristabit iustum quic∣quid acciderit ei. prouer. xii. c. What fortune / losse of godes aduersyte / pouerte / that co∣meth vnto a Iuste man / he sholde not be wrothe / for the good persone bereth pacyently all aduersytees for the lo¦ue of god as dyde ye good man iob / a man is wrothe ayen hymself in many maners. wherof one is ryghte yll and worste of al whan by ire a man faileth to dyspayre / & yt man is homycyde of hymself. For therof foloweth dampnacion and perdycyon for the brekynge of the cōmaūdement of god Non sis occisor. By thyselfe of wyll ne of dede be thou no homycyde / ne in thyselfe ne in thy neyghbour. Those the whiche be ire ben homycydes of themselfe sholde be put from the prayers oraysons and from sepulture ecclesiastycall / and sholde be bu∣ryed in grounde vnhalowed yf the ende of them appere without ony repentaunce ye whiche may be so grete that as vnto god / that suche homycyde shall be in the waye of saluacyon / but suche thynge is vnkno∣wen as vnto vs. Also a man is wrothe a∣gaynst hymselfe whan a man accomplys∣sheth not his wyll / or whan yt he leseth or wynneth ony thinge by his folye / or whan a man leseth or geteth ony good / or whan a man falleth in to ony inconuenyente by deffaulte of takynghede to hymselfe. For these thynges here and for many other a man is wrothe somtyme so outrageously that a man stryketh hymselfe / or his wyfe his chyldren / and seruauntes / and that a man breketh pottes and pānes in doinge many ylles. And oftymes a man falleth in to sykenes the whiche greue the body / the whiche taketh hede to gete of goodes also well spyrytuell as corporell / and the whi∣che dampneth the soules of them the whi∣che ben obstynate and perseuerynge vnto the dethe without penaunce. By this Ire yt persone is all troubled. n̄. dauid ī psal. Turbatus est in ira ocuius me{us} anima mea & vēter meus. Et socrates dicit {quod} ira¦cūdis cū aliis irasci desierit sibi irascit{ur}. &c
After the cause wherfore ony is wrothe & the yll the whiche foloweth and he it appe¦tyteth to auenge hym and to do yll / ye syn of ire is more grete or more lytell the whi∣che is knowen as vnto god ye whiche shall do the iugement and the punycyon. G ¶Of ire ye whiche is agayne god. xxvi ITem inferre caue cū quo gracia tibi iuncta est. Chaton sayth vn∣to his chylde / kepe the from bryn¦gynge in of stryfe or noyse / with god / thy frende / or thy neyghbou¦re with whome grace is ioyned vnto the A man wratheth hym ayenst god for ma¦ny thynges / pryncypally for the flagellaci¦ons / aduersytees / fortunes / sykenesses / & mortalytees / losses / punycyons / famyne / warre & yll tyme. &c. that he sendeth. For these thynges here a man murmureth a∣yenste god in blasphemynge hym yllynge him / dyspytynge / renyenge him & his sain¦tes. And yf a man may venge hym / men do venge them the whiche is a haulte fo∣lye to haue wyll to resyste / or to go ayenst the wyll of god ye whiche sleeth or maketh lyuely / the whiche maketh to go in to pa∣radyse or in to helle. Vn̄. psal. Dn̄s mor∣tificat et viuificat deducit ad inferos & re¦ducit / dn̄s pauperem faciat et ditat humi¦liat et subleuat. ¶Also it is folye to be in wyll to resyste ayenst god the creatoure ye whiche is the iuge that punyssheth all ma¦lefactours. Vnde deutero. xxxii. Reddam vltionem hostibus meis et his qui oderūt me retribuam / inebriabo sagittas meas sanguine / et gladius meus deuorabit car∣nes &c. Thou sholdest not be wroth ayenst god / for he sendeth of aduersytees and fla¦gellacions for fyue consyderacyons. The fyrste is vnto the synners to thende yt they confesse them / amende and purge theym from synne / and it is a token of loue. For god wylleth not that they ben dampned / Vnde appo. iii. Ego quos amo arguo et castigo Et alibi: ad hoc tendunt mala que vobis infero vt reconsiliam me vobis di∣cit dn̄s: ego cogito cogitationes pacis & nō afflictionis. Example in saynt eustace vn¦to whom god sente of tribulacyons for to conuerte hym & saue him. &c. The seconde is vnto synners obstynate in synne to the ende that they begynne theyr helle in this worlde as herodes the whiche was eaten with hande wormes & other wormes. &c. The thyrde is to the good & iuste. For god them sendeth of trybulacyons to thende yt they enpryde them not of the good dedes that they done / and for to kepe theyr ver∣tues as god dyde vnto saynt poule. Vnde ii. ad corin. xii. Ne magnitudo reuelatio∣num extollat me / datus est michi stimul{us} carnis mee angelus sathane. vt me colla∣phizet. &c. The fourth cōsyderacion wher¦fore god sendeth of tribulacyons vnto the good is vnto the greate acumulacyon of vertues and to thende that they ben ye mo¦re gloryous in paradyse. For the more the sayntes haue endured pacyently grete tor¦mentes. And the more they haue ben ver∣tuous & gloryous as iob. Quamuis mul¦tas tribulationes habuit tamen sanctior effectus est. The .v. is to thende that ye na¦me of god be louede and gloryfyed / as of a man the whiche was borne blynde / and after was lyghtened & god was praysed / And of the lazar the whiche was araysed after that he had be thre dayes in the erth buryed. &c. H ¶Of the vengeaunce that god de∣fendeth. Ca. xxvi.
THe sage sayeth that he the whi∣che wyll venge hym on his ney¦ghbour he shall fynde vengeaū∣ce of god. And also as he kepeth his hate for to venge hym whā he hathe oppertunyte. In lyke wyse shall god do to auenge hym on hym for his syn¦nes. Vn̄. eccle. xxviii. Qui vindicari vult a dn̄o inueniet vindictam / et peccata illi{us} seruans seruabit. Whan ony persone is of¦fended / hurte / or exceded in ony maner he ne sholde venge hym of that hymselfe for many thynges. Fyrste for god hathe with holden and reserued to hym and vnto his vycayres to do Iustyce / iugement & ven∣geaunce. vn̄ ad roma. xii. Michi vindictā et ego retribuam in tempore dicit dn̄s. Et deutero. xxxii. Mea est vltio et ego retri∣buam eis in tempore. The vengeaunce & I shall rewarde them in tyme. & eccle. xii. Altissimus odio habet peccatores et im∣piis reddet vindictam. Also whan ony is venged of hymselfe he taketh the offyce of god / as yf he were god & iuge. Also he him maketh iuge and partye in his owne cau∣se the whiche is agayne ryght and reason Null{us} debet eē iudex ī sua {pro}pria causa: re¦gula iuris. Also iustice ought to be done by counsayll. {pro}. xi. et. xxiiii. Salus erit vbi multa sunt consilia. Helth shall be where many counsaylles ben. Also it ought to be done by greate and meure delyberacyon / and all in peas withouten hast. The whi∣che thynge ne dothe he the whiche hym a∣uengeth / incontynent / but where a perso∣ne hathe offended god he punyssheth him not ne his offycers / they abyden the tyme and the place to punysshe and to do Iusty¦ce. Legitur luce. xviii. Deus autem non faciet vindictam electorum suorū claman¦cium ad se die ac nocte: sed pacienciam ha¦bebit in illis. Example how a man curyal yt whiche synned vpon ester euen at night was not punysshed of god / incontynent yt he wende to be / but god abode to punisshe hym. viii. dayes after. quere lxxx. b. Ano¦ther example how the iewes ne weren in contynent punysshed that they hadde ma¦de our lorde Ihesu cryste to be crucefyed / but god taryed a grete whyle after & lefte them saynt Iamys for to conuerte them and for to abyde that they myght doo pe∣naunce. And whan god had sene theyr ob∣stynacyon and that they hadde slayne the said saynt Iames he suffred that they we¦re punysshed of Vaspasyen in this worlde In lyke wyse as it is wryten in the .v. cō∣maundement of the examplayre. whan ye innocentes were byheded by herodes and that they cryed vnto god for vengeaunce Vindica sanguinē nostrum deus noster. He ne venged theym incontynente: ne he∣rodes was not sodaȳli punisshed / but god them answerde yt they sholde abyde. Ex¦pectate donec impleatur numerus fractū vestrorum. Also how be it that god sawe & knewe the synne of the sodomytes before that he them punysshed he sayd illud gene¦sis. xviii. Descendam et videbo vterum clamorem qui venit ad me opere comple∣uerint: an non est ita vt sciam. I shall des¦cende and shall se yf they haue accomplys∣shed in operacyon the clamour the whiche is come vnto me / where yf it be not soo yt I may knowe it. And sente two aungels in semblaunce of men the whiche lodged nere vnto Loth. &c. In gyuynge example vnto the Iuges that they ne sholden doo punycyon without grete delyberacyon & informacyon. And he the whiche vengeth hym of hymselfe hathe no counsayll / of de¦lyberacyon / ne auctoryte so to do / wherfo¦re he offendeth gretely. But yf he so do a∣mende the yll the whiche vnto hym is do∣ne by / iustyce he offendeth not. For iustyce sholde be done and foūded in good and af¦ter
hym / How be it yt the yll offycers them peruerten in many maneres. The greate lordes the whiche ne wyllen obey vnto ius¦tyce it departen with the swerde. And is suffred of them / ye whiche haue good right Vnde catho. Pugna pro patria. Fyghte for to defende the coūtree. Also whan ony is offended & he him vengeth in his wrath he ne vseth of the Iustyce of god. Vnder ia¦cobi .i. Ira enim viri iusticiā dei: non ope¦ratur. Et catho. Ira impedit animum ne possit cernere verum. Ire letteth the cou∣rage that it may not dyscerne true with ye false / and Dauyd sayth. Myn eye is trou∣bled with Ire. Vnde psalmista. Turba∣tus est in ira a furore ocul{us} meus. A man sholde note that the vengeaunce the whi∣che is done by ire is iniuste and yll in four maneres. The fyrste is whan ony punys∣sheth / or woide punysshe hym the whiche hathe not deserued it. The seconde is whā he hym bryngeth or wolde brynge to gret∣ter payne than he hathe deserued. The .iii is whan he infere / or wolde inferer asmo∣che of payne egally as he hathe deserued / but not after the ordre of iustyce as whan he wyll punysshe ony of hymselfe without callyng iustyce & superyores / vnto whom it apperteyneth for to do it. The fourth is whan ony bryngeth in or wolde brynge in ony iuste / and after the ordre of iustice but not by good & iuste entencyon / & for good ende. The entencyon of hym yt whiche pu∣nissheth sholde other for the welth & salua¦cyon of him the whiche hathe deserued pu¦nycyon / to the ende that he correcte hym / or by the conseruacyon of the iustice comu¦ne / to thende that all other correcte theym by his example / or for to do honoure vnto god in punysshynge ye offence that a man hathe done to breke his cōmaundemente. He than the whiche vengeth hym / or appe¦tyteth to venge hym by hate / rancour / or to ye ende that he beholden & called a good iusticier / in sechinge the preyse of the worl¦de / or to the ende that he haue moneye / or for ony other cursed ende / he sholde vnder¦stonde yt he sȳneth mortally / & after saint Thomas. Ire is mortall synne whan ony bryngeth in or wyll do ony vengeaūce vn¦to another after the maneres beforsayd / or after some of them / for it is agayne ius¦tyce and charyte. Also he the whiche ven∣geth / hym dysobeyeth vnto god after the scryptures the whiche sayth in many pla∣ces and passages / that a man ne yelde the yll for the yll. Vnde paulus .i. thessal. quīto Videte ne quis malū pro malo alicui red¦dat: sed semper quod bonum est sectamini inuicem: et in omnes. Take hede that no∣ne ne yelde vnto ony yll for yll / but that ye folowe euermore togyders that the whi∣che is good. Et legitur ad roma .xii. Noli te prudētes tieri aput vosmet ipsos nuilli malū {pro} malo reddētes. Be ye not pruden¦tes ayenst yourselfe ne yeldynge yll for yll vnto ony. Sequitur. Non vos deffendē∣tes carissimi: sed date locum ire. Ryght de re frendes defende you not but gyue place vnto ire. Item ad roma. xii. Benedicte {per} sequentibus vos: benedicite et nolite male dicere. Blysse ye those the whiche persecu∣teth you / blysse them and curse them not / Example. We rede that our lord appered hym vnto a woman in trybulacyon vnto whome he sayd / kepe thre thynges & thou shalte be saued / holde thy peas in maledic¦cyons / be pacyent in trybulacions / & yelde not the yll for the yll. Quere. lxxxix. b. Ano¦ther example how the blyssed and holy sa¦ynt Machayre was pacyente and suffred whan he was wronged and beten cruelly and impyteously for a woman the whiche hadde accused him and put vpon him fals¦ly and wrongfully that she hadde concey∣ued a chylde of his sede and of none other
Quere. lxxxx. a. It is a greate perfeccyon as to bere pacyently aduersyte and to doo the good agayne the yll. And therfore god sayth / yf ony stryke the on the ryght cheke gyue vnto hym the other. And he the whi¦che stryueth with the in iugement and ta¦ke awaye thy robe and gowne / leue it him and the mauntell. Vnde mat. v. Si quis te percusserit in dexteram maxillā tuā pre¦be ei et alteram: et ei qui vult tecum in iu¦ditio cōtendere et tinicam tuam tollere di¦mitte ei et palium vt dictum est. Those yt whiche be not of suche perfeccyon maketh them to amende the yl done by iustyce. Al so thou shalt not seche vengeaunce. And yu shalte not be remembred of the iniurye of thy cytezeyns. In lyke wyse as it is wry∣ten. Leuitici. xix. Non queras altionem. nec memor eris iniurie ciuium tuorū. Et legitur eccle. x. Omnis iniurie proximine memineris et nichil agas in operibus in∣iurie. Thou shalt not remembre the of the iniurie of thy neyghbour / and do nothyng in the operacions of iniurye. And Chaton sayth. Litis preterite noli maledicta re∣ferre. Compte not ne reken the cursed thȳ¦ges of stryfes paste. Et prouerbiorum .xx. Ne dicas reddam malū pro malo sed ex∣pecta dominū et liberabit te. Also god wyl not that a man venge hymselfe. In lyke wyse as it appereth clerely in the gospell / of saynt Marke whan the samarytayns wolde not receyue him / and saynt Iamis and saynt Iohan sayd vnto hym. Wylte thou yt we saye yt the fyre dyscende frome heuen and that it consume them. Our lor∣de blamed and repreued them of that thȳ¦ge / vnto whom he sayd. luce. ix. Nescitis cuius spiritus estis: filius hominis non ve¦nit animas perdere sed saluare. Know ye not of whose esperyte ye be / the sone of a man is not come for to lese the soules / but to saue them Example how a boye or kna¦ue was dampned for hate & wolde be ven¦ged. Quere. lxix. a. I ¶Also Ire and vengeaunce dysplea¦seth vnto god. For he the whiche vengeth hym by ire brenneth his temple. That is ye conscyence of the man the whiche is ye pla¦ce and the house wherin god resteth. vnde psal. Incenderunt igni sanctuarium tuū in terra: polluerunt tabernaculum nomi∣nis tui. That is to saye these wrathful peo¦ple hathe brente by the fyre of ire thy holy place / where as they haue soyled the taber¦nacle of thy name in the erthe / and saynt poule sayth ad corinth. iii. ca. Descitis qia templum dei estis et spiritus dei habitat in vobis. And there foloweth a thinge mo¦che to drede. Si quis autem templum dei violauerit: desperdet illum deus. Certayn¦ly yf ony hathe fyled ye temple of god / god shall dystroye hym. Iterum in eodem. ca. Tēplū dei sctū est {quod} estis vos. The tēple of god is holy / the whiche ye be. Whan an hostyller is angrye or wrothe the hostes yt he hathe lodged in his hous be not at their ease herbeged / god is not in ye man angry or wrothe. Vnde super illud ad ephe. iiii. Nolite contristari spiritum dei sanctum vnde grego. Dum ira animū pulsat spi∣ritusancto habitationem turbat. Trouble thou not the holy spyryte of god / whan ire stryketh the courage of ye man it troubleth the habytacion of the holy ghost. And ther¦fore god wyll not enhabyte / nor abyde by grace with a mamirous / furyous / motyf hasty / but he wyll enhabyte and abyde in people humble and peasyble the whiche fe¦reth his wordes. As it is wryten Ysaye pe¦nul. ca. Super quem requiescet spūs me{us} nisi super humilem et quietum & tremen∣tem sermones meos. In the place where god enhabyteth is not but peas as dauyd sayth. In pace factus est locus eius. And he loueth people peasible / and persecuteth
people furyous. &c. Example how those ye whiche wrathe them ayenst god & ayenst his saintes ben deed myscheuously as ege as / Tarquyn / Dacien / Valeryen. &c. lvii. c.f.h. K ¶A questyon whan it is that ire is go∣de or whan it is venyell synne or mortall. Capitulo. xxvi. DEsine ab ira et derelinque fu∣rorem / noli emulari vt mali∣gneris dicit psal. That is to saye cesse the of ire & leue fu∣roure / ne haue thou none en∣uye vpon another that thou become not a curste. Men fynde in scrypture that ire is somtyme good and leful / and somtyme it is meane and veniel synne / and somtyme ryght yll and mortall sȳne. ¶Ire is good whan it is agayne his owne synnes / or a∣gayne those of his neyghbour without pas¦syon of his troblement. For a man oughte to haue dyspleasaūce to haue offēded god by synne or to se hym offended. And that dule or sorowe yt is taken for the sayd syn∣nes ben called in scrypture contrycyon / & the duyll or the ire ye whiche is agayne the synnes of another is named zelus iustitie. God and his sayntes haue vsed of this ire agayne the synners wherof Moyses spa∣ke vnto the chyldren of Israell / illud deu∣tero. xi. Cauete ne forte decipiat{ur} cor ve∣strū & recedatis a dn̄o. Sequitur iratus{que} dominus claudat celum. &c. Also god wra¦thed hȳ without passyon of trouble again Dauyd for that yt he made to nombre hys people / as it is wryten .ii. regum .xxiiii. & for his synne he made mortalyte in his sa¦yd people. Also he was wrothe agayne da∣uyd whan he cōmytted auoutrye / and for asmoche that god loued hym he wolde cor¦recke hym. For a good fader the whiche lo¦ueth his chylde hym threteneth and punis¦sheth whan he offendeth. Saynt poue sa¦yeth ad hebre. xii. Eii mi non ngligere disciplinam dn̄i: ne{que} fatigeris dūm a eo argueris: quem enim dgit dn̄s caigat: flagellat autem omnem tum quem reci¦pit sequitur. Quis fiius quem non corri∣pit pater quod si extra disciplinam estis cu∣ius particepes facti estis: ergo om̄es adul¦teri et nō filii dei. Also whan Moyses spa¦ke vnto pharaon and he wolde not here it he was wrothe exodi. xi. Exiuit a pharao ne iratus nimis. Also Moyses cōmaūded vnto the chyldren of Israhell that they ne sholde kepe the manna tyll vnto the mor∣nynge. And they were dysobedientes. and Moyses was wrothe. exodi. xvi. Iratus ē moises contra eos. Also whan Moyses ca¦me to seche the cōmaundementes / he foū∣de the calfe and the daunce & he was wro¦the as it is wryten exodi. xxxi. Iratus est valde. Also god wrathed hym agayne the iewes the whiche made theyr marchaun∣dyses in the temple. And he chaled theym oute and theyr oxen and kyen / and made a whyppe &c. as it is wryten ma. xxi. And therfore maye a man be wrothe withoute synne agayne the trespassours. It is the werke of mercy as it is declared before. / Quere ad numerum .xxii. c. & .xxv. b. Men make a question. That is to vnderstonde whether it be lefull for to speke ony foule thynge bycause of correccion. The answer is made after saynt Thomas scdā scdē. q. lxxii. In lyke wyse as it is leful to bete ony persone or to endōmage in worldly godes bycause of dyscyplyne. In lyke wyse may ony man speke worde cōuysyous vnto hȳ that he correcteth whan he hym sholde cor¦recte. And in this manere our lorde called his dyscyples fooles / as it is wryten luce vltimo. Ostulti et tardi corde ad creden∣dū et apo. ad gal. ii. O insensanti galathe
How be it in lyke wyse as saynt Austyn sa¦yeth. Obiurgacyons and wordes conuen¦sieuses be not to speke yf ther be not neces∣syte. And not to thende that they serue vn¦to vs / but vnto our lorde. In spekynge su¦che wordes a man sholde haue ryght gre∣te dyscrecyon & attempraunce / for he may speke suche wyce that he sholde dyshonou¦re the persone. And that hymselfe sholde synne mortally as the scrypture saith the whiche shall abyde bycause of shortnes. ✿ Ire is venyall synne whan it is sodayne wtout delyberacyon of reason. And whan ony sourdeth sodaynly in ire & that forthe with by reason he repenteth hym / resyste∣the and putteth out suche ire without wil to venge hym he ne synneth but venyally Vnde cassiodorius dicit {quod} venialis ira est que non couritur ad effectum. Also ye scrip¦ture sayth that whan ony feleth hym hur¦te there sourdeth sodaynly a mouynge of courage impetuous yt whiche appetyteth vengeaunce is ire for as moche as he suf∣freth. Vnde super illud mathei. v. Om̄is qui irascitur fratri suo. dicit glosa. Ira ē vehemens motus animi ad nocendum.: / Ire is a mouing hugely of courage to noy or hurte / and this ire yf it be soo moche so∣dayne in ony maner that it cometh before ony delyberacyon of reason. And al mouȳ¦ge of wyll / it is sayd the fyrst mouynge ye whiche is not in our puyssaunce to resyst And therfore it is no synne / but it may be the payne of synne. And whan reason ap∣perceyueth ire and it appetiteth with ven¦geaunce and therin taketh ony pleasure / Also he ne resysteth at the fyrst / how be it he ne gyueth ful consentynge ne delybera¦cyon for to venge hym / it is venyell synne Also whan ony wratheth hym sodaynly / And that in lytell thynge he vengeth him How be it that he hym sholde venge wele in greate thynge yf he wolde / but he wyll not doo it. Than suche ire and cōmocyon may alonely be venyell sȳne by ye lytylnes of vengeaunce as to drawe a chylde by ye herys and semblable thynges. Also whan ony wratheth hymselfe of a naturall mo∣cyon / and that he is impacyent / how be it ne in dede ne in worde ne in maner what so it be for this sayd ire he wolde not ven∣ge hym ne put his ire in effecte / this Ire maye be venyell synne. Also some wrathe them sodaynly & anone repenteth theym & demaundeth pardon. And in some men it is longe or the fyre of ire be lyghtenyd in them and lately it is quenched / for seldo∣me they repente them and demaunde par¦don. Those here ben worse than those be∣fore spoken. Vnde. au. Melior est enim qi quauis ira sepe temptetur / tum festinat {quod} sibiremittat ille cui fecisse iniuriam a∣gnoscit {quam} qui tardius irascitur et ad veni¦am petendam tardius inclinatur. And of this selfe matere speke the holy doctoure saynt Iherome vpon the pystyll of saynt poule. ad titum / and saith. Ne{que} vero qui aliquando irascitur iracundus est / sed ille dicitur iracundus qui crebo hoc passione superatur. ¶Ire is mortall synne whan a man desyreth to do yll and for to cōmyt and do vengeaunce vnto his neyghboure by delyberacyon and consentynge of rea∣son. And suche or semblable ire the whiche is synne in somtyme in the herte alonely without ony more / and somtyme it appe∣reth also in a man withouteforth / eyther by tokens or by wordes / and somtyme in werkes and operacyon. In lyke wyse as it is declared here before more alonge in this sayd booke. Quere. xxvi. b. d. e.
L ¶Of the remedyes agaynst the syn of ire. Ca. xxvi. DEnuntiamus autē vobis fra∣tres vt subtrahatis vos ad oī fratre ambulante inordinate. ad thessal. iii. ca. Saynt poule sayth in his epystyl. Brederne we denounce vnto you that ye withdraw and take awaye from euery broder yt whi¦che lyueth & walketh dysordynately. Four remedyes ben foūde in scrypture as agaȳ¦the ire of his neyghbour. The fyrst is how a man sholde speke swete wordes vnto pe¦ple the whiche ben treful / troubled or wra¦theful / for to cole them and appease them from theyr ire / in lyke wyse as sayth ye sa∣ge. Also the experyence techeth it vs. Vn̄. prouer. xxv. Lingua moliis cōtringit du¦ritiā cordis. et {pro}uer. xv. Respontso mol∣lis frangit iram sermo durus suscitat fu¦rorem. That is to saye a softe answer bre¦keth ire / a harde worde moueth furoure / answer peasybly in swetnes. Vn̄. eccle. iiii Respōde pacitice ī man suetudine. & eccl. vi. Verbū dulce multiplicat amicos. and maketh softe the enemyes. Also the sage man maketh him amyable in wordes. vn̄ eccle. xx. Sapiens is vbis am abtlē se fa∣cit. The seconde remedye agayne ire is ye a man sholde holde his peas agayne hym the whiche is wrothe / yt whiche menaceth or wrongeth. And hȳ behoueth not to yel∣de iniurye agayne iniurye for to defende hym. In lyke wyse as sayeth saynt Pou∣le ad romanos .xii. Non vos deffēdētes carissimi: sed date locum ire. Example of a relygyous the whiche demaunded of a ho¦ly fader what he sholde doo for that / that he had no peas with the other. The good fader answered hym. In omnibus si ta∣cueris requiem habebis. Thou shalt haue rest and peas in all thynges and agayn al persones the whiche sayeth the yll yf thou holde thy peas. Whan a man holdeth hys peas agayne a man that is wrothe he ap∣peaseth hym lytell and lytell. And the fyre of his ire he is quenched. Verbi gratia. Al¦so whan a man taketh the wodde from ye fyre the whiche is matere it quencheth ly¦tell & lytell. Whan a man holdeth his peas agayne a man ireful / and that in his fyre of ire a man putteth no matere for to en∣crease the fyre / he quencheth it. And yf the¦re be in companye an irefull man detrac∣toure by whom noyse is moued / hym be∣houeth to departe and after peas shall be there. Vnde prouerbiorum .xxvi. Cum de¦fecerit lingua extinguetur ignis / susurre∣ctione subtracto conquiescūt iurgia. & eccl viii. Non litiges cū homine līguato & ne strues in ignē illius ligna. And Chaton sa¦yeth vnto his chylde. Cōtra verbosos no li contēdere verbis. Lis minimis verbis interdū maxima crsccit. Stryue thou not in wordes agayne these tangelers saynge yll. Greate ire / noyse / and stryfe they ma∣ke somtyme by lytell wordes. Dauyd the prophete vsed of this remedye. For whan a synner spake agayne hym / he kepte his mouthe from yll spekinge. Vn̄. psal. Po∣sui ori meo custodiam / cum cōsisteret pec∣cator aduersum me. ¶Another example how a chamberer or mayden seruaunt in a house was pacyent whan her maystres cursed her and tormented her by strokes / and god appered vnto her. Quere .lxxxxix b. ¶Another example of the pacyence of a good chylde the whiche praysed our lor∣des Ihesu cryste in many tormentes that he suffred / the whiche were done vnto hȳ by men of warre. Quere: xvii. b. Also for to put scylence vnto a man lygycyous and debatefull / ire is appeased & peas cometh in the company. Vnde prouerbiorum .xxvi
Qui imponit stulto silentium / rigas mi∣tigat. Also it is a grete goodnes as of pe∣as. And it is more worthe than meate as to eate a mouthefull of brede in peas than to haue wynes and meates in warre and dyuysyon. Vnde prouerbiorum .xvii. Me¦lior est bucela sicca cum gaudio: {quam} domus plena diuiciis cum iurgio. ¶And therfore men sholde seche the meanes to appease ye people irous. Example how that a knight abstayned hym for to speke for to flee cur∣sed wordes / and to the ende that he offen∣ded not ayenst god. The thyrde remedye agayne ire is to fle the company / famyly arite / amytee / and felawshyp of all peo∣ple Irous / noysefull / furyous / & wrathful ¶Fyrst a man sholde fle the suroure and ire of an Emperour / a kynge / or of a my∣ghty prynce or lorde / for he is ryght terry∣ble and furyous whan that he is wrothe / or hathe ony body in indygnacyon. Vnde prouerbiorum .xx. Sicut tremitus leonis ita et ira regis: et sicut ros super herbam ita ethyleritas eius. ¶Also it behoueth to kepe hym to speke vnto him wordes that ben noyfull and wrongfull. For they trou¦ble somtyme those that ben sages. Vnde. ecclesiastisis. vii. Calumia conturbat sa∣pientem: et perdet robur cordis illius. Al∣so it behoueth to kepe hym to take stryfe agaynst an Emperoure / a kynge / or ano∣ther grete lorde / for the dethe therto belon¦geth and apperteyneth. Vnde prouerbio∣rum .xvi. Indignatio regis inimicus est mortis: et vir sapiens placabit cum. Et ec∣clesiastisis .iiii. Noli resistere contra faciē potentis ne coueris contra ictum fluuit.: / ¶Resyste thou not agaynste the face of a puyssaunt kynge / or lorde that he make yt not for to be casten in to the water for to be drowned. Et ecclesiastisis .viii. Non li¦tiges cum homine potente / ne / forte / insi∣das in manu illius. Also a man sholde flee ye companye and famylyerte of men and women irous / furyous / and noysefull: for a man is not surely nere them nor aboute them. And theyr famylyarte is worthe no¦thynge. Vnde prouerbiorum .xxii. Noli a¦micus esse homini iracundo: ne{que} ambu∣les cum viro furioso ne forte discas semi∣tas eius: et sumas sclandalum anime tue ¶Also it is more worthe to haue the hate of the ylle than there company. For a mā there lerneth non ylle / and no good therof {pro}cedeth. vnde ysidorus. Melius est enum malorū odium {quam} cōsortiū. Et psal. Cum sancto sanctus eris & cum {per}uerso {per}uerte∣ris. & Ecclesiastisis .xxii. Cum stulto non multum loquaris: et cum insensato non abieris: serua te ab illo vt molestiam non habeas et non coinquineris in peccato il∣lius deflete ab illo et inuenies requiem et non accidiaberis in stulticia illus. Et eccle¦siastisis .vii. Discede ab iuiquo et defici∣ent mala abste. ¶Go awaye or departe thou from an yll persone. And illys shall defayll in the. And saynt poule sayth. Wyll thou not to commune with the operaciōs infructucuses of derkenesses / but repreue them. Vnde ad ephesios quinto. Noli cō∣munycare operibus infructuosis tenebra¦rum magis autem redarguite. Also in ly¦ke wyse a man sholde fle and eschewe the company of a woman irous / furous / and debatefull. For she is ryghte malycyous & yll / iniuryous without kepynge of ony se∣crete what so euer a man can do vnto her All confusyon / dystruccion / and irreueren¦ce cometh and procedeth of her. vnde eccle¦sia. Non est caput nequi{us} super caput co∣lubri. et non est ira super iram mulieris. Sequitur mulieris ira irreuerentia et cō¦fusio magna. Et prouerbiorum .xxi. Me∣lius est habitare in terra deserta / {quam} {con}mu∣liere rixoza et iracunda. ¶Example of a woman ye whiche was angry and wrothe
one tyme sharpely agayne her husbande / the whiche woman ne coude kepe his se∣crete. And in her furour and ire sayd vn∣to hym. Thou wenest to haue thre chyldrē of me / & thou ne hast but one onely. Que∣re .lxxi. a. ¶The fourth remedye agayne the ire or hate of his neyghboure is to doo hym the good agayne the ylle / as to gyue hym to eate and to drynke whan he hathe hongre or thurst or other thynge in his ne¦cessyte. And in so doynge thou shalt quen∣che the fyre of ire / and thou shalt embrace in hym the coles of charyte / and he shal be in thy loue / more ouer god shall gyue the retrybucyon. Vnde ad romanos .xii. & pro¦uerbiorum .xxv. Si esurierit inimicus tu¦us ciba illum / si scicierit da eibibere / hoc enim faciens carbones ignis congregabis super caput eius et dominus reddet tibi. / And god sayth in the gospel loue your ene¦myes / doo ye good by operacyon vnto thē the whiche haue hated you. Blysse ye with mouthe those that curse you / and pray for your persecutoures the whiche wrongeth you and dyspyseth you. And your reward shall be greate in heuen. Vnde mathei. v. et luce .vi. Diligite inimicos vestros be∣nefacite his qui oderūt vos benedicite ma¦ledicentibus vobis / et orate pro persecut¦ribus et calunniantibus vos et erit mer∣ces vestra multa in celo. A man sholde no¦te here yt the vertue of pacyence is agayne the synne of ire / and therfore in all aduer¦sytees / iniuryes / sekenesses / and fortunes It is the very and souerayne remedy as to bere pacyently. A ¶Of hate the whiche god defen∣deth. Ca. xxvii. IT is wryten leui. xix. Non ode∣ris fratrem tuum in corde. God made to tel vnto the chyldren of Israhell by his seruaunt Moy∣ses. Thou shalt not hate thy bro¦ther in thy herte. That is to vnderstonde by enuye in thynkynge yll vpon him / or in desyrynge the losse of his goodes / or hery∣tages / or the yll and dyshonoure of his bo∣dy / or the dampnacyon of his soule. It is wryten in the same chapytre leuitici. xix. Non facies calunniam proximo tuo: nec vi opprimes eum. Thou ne shalte do noo dyspyte vnto thy neyghbour / and thou ne shalte chase hym by force. Syth that god the cōmaundeth that thou loue thy neygh¦boure as thyselfe it foloweth wele that he the defendeth that thou hate him not / and that thou do vnto hym none yll / no more than thou woldest a man dyde vnto the / loue thy neyghbour / than thou hatest him not. It is wryten zach. viii. Vnusquis{que} malum contra amicum suum ne cogite∣tis in cordibus vestris: et iuramentū men dax ne diligatis omnia sunt que odi / dicit dominus. Euery of you or none of you ye thȳke none yl agayne your frende in your hertes / and loue ye not the othe of a lyar / god hateth these thynges. Euery man the whiche dysobeyeth vnto god synneth mor¦tally. And euery man yt whiche hateth his neyghbour dysobeyeth vnto god / than he sinneth mortally by the consequent he put¦teth hymself from paradyse and byndeth hym vnto dampnacyon. B ¶The synne of hate is to drede and to fle for many thynges wherof we shall tell fyue. ¶The fyrste is that for to hate his neyghbour in desyrynge his yll a man dys¦obeyeth vnto god the whiche is so greate synne / venim / and syknes vnto the soule that it chaseth from the hater charite and these other vertues & letteth all his godes
spyrytuall that it ne maye vnto hym prof¦fyte as by symylytude sayenge that seke∣nes corporell chaseth the helthe of the bo∣dy. And letteth to drynke and to ete / And other good that it ne maye vnto hym pro¦fyte. And also as sykenes is contrary vn∣to helthe and that thou ne mayst be hole / and seke togyders. In lyke manere hate is contrarye vnto dyleccyon. And enuye vnto charyte the whiche ne maye be togy∣ders. For the logycyans sayeth that two thynges the whiche ben contraryes & op∣posytes the one vnto the other ne maye be ne abyde togyders but that ye one chaseth the other. Vnde duo opposita nun{quam} pos∣sunt simul esse in eodem subiecto. Yt thou hate than thy neyghbour thou louest hym not. Yf thou hast enuye or wrathe agaynst thy neyghboure or euen crysten thou arte oute of charyte. And yf thou be out of the loue and of the charyte of thy neyghboure Thou arte oute of the loue and of the gra¦ce of god / thou ne louest neyther god nor thy neyghboure. Vnde .i. iohannis .iiii. Si quis dixerit quoniam diligo deum et tra∣trem suum oderit mendax est. That is to vnderstonde yf ony wyll saye yt he loueth god & hateth his euen crysten he is a false lyar. Iterum in eodem capitulo. Qui nō diligit fratrem suum quem videt: deum quem non videt quomodo potest diligere He the whiche loueth not his broder euen cristen that he seeth / how may he loue god ye whiche he seeth not / hene may do it. for to gyue you in knowlege & to vnderston∣de clerely / yf thou hate thy neyghboure & euen crysten / thou louest not our lorde ihe¦su cryst / and thou arte clene oute of grace and charyte / and thy vertues and thy go∣des spyrytualles ben departed frome the. Quia virtutes cum viciis remanere vel parmanere non possunt. Then noo good spyrytuell resteth in the. And by the conse∣quent thou ne mayst be in suche wyse sa∣ued / but dampned with all the deuylles of helle. Also saynt Ambrose sayeth. Qui ca¦ritatem non habet amyttit omne bonum quod habet. He the whiche hathe no chary∣te leseth all his spyrytuell goodes. And he the whiche hateth his neyghboure hathe no charyte. For charyte is to loue god and his neyghbour / and it behoueth that there be the one loue and the other / or charyte is loste. For vnto the dystruccyon of all o∣ne diffynycyon or proposycyon it suffyseth that the one partye be false / thus sayeth ye logyciens. Ad destructionem totius diffi¦nitiōis vel prepositionis sufficit vna pars esse falsa. And mayster Nycole de lyre sa∣yeth that by an yll cyrcūstaunce all the de¦de is yll. Malum consistit in singulis de∣fectibus: ita {quam} vna circunstantia mala: fa¦cit totum actum mala. And the holy and blessyd saynt poule sayeth. Illud .i. ad co∣rinth. xiii. Si linguis hominum loquar et angelorum: caritatem autē non habue∣ro factus sum velut es sonans aut cymba¦lum tinniens. This auctoryte is expoun∣ded in the ende of the chapytre of charyte Quere .iiii. c. ¶Example how a woman a¦uoutres was dampned for the kepynge of hate withoute beynge in wyll to pardon. lxxviii. d. ¶Another example how that a woman aduoutres was dampned ye whi∣che trusted in the almesdedes that she had gyuen. Quere .lxxxxii. d. It is wryten eze chie .xxxiiii. that the iustice of the iuste and his almesdedes and good operacyons ne shall delyuer hym in ony houre that he ha¦the synned. ¶Also it is wryten in the said chapytre as here after ensueth. Iustus non poterit viuere in iustitia sua in qua∣cū{que} die peccauerit. The iuste ne maye ly∣ue in his Iustice in ony daye that he syn∣neth mortally / as to hate his neyghboure and euen crysten be it man or woman. Al
maner of goodes spyrytual and temporal groweth there as is peas / concorde / and perfyte loue / and they lesse and dymynys∣she where as is dyscorde / malyce / wrathe / Ire and enuye. Vnde ambrosius. Par∣ue res concordia crescunt: magne vero res discordia dilabuntur. ¶Also euery royal∣me the whiche is deuyded shall be desola∣te. Vnde mathei. xii. Omne regnum in se ipsum diuisum desolabitur et domus su∣pra domum cadet. C ¶The seconde cause wherfore hate is to drede / is for that / that it is soo greate a glayue and swerde and offence that it sle∣eth spyrytuelly of dethe of gylte the soules of haynours or hatefull people the whiche hateth theyr neyghbours and euen cristen by enuye or malyce desyrynge theyr vnfor¦tune and losse bothe in theyr bodyes and goodes vniustelye .i. vnde iohannis tertio Oninis qui odit fratrem suum homicida est: et scitis quoniam omnis homicida nō habet vitam eternam in se manentem. ✿ That is as moche for to saye. Euery man the whiche hateth his neyghboure in hys herte is a man kyller and knowe ye that euery homycyde hathe not eternall lyfe a∣bydynge in hym. For by his hate he depar¦teth froo god / his loue / and his grace / the whiche is the lyfe of his soule. In lyke wy¦se as it is declared in the cōmaundement of homycyde and murdre. ¶Also by hate and cursed malyce a man sleeth his soule spyrytuelly / in lyke wyse as a man maye se by symylitude that a stroke with a swer defieeth a man corporelly. For hate ran∣couce and enuye and all mortall synnes / is by symylytude as a swerde cuttynge of dothe syes the whiche stryketh the soule for to dampne it. And yf that remedye be not had therin in this worlde by penaūce there is no helthe after the dethe. Vnde ec¦cle. xxi. ¶Quasi rumphea bis acuta om∣nis iniquitas plage illius non est sanitas ¶Also the synnes be to flee as frome the face of a serpent. For they slee spyrytuelly the soules of men. Vnde ecclesi. xxi. Qua¦si a facie colubrifuge peccata si accesseris ad illa suscipient te dentes illius dentes leonis interficientes animas hominum. Note wele that a man sholde not vnder∣stonde that the soules ben deed / slayne / & that they defaylleth aboue al by synne / for they ben mortelles / but a man sholde vn∣derstonde that they ben deed spyrytuelly / of dethe of gylte / and dyscendeth in to the dethe eternel / the whiche is dethe without deyenge as it is sayd before. For to auoy∣de the sayd dethe it behoueth to loue oure lorde Ihesu cryst and his neyghbours / & to flee hate. Saynt Austyn sayeth. Vita mea dilectio est et mors odium. My lyfe is dileccyon / and my dethe is hate. Et legi¦tur. de. peni. di. i. Omnis qui non diligit: manet in morte. Euery man the whiche loueth not dwelleth in dethe. Et poeta di∣cit. Si quis odit fratrem suum censetur ob hoc homicida. He is iuged for homycy∣de. &c. ¶Example how a boye was damp¦ned for hate and that he wolde be venged Quere .lxxix. a. Another example how the deuyll slewe a man for the kepynge of ha∣te and wolde not pardon hym .lxxix. c. D ¶The thyrde thynge wherfore ye sinne of hate is for to be dredde is for that / that it blyndeth the soule of the haynoure / that is to put oute the inwarde eyes of his vn∣derstondyng. Vnde .i.x.ii. Qui diligit fra¦trem suum in lumine manet: qui autem odit fratrem suum in tenebris est et in te∣nebris ambulat: et nescit quo eat quoniam obcecauerunt oculos cius. That is to saye in oure maternall tonge of Englysshe to you the whiche vnderstondeth not the la∣ten. He the whiche loueth affectuously his euen crysten broder he dwelleth in lyghte
And he the whiche hateth hym is in derke¦nes and walketh in derkenes. And he ne knoweth where he gothe. For derkenes ha¦the put oute his eyes. His entendemente is made derke / his lyght is lenyne / that is charyte the whiche gyueth lyght and shy∣neth is put oute / charyte is adnychylate & loste. ¶Also in lyke wyse as the eyes of ye body of a persone wexeth dȳme and der∣ke for to beholde sharpely the beaumes of the sonne. In lyke wyse the eyes of ye sou∣le ben put oute and made derke for to se ye welth of theyr neyghbour. Vnde gregori{us} Mens inuidi tam de alieno bono affligi∣tur {quam} de radio solis excecatur. By the gre¦te lyght is vnderstonde here the haboun∣daūce of the good operacyons of thy ney∣ghboure / by the whiche good operacyons the enuyous haynoure is blynded of duyl that he hathe to se them. Also thou hateful thy soule is in derkenes. In lykewyse as a man may se by symylytude that the bo∣dy of a blynde man is in derkenesse whan his eyes ben put oute. Thou seyth not the ylle that is in the ne that that thou hast for thy synne. And therfore thou mayst saye. Iliud psal. Comprehenderunt me iniqi∣atates me et non potui vt viderem. Vnder stonde wele whan a blynde man hath lost his conductoure & leder he ne seeth whan he falleth in a dytche or in ony daunger / no more dothe the hatefull whan he hathe lost his conductoure and leder the whiche is god / his lanterne is put out / that is cha¦ryte as it is said. And therfore he seeth not ne vnderstondeth ye inconuenyents wher¦in he falleth and tombleth. Vnde prouer. iiii. Via imptorū tenebrosa nesciunt vbi corruūt. Et psal. Via impiorum tenebre et lubricum. Et eccle. xxi. Via peccantium complantata lapidibus / et infinem illorū inferi et tenebre pene ¶Also these hateful and enuyous ne maye see the goodnes of theyr neyghboure. For theyr malyce & syn blyndeth theyr eyes. Vnde legitur in libro sapientie. Eccecauit illos malitia illorum ¶Also these hatefull ye whiche deyeth im¦penipente / they shall be sente into the lan∣de of myserye & of derkenes. iob. x. Ver∣ram miserie et tenebrarum &c. As it was of hym the whiche entred at the weddyn∣ges withoute beynge clothed of the veste∣ment nupcyall or weddynge garmente / yt is of charyte. Vnde mathei. xxii. Amice quomodo huc intrasti non habens vestem nuptialem: ligatis manibus et pedibus e∣ius proiicite eum in tenebras exteriores. / Bynde ye hym handes and fete / not with cordes but with the dyuyne iustyce / & cast hym in to derkenesse / that is in to hell. &c. ¶Example. It is wryten in the .xi. chapy¦tre of exode / that the kynge pharaon and his people hadde the .xi. plage of derkenes thycke by punycyon / & the chyldren of Is∣rahell had lyght. &c. E ¶The fourth thynge wherfore hate is to drede / it is for that / yt it putteth frome paradyse. Quia deus non saluat impios vt dicitur iob. xxxvi. of this mater. Quere xliiii. b. c. d. e. f. g. F ¶The fyfte is for that that it byndeth vnto punycyon and dampnacyon: Quia iniusti punientur: et semen impiorum pe∣ribit. vt dicit psal. Examples of people ha¦tefull. Quere. lxxix. a. b. c. G ¶How hatefull people sholde pardon / and pacyfye togyders the iniuryes and offences done and spoken yf they wyll that god them pardon theyr synnes. Capitulo. xxvii.
IT is wryten mathei. v. ca. Va∣de reconsiliari fratri tuo. Thou hatefull man go to reconsile the with thy broder. The moost so∣uerayne remedye that the hate∣full sholde doo for to be in the loue and in the grace of god / and for to haue parady∣se whan he shall departe out of this worl∣de is that he sholde put awaye his hate & to go to pacyfye hym with his neyghbour And to pardon and forgyue him benygne¦ly his trespasse. For it is the ryghte waye for to make his peas with god / and for to haue saluacyon. Saynt Gregorye sayeth that by the loue that we haue in god the lo¦ue of our neighbour is engendred. And by the loue that we haue vnto our neighbour the loue of our neyghboure is nouryshed Vnde gregorius in moralibus. Per amo¦rem dei amor proximi gignitur / et per a∣morem proximi dei amor nutritur. It is the moost greate thynge and moost plea∣saunt vnto god to loue his neyghboure as hymselfe / as all the sacrefyces and oblacy¦ons that we maye doo vnto hym. Vnde marci. xii. Diligere deum ex toto corde & proximum tan{quam} seipsum / maius est om∣nibus olocaustimatibus & sacrifiis. And therfore the holy euangelyst sayth that yf thou do oblacyon vnto god at the alter & that thou recorde or remembre ye that thy broder or thy neyghboure hathe ony hate or thynge ayenst the leue thy gyfte before the alter go fyrste to pacyfye the with thy sayd broder / and afterwarde come offre thy gyfte. Vnde mathei. v. Si offers mu∣nus tuum ad altare et ibi recordatis fueris quoniam frater tuus habet aliquid aduer¦sum te: relinque ibi munus ante altare / et vade prius reconsiliari fratri tuo. The glo¦se and the expositours sayeth vppon thys paas there. Si frater tuus habet aliquid aduersum te. For that that thou hast him offended and wronged or hurte. That is yt thou sholdest leue thy gyfte for to go pacy¦fye ye with hym. And yf he hathe offended the he sholde come to the / thou ne sholdest go vnto hym / but thou art to pardon hym In lyke as thou woldest that god pardon¦ned ye thy synnes. And whan thou ne wyl∣te pardon hym he shall goo agayne the / & god ne shall pardone the thy synnes as yu shalte here herafter. Saynt peter demaū¦deth of oure lorde / yf my broder synne in me seuen tymes wylte thou that I pardō hym tyll vnto the seuenth. And oure lorde hym answered. I saye not alonely tyll vn¦to the seuenth tyme / but I saye vnto the yf he repente hym / and that he demaunde the pardon / that thou hym pardon tyl vn¦to foure hondred .lxxxx. tymes. Vnde mat xviii. Non dico tibi vs{que} septies sed vs{que} septuagesies septies. Et luce. xvii. Si se∣pties in die peccauerit inte frafer tuus et septies in die conuersus fuerit ad te dicēs penitet me dimitte illi. Yf thy brother ha∣the synned in the by seuen tymes in a day and that he be conuerted vnto ye seuen ty∣mes in a daye sayenge I repente me / par¦don hym. Our lorde Ihesu crystis soo py∣peous / mercyfull / and so full of charyte / yt all those the whiche hym hathe offended / yf they wyll repent them / amende / and de¦maunde grace and pardon in doynge pe∣naunce that he pardonneth all benygnely and with good herte. Vnde Ezechie. xviii. Si autem impius egerit penitentiam. &c Vita viuet & non mortetur: ominum ini¦quitatum eius non recordabor. He gaue pardon and forgyuenes vnto Longis the whiche perced his syde with a spere / and is sauyd in the realme of paradyse with al the blessed seyntes. He gaue pardon also vnto the good thefe Dysmas the whiche hanged on his ryght syde on good fryday. And yf he be so mercyfull to gyue pardon
He wylleth also that in lyke wyse we doo vnto them the whiche vs hathe offended / And yf we so do we shall be his chyldren / imitatours regynynge and parteyners in his realme / and we shall pardon our syn∣nes yf men vs requireth. Vnde mathei. vi Si dimiseritis hominibus peccata eorum dimittet et vobis pater vester celestis pec¦cata vestra. That is to saye / yf ye haue lef¦te or forgiuen vnto men theyr sȳnes / your fader celestyall shall forgyue you your sin¦nes. Et legitur ecclesias. xxviii. Belinque proximo tuo nocenti te: et tunc deprecanti tibi peccata soluentur. And yf thou wylte not pardon vnto thy neyghbour his offen¦ces that he hathe done vnto the and yf he the requyre / god shall not pardon ye offen∣ces that thou vnto hym haste done. Vnde mathei. vi. Si non dimiseritis hominib{us} peccata eorum: nec pater vester dimittet vobis peccata vestra. Et augustinus dicit {quod} vnusquis{que} talem indulgentiam accep∣turus est a dn̄o qualem ipse dederit proxi∣mo. Euery man and woman shal haue su¦che indulgence of god as he hathe gyuen vnto his neyghboure. Also yf god pardon the many synnes in confessyon and that yu be so vnkynde that thou wylt not pardon vnto thy neyghbour / god shall redemaun∣de and axe the that / that he vnto the hathe pardonned for thyn vnkyndnes / yu sholde be mercyfull vnto another as thou wolde that a man sholde be vnto the. H ¶Example in the euangelyst. mathei. xviii. of hym the whiche owed vnto his lor¦de. x. M. talentz the whiche had not therwt to paye it / he asked mercy of the lorde and he quyted hym and gaue hym al his dette And incontynent that seruaunt made to put in captyuyte a seruaūt of his the whi¦che ought hym but an hondred pens / and for ony prayer that he coude make / he ne wolde haue mercy ne pardon hym his det And whan the lorde herde it / the whiche had pardonned hym the grete det he was ryght wrothe and angrye of the vnkynde∣nes and of the hardnes of ye sayd seruaūt that he ne pardonned the lytell dette / and incontynent made hym for to come befo∣re hym and sayd vnto hym. Illud mathei xviii. Serue nequam omne debitum di∣misi tibi: quoniam rogasti me / nōne opor∣tuit & tu misereri {con}serui sicut & ego tui mi¦sertus sum. Cursed seruaunt I hadde for gyuen the all thy dette / for thou hast pra∣yed me / was it not conuenyent vnto the yt thou haddest mercy on thy seruaunt in ly∣kewyse as I haue had mercy of the. The sayd lorde made to take hym / and to put hym in pryson / and hym demaunded al yt that he hadde hym pardonned. And in ly∣ke wyse shall god do vnto them the which ne wyllen pardon vnto theyr neyghbours as sayeth the sayd euangelyst. Vpon this mater there are many oppynyons. For so me sayeth that as before is wryten / that god shall redemaunde the synnes that he had pardonned for the vnkyndenes. The other sayeth that it behoueth not to vnder¦stonde that in the sayd worde there is to∣tale symylytude. For that that god hathe one tyme pardonned / hene shal redemaū¦de it ne yet punysshe it more. Quia non punit deus bis inidipsum: et quia deus est pronior ad miserandum {quam} ad puniendum ita quia est imitabilis. And it sholde seme that he were muable yf he demaunded yt / that he before hadde pardonned and for∣gyuen vnto the wretchyd synner in thys worlde / as dyd the beforsayd lorde of who¦me is made mencyon in the sayd euange¦lyst. But there is symylytude in that that where the forsayd lorde reproued his ser∣uaunt of vnkyndenes done vnto ye other man and punysshed and put hym in pry∣son. In lykewyse shal god vnto those that
ben vnkynde the whiche ne wyll pardon theyr euen crysten as the sayd seruaunte dyde / and vnto them shall saye. Serue ne quam. &c. And them shal sende in to ye pry¦son of helle / there for to remayne for euer∣more in payne and dystresse / not for theyr synnes that before he had pardonned / but for theyr vnkyndnes to theyr euen cristen Also some saye that the sayd vnkyndnes is so grete synne and greuous that it may not be lyke in grauyte vnto ye synnes par∣donned or forgyuen before. And therfore the haynoures and hatefull people sholde pardon or they shall be punysshed eternal∣ly without ony remyssyon. Also he ye whi∣che ne wyll pardon / prayeth vnto god yt he ne pardonne hym his synnes whan he sayeth his pater noster in saynge dimitte nobis debita nostra sicut et nos dimitti∣mus debitoribus nostris. That is to saye Pardon vs our synnes in like wyse as we them pardon vnto them the whiche hath vs offended. ¶Men fynde that the empe¦roure Theodosyen helde vnto greate boū¦te whan a man hym requyred and prayed faythfully that he wolde pardon him and forgyue hym. And the more that he was wrothe and angrye / ye more sooner he par¦donned. In lyke wyse sholde we do by cha¦ryte. &c. And in as moche as the sayd gos∣pell of saynt mathieu sayeth illud mathei v. Relinque ibi munus tuum ante alta∣re. Leue thy gyfte before the alter / that is to vnderstonde yt god refuse not thy gyfte And so ne wylleth yt thou it brynge agayn for thou sholdest gyue it / but he wylleth yt thou defferre and that thou it offre in cha∣ryte without the whiche it is not meritori¦ous tyll that thou haste taken awaye thy hate. Quia sanctus thomas dicit. Nul∣lus homo potest mereri nisi mediāte gra∣tia. No man ne maye do thynge meryto∣ryous but onely by ye meane of grace. And in as moche as he sayeth vade / not alone∣ly with fete / but with that in humble cou∣rage for to bowe the doune and to humble the to demaunde pardon and forgyuenes And to pacyfye the with thy sayd broder / And afterwarde come for to offre thy sa∣yd gyfte / and it shall be vnto god agreable and vnto the good and merytoryous / vty¦le and prouffytable. The maner to recon∣syle hym with oure lorde Ihesu cryst and with his neyghboure after that as sayeth mayster Iohan crysostome vpon the said euangelyst. Si offers munus tuum. &c. Si cogitatu offendisti cogitatu reconsi∣liare / si verbis / verbis / sifactis / factis. &c ¶Yf thou hast hated thy neyghbour alone¦ly in thyn herte withoute spekynge ne do∣ynge yll / take awaye thy hate / pardon hȳ with thyn herte without vengeaunce and reconsyle the with god and with thyselfe / without spekynge vnto hym / and yf thou haue offended by wordes / also reconsyle ye by wordes. And yf thou haue offended by dede reconsyle the by dede / for so sholdest thou do. I ¶Epample. It is wryten in some pla¦ces and reherced in the booke of the dyscy∣ple how a knyghte slewe the fader of ano∣ther knight / the whiche wolde venge him of the dethe of his fader / but he ne myght fynde the sayd homycyde vnarmed & vn∣puruayed for to kyll hym. And one tyme on the good frydaye that god was crucyfy¦ed the sayd knight yode barfote vnarmed for to requyre pardon of the other knyght the whiche knyghte also soone as he sawe hym he drewe out his swerde for to haue taken vengeaunce on hym / and came to∣warde hym. Than the other knyghte fell prostrate at his fete & sayd vnto him. I be¦seche you and requyre you for the loue of hym the whiche on this day hathe ben cru¦cyfyed for vs on the moūt of caluary yt ye
pardon me that yt I haue offended agayn you to haue slayne your fader. And yt kny¦ghte toke hym vp and pardonned hym al for the loue of our sauyoure Ihesus. And in token of pardon and reconsylyacyon he hym embraced & kyssed. And whan it ca∣me to the offrynge that the sayd knyghte yode to kysse the crosse as he was accusto∣med than Ihesus on the crosse embraced the sayd knyght with his armes and kyst hym before all ye people / and a voyce was herde of all that was there. Thou the whi¦che hast pardonned on this daye hym the whiche hathe slayne thy fader for the loue of me. And I pardon the this daye al thy synnes. And in that knyghte was accom∣plysshed that the whiche is wryten. Luce. vi. dimitte et dimittimini. Forgyue & mē shall forgyue you / pardon & men shall par¦don you. And those that ben obstynate the whiche wyll not pardon as it is sayd shall haue no pardon what soo euer confessyon that they make. Vnde ysodorus de sūmo bono. Erustra deum sibi {pro}pitiari querit qui cito in proximo placari negligit. He ye whiche dysprayseth to pacyfye wt his ney∣ghboure / for nothynge secheth he to ende∣bonayre god in hym. Example of a man yt the deuyll slewe for kepyng of hate and ne wolde pardon. lxxix. c. Another example of a woman dampned for the kepynge of her ire without beynge in wyll to pardon. lxxviii. d. Another example how the deuyl wende to lette saynt Thybault to concor∣de the barons of the companye the which were in diuysyōn. Another example. cxii.l K ¶How enuye and all her braunches & dependences ben defended by this com∣maundement. Ca. xxviii SAynt Austyn sayth {quam} inuidia est dolor aliene felicitatis. En∣nye the whiche god defendeth is to haue doloure / heuynes & bytternes to se that his neigh∣boure aboundeth in temporell goodes / or spyrytuell. Also he reioyseth hym to se the yll / the dōmage / the ruyne / dampnacyon / and perdycyon of his neyghboure is enuy that god defendeth. Vnde prouerbi. xxiiii. Cum ceciderit inimicus tuus ne gaude∣as / et in ruina ei{us} ne exaltet cor tuū. Thou shalte not enioye the whan thyne enemye shall be fallen. And thyn herte shall not ex¦alte in his ruyne. Et legitur prouer. xviii. Qui in ruina letatur alterius: non erit ī∣punitus. He the whiche enioyeth hym in ye ruyne of another shall not abyde vnponys¦shed. Enuye is a cursed tree / his rote is he uynes / his stroke is malyce / his braūches ben rancoure & hate / his floures ben pale∣nes / and lenenes / the fruyte is worthe no∣thynge / it is but bytternes. wherfore ye tre is not good but to brenne in the fyre of hel Vnde ma. vii. Omnis arbor q̄ non facit fructum bonum excidetur / et in ignē mit∣tetur. Euery tree / that is euery persone ye whiche ne dothe good fruyte / that is good operacyons shal be cutte / yt is taken from this worlde and sente in to the fyre of helle Also by enuye for to noye his neyghboure the enuyous sayeth of hym many yll wor∣des by detraccyon / susurracyon / and moc¦kerye for to put hym from his good renō∣me / and to menysshe his good. This ma∣ter is declared in the .viii. cōmaundement Also by enuy many proces / noyses / hates iniuryes / warres / bataylles / and occysyōs ben done / ye whiche to haue dampnacyon and perdycyon. Also by enuye of the deuyl dethe dampnacyon and perdycyon ben co¦men in to this worlde. And those the whi∣che ben enuyous foloweth the sayd deuyll
and shall go with hym in to hell in perdy∣cyon yf they deye impenytentes. Vnde sa¦pientie. ii. Inuidia diaboli mors intrauit ī orbem terrarum / mittatur autem illum qi sunt ex patre illius. Also by enuy Cayn sle∣we his broder Abell / as it is wryten in the examplary. Quere. lxxvi. Also by enuy Io¦seph was solde of his owne bredren ye whi¦che sayd vnto theyr fader that they hadde founde his gowne all blody & that he was deed. And theyr sayd fader sayd illud gene¦sis. xxxvii. Hera pessima deuorauit filiū meum ioseph. A cursed beest hathe deuou¦red my sone ioseph / that is enuye. &c. Cha¦ryte the whiche is agayne the synne of en∣uye is here commaunded / the whiche is ye moder and the cause of all vertues in ly∣ke wyse as it is declared before. Quere iiii. a. A. ¶Of the vertue of pacyence the whi¦che is agayne the synne of yre. Ca. xxviii. IT is wryten prouerbiorum. xii. Non contristabit iustum quid∣quid acciderit ei. The sage sayth that the iuste wratheth hym not by passyon of ire ne of troblemēt for payne ne aduersyte yt to hym cometh / For he bereth all pacyently for the loue of god. Pacience in aduersyte is a vertue / by the whiche the bounte of ye man is proued in lyke wyse as men shall here hereafter / And it is to be noted that pacyence in try¦bulacyon maketh the man pacyent to ha∣ any goodes spyrytuelles. ¶Fyrst pa¦nce in trybulacyon enlumyneth the en¦endement of the man and it maketh for to knowe hymselfe. Vnde ysaie. xxviii. Tantummodo sola vexatio dabit intel∣lectum auditui. ¶Secondly pacyence in tribulacyon maketh the man sage and go¦uerneth by grete prudence / and he ye whi∣che is impacyent lyfteth vp hymselfe and sheweth his folye. Vnde prouerbiorū. xiiii Qui paciens est multa gubernatur pru∣dentia / qui autem impaciens est exaltat iustitiam suam. Et legitur prouerbiorum xix. Doctrina viri per pacientiam eius noscitur. The doctryne of the man is kno∣wen by his wysdome. Example howe the sone of Abraham Ysaac susteyned pacyen¦tely whan his sayd fader wolde a made sa¦cryfyce of hym. Quere in the exemplayre li. a. ¶Thyrdly pacyence in aduersyte ke∣peth the vertues and ye spyrytuell goodes of the soule as the coffre and the purse ke∣peth the moneye and the treasoure of the man. Vnde. lii. xxi. In pacientia vestra possidebitis animas vestras. ¶Example how Dauid was moche pacyent agayne the warres & tormentes that Saul dyde vnto hym and wolde not slee hym / where he myght wele haue done it many tymes yf he hadde wolde as it is wryten .i. regum xxiiii. Also whan he cutte one parte of his mauntell and whan he founde hym a sle∣pe. Vt habetur .i. regum. xxvi. And yf the theuys breketh the coffre lyghtly they take the treasoure. Also yf a man be broken in trybulacyon by impacyence lyghtly the de¦uyll taketh and deceyueth the soule. Legi∣tur ecclesiastici. xxi. Cor fatui quasi / vas confractum et omnem sapientiam non te∣nebit. ¶Fourthly pacyence in trybulacy∣on and swete wordes in answer appeseth the ire of his enemyes. Vnde prouerbiorū xv. Vir iracūdus prouocat rixas qui au∣tem paciens est mitigat suscitatas. In eo¦dem capitulo. Responsio mollis frangit iram: sermo dur{us} suscitat furorem. Et ec∣clesiastici. vi. Verbum dulce multiplicat a micos: et inimicos mittigat. Swete wor¦des multiplieth frendes / and maketh soft
the enemyes. Example in Ihesu cryste ye whiche neuer profered yll worde agaynste them the whiche wronged hym / persecu∣ted and put vnto dethe / but bare all pacy¦ently. ¶Fyftely pacyence in trybulacyon maketh god to enhabyte with the pacient Vnde psal. Iuxta est domin{us} his qui tri∣bulato sunt corde. Iterum psalmi. Cum ipso sum in tribulatione. Example in the lyfe of faders how as these deuylles in the gyse of beestes bette and tormented saint Anthony / god theym chased and hym ay∣ded in his trybulacyon. Than saynt An∣thony sayd vnto god / wher were thou my lorde Ihesus / wherfore ne haddest thou co¦men at the begynnynge. And god said vn¦to hym. Anthony I was here / but I abo∣de thy stryfe to se how thou woldest resyst And for as moche as thou haste wel resys¦ted in pacyence. I shal make to be renom¦med of the thorowe oute all the worlde. ✿ ¶Syxtely pacyence in trybulacyon ma∣keth man vyctoryous and knyghte before the kynge celestyall dygne of more greate rewarde and prayse than he the whiche ha¦the vaynquysshed his enemyes / breketh ye batayll and wynneth the iourneye. Vnde prouerbiorum. xvi. Melior est paciens vi∣ro forti & qui dominatur animo suo expu∣gnatore vrbum. ¶Example how iob was pacyent whan he loste his goodes and his chyldren and he wrathed hym not but bles¦syd god. Vnde iob. i. Dominus dedit do∣minus abstulit: sicut domino placuit ita factum est sit nomen domini benedictum ¶Another example how ye thre chyldren were pacyente in the furneys and therin blyssed god / as it is wryten danielis. iii. And they ben dygne of prayse and of re∣warde eternell. It is wryten in the thyrde chapytre of the appocalypse. He the which hathe vaȳquysshed shal be clothed in why¦te clothes / and I shall not put out his na∣me of the booke of lyfe. And I shall con∣fesse his name before my fader and before his aungelles. Also it is wryten. He ye whi∣che hathe vaynquysshed in this wretchyd valeye of myserye I shall gyue vnto him in my kyngdome of heuen that he shall be with me in my throne. And it is wryten in the seconde chapytre of the appocalyp∣se. Be faythfull and true tyll vnto ye dethe and I shall gyue the the crowne of lyfe / He the whiche hathe vaynquysshed shall not be hurte of the seconde dethe. And it is wryten in the fyrst chapytre of the epys¦tles of saint Iamys. Blissed be that man the whiche suffreth temptacyon / for whan he hathe be approued he shall take ye crow¦ne of lyfe that god hathe promysed vnto those the whiche loueth hym. And yf it be so that the persone be vaynquysshed by tri¦bulacyon he leseth the rewarde and ye glo∣rye of the good knyght pacyent. Vnde pro¦uerbiorum. xix. Qui impatiens est susti∣nebit damnum. He the whiche is impacy∣ent shal susteyne dommage and hurte. ✿ ¶Seuenthly the man pacyente the whi∣che is amonge his enemyes wronged and tormented deserueth to haue a crowne of glorye as the martyrs. And ye man or wo∣man the whiche is impacyent in trybula∣cyon leseth the crowne the whiche was re∣teyned for hym or her yf they hadde well foughten agaynst the temptacyon of the deuyll. Vnde. ii. ad thimoteum. ii. Qui cer¦tat in agone non coronabitur: nisi qui legi time certauerit. ¶Eyghtely the man the whiche bereth and taketh pacyently the se¦kenesses and trybulacyons here byneth in this wretched valeye of mysery for his ow¦ne synnes and trangressyons after confes¦syon it shall serue hym of penaunce and of medecynes for to purge him and make hym clene of his iniquytes and trespasses The wyse man sayeth in the ecclesiastice.
Altissimus de terra creauit medicinam: et vir prudens non abhorrebit illi. Also the vertues ben better and parfayte in seke∣nes whan the man it bereth paciently. vn¦de .ii. ad corin. xii. Virtus in infirmitate perficitur. And those the whiche endureth the dethe wylfully for theyr owne synnes / and defautes after confession. Whan they ben seke in theyr beddes or whan they ben hanged and made to deye as the good the fethe whiche was put to dethe whan that our lorde suffred his passyon. It is ryghte grete penaunce moche merytoryous whā it is borne pacyently. And therfore god sa¦yd of good ryght vnto the sayd thefe. thou shalte this daye be with me in paradyse. / Hodie mecū eris in paradiso. Vnde apo. xiiii. Beati mortui qui in domino moriū¦tur. Blessyd be those that ben deed ye whi∣che deyeth in our lorde / theyr dethe is mo∣che precyous before god. Vnde psal. Pre¦ciosa est inconspectu domini mors sancto¦rum eius. And vnto the contrari the dethe of synners impacyent is ryght yll. Eccles. xli. O mors {quam} amara est memoria tua ho¦mini iniusto. ¶Nynethly pacyence in try¦bulacyon maketh to god in to paradyse. / Vnde actuum. xiiii. Per multas tribula¦tiones oportet nos intrare in regnum dei Also of those the whiche haue had of tribu¦lacyons in this worlde it is wryten in the apocalypse that saynt Iohan sawe one ty¦me soo grete a hepe of people that a man ne myght nombre them the whiche pray∣sed god. And he demaunded of one of the auncyentes what these people were that were there. Vnde apo. vii. Niqui amitti sunt stolis et albis qui sunt: et vnde vene∣runt. R. Hi sunt qui venerunt de tribula∣tione magna et lauauerunt stolas suas & dealbauerūt eas in sanguine agni ideo sūt ante thronum dei: et seruiunt ei in templo eius: et qui sedet in throno eius habitat su¦per illos. Withoute pacyence none ne co∣meth vnto perfeccyon / none ne hathe vyc¦torye / for who so leseth pacience he is vaȳ¦quysshed / & yf he haue pacyence he is glo∣ryous. The cuppe of golde suffreth many strokes and of fyre before that he come vn¦to the kynges table. And the chalyce befo∣re that it be lyfte vp and set on the auiter for to synge masse. Many greate strokes suffreth the tonne before that the wyne be put therin. Moche is the robe of scarlet de foylled before that it be worne. And vnto this may a man fynde as many of exam∣ples as there are of craftes within Lon∣don. In lyke maner before that thou goo before god thou oughtest to be well pury∣fyed and made clene from synne. And to be precyous as the golde / harde as ye yron it behoueth to haue pacyence in trybulacy¦on / that is the yate wherby the iuste per∣sones entreth in to paradyse. Hec porta domini iusti intrabunt in eā. vt dicit psal∣mista. B ¶Also pacyence in trybulacyon make∣the a man to haue syxe vtylytees after. vi propretees that the fyre hathe. ¶Primo the fyre shyneth and gyueth lyght / too do∣the trybulacyon as sayeth Ysaye. xxviii. Tantummodo sola vexatio dabit intel∣lectum auditui. ¶Secundo. The fyre brē¦neth the wodde and the thynges combusti¦bles soo dothe tribulacyons the delectacy∣ons of the body and of the worlde. ¶Ter¦tio. The fyre maketh softe the lede / ye yron and the thynges harde. In lyke wyse try∣bulacyon and losse of goodes maketh sort hertes / and maketh them to cease and to holde rygoure. ¶Quarto. The fyre pur∣geth and maketh clene the ruste of ye yron and of metall. In lyke wyse trybulacyon purgeth the man from the ordure & fylth of synne / and hym maketh to confesse and to requyre god. Mala q̄ nos hic premiūt
ad deum nos ire compellunt. Quinto. the fyre prouueth the golde in the furneyse for to vnderstonde yf it be good / pure / & clene In lyke wyse god sendeth of trybulacyōs vnto man to the ende that he be prouued manyfestly yf he be good or yll for to haue trybulacyon in good or yll / how be it that god hym knoweth wele. Vnde psal. Pro¦basti nos deus igne nos examinasti sicut examinatur argentum. Iterū psal. Do∣mine probasti cor meum & vesitasti nocte igne me examinasti. Et legitur eccle. xxvii Vasa figuli {pro}bat fornax & homines mul¦tos temptatio tribulationis. Also for to knowe that that is within a persone him behoueth to speke some iniurye that pryc∣keth hym / and his courage shall appyere without forth. Vnde hugo de sancto victo¦re. Qualis vnusquis{que} aput se lateat: illa ta iniuria probat. Sexto. The hete of the fyre goeth vpwarde. In lyke wyse tribu∣lacyons maketh the persones to take hede vnto god to thende that they possede para¦dyse / vnto the whiche we maye go cum il¦lo qui est benedictus in secula. Amen. A ¶Here foloweth the syxte com∣maundement of god / the whiche treate of thefte and auarice. Ca∣pitulo. xxix. Nothynge of other mennes yu shalte take By thefte / extorcyon / ne gyle A full strayte accompte must thou make Lyue thou longe or lytell whyle IN the olde testament is wryten this commaundement deutero∣um. v. ca. & leui. xix. Non facies furtum. Thou shalte do no theft in manere what soo it be / or yll shall come vnto the yf thou deye without correccyon and amendement / in lyke wy∣se as thou shalt fynde by many examples Quere. lxxx. a.b. This worde here theft to take it generally comprehendeth vnder it all auaryce / ye whiche is defended by this commaundement and all sacryleges / all pylleryes / symonyes / vsuryes / treasons / trecheryes / fraudes / begylynges / decepcy¦ons / and all other cautelles / braunches & dependauntes that a man may recompte by the whiche the esperyte dyabolyke may brynge in mynde vnto the auarycyous of what estate that he be to take & to drawe vnto hym the goodes of another vniustly And here is cōmaunded the vertue of ius∣tyce as well dystrybutyue as coniunctyue the whiche vs adresseth to yelde vnto eue¦ry man that that vnto hym apperteyneth Vnde math. xxii.c. Reddite que sunt ce∣saris cesari: & que sunt dei deo. And for as moche as couetyse is the rote of all yll. In lyke wyse as sayeth saynt pouie. i. ad this motheum. vi. Radix omnium malorum est cupiditas. And how yt rote extendeth her sauour and humour in all the person∣nes of the worlde. For frome the leste tyll vnto ye moost grete all estudyeth & taketh hede vnto auaryce & dothe trycherye / fran¦de and decepcyon the one vnto the other. In lyke wyse as sayeth the prophete Hie∣remy. vi. A minore qippevs{que} maiorē oēs auaritie studēt & a {pro}pheta vs{que} ad sacer∣dotē cūcti faciūt doiū. Wherfore it folow∣eth yt this cōmaundement is oftymes bro¦ken & that thefte & auaryce bryngeth ma∣ny to dampnacyon / as it is delared here after by chapytres. B. ¶And fyrst.
¶Of theft that god defendeth. xxix. NOn furtum facies. Thou shal¦te do not theft / the whiche is cō¦mytted whan a man taketh ye goodes of another vniustly / fraudelently / and secretely a∣gaynst the wyll of the mayster vnto who∣me they belonge / and without ryght and reason. Many sortes of theues reygneth in the worlde in lykewyse as the experyence techeth it vs. There ben some the whiche ben couered the whiche steleth secretely the goodes of another vniustly / the whiche bre¦keth this commaundement / and ben han∣ged whan they ben knowen. The good mā Thobie feered this synne. For on a tyme his wyfe brought a kydde in to his hous / Whan the good blynde man herde it crye he sayd. Beware yt it be not comen of theft for it behoueth vs not to ete / ne to touche ony thynge that is comen of theft / yelde it agayne vnto the owner. Vn̄ thobie. ii. Nō licet nobis aut edere de furto aliqui dant contigere. &c. Some there ben the whiche ben pryue and of those there bē two sortes For the one dooth the grete theftes / as the balyfs / sheryfs / and receyuers / the whiche steleth the amendes and fynes and many other thynges frome theyr lordes. The o∣ther dooth the lytell theftes as the chyldrē and seruauntes of an hous the whiche ste∣leth the breed / the meet / the wyne / bere / or ale / and the capons / and hennes. &c. The theues companyons ben they the whiche ben parteyners vnto the thefte in partyn¦ge it / or the whiche haue of gyftes / or ye whi¦che theym byeth / or the whiche coūceyleth that it be doone / or the whiche theym com∣maundeth to do it / or those the whiche de∣fendeth the theues / or those the whiche thē lodgeth and receleth / or the whiche ben pre¦sent whan they ben doone / it seeth / vnder∣stādeth / and knoweth / and accuseth them not ne repreueth / nor them correcketh vn∣to theyr power. Qui tacet consentire vide¦tur. et in decre. Agentes / pacientes / con∣sentientes / pari pena pumentur. xvii. q. iiii. Omnes. As moche is he worthe that hol∣deth as he that fleyeth. Also those ye whiche haue not accomplisshed the testamentes & ye bequestes of those yt ben deed wtholdynge the goodes ben theues / and shal haue puny¦cyon yf they deye impenytentes without correccyon and restytucyon. ¶Example how the deuylles bare awaye the soule of a man the whiche hadde withholden ye horse of a deed knyght / the whiche had gyuen it vnto the poore people. Quere in the exam¦plary. lxxx. C. C. ¶A questyon. For to vnderstande yf a man commyt theft in takynge of a lytelll thynge as of a grete thynge. The answere is / ye. For thefte is taken where a man ta∣keth vniustly the thynge of ony persone be it grete or lytell. And in thefte god taketh hede vnto the herte of the thefe and not vn¦to the thynge that he taketh. Vnde primi regum. xvi. capitulo. Homo videt eaque parent dominus autem intuetur cor. Et in¦decre. Hurtum est iniusta ablatio rei {quam}tū cun{que} parua sit. xiiij. q. vi. ca. vltimo Quia in furtu non quod ablatum: sed meus furē tis attēditur. xiiij. q. vi. capitu. vltimo. And this is to be vnderstande whan ye thought is suche that he wolde take also with good wyll a grete thinge yf he myght / or as of yt lytell thynge taken the lorde entendeth to be greued. And saynt Thomas secunda se¦cunde questione. lxvi. Yf ony take a lytell thynge theuysshely / and that he vnto who¦me apperteyneth the sayd thynge ne repu¦te that a man do vnto him noysaunce / and also that he the whiche taketh presumeth yt that thynge the whiche he taketh is not a∣gaynst the wyll of the lorde or owner vnto
whome it apperteyneth and belongeth / & whan that it is in suche manere commyt¦ted he is excused of thefte. Otherwyse it is mortall synne / for it is agayne the dy∣leccyon of his neyghboure vnto whome a man dothe nuysaunce. ¶Also saynt Tho∣mas sayeth that in suche lytell thynges yf ony haue courage to stele or to do nuysaū∣ce vnto his neyghbour that he sȳneth mor¦tally. And therfore lytell thefte is to drede as grete / for yf ony do vnto his wyttynge dōmage with his beestes in the medowes or labours of his neyghbours / or yf he ta∣ke the fruytes of trees / as appylles / peris benes / pesen / or hunters the whiche dothe dōmage in the cornes with theyr houndes &c. suche people ne sholde be assoylled yf yt they ne wyll make restytucyon of the dom¦mages that they haue done. Vnde dicitur in decre. Inferens damnum proximo nō est absoluaundus: nisi prius damno secun¦dum arbitrium lesi restituo. xiiii. q. vi. cō∣petimus. It is that that before is wryten Nothynge of other mennes thou shalt ta∣ke by thefte ne by deceyte / yf thou haste yu muste yelde it or thou shalte neuer se god in the face. The synne of thefte noyeth vn¦to the soule of the thefe in many maneres Fyrste thefte putteth the soule vnto pouer¦te of goodes spyrytuelles / for it chaseth & maketh to put in forgetefulnes his vertu¦es & good operacyons lately goten. Que∣re ad numerum. lxiiii. b. Secundo. Theft letteth to gete of vertues and goodes spy¦rytuelles in as many of maners as a mā wyll gete. Quere post. xliiii. c. ¶Example how that a seruaūt ne myght receyue his creatour of the hande of saynt Thomas / tyll that he had confessed that he had sto∣len of fygges from his mayster. Quere in the examplayr foure score & one. b. Tertio The thefte dyffameth the theues in thys worlde whan they ben knowen and han∣ged. Quere post ad numerum. xliiii. d. ✿ ¶Example of a thefe the whiche was ar∣rested dyuynely with his thefte vpon the graue of a deed body. Quere in the exem∣playre. lxxx. b. Quarto. The thefte blynde the ye soule of the thefe in suche manere yt he seeth not the good that he leseth / and ye lyne and bonde in the whiche he putteth hym. Quere ibi post ad numerum. xliiii. e. etiam. Quere. xxvii. d. Quinto. The syn of thefte is a place by the whiche the thefe is taken by iustyce and hanged on the ga¦lowes. Or it is a place by the whiche ye gre¦te hangman the deuyll hangeth the thefe on the gybet of helle / & kepeth hym frome rysynge and mountynge in to paradyse / in lyke wyse as it is declared here after.: / Quere ad numerum. xliiii. f. ¶Example how a monke sawe by permyssyon dyuy∣ne of ryche men hanged in the fyre of hell Quere in the examplayre. lxxxiiii. d. Ano∣ther example how that a thefe vsurer was tormented in helle / oute of whome proce∣ded a drye tree on the whiche was hanged those of his lygnage the whiche hadde not wylled to resyste whan they lyued in this worlde. Quere. lxxxvi. a. ¶Another exā∣ple how foure men of a lygnage were dā¦ned and hanged one after another for yt / that they dyde possede falsely an herytage Quere. lxxxi. g. For that that a lytell byrde taketh a lytell grayne of corne fast by the grynne / he is happed by ye necke and put vnto dethe and perdycyon. Also for a lytel of another mannes goodes that a thefe taketh he is gretely in dōmage / for ye frac¦cyon / and brekynge of the commaunde∣ment of our lorde Ihesu cryste is the corde the offence the halter / wherby he is taken by the hangman the deuyll for to hange & strangle hym as it is sayd before. And for a lytell thynge the whiche endommageth another he endommageth hymselfe gre∣tely.
For he leseth his goodes / his body & his soule &c. Sexto. Thefte sleeth the sou¦le of the thefe spyrytually of dethe of gylt In lyke wyse as it is declared in the begȳ¦nynge of the synne of homycyde. Quere. xxiiii. b. and in ye chapytre of hatred. Que∣re. xxvii. Septimo. By thefte the theuys be cursed and excommuned euery sonday in the chirche vnyuersall / the whiche is a thynge moche to drede in lyke wyse as it is declared herafter. Quere. xlviii. b. Octauo. The theuys sholde drede the iu∣gement partyculer and generall the whi∣che shall be done of them in the courte so∣uerayne before our lorde Ihesu cryst. In the whiche iugement there shall be many accusatours. ¶Example of a chylde the whiche was accused of ye deuyl before god for that that he hadde stolen an halfpeny from his cosyne germayne and had puny¦cyon. Quere in the exemplayre. lxxx. d. ✿ ¶Also these theuys sholde / and also ben bounde to restytucyon yf they wyll be sa∣ued what confessyon soo euer they make. In lykewyse as it is wryten in droit. xiiii q. vi. c. Sires. Non dimittitur peccatum nisi restituatur ablatum. De restitutio. ✿ Quere ibi post. xxxiiii. b. c. d. e. f. ¶Exam∣ple of a chylde the whiche was tormented in the paynes of purgatorye for that that he had not restored ye moneye that he had borowed. Quere. lxxxviii. b. Other exam∣ples in eodem loco. Nono. These theues sholde drede to lese the Ioyes of parady∣se. Quere. xliiii.i.xlvii. a. vnde. i. ad corin. vi. Ne{que} fures ne{que} auari regum dei pos¦sidebunt. Decimo. These theuys sholde drede punycyon and dampnacyon eternel Quia iniusti puniētur. Quere post. xliiii k. ¶Example of the punycyon of a thefe named achar. Quere. lxxx. a. ¶Another example of a carle the whiche was punys¦shed of the deuyll for that that he had vn∣closed his neyghbours hedge of a lytell of the hedgynge. Quere. lxxxi. a. Those the whiche haue offended god by thefte do pe¦naunce and restytucyon / and take the con¦dycyons of the pylgryme of paradyse the whiche ben wryten towarde the ende of ye boke and they shall be sauyd. ¶Example of a thefe zecheus the whiche repented hȳ and made restytucyon and he is saued. ✿ ¶Another example of the prynce of the∣uys that saynt Iohan conuerted / he was saued by penaunce. lxxiiii. e. A ¶Of sacrylege that god defendeth. capitulo. xxx. AFter these maysters. Sacrile¦ge is in suche wyse dyffyned. Sacrilegium est sacre rei vio¦latio et eiusdē vsurpatio. Sa¦crylege is vyolacyon of holly thynge and vsurpacyon of the same thyn∣ge. Et dicitur sacrilegium quasi sacrum ledens vel violans vel depurpans. And it is said sacrylege also as hurtyng holy thȳ¦ge / or vyllynge / or deturpynge. Sacryle∣ge is cōmytted somtyme by reason of the persone / somtyme by reason of the place / and somtyme by reason of the thynge. It is cōmytte by reason of the persone whan that ony beteth a clerke or a persone rely∣gyous. xvii. q. Quisquis. And it is a case reserued vnto the pope after the manere as the dede is cōmytte. By the reason of the place as whan the chircheyarde or the chirche be violed / deturped / brokē or bren¦te / or suche other semblables. Suche peo∣ple ben excommunyed and cursed of sen∣tence de droit ipso facto. By the reason of the thynge as whan that it is consecrate & deputed vnto holly vsage of the chyrche /
and that it be vsurped / rauysshed / taken / or whan of that thynge a man abuseth or vseth vnlefully. This laste membre is dy∣uysed in thre partyes. For sacrylege is cō∣mytted whan a man steleth or rauyssheth the holy thynge within holy place / or whā a man taketh the thynge not holy in holy place / or the holy thynge in place not ha∣lowed. In lyke wyse as it is wryten. xliii. q. iii. Quisquis. Sacrylege is a grete sȳne moche comune. for many ne maketh char¦ge for to take the goodes of the chirche / as rentes / reuenues / oblacyons / dysmes / or other goodes the whiche hathe ben offred and gyuen vnto god and vnto his chirche or vnto ony saynt. &c. Acurate hathe noo power to absoyle of sacrylege / for it is a ca¦se reserued vnto the bisshop. &c. For to spe¦ke of those the whiche handeleth ye money of the chirche / a man sholde vnderstonde that yf the receyuours or tresorers of the goodes of the chirche hathe ben vnfayth∣ful in theyr charges and cōmyssyons / that is to vnderstonde yf they haue comptes ye whiche be not good verytables / & loyalles or yf they haue compted more hye thanne they sholde in iourneys put and dyspens. They ben theues and yet wors than sacri¦leges to defraude and to pylle the chirche Yet shal they compte one tyme before god in iugement where they shall haue ye pay¦ment after theyr desert. Vnde. psal. Tu reddes vnicui{que} iuxta opera sua. God is theyr partye and Iuge with whome they haue to do. And therfore yf they haue offē¦ded in ony maner make in suche wyse the¦yr appoyntement by penaunce and satys∣faccyon or they shall haue dampnacyon. / It is wryten marci. x. Ne fraudem fece∣ris. A persone the whiche fraudeth ye chir∣che fraudeth fyrste of all his owne propre soule / and he shall fynde no prouffyte / but dōmage in the ende of the causes. Vnde {pro}¦uerbiorum. xii. Non inueniet fraudulen∣tus lucrum. The begyler ne shall fynde of gayne vnto his soule. Also the sage sayeth that in lyke wyse as he ye whiche stryketh with a spere or arowe for to slee another / hym noyeth moche / so dothe also he ye whi¦che fraudulously noyeth vnto his frende. Vnde prouerbiorum .xxvi. Sicut noxius est qui mittit lanceas et sagittas in mor∣tem / ita vir qui fraudulenter / nocet ami∣co suo. Our frende that is god & his chir∣che and he the whiche fraudeth the chirch of god noyeth hym moche / & therfore god shall punysshe hym. Vnde psal. Vultus domini super facientes mala / vt perdat de terra memoria eorum. The vysage of god loketh vpon them the whiche done yll to the ende that he lese from ye erthe theyr memorye. Also these vniust shall be punys¦shed and the sede of the cursed shall perys∣she. Vnde psal. Iniusti punientur / et se∣men impiorum peribit. Also some people ben infydeles vnto the chirche the whiche byeth the brede from the moder of god / or the appelles from the chircheyarde / or o∣ther thynges the whiche haue be gyuen or the whiche apperteyneth vnto god or vn∣to his sayntes / & afterwarde ne wyl paye them without beynge cyted or adiourned or so longe dyffereth to yelde it that ye chir¦che hathe necessyte. Suche people know∣eth that it is greate offence and that they ben bounde to grete satysfaccion / for they goo agayne the wyll of god. mathei. xxii. Reddite que sūt cesaris cesari: et que sūt dei deo. Some men maketh no conscyen∣ce / and sayth that they ben of those ye whi∣che hathe gyuen the sayd brede vnto the moder of god / or that the appelles of the chirchyarde vnto them apperteyneth. Vn¦to that I answer them that they haue no¦thynge therin / and that incontynent that they haue made ony gyfte or ony oblacion
vntō god / vnto the vyrgyn marye / or vn∣to the sayntes of paradyse / they haue noo more nothynge in the gyfte that they ha∣ue made the seygneurye and domynacyō that they hadde therin is gone vnto god / or vnto his sayntes / they ne maye do mo∣re nor dyspose afterwarde vnto theyr ple∣sure but that they haue offended. And soo it sholde not retorne vnto the vsage secu∣lers after the rule of ryght the whiche sa∣yeth. Quod semel dedicatū est deo ampli¦us ad humanos vsus reduci non debet. B. ¶Also some tresorers ben infydeles & dysloyall vnto the chirche the whiche ta∣keth the goodes of it and gothe & aydeth vnto theyr occupacyons seculers as they sholde do of theyr owne. And also they ne demaunde lycence ecclesyastyce. A man sholde saye vnto suche people that they o∣pen theyr vnderstondynges and knowe yt they offende in many maners. Fyrst they defraude thentencyon of those the whiche haue gyuen or founded the goodes. Secū¦do they retarye the spyrytuell good / for pa¦rauenture the chirche hathe had therof ne¦de. Tertio yf they them steleth frome the chirche they shall be sacryleges. Quarto they go agayne the droit wryten & agayn the wyll of god. The thynge the whiche is gyuen or dedicate vnto god / or vnto hys sayntes ne sholde retorne vnto the secula∣rytees vsayges / so a man sholde not abu∣se it / it sholde incontynent and without ta¦ryenge go in the vsage of the sayd chirche or of the seruaūtes of god in lyke wyse as it hathe be establysshed. And yf the people of the chirche betake vnto ferme muable theyr dysmes and reuenues vnto the secu¦lers it is none abuse / it is suffred / to then∣de to put theym vnto prouffyte and for to make them the better in valure. Also to ye ende that the people of the chirche maye ye more better take hede vnto prayer / studye and contemplacyon. Thou tresorer answe¦re me. Haste thou puyssaunce withoute le∣ue to take the goodes of thy neyghbour & for to ayde the in thy necessyte: vel sic. hast thou puyssaunce to take them eyther vn∣to thyselfe or vnto another without ye wyl of them vnto whome they apperteyne / yu sholdest answere me that naye. And also I sygnyfye the that thou haste no power to take the goodes of ye chirche / thou haste but the handes as seruaunt to put vnto ye prouffyte of the chirche. And the seruaunt of a temporall lorde hathe no power to go take the moneye of his mayster and to ay¦de hȳ in his necessyte / or to lende it at his pleasure / no more hast thou the goodes of the chirche / and therfore in so doyng thou offendest god. ¶Also thou tresorer whan thy neyghboure hathe gyuen of his godes vnto the virgin marie or vnto saint peter thou ne sholdest take them or put them to ye buyldynge of saynt poule. For thou shol∣dest defraude ye entencyon of thy sayd ney¦ghboure the whiche is to gyue or to foūde Also thou takest awaye from the vyrgyn marye that thynge that apperteyneth vn¦to her. Also thou ne accomplysshest iustyce the whiche is to yelde vnto euery man the good that apperteyneth vnto hym. Also saynt poule is content of the good that he hathe and that god hym hathe gyuen / the whiche wyll not yt thou take awaye from another his good for to brynge it vnto hȳ & therfore in doyng suche thyng yu sholdest go agaynste god and of his iustyce / & shol∣dest be vnfaythfull vnto thy neyghboure & vnto the vyrgyn marye to defraude thē Men saye in commune langayge that ye thynge the whiche is gyuen vnto saynt pe¦ter ne sholde be gyuen vnto saynt poule. &c. C. ¶. Vnto a man vnfaythfull a mā ne sholde betake ye godes of the chirche to kepe / to receyue / to dystrybute / ne offyce /
cause to iuge / to appoynt / to plede / to kepe & to demene. For in hym dare not a man truste. The psal. sayeth. Deleantur de li∣bro viuentium et cum iustis non scribant{ur} &c. The people vnfaythful shal not be wry¦ten in the boke amonges them that be go¦de / for they ne do the operacyons. The go∣de and faythfull seruauntes ben praysed of god and of the worlde / and them sholde a man loue as hymselfe. And the vnfayth¦full ben dyffamed and put oute. Audi scri∣pturas. legitur prouer. xxviii. Vir fidelis multum laudabitur. Et in eccle. Si est ti¦bi seruus fidelis sit tibi quasi anima tua. / Yf thou haue a faythfull seruaunt take hȳ vnto the as dere as thy soule. Also a fayth¦full frende is grete defence / he the whiche fyndeth hym hathe founde a treasour / no comparyson is there vnto a feythfull fren¦de. Vnde eccle. vi. Amicus fidelis fortis protectio: qui inuenit eum inuenit thesau∣rū amico fideli nulla est comparatio. God shall rewarde wele his seruauntes ye whi∣che ben faythfull. Audi scripturas. legitur apoca. Esto fidelis vs{que} ad mortem & da¦bo tibi coronam vite. Be thou faythful tyl vnto the dethe / and I shall gyue the / the crowne of lyfe. Also god sayd vnto Abra∣ham the whiche was faythfull. Illud ge∣nesis .xv. Merces tua magna mecum ni∣mis. Thy rewarde is ryght grete with me Also god sayd vnto Moyses that he was ryght faythfull. Illud deutero. viii. Re∣rum omnium perfrueris abundantia. Al∣so he said vnto his appostylles. Illud ma∣thei. v. Gaudete et exaltate m̄ merces vr̄a copiosa ē in celis. Et luce. vi. Ecce enī merces vr̄a: multa est in celo. Enioye ye & lyfte vp your hertes for your rewarde is haboundaunt in the heuens. God shal not saye so vnto the vnfaythful people / but he shall shyt ye yates of paradyse vnto them And shall say vnto them that he knoweth them not. Nescio vos vn̄ sitis desceditta¦me. By these thynges beforsayd ben vn∣derstonde that euery tresorer sholde wele examyne his conscyence yf he haue taken ony thynge / borne awaye / nor lende as it is sayd ne done thynge that is dysloyall in his sayd cōmyssyon / for it is a charge mo∣che to drede as to handle the moneye of ye chirche vnto those ye whiche done theyr de¦uoyr. For they ben bounde vnto restitucy∣on and vnto grete penaunce yf they wyll be saued / in lyke wyse as thou shalt fynde in the chapytre of restytucyon. Also those the whiche taketh vniustely the good of ye chirche sholde drede maledyccyon and ex∣communycacyon. For euery persone that hathe the maledyccyon of god and of the chirche is gretely acurst. And those ye whi∣che taketh the goodes of the chirche vnius¦tely haue theyr maledyccyon / than is he moche accursed. Also those the whiche ha∣ue the maledyccyon of god and of the chir¦che ben pryued from masses / prayers and oraysons of the chirche. And those the whi¦che taketh the goodes as theuys sacryle∣ges haue the maledyccyon of the chirche / Than they ben put from the said prayers and benefaytes of the chirche. And by the consequente they ben acursed. Also these dysloyalles sholde drede to lese paradyse Whan that a seruaunt robbeth his mays∣ter he putteth hym out of his hous & from his office & seruyce. In lyke wyse shal god vnto those yt taketh his godes as it is said Example in iudas yt whiche was put frō paradyse / & from ye nombre of the appos∣tles & seruaūtes of god. Vnde ps. Etant dies pauci & episcopat si ei{us} accipiat alter His dayes were abredged & how another toke his dygnyte & his offyce / he was ap∣postle & purseberer / he murmured of the precyous oyle yt Maudeleyne shedde vpō our lorde / & sayd yt it hadde ben wele solde
for thre hondred pens. And he sayd those wordes bycause he was a thefe / sacrylege and accursed. Also those yt taketh the goo∣des of the chirche vniustely drede punycy∣on and dampnacyon. And yf they wyl not byleue it by symple worde or by these scrip¦tures / yet put to fayth in the examples yt foloweth. ¶Fyrst. Example how Heliodo¦rus was terrybly punysshed of punycyon dyuyne in takynge the tresours of the chir¦che of Iherusalem as thou shalt fynde in the exemplayre .lxxxii. b Another example of theuys sacryleges the whiche were pu∣nysshed bycause they had stolen the crosse & the goodes of the chirche .lxxxii. d ¶Ano¦ther example in iulyen the apostat ye whi∣che persecuted the chirche & he was slayne myraculously .lviii. a. ¶Another example how relygyous people sholde drede ye syn of thefte and sacrylege for gyuynge the go¦des of the chirche to theyr parentes. lxxxii f.g. ¶Another example how that an erle and many of his lygnage were dampned bycause he posseded an herytage vniustly the whiche had be taken awaye from the chirche .lxxxii. a. Another example howe ye frere of doyen of Coleyn was dombe and arested dyuynely / for that yt he denyed the money of the chirche the whiche hadde be lente hym / and he ne wolde yelde it agay¦ne. lxxxii. c. A. ¶The examplayre & theleccyon of tho¦se yt wele or yll paye theyr dysmes. xxxi IT is wryten deuteronomii .xiiii. ca. Decimā partē seperabis de cuntis fructib{us} tuis qi nascūtur ī terra {per} amos sīgulos decimā fru¦menti tui et vini et olei & primo∣genita de apmētis et ouib{us} tuis: vt discas timere dn̄m deū tuū ī oī tēpore. Thou shalt depart ye tenth partye of all thy fruytes yt ben borne in ye erthe euery yere. The tenth of thy whete and of thy wyne / and of thin oyle. The fyrste borne of thy beestes and of thy shepe to thende yt thou lerne to dre∣de thy lorde god in al tymes. The dysmes shold be payed vnto god and vnto his ser¦uauntes of ryght. And therfore those the whiche haue stolen or the whiche haue no∣thynge payed of dysmes of goodes yt god vnto them hathe made to growe vpon ye erthe or the whiche hathe witholden ony partye or the whiche hathe payed and gy∣uen of the worste / or payed with yll wyll / or suffred to lese the sayd dysmes without puttynge them vnto prouffyte / & sauete / or dyffer to longe to paye them. This is he¦re a grete synne moche to drede / for it is a¦gayne the wyll of god the whiche cōmaun¦deth to paye the dysmes cerymonyally in lyke wyse as thou shalte here hereafter by scryptures. And fyrst thou shalte knowe yt god is the creatoure the whiche maketh to growe & to come thy cornes / thy laboures thy fruytes / thy bestyall and all thy godes that the erthe bereth. And also thou shol∣dest knowe that god hathe witholden & re¦teyned for hymselfe the tenth partye of al those fruytes and goodes growynge in ye sayd erthe. Yf thou wylte not byleue it by symple worde / let hym go study the scryp¦tures in the chapytres the whiche shal be hereafter alledged. And fyrst it is wryten deutero. xii. Decimas et primitias ma∣nuum vestrarum & vota at{que} deuorta pri¦mogenita bonum et ouium reddere preci¦pit dominus. That is to saye. Oure lorde hathe commaunded to yelde the dysmes & fyrst fruytes / ye labours of your handes & your vowes & gyftes / ye fyrst borne of ky¦en & of shepe. And it is writen deuto. xviii Ab his qi offerūt victimas siue bouem siue ouē īmolauerint dabūt sacerdoti {pre}micias frumēti vini: et olei & lauarum partem ex
duium tonsione: ipsum enim elegit domi∣nus deus tuus de cuntis tribubus tuis vt stet et ministret nomini dei tui. &c. ¶Of those the whiche offreth sacryfyces or the whiche haue sacryfyced oxe or shepe they shall gyue vnto the preestes the fyrst fruy¦te of whete / wyne / and of oyle / and ye par¦te of the wolles of the clepynge of sheryng of the shepe. Thy lorde god hathe chosen that preest of all thy lygnees to the ende yt he it holde of the and admynystre in ye na¦me of our lorde. ¶Also our lorde sent vn∣to the chyldren of Israhell whan they shol¦de offre in deserte the wordes the whiche ben wryten leuitici. xxiiii. Cum ingressi fueritis terram quam ego dabo vobis et messueritis sagetes feretis manipulosspi carum messis vestre ad sacerdotem. &c. Whan ye shall be entred in to the lande that I shall gyue you / ye shall bere youre handes full of ye erys of your corne vnto ye preest. &c. Et legitur leuitici. xxvii. Om∣nis decime terre siue de fructibus siue de pomis arborum dn̄i sunt: et illi sanctificā¦tur. Al the dysmes of the erthe / be it of cor¦nes / or fruytes / or of apples of the trees / they ben of our lordes and they ben sancty¦fyed vnto hym. Et legitur numerū. xviii. Vniuersas frugū primicias quas gignit humus domino deportantur. The vniuer¦selles fyrst fruytes and cornes the whiche the erthe engendreth be borne vnto god / Yf thou wylte vnderstonde what it is to saye primicias. Catholycon sayth that pri¦micia primicie dicitur a primis pluraliter he primicie prumiciarum. vulgo dicitur {quod} primicie sunt proprie que primo de fructi¦bus percipiuntur: vel que deo offeruntur. Primicie they ben the newe the fyrst fruy¦tes and cornes that the erthe bereth. Also primicia est prima pars frigum dn̄o offe∣renda. And it is wryten in the .vii. chapy∣tre of the epystylles saynt poule vnto the hebrewes how the preestes the sones of le∣ui takynge the cōmaundemente hadde to receyue the dysmes of the people after ye lawe. Example of this matere of a lorde the whiche withelde the tennethe of ye go∣des that he gaue vnto his seruaunt. Que¦re. lxxxiiii. a. Augustinus dicit decime et debito requiruntur et qui eas dare nolue∣rit res alienas inuadit. That is to saye yt the dysmes ben demaunded of ryght. For they ben due / and he the whiche ne hathe wylled to gyue them he witholdeth thyn∣ges straūge the whiche apperteyneth not vnto hym. And god sayeth in the gospell / mathei. xxii. Reddite que sunt cesarus ce¦sari et que sunt dei deo. Syth that it is so founde in the scryptures that god hath wt¦holden for hymselfe the tenth partye of ye fruytes and cornes the whiche cometh frō yere to yere vpon the erthe as it is sayd / & that he wylleth and cōmaundeth cerymo∣nyally that in suche wyse it be done. Tho∣se that dysmeth yll vnderstonde they that they cōmytte synne and that it is vnkyn∣denes vnto them for to mysknowe theyr benefactour. Also those that yll dysmeth that may wele they shall answer at iuge∣ment partyculere / or generall the whiche shall be made of theym before god in the courte celestyall. For god shall be there iu∣ge and partye. Also they shall haue so ma¦ny of accusatours the whiche shall accuse them of theyr synnes that they shall see / & knowe themselfe that they ben culpables Also those the whiche payeth vnto the .xi. or vnto the .xiii. or vnto the .xxx. sholde vn¦derstonde that it is no dysme. It is an yll custome the whiche hathe be begōne of co¦uetous people / auarycyous and vnkynde the whiche dysknoweth the good that god vnto them hathe gyuen. Those the which foloweth suche custome sholde drede that couetyse and auaryce ne put oute theyr in¦warde
eyes. Wherof it is wryten in ye bo∣ke of sapyence. Malitia eorum eccecauit eos. Theyr malyce that is theyr synne ha∣the blynded them that they maye not see theyr yll. It is greate peryll and daunger for the soule to folowe the custome & wyll of people auarycyous. For they goo vnto dampnacyon yf that they deye impenitē∣tes &c. B. ¶The condycyons to paye wele the dysmes. Many condycyons sholde those haue ye whiche wyll paye wele the dysmes of the whiche we shal tell foure. The fyrst is that a man sholde paye entyerly / again those the whiche paye nothinge in rekenȳ¦ge fyue or syxe sheuys of corne & begyleth god of the halfe shefe / or agayne those ye whiche paye nothynge of the newe fruytz eten in somer / as peres / plōmes / benes / & pesen. &c.. It is writen eccle. xxxv. Bono animo redde gloriam deo et minuas pri∣micias manuum tuarū. Yelde glorye vnto god by courage and mynysshe not ye fyrst fruyte of the labours of thy handes. The seconde is that a man sholde paye ioyousli without heuynes ne without hauing grut¦che therin agayne those vnto whome it se¦meth that they lese that that they gyue to the dysme / as yf they sholde caste it dow∣ne the water they offendeth gretely. Audi scrypturas. eccle. xxxv. In omni dato hy∣larem fac vultum tuum et in exultatione sanctifica decimas tuas. Make thy vysa∣ge ioyous in euery gyfte / & sanctyfye thy dysmes in exultacyon. Et legitur. ii. ad co. ix. Hilarem enim datorem diligit deus. / That is to saye yt god loueth the gyuer io∣yous. & ysodorus sayeth. Qui cū tristitia largit{ur} remuneratiōis nō {per}cipit fructū. He the whiche gyueth & enlargeth wt heuines ne apperceyueth the fruyte of remunera∣cyon. Also a man ne sholde let lese the dys∣mes nor the thynge that apperteyneth to god. For it is wryten exo. xiii. Pru  trugū tre tue deteres ī domū dei tui.  fyrste cornes & fruytes of the erthe y•  bere them in to the house of thy lorde  The thyrde condycyon that a man she  haue for to paye wele his dysmes is that a man sholde paye of the best and not o ye worste / or that the whiche falleth vnto the tenth agayne those the whiche gyuen the corne eten troden or full of drake / or agaȳ those the whiche taketh for themselfe the good appelles and gyueth the yll / they of∣fende gretely. Audi scripturas. Legit{ur} nu∣meri. xviii. Oīa que aftertis ex decimis & in donaria separabitis optima: et electa erunt. All those thynges the whiche ye of∣fre in dismes and in gyftes ye shal depart the beste and they shall be chose & agrea¦bles vnto god. et legit{ur} leui. xxvii. Quicqid decimum venerit sanctificabitur dn̄o nō elegitur bonū nec malū nec altero commu¦tabitur. Si quis mutauerit quod muta∣tum est et {pro} quo mutatū est sanctifica do∣mino. Hec precepit dn̄s moysi. What thyn¦ge so euer it be that cometh the tenth shall be sanctyfyed vnto the lorde / the good nor the yll be not chosen & it shal not be chaun∣ged in to another. Yf ony chaunge it ye thȳ¦ge the whiche is chaunged / and wherfore it is chaunged / santefye it vnto our lorde Our lorde hathe cōmaūded these thynges here vnto moyse. Et legit{ur} eccle. xxxv. No¦li afferre munera praua non enim suscipi et illa deus. Offre thou not yll gyftes god ne shall take them. Et legitur iuce .xi. Ve vobis phariseis qui decimatis mentam & rutā et oē olus {pre}teritis iuditiū et caritatē dei. Woo be to you pharysyens the whiche dysme the lytell & yll herbes & trespasse ye charyte of god. The fourth condycyon is yt a man sholde paye without taryenge / nor to drawe backe tyll that a man be somo∣ned / cyted or warned. It is offence to tary
to gyue vnto god yt whiche apperteyneth vnto hym / or lende vnto hymselfe his dys¦mes tyll vnto another yere wtout spekyng vnto the curate. It is wryten exodi. xxii. Decimas tuas & {pre}mitias nō tardabis of terre. Thou sholdest not tary to offre thy dysmes / & thy fyrst cornes & fruyte. C. ¶. We haue example in Cayn & Abell of tho∣se that wele or yll paye theyr dysmes. Frō the begynnynge of the worlde god cōmaū¦ded vnto oure forne faders yt they sholde paye ye tenth of theyr fruytes. And for as moche as they had not vnto whom to pay it god cōmaunded yt they sholde brenne it & that they sholde make smoke ye whiche sholde mounte in to heuen for to do vnto god honoure & sacryfyce by obedyence / & in reknowlegynge yt the sayd goodes co∣meth of god. Cayn & Abel yt were Adams sones made it. But Abels was good for he dysmed wele / and there his smoke moun∣ted in to the heuen and pleased god. Cayn was wycked & dysmed ylle / wherfore his smoke yede downewarde towarde ye erth & it pleased not to god. Also his lande fruc¦tefyed not wele in fruytes & labours and bare thystylles / drake / and darnell / & thor¦nes. &c. And for asmoche as Abell was go¦de and obedyent & loued of god / & that his lande fructefyed wele and that al goodes came vnto hym / cayn had enuye vpon hȳ and slewe hym & was accursed. Vnde ge. iiii. Respexit dn̄s ad abelle et ad munera eius: ad cayn autem et ad munera eius nō respexit. Sequitur. Nunc maledict{us} eris super terram cū operatus fueris eam nō dabit fructus suos: vagus et {pro}fugus eris super terram. God loked vpon Abell and vpon his gyftes / for he made them wele / And he loked not vpon Cayn / nor vpon his goodes / for he gaue of the worste / and god sayd vnto hym. Thou shalte be nowe accursed aboue the erthe whan thou shalt laboure it ne shall gyue her fruyte. Also ye be cursed in dysmes and fyrste cornes and fruytes. ¶For ye haue frauded me of my parte that I haue witholden for myselfe Vnde. michee. iii. In dicimis & primitus vos maledicti estis. &c. Glosa. Quia fran dastis me parte mea. The gyftes of god for to paye wele the dysmes. ¶Those the whiche paye wele the dysmes haue pryn∣cypally .iiii. gyftes of god. The fyrst haboū¦daunce of fruytes / laboures and worldly goodes as sayeth the scryptures in many places. Vnde malachie .iii. Inferet omnē decimam in horeū meum: et sit cibus ī do∣mo mea: & probate me super hoc dicit dn̄s si non aparuero vobis catharactas celi et effundero vobis benedictionē vs{que} ad abū dantiam: et increpabo pro vobis deuoran¦tem. Glosa. Vermen vel virium aeris se¦quitur: et non corrumpet fructū terre ve∣stre nec erit sterilis vinea in agro dicit do∣minus. That is to saye bere al dysme into my garnier & that that is to ete in my hou¦se / & prouue me of this thynge sayeth god Yf I open not to you ye thynges of heuen and yf I shedde not benedyccyon tyl vnto haboundaunce. And I shal blame for you the deuourynge worme and vice of ye ayre And he shal not corrupte ye fruyte of your lande. And the vyne shall not be barayne in the felde sayeth our lorde. Example of a lorde the whiche payed wele his dysmes & his vyne bare of fruyte two tymes in one yere quere in the exemplayre .lxxxiii. b. Et legitur leuitici .xxvi. Dabo vobis pluui∣as temporibus suis: et terra gignet get∣men suum / et pomis arbores / replebun∣tur. et cetera. I shall gyue you of raynes in theyr tymes and whan they haue nede sayeth our lorde Ihesu cryste. And I shall make the erthe for to fructefye and engen¦dre his buddes and his floures. And also ye trees shall be replenysshed wt apples. &c
Et legitur deuterono .xi. Dabit pluuias terre vestre temporinam et serotinam vel colligatis frumentum et vinum et oleum fenum ex agris ad pascenda iumenta / et vt ipsi comedatis et saturenimi. Moyses sayd vnto ye chyldren of Israhell. &c. God shall gyue raynes couenables in tyme vn¦to your lande / to thende yt ye gadre whete wyne & oyle / haye from the feldes to pas∣ture with your marys / & to the ende that ye ete and be fedde. Et legitur prouerbio∣rum .iii. Honora dn̄m de tua substantia & de primiciis omniū frugū tuarū da pau∣beri implebuntur horea tua saturitate et vino torcularia redundabunt. That is to saye. Honoure god of thy substaunce & of the newes of all thy cornes and fruytes / gyue vnto the poore and thy graynes shal be fylled of haboundaunce / & the pressers shall redounde of wyne. E. ¶Example in iob yt whiche was true / obedyente / pacyent / and beloued of god / for he dysmed right faythfully. Also after that he had be prouued god sent vnto him haboundaunce of al goodes. It is wryten iob. xlii. yt he posseded .xiiii. thousande she∣pe. syx thousande camellys / two thousan couple of oxen / & a thousande of asses. &c. Also Ioachin & saynt Anne yt payed well theyr dysmes & departed theyr goodes in thre partyes / haboūded in goodes as it is wryten in the legende of saynt Anne. and vnto the contrary. Those yt paye yll theyr dysmes ben punysshed by maledyccyon of famyne and pouerte / as it is sayd of cayn Legitur deutero. xii. Cauete ne forte de cipiatur cor vestrū & recedatis a dn̄o. &c. Sequit{ur} iratus{que} dn̄s claudat celū et plu∣uie nō descendāt: nec tra det germen̄ suū: pereatis{que} velocit de tra optima. &c. Be∣ware leste parauenture your herte be dys∣teyned / & that ye departe not from god & that he be not wrothe & close the heuen / & that ye raynes dyscende not / & that ye erth ne gyue his sede / and that ye perysshe not hastely from the lande ryght good & beste & for the defaute to dysme wele & to obeye vnto god. The seconde good that those ha¦ue the whiche wele paye theyr dysmes / is helthe of body / wherof speketh saynt Aus∣tyn saynge. Si decimā bene dederis non solū abondātiā fructuū: sed etiā sanitatem corporis {con}sequeris. Yf thou haue wele pa∣yed thy dysme thou shalte not alonely ha∣ue haboundaūce of fruytes / but with that helth of body. Also whan thou haste done an almesdede / helth the more sooner shall come to the. Vnde ysaie. lviii. Cū feceris elunosinā sanitas tua citius orietur. And vnto the contrary those yt yll dysmeth god vnto them sendeth sekenesse / as of ye gou∣te / of the heed / of ye stomacke / of the axes. &c. The thyrde gyfte that those haue that paye wele theyr dysmes / is that god vnto them pardonneth theyr synnes after true confessyon. Legitur prouer. x. Vniuersa delicta operuit caritas. Charyte couereth all synnes. Et legit{ur} .i. petri. iiii. Anteoīa inutuā in vobismeipsis caritatē continuā habentes qia caritas cooperit multitudinē peccatorū. The .iiii. gyfte is to possede the realme of paradyse & the grete godes and ioyes that there ben. Of these two last gyf¦tes speketh saynt Austyn & sayeth. Qui primū desiderat habere aut peccatorū in∣dulgentiā {pro}mereri decimam et de nouem {per}tibus clā dare studeat pauperibus: qi ve∣ro non dat punitur ī oppositis. He the whi¦che desyreth to haue rewarde or to deser∣ue to haue pardon of his synnes paye hys dysme and studye to gyue vnto the poore of the nynthe partyes of thy goodes that with hym abydeth. And those yt gyue not as it is sayd / god punyssheth them by the opposyte. That those whiche wyl not pay well theyr dysmes haue not haboundaūce
of goods / helthe of body / ne remyssyon of theyr synnes. And also they ne shall posse∣de paradyse yf they deye impenytentes af¦ter ye remedye that vnto it apperteyneth. Many examples of those the whiche paye wele theyr dysmes shall be founde in the exemplayre Quere. lxxxiii. a. A. ¶Of vsurye the whiche god defen∣dethe. Ca. xxxii. IT is wryten in the .xxv. chapitre of the boke of leuytes. Pecuniā tuā nō dabis ad vsurā / & frugum su{per}habūdantiā nō exiges ego do min{us} vester. Our lorde made tel to the chyldren of Israhel by his seruaunt Moyses. Thou shalt not gyue thy money vnto vsurye / & thou shalt not axe superha¦boūdaūce of cornes. &c. For to vnderston∣de wele the mater of vsurye / a man shold knowe that vsurye is somtyme manyfest & somtyme hydde / wrapped / dyuers con∣tractz yt is defended by this cōmaūdemēt For god wyll not that a man sell the tyme yt he hathe gyuen in cōmunalte. That is to saye ye whan a man lendeth ony thynge god defendeth that he take ought ouer for dylacyon of tyme. For in suche manere a man selleth ye tyme / wherfore he is an vsu¦rer. For without labourynge they wyll ha¦ue prouffyte / whiche is agayne the wyll of god as he sayed by his prophete Dauyd. Labores manuū tuarū qia māducabis. Thou shalte laboure with thy handes / for thou shalt ete. Syth it is true that god de¦fendeth vsurye ye scrypture speketh in ma¦ny places. Fyrste it is wryten deute .xxiii. Non feueraberis fratri tuo ad vsurā pe∣cuniā ne fruges nec quālibet aliā rē Thou shalte not lende vnto thy broder money to vsurye / ne of cornes / ne of ony other thyn¦ge. And it foloweth in the sayd chapytre. / Fratri aūt tuo abs{que} vsura id quod indi∣get cōmodabis vt benedicat tibi dn̄s deus tuus in oī tempore. &c. Thou shalte lende vnto thy broder wtout vsurye that thynge wherof he hathe nede / to thende yt thy lor∣de god blysse the in all tymes. God wyll yt men lende eche other by charyte / & not for hope of ony gayne or retrybucyon. Vsury manyfest is whan a man lendeth corne / wyne / golde or syluer prȳcypally for to ha¦ue ony prouffyte exprest by the partyes or alonely in hope. Canon dicit. {quod} vsura est vbi ampli{us} requirit{ur} quā dat{ur} quicqid illius sit: sed si non recipit & spē habeat recipien¦di vsura est. The droit canon sayeth. Vsu∣rye is whan a man demaūdeth more thā a man ne gyueth what thynge soo euer it be / & yf he receyue no more. And yt he hath hope to receyue it is vsury. For god regar¦deth the thought yt is reputed for the dede Whan ony hathe lente corne / wyne / or sy∣dre / the lender hathe no more seygnourye of yt thynge lende. The said lender gyueth the lone or prest after the cōmaundement of god. Mutuū date. And yf the sayd len∣der receyue gyft he therof hathe the gayn not of hymselfe but of the dettour / ye sayd lender ne selleth nothynge vnto ye dettour the whiche is his / but yf he sholde take gyf¦te he sholde sell the tyme the whiche apper¦teyneth vnto god. And whan ony selleth the thynge the whiche apperteyneth not vnto hym / he ne sholde haue the gayne. In lyke wyse he ne sholde sell the tyme / for ye sholde be vsurye. The vsurer wyl haue ga¦yn in slepynge & wakynge without ony la¦boure yt whiche is agayne ye worde of god wryten. Gene. iii. ca. In sudore vultus tui vesceris pane tuo. In the swete & labour of thy vysage thou shalte gete thy brede. / Whan ony lendeth his hors / or oxe for to
do ony labourage lefull he may take pryce For it is his thynge ye whiche ne gothe vn¦to the seygnourye of the lender as of mo∣neye lende. Vbi est mutuū ibi ē dn̄m. vn̄ mutuum dicitur de meo tuum. B. ¶The kyndes of vsurye hydde that god defendeth. ca. xxxii. IT is wryten luce. vi. Mutuū da¦te nichil inde sperantes. God cō∣maundeth that a man gyue the prest withoute hauynge hope to haue ony thynge ouer the thynge lende. Vsurye hydde ye whiche otherwhy∣les is sayd wrapped in seuen kyndes. The fyrst is done in receyuynge gage / or in ma¦kynge herandes. The seconde in sellynge and in byenge. The thyrde is made in len∣dynge. The fourthe for to be meane to len¦de. The .v. by assocyacyon. The .vi is vn∣der maner of pain The .vii. for to take ser¦uyce without pryce / or for to make to len∣de vnto another & in takyng gratuyte. As vnto the fyrst kynde the whiche is done in receyuynge gayge / or in makyng erandes a man sholde vnderstonde that it is dyuy∣sed in .v. maners. The first is whan by the lone a man receyueth ony gayge for assu∣raunce ye whiche of it selfe bereth ony fruy¦te or prouffyte / as who sholde take a gar∣din in morte gayge. A man ne sholde take the fruytes or prouffytes of the sayd gage but in rebatynge vpon ye pryncypall sōme lende / or it sholde be vsurye / & it behoueth to make restytucōn. Moyses sayth in deu¦te. Non accipies loco pignoris inferiorem et superiorē molā. Thou shalt not take in sede of gayge neyther ye vpper grindyng sone nor the vnder. A man demaundeth what it is of cōmunytes of ony cytees the whiche betaketh money vnto vsury. The answer. All those cytezynes ben vsureres of whose auctoryte & coūsayll ye sayd prest is made. Vnde raymondus dicit. Oēs illi¦ciues quo{rum} auctorytate & consilio fit: vsu∣raii sūt. And in yt maner yf a communyte sholde receyue ony gage / as cyte castell or towne / & that they ne compte the fruytes ouer the pryncypall pryce. All those here ben vsurers. ar. vii. q. i. Sicut vir. &. xxiiii q. iii. Sihabes. Vnderstonde this matere & of one persone / & of many. For all those the whiche taketh the fruytes & leueed of the sayd castell or towne without rebatyn¦ge vpon the prxncypall pryce ben vsurers as it is sayd. The seconde maner is whan the lender receyueth gayge that he vseth / or maketh serue without ony thynge dys∣comptynge of the pryncypall / as lynnen clothe vestementes. Vnde amos prophe∣ta .ii. ca. Super vestimentis pigneratis accubuerūt. &c. They ben couched vpon ye vestimentes engayged. The thyrde is as the lender taketh bestyall in gayge / & ma∣keth them more to dyspende and ete than they ne sholde in suche case. The fourth is whan the vsurer maketh erandes & mes∣sages / & at euery erande or message he ha¦the a rewarde & lyueth by it. The .v. is as the vsurer renneth & that he ne wyll gyue dylacyon tyll that a man vnto hym hathe gyuen ony thinge. Of suche people a man maye saye. Illud psalmiste. Deuorāt ple¦bem meā sicut escā panis. They deuoure my people as the mete of brede. C. ¶The seconde kynde of vsurye hydde the whiche is made in sellynge or byenge is dyuysed in foure manere. ¶The fyrste is whan ony selleth his marchaundyse vn¦to credence for moche more than it is wor¦the for asmoche as he gyueth terme of pay¦ment / he yt dothe so is an vsurer. vt pʐ ex∣tra de vsu. c. Consuluit. ¶The seconde is
whan a man byethe the thynges that yet groweth / as ye corne in grasse / ye appelles or vynes in floure moche lesse than they be worthe. For as moche as a man auaūceth the payment / or yt a man them take in pa¦yenge hymselfe by suche condycyon yt they shal haue suche case whan it may happen theyr catell safe / in this maner a man sel∣leth the tyme yt is not to be solde / & therin is vsurye. extra de vsu: cōsuluit. But who so sholde by them of so meane a price that a man sholde be vncertayne whether they sholde be more worthe or lesse. For to put a waye the peryl of the vsurye it is better to do and to saye in this wyse. I wyll not in no maner what so it be sell my corne / nor myne appylles nowe: but I purpose to sel them on suche a daye / & yf thou wylte gy∣ue me the pryce that they ben worthe at ye sayd daye or more / or lesse thou shalt haue them / and I shall kepe them for the. And yf thou auaūce money nowe ye pryse shall be as they shall be worthe at the sayd day as whan the apples are to be gadred and the corne after Auguste. ¶The thyrde is whan a man byeth ony ware to be delyue¦red at suche a terme moche lesse than they ben worthe at the sayd terme for asmoche as a man auaunceth the moneye / here is vsurye. ¶The .iiii. is whan ony ryche mā is requyred to lende or to engage vnto the poore people the whiche ben in necessyte / ye wyll not sell in perpetuyte theyr rentes or herytages yf they may fynde a lender / or an engayger. And the sayd ryche man in suche wyse knoweth it / but he hathe the herte in the practyse / & wylleth that his fy¦naunce vnto hym be prouffyte & encreasȳ¦ge / but for to fle ye name to be an open vsu¦rer he loueth better to make the contracte vnder the forme of sale & byenge as of the preste / or of other pryse to thende that his sayd fynaunce vnto hym do prouffyte / yf in this manere he by of the sayd indygens rente or herytage to requyte agayne that these other call vnto grace. That is to vn∣derstonde by suche condycyon that as ma¦ny tymes and as often that within certaȳ terme / as of .vii. or .x. yeres / or vnto hym or vnto his heyres he shall yelde the sōme gyuen with the arrerages / the sayd hery∣tages or rentes shall come agayne vnto ye sayd sellers / or vnto theyr heyres / here is vsurye hydde the whiche is as syluer len∣de contrary vnto charite / & here behoueth restitucion of al yt that a man taketh ouer the fyrste sōme gyuen. Suche people the whiche wyll encrease theyr rychesses / and fle contractes of wynnynge and of lone / in hydynge theyr vsurye by forme of sellȳ¦ge & byenge / defrauldeth the entencion of the lawe of charyte & of iustyce vnto theyr power / & deceyueth theyr soule by ye synne of suche vsurye hydde. The whiche synne they wolden vnto them to be lefull wtoute reproche or without oblygacyon to make restytucyon the whiche thyng may not be done. But who so sholde bye the sayd hery¦takes the iuste pryce that they ben worthe in good entencyon without hauynge the entencyon corrupte as it is sayd of the ry∣che the whiche taketh hede vnto the prac∣tyse he may do it without vsurye / how be it that there is tyme to requyre it. Quic∣qid agant hoīes: intentio indicat oēs. The vsure is wrapped in the thought yt god se∣eth & knoweth. The whiche shall make in dycacyon. Legit{ur} primi regū .xvi. Hō enim videt ea que parāt: dn̄s autē intuetur cor. Also it is to be noted that whan in ony cō¦tracte hathe defaulte of iustyce & of goode equyte in suche wise that one of ye partyes is endōmaged / he that dothe the dōmage is bounde in dede of conscyence to quyte ye contracte or to supplye the defaute of ius∣tyce but specyally whan ye partye it requy¦reth
& is of necessyte. D. ¶The thyrde kynde of vsurye hydde the whiche is done in lendynge is dyuysed in many maneres ¶The fyrst is whan ye vsurer lendeth vpon intencyon to haue o∣ny gyfte / gratuyte / or seruyce ouer ye thyn¦ge lende / how be it that in lendynge it we¦re not spoken. And yf he thought not to ha¦ue some prouffyte / he ne wolde lende no∣thynge. Here is vsurye as vnto god for ye entencyon corrupte yt our sauyoure defen∣deth. luce. vi. Mutuū date nichil inde spe∣rantes. Et deutero .xv. Si vnus de fratri¦bus tuis ad paupertatē venerit nō obdu∣rabis cor tuū nec cōtrahes manū. sed ape∣ries eā pauperi & dabis mutuū quo eū in¦digeri {pro}spexeris. Whan that ony lendeth moneye vnder hope to receyue ony thyng & that it be soo that he ne wolde lende no∣thynge yf he ne thought not to haue prouf¦fyte / that that he receyueth afterwarde is vsurye / how be it that he axe it not. And is holden to make restytucyon. ¶The se∣conde is whan the vsurer lendeth olde cor¦ne sydre / or wyne whan it is at a vyle pry∣ce / to the ende that it be yelded vnto hym in the tyme that it shall be more dere / bet∣ter or renewed & not for ye necessyte of him yt boroweth / but vpon entencyon to gayne it is vsurye. ext. de. vu. ca. Nauigāti. E. E. ¶For to knowe many cas in generaly¦te it is to be noted yt whan a man gyueth money or other thyng vnto ony indygent in .v. maners. ¶The fyrste is lyberally / & without ony gayne of hope temporell / he∣re is charyte. ¶The seconde is to thende that the marchaunte of the sayd moneye vnder condycyon of losse and of gayne as wele of the pryncypall sōme as of gayne / & that may be lefull. ¶The thyrde in su∣che condycyon yt the sōme lende shall be e∣uermore certayne and sure as vnto ye len∣der / but the gayne shall be vnder doubt of losse / or of gayne / & here is vsurye. ¶The scrypture gyueth a rule generall & sayth ye thynge ye a man taketh ouer ye pryncypal is vsurye. vt pʐ. xiiii. q. iii. Pleri{que}. ¶The fourth by suche condycyon that the lender auenture the sōme lende in perylles / and fortunes vpon hym / but the borower shall be bounden in ony sōme vnto the lender / here is vurye / & yf he loste an. C. M. crou¦nes for to haue in certayne a lytell blanc. extra de vsuris. ca. nauigāti. ¶The .v. in puttynge gayne and catell incertayne / as to lende an hondred crownes for to recey∣ue at the ende of the yere an hondreth and ten / here is vsurye manyfest. Yf ony man hathe lende lyberally & without hope to ha¦ue retrybucyon temporell / & the borower wolde vnto hym gyue ony thynge lyberal¦ly he may take it without peryll of vsurye For in suche case he is no more restraynte as not to dare take gyfte after the preste as before. Yf a man had promysed to yeld the sōme lende at a certayne daye / & by ye defaute of the whiche promesse the lender is endōmaged / for he sholde paye his ren∣te or his taxe. &c. he maye ouer the sayd sō∣me lende take iustely his losse wtout vu∣rye. Also some vsurers there ben the whi∣che for ye prest taketh euermore some thyn¦ge or putteth more ouer & aboue the thyn¦ge lende. And for as moche as ye borower ne maye furnysshe at euery terme ye sayd lender maketh hym to compte two or .iii. tymes / & taketh decretm awaye some thin¦ge as euery tyme yt he compteth / & make∣the often of vsurye the pryncypall dette. / By the whiche they ben reputed vyllains and cruell vsurers. F ¶The .iiii. kinde of vsurye hyd is whan ony receyueth ony gyfte for to be ye meane to make ought be lende vnto the indigent G ¶The .v. is made in assocyacyon of bes¦tyall ye whiche may be good or yl dyuersly
The whiche they make in many of mane¦res / but it behoueth to take for a rule gene¦rall the whiche is sothe that as often that by the condycyons of the contracte ye one of the partyes abydeth subiecte vnto the losse and aduentures / & the other is sure nothynge to lese / it is vsurye / as a man may saye that he the whiche betaketh hys beestes / yt is by suche condicyon yt they shal be immortelz. That is yf they dye the fer∣mer shall put as many of other / or shal pa¦ye the sōme yt they ben worthe whan they were vnto hym betaken / yf they encrease the betaker wyll parte / & yf they decrease he wyll nothynge lese / the whiche is vsu∣rye. ¶Also whan one of the partyes of ye ferme is notably assured / & the other euy∣dently greued / the contracte is dampna∣ble / but lytell excesse in losse or in gayne is not in all agayne iustyce ne peryll of dam¦nacyon. ¶A questyon for to vnderstonde yf it be vurye yf a man receyue an .C. she¦pe to kepe for one yere / & for the fruytes & kepynge of the same he sholde haue twen¦ty shelinges or more after that yt the gyuer & he couenaūted togyders by suche condy∣cyon yt in the ende of the terme ye gardyen hym sholde restore as many of shepe and so many good with the woles. To assoyll this questyon after the coūsayll of good ex¦peryment a man sholde consyder yf it be tyme of moreyne yf the shepe ben seke / or yf the pasture ben sekely & that it appere greate peryll and losse vpon the gardyen & not vpon the gyuer / here is vsurye / but yf the sayd pasture & the shepe were hole without tyme of moreyne ne of peryll and that a man gyue pryse reasonable & that the sayd gardyen maye wele yelde that ye sayd gyuer demaundeth / therin sholde be no vsurye. A more sure thynge it sholde be to marchaunde alonely for ye fruytes pay¦nes & kepynge of the sayd shepe. And that the perylles of prouffytes were vpon the gyuer and not vpon the gardyen. H. ¶The syxte spyce or kynde of vsurye hydde is whan a man lendeth vnto a ter∣me spoken to yelde the thynge lende vpon payne to paye as moche of auauntage / he¦re may be vsurye after some cyrcumstaun¦ces / but somtyme he may wele do it iuste∣ly for to punysshe the neglygence of some as is beforsayd. I. ¶The .vii. kynde of vsurye hydde is whan the vsurer wyll nothynge take ouer the pryce gyuen / but for the sayd prest put in besynes .ii. or .iii. days of the borower in his felde / or whan he ne wyll lende by hys hande / but maketh to lende his seruaūtes or another his frende and kepeth the gra∣tuyte. For to be shorte in this mater ye ma¦lyce of worldly people auaricious is right grete / for they fynde so many of cautelles in betakynge theyr vsury vnder ye shadow of pyte & in makynge passementes of ob∣lygacions of bargayns of contractes that a man ne maye escrye nor determyne the hydynge of theyr vsurye / but euery man sholde vnderstonde that god cōmaūdeth that a man do charyte vnto his neighbour & that a man lende hym. And more ouer he defendeth that for the preste a man ne sell the tyme as it is beforsayd. Those the whiche it selleth or the whiche haue solde it remedye vnto theyr conscyences yf they wyl wele deye surely / & to be assured to go in to paradyse. For whan they shall be in iugemente before god theyr cautelles no malyce there shall make nothynge. And theyr vsuryes wrapped and hydde vnder the shadowe of pyte shall be vnfolded and manyfest. Quia nichil occultum est: quod non reueletur. And our lorde Ihesu cryste shall iuge them and condampne thē after the trouthe of the thynge / in beholdynge what thoughtes these vsureres hadde.
¶Also god seeth and knoweth yf ony mā hathe solde the tyme in hydynge his vsu∣rye / & yf he hathe taken bounte & prouffy∣te ouer the thynge lende without takynge therin payne ne laboure for the dylacyon of the tyme termyned. And for as moche that suche iugemēt is doubtous and that dampnacyon is to be dredde it is beter to make restytucyon & penaunce for to haue assurance of saluacyon. T'ene certū et dimitte incertū. Holde the thynge certayn & leue that the whiche is not certayne Da¦uyd maketh a questyon in the psalter sain¦ge. Dn̄s qis habitabit ī tabernaculo tuo aut quis requiescet ī mōte sctō tuo. Seqit{ur} Qui iurat {pro}oximo suo et nō decipit: qui pecuniā suā nō dedit ad vsurā et muneta su{per} īnocentē non accepit. That is to saye Lorde who shall enhabite or dwell in thy tabernacle / or who shall reste in thy holly mountayne. The answer. That shal be he the whiche swereth vnto his neyghboure / and deceyueth hym not. He the whiche ha¦the not gyuen his goodes vnto vsurye / & the whiche hathe not taken gyftes of ye in¦nocentes he shal mount in to paradyse. &c Examples of vsurye. And fyrst of an vsu∣rer yt wolde not make restytucyon for the amonycyon and warnynge of his preste / the whiche sayd that he wolde proue yf he myght be saued without restytucyon. and so myscheuously he deyed .lxxxvii. e. Ano∣ther example how an vsurer ye whiche wol¦de not restore cryed at his dethe yt he brent and broyled .lxxxvi. h. K ¶Of vsury manyfest & notable. xxxii. IT is wryten math. xvi. Quid {per}¦dest hoī si mūdū vniuersū lucret{ur} aīe vero sue detrimētū patiatur what dothe it prouffyte vnto a thefe vsurer to assemble & wȳne all the worlde / & that at his dethe his sou∣le be sent vnto the tormentes of hell. Vsu∣rye open and notoryous is moche detesta¦ble / the whiche a man sholde fle for many thynges: of the whiche I shall tell foure. / ¶The fyrst is for that yt these vsurers be cursed by sētence of ryght / ipso facto. The seconde is for yt that they ben pryued from the holy cōmunyon / for vnto the vsurers a man sholde denye the sacrament of the aulter as wele in the dethe as in the lyfe / yf they haue not true repentaunce and yf they wyl not make restytucyon. Example of an vsurer the whiche wolde not restore Quere .lxxxvii. a. ¶The thyrde is for that that theyr oblygacyon is not agreable vn¦to god / & it ought not to be receyued. The iiii. is for that yt they sholde be pryued frō sepulture ecclesiastyke. Vt habetur extra devsuris. c. quia ī oībus. ¶Example of an vsurer the whiche wolde not restore that was borne by an asse vnto the gybet or ga¦lowes & there was buryed. Quere. lxxxvii a. Many other examples of vsurers ben wryten in ye exemplayre of the cōmaunde¦mentes. Quere. lxxxvi. a. b. c. d. An open vsurer & knowen the whiche sholde come at the necessyte of dethe ne sholde be assoyl¦led / yf he dyde not yt were in hym to resto¦re playnly tyll vnto the last peny all ye vsur¦ryes wherin he maye be reproued and re∣deuable. And there vnto he sholde dyspose mouables and herytages / ne also it shold not suffyse to ordeyne that after his dethe they were restored. But it behoueth that forthwith the partye endōmaged be con∣tented / or in his absence the ordynayre / or the chapelayne representynge the partye endommaged / otherwyse the testamente that he maketh is of no valoure / ne the ab¦solucyon that he receyueth. And yf he deye so he sholde be pryuate frō ye holy groūde / for he yt sholde bury hym sholde be cursed.
extra de sepulturis eos libro .vii. Also the herytiers the whiche hym shall succede in mouables & herytages shall be in lyke wy¦se bounde to restore the dommages vpon payne of dampnacyon. ¶Example how iiii. men of one lygnage were hāged in hel the one after another / bycause that they dyde possede fasly an herytage withoute beynge in wyll to restore it .lxxxi. g. ¶Ano¦ther example how that another Erle and many of his lygnage were dampned and put in to helle in tormente vpon a laddre / bycause they dyde possede an herytage vn¦iustely withoute beynge in wyll to restore it .lxxxii. a. ¶Another example how that an abbot sente agayne the moneye gyuen and bequethed from his monasteri / bicau¦se that it was comen of vsurye / and yll be¦goten .lxxxviii. f. A. ¶Of symony that god defendeth. AFter the maysters symonye is in suche wyse dyffynyed. Si∣monia ē studiosa volūtas emē¦di vel veldendi spūale vel an∣nexū spūali. A man cōmitteth symonye for to selle / or to by a spyrytuall thynge or a thynge yt is annexed vnto the spyrytualyte by paccyon or gyfte / of pro∣messe / seruyce / prayers / supplicacyons vn¦due / or by ony other thynge tēporell. God and nature gaynsayeth yt a thynge spyry∣tuell maye be compared / or bought by thȳ¦ge corporell & temporell of what pryse & dygnyte yt it be / as it shall be declared he∣re after. This synne is named somonye / for asmoche as in the tyme of ye appostles the fals & dysloyall symon magus offred a grete sōme of moneye vnto ye appostles wenynge by yt to gete the grace yt he sawe in them / & vnderstode yt yf he myght haue that geace yt he wolde selle it vnto other / & sholde recouer moche of fynaūces. But in fygure of all those yt selleth or byeth thyn∣ges spyrytuelles he & his moneye was cur¦sed by the mouthe of saynt peter / & bycau∣se that he was the fyrste in the newe testa¦ment yt wolde by thynge spyrytuell / thys espyce or kynde of thefte is named symo∣nye in all holy chirche bycause of ye cursed symon fygured of all the dampned symo∣nyacques. For to sell or to bye a thyng spy¦rytuall a man sholde vnderstonde euery paccyon or contracte ye whiche is not ma∣de symply & purely for the loue of god / but is made pryncypally by gyftes / prayers / seruyces / & for ony other thynge temporel Also for to sell or to bye thynges spyrytuel it is here to vnderstonde the grace of the holy ghost / & the vertues yt ben in the soule the spyryte of prophecye / office of predyca¦cyon / or to do the offyce dyuyne in the chir¦che and to admynystre the holy sacramen¦tes. By thynges annexed vnto the spyry∣tualyte is to be vnderstonde sepultures / dismes / chalices / corporaces: to welies / an¦bes / and other vesselles / or vestementes halowed the whiche may be solde or chaū¦ged vnto other chirches not the more dete for as moche as it is halowed other wyse it sholde be symonye. Also cures / preden∣des / chanonryes / chapelles / right of patrō¦nayge in it selfe symply consydered ryght to receyue dysmes / oblacyons bycause of benefyce of the chirche / auctoryte or office to serue a cure or other predende of ye chir∣che / al these thynges haue annexacyon vn¦to holy ordres & they ne may be boughtne solde after the forme beforsayd but yt ther be symonye whiche is a cryme capytall af¦ter the droitm & compared vnto heresye. vt habet{ur}. i. can. q. i. Qui studet. Et thomas. iii.iiii. By the whiche cryme all holy ordey¦naunce
of ye chirche is peruerted and shall be from yll vnto wors approchynge ye gre¦te and excessyue trybulacyon of the chirch Thou shalte fynde many examples of sy∣monye in the .vi. cōmaundement of the ex¦emplayre .lxxxv. a. b. c. Quere. per tabulā. B. ¶Of ye maners of symonye that god defendeth. Ca. xxxiii. IT is wryten actuū .viii. ca. Pe∣cunia tua tecūsit in perditionem Saynt peter said vnto Symon magus. Thy moneye be with ye in perdycyon. These wordes he∣re may be taken & also vnderstonde vpon all symonyacques as it is before sayd. but a man sholde vnderstonde that the synne of symonye is chaunged in to many ma∣ners after the dyuersyte of the people the whiche entermell them vnduely in thyn∣ges in spyrytuell thynges / as hereafter so me in partyculer shall be declared. C. ¶Fyrst a man the whiche receyueth ye holy ordres or the whiche entreth in ony be¦nefyce of the chirche in gyuynge or in pro∣mettynge by hymselfe or by other / golde or syluer or ony other thynge is suspende by right wryten Extra de symonia. tanta &. i. cā. i. q. Reperiūtur. And yf in suche es¦tate he mysbehaue hym vnto ye mysteres dyuynes he is irreguliere & may not be as∣soylled yf he ne resyne the benefyce / or yf he haue not dyspensacyon of the pope. It is wryten iohannis .x. Quit non intrat {per} hostiū ī ouile ouiū sed ascendit aliunde: ille fur ē & latro: qi autē intrat {per} hostiū. i. x{pre}m: pastore ē ouiū. That is to vnderstonde / he whiche entreth not by ye dore / yt is by Ihe¦su cryst in to ye folde of shepe / yt is in ye chir¦che ecclesiastical for to gouerne the people but entreth by another place than by ye do¦eyt is Ihesu cryst he is a these secrete or a watcher of the waye. D ¶Secondly a clerke that maketh pac∣cyon wt a man of the chirche or other for to haue his tytle in promysynge yt he shall ne¦uer demaunde nothynge for asmoche as vnto hym suffyceth yt it maye passe / he is pryued from the ordres yt he receyueth in suche maner yt none there maye dyspence hym but the pope after ye droite. Extra de simonia per tuas. E. ¶Thyrdly two persones benefycyed ye whiche couuenāteth togyder vnder suche forme (permute we benefyces) but for as moche as your benefyce is better than my ne I shall gyue you suche a sōme of mony This is here symonye. How be it yt the one may make pensyon vnto ye other wtout sy¦monye. And yf they make ye sayd permu∣tacyon symply wtout ony thynge demaun¦dynge the one of the other / but they make gyftes or promesses vnto ye patron for to graunt his good wyl therunto it is also sy¦monye. And yf they saye to eche other in this wyse for asmoche as we may not per¦mytte togyder without ye consent of ye bys¦shop labour we bothe to gete his consente Suche paccyon ne sholde be symonyacall yf it were made symply wtoute gyfte / and that ye sayd consentement were not goten by maner of symonye. ¶Also to renounce vnto ony benefyce by suche condycyon / & paccyon made that it shall be gyuen vnto suche a personne it is symonye / whan the renouncyacyon is not made vnto a perso∣ne that is worthy to haue it / & simply and purely for the loue of god. Legitur ioh. x. Ego sum ostium ouium per me si quis introierit saluabitur et pascua inueniet. / Oure lorde Ihesus sayeth. I am the dore of the shepe cote yf ony there entre by me he shall be saued and he shall fynde pastu∣re there within. Symonye is commytted and done somtyme as wele of the persone
that gyueth the benefyce as of hym ye whi¦che receyueth it / somtyme of the one alone∣ly / somtyme ne by the one ne by the other / as yf for example some gyueth vnto the fa¦mylyers of the bysshop ony thynge for to moeue hym to gyue ony benefyces. He the whiche knoweth nothynge of that gyft ne¦semblably the bysshop by the meane albeit of the whiche gyft sholde be made donnay¦son of the benefyce. Suche donayson shol¦de be made symonyall / but alonely he the whiche hath made the donayson vnto the famylyers of the bysshop shal be in mortal synne / and symonyer as vnto that. And he that is benefyced by suche maner vnkno∣wen sholde be bounde whan it sholde come vnto his knowlege to renoūce vnto ye sayd benefyce and to the other goodes presētes of the same / but he is not bounde to restore the goodes dyspended durynge the tyme of the poore conscyence. For to knowe cle∣rely whan a man commytteth symonye in permyttinge of benefyces / or whan ony re¦nounceth vnto his benefyce / or whan ony gyueth a benefyce / or whan ony receyueth it. It behoueth to se and to consyder the con¦dycyons / the maners / and the causes / and yf there ne be gyftes / ne promesses / ne pra¦yers of lordes or of frendes. &c. Moreouer it behoueth pryncypally to regarde the fy∣nall ende to the whiche a man hath enten∣cyon for to come. For yf the condycyons & the fyne be made purely for the loue of god he is wele entred in the benefyce by the do¦re. And yf a man entre otherwyse in bene¦fyce than by god / symonye is to be dredde For he is not entred by the dore. F. ¶Also for to knowe that it is grete syn to sell a benefyce a man maye it clerely se in the example of hieroboam kynge / the whiche solde the bysshopryches & dygny∣tes. And therfore god was wrothe agayn hym in so moche that he was degraded & vnclothed hym and his lygne / as it is w¦ten in tertio regum .xiii. Quicun{que} vo∣bat implebat manum hieroboam et fiebat sacerdos excelsorum. &c. Quere. lxxxv. c. G. ¶Also men rede in secundo machabeo¦rum .iiii. how the kynge Anthyochus solde vnto Iason the dygnyte to be souerayne preest (that is bysshop) and yll came vnto hym. The prophete Ysaye sayeth in his .v. chapytre. Ve qui iustificatis impium {pro}¦muneribus et iustitiam iusti aufertis ab eo. Cursed be you the whiche iustyfye ye yll by gyftes / and take awaye the iustyce of the iuste. Those the whiche entreth in to benefyces vnduely by the force and puys∣saunce of prynces or greate lordes / or by menaces / murmures / or by theyr prayers and supplycacyon / and not by the dore the whiche is Ihesu cryst ben theues. For for the drede puyssaunce or fauoure of ye sayd lordes the good ryght is corrupte / ye good ben expelled / and the vnworthy beneficed and yll cometh vnto them. We haue an ex¦ample in primo machabeorū .vii. how cur¦sed Alchymus was constitute souerayne bysshop of the kynge demetrius. The whi¦che dyde many of ylles. Also the sayd Al∣chimus deyed cursedly / as it is wryten .i. machabeorū .ix. ca. This example is wry∣ten after. Quere. lxxxv. h. ¶Also some en¦treth in to benefyce vnduely by flateryes / glosynges and decepcyons. And for asmo¦che as they entre not by ye dore / that is by Ihesu cryste they ben theuys. ¶Also the∣se bysshoppes and prelates the whiche pa¦yeth theyr seruauntes of theyr salayres & seruyces by gyuynge vnto them some be∣nefyce or prebēde / chapel or dygnyte wher it is so that the cause be for the payment / and not for the loue of god it is symonye. But it is wryten in droit canon / yt whan a bysshop consydereth the prudence of his clerke / the dygnyte of his seruyce / the stre¦myte
/ holynes / and bōunte of hym / and yt he be of grete meryte. For the goodnes yt he seeth & knoweth in hym he sholde bene¦fyce hym in that chirche and it is no symo¦nye / but it is wele done. For in the courtes of prelates a man sholde prouue the cler∣kes. Also to ordeyne charyte a man sholde gyue fyrste vnto his famylyeres as vnto straungers yf they ben egally good. H ¶The people laye the whiche gyueth or prometteth or maketh prayers & supplica¦cyons indue for to benefyce theyr kynnes∣men / seruauntes or other theyr frendes / ben symonyackes and sholde be accursed / after that that saint Thomas sayeth and raymonde. Si quis auaritia ductus amo¦re seruitio vel precibus episcopalem vel sa¦cerdotalem acceperit dignitatem: et ī vi∣ta nō relinquerit eum{que} in asperam peni¦tentiam mors nō inuenerit ineternū peri¦bit. i. q. i. ca. Si quis. Yf ony hathe taken ye dygnyte epyscopale or sacerdotale lede by auaryce / by loue / seruyce or prayers / and he ne hathe lefte it in his lyfe / and at ye de∣the ne hathe founde it in sharpe penaunce he shal paye in pardurablete. In gyuyng a benefyce vnto one ye whiche is of his blo¦de / albeit there be no symonye for that / yt there is no sale / yet is there synne the whi¦che is cōmyt in thre maners / or for asmo∣che that he loueth tenderly his flesshe / or for that that he coueyteth to gyue a thyng vndue vnto his kynnesman / or for asmo∣che as he vylependeth the thynge spyrytu¦ell in gyuynge it vnto one indigne. And it semeth that he sholde haue therin symony yf he hadde the regarde how his cosyn ha∣the the prouffyte temporal for the spyrytu¦all / in as moche as cosyn / for he sholde re∣ceyue a thyng the whiche ne sholde be due vnto hym. It is not the lesse symonye for to haue the regarde that his kynnesman hathe the prouffite temporall but as yf hȳ¦selfe had it. Whan a man gyueth a benefy¦ce a man sholde beholde whether the per∣sone vnto whome ye gyfte is made be wor¦thy it. And that it be gyuen symplye and purely tor the loue of god. We rede math. x. How our lorde sayd. Gratias date / the whiche is expounded in two maners. Or whan a man there putteth no cause of sa∣le / or whan a man hathe no regarde in gy¦uynge but alonly god / or only grace. And therfore he ye whiche gyueth vnto his kin¦nesman ne gyueth in suche wyse / albeit yt god hathe sayd / gratis date. Also who soo wyll gyue vnto his kynnesman withoute symonye / it behoueth that the persone be worthy it. And that the gyfte be made for the loue of god purely / as it is sayd. Vt in¦tret per ostium: id est christum in ouile oui¦um. Our lorde Ihesu cryste gaue the dyg¦nyte and gouernement of the chirche vn∣to saynt peter and not vnto saynt Iohan nor vnto his other parentes / in gyuynge vs example that in lyke wyse shold we do ¶Also whan the appostles chose Mathy¦as and Ioseph the iuste / to the ende yt one of them two were apostle in ye place of iu∣das. Sors cecidit super mathiaz. For Io¦seth was of the parente of Ihesus. Legi∣tur in secundo libro regum. {quod} infidelis est episcopus qui nepotulo suo cōfert prelatio¦nem cum sciat enim inabillem et sciat to∣tum pondus prelii versum super prelatū. That is to saye. The bisshoppe is vnfaith¦full the whiche bryngeth vnto prelacyon / or dygnyte his lytell neuewe whan it is so that he knoweth that he is feble to fyghte and that he knoweth that all the countre and the ruyne of the batayll tourneth on the prelates. Example that a man ne shol¦de constytute ony by prayers charnelles. / Quere. lxxxv. f. ¶Also god gyueth vs ex∣ample clerely that we ne sholde lyfte vp our parentes in dygnyte spyrytuel yf they
be not worthy it. Legitur mathei. xx. that whan the wyfe of zebede aunt of Ihesus hym prayed that her two chyldren / saynt Iames & saynt Iohan cosyns of our lorde that he sholde make them sytte the one on his ryght hande and the other on his lefte hande. The answer was. Nescitis quid petatis. They were vnworthy to be set ne¦re by hym. And therfore god said vnto her ye wote not what ye demaunde. Marye ye may wele endure passyon as I. But to sette you on my ryght hande it is not vn∣to me to gyue it you: sed quibus paratū est a patre meo. That is vnto them the whi∣che ben dygne. I. ¶Fourthly those the whiche make pac¦cyon to gyue certayne sōme for to be recey¦ued in a monastery suche wyse rented yt it is suffycyent to susteyne & to puruaye as wele those that there ben nowe as those yt they shal receyue they ben symonyacques And in lyke wyse those ye whiche maketh the sayd recepcyon / or therto gyue coūsayl consentement / and there nys custome vn¦to the contrary the whiche maye excuse ye synne. K. ¶Fyfthly the people of the chirche shol¦de admynystre the sacramentes / and the sepultures without makynge paccyon ne exaccyon of money / otherwyse there is sy¦monye. But after yt they haue done theyr deuoyre the laye people them sholde con∣tente after the customes auncyentes or o∣therwyse a man may make them to come before the bysshop after the droitz. Extra de symonia ad apostolicam. The sacra∣mentes of the chirche ne sholde be solde / for that sholde be symonye. Oure lorde it shewed clerely vnto his apostles whan he said vnto them Illud math. x. Infirmos curate mortuos suscitate: leprosos: mun∣date: demones: eiicite: gratis accepistis: gratis date. The gospell sayth. Hele ye the seke / arayse ye the deed / hele ye the lepres chase awaye the deuylles / ye haue taken for nothynge gyue you it for nothynge. Al¦so it is wryten. Administre ye takynge no¦thynge for it the Eucharistie that is the sa¦crament of the aulter vnto ye people / con∣fesse ye takynge nothynge / baptyse ye ta∣kynge nothynge / gyue you vnto all folke for nothynge after the appostle. Vn̄ augu¦stinus dicit. Gratis eucharistiam plebi ministrate: gratis: confitemini: gratis ba∣ptisate secundum apostolum: cuntis gra∣tis date. L. ¶Whan ony preest selleth or marchaū¦deth the masses or that he synge masse for moneye and that the cause fynall of ye dy∣lectacyon be to thende that he haue ye sayd moneye / it is symonye / and synneth mor∣tally. Vnde augustinus. Qui precise vnā missam vel plures pro pecuniis celebrat dā¦nationem sibi eternam preperat. He that syngeth a masse / or many for moneye he prepareth vnto hymself eternell dampna¦cyon. And it is here to be noted that ye thȳ¦ges temporelles ne sholde neuer be ye ende of thynges spyrytuelles / but there ben cau¦ses wele mouynge. Vn̄ hec est falsa: The preest is holden to gyue the thynges spyry¦tuelles to thende that he haue the thinges temporelles. Sed hec est vera. The laye¦man is holden to gyue the thinges tempo¦relles for the thynges spyrytuelles / not in byenge them / for they sholde not be solde as it is sayd in lyke wyse as a man selleth the flesshe vpon ye stalle. The grace of god the whiche is in the sacrament is inappre¦cyable and it falleth not vnder ony pryce / For man hathe not thynge wherof he it may bye / but for asmoche as the seruaun∣tes of god ne may laboure in thynges spy¦rytuelles without hauynge theyr lyuynge & sustentacyon / god wyll that a man vn∣to them gyue some thyng for to lyue it hī
they haue done theyr deuoyre. Vnde pau. i. corinth. ix. Qui altario deseruiūt cum al¦tario participāt ita et dn̄s ordinauit hiis qui euangelium anunciant de euangelio viuere. They the whiche on the alter dys∣seruen shall be parteyners of the aulter / in suche wyse that god hathe ordeyned vn¦to theym the whiche shewe the gospell / to lyue of the gospell / not that they shall selle it / for that sholde be symonye as it is sayd M. ¶Syxtely marke wele that no man laye ne sholde presume to do the offyce of preestes ye whiche ben in holy ordres / whe¦re yf they do yll shall come vnto theym as dyde vnto the kynge ozyas. For after that he had coueyted and presumed to doo the offyce and that he had taken the ensēcer & encensed and menaced the preestes for ye that they gaynsayed hym leperye hym to∣ke in the vysage within the house of god / &c. as it is wryten .ii. paralipo .xxvi. Que∣re. lxxxv. g. N. ¶Seuenthly a man ne sholde sell the yeftes of grace / ne the vertues the whiche ben in ye soule / ne scyence / where that shol∣de be symonye. Augustin{us} dicit. Spectat ad offirium vestre dignitatis gratie petē∣tib{us} dona dare gratis: sed si vn{quam} fidei mu¦nera vendatis incoursores giezi leprāvos sciatis. It belongeth vnto ye offyce of your dygnyte to gyue gyftes for nothynge vn∣to the demaundauntes of grace / but yf ye sell in ony wyse the gyftes of fayth know∣lege you than vnto the lepre of Gyezy. In lykewyse as sayeth saynt austyn vnto the mynystres of the chirche. Giezie was the dyscyple of Helyseus / ye whiche toke a gre¦te gyfte of the ryche man Naaman for yt that his mayster had heled hym of his le∣prye: And therfore the sayd prophete Hely¦syus sayd vnto giezi. Lepram naaman adherat tibi et semini tuo. The leprye of Naaman shall be broughte vnto the and vnto thy sede. In lyke wyse was it done as it is wryten in quarto regum .v. ca. For he hadde receyued gyft of the grace of the holy ghost. Quere post .lxxxv. b. O. ¶A questyon to vnderstonde yf an ad¦uocate may sell the scyence of the iuste cau¦se that he demeneth. The answere. He ne sholde selle the scyence / but he may selle ye grete laboure and trauayll of his body yt he taketh to studye to plede and to defen∣de ye iuste cause. For god sayeth in the gos∣pell that ye werkman is worthy of his me∣te and of his hyre. Mathei. x. Dignus est enī operarius cibo suo. Et luce. x. Dign{us} est enim operarius mercede sua. But yf ye sayd aduocate solde the scyence by maner of sale / or that he hadde in his thought the entencyon to selle it he sholde be symony∣acke before god. It is wryten prouerbio∣rum .xxiii. Veritatem eme et noli vende¦re sapientiam et doctrinam et intelligen∣ciam. &c. Be ye true and sell not wysdom doctryne and intellygence. ¶Also the scy∣ence solde noyeth as it is sayd. and yf it be gyuen it groweth and also multeplyeth. / And yf it be hydde it serueth of nothynge / Vnde scientia que data est crescit: cresce¦re nescit si taceatur. Et legitur ecclesi. xx. Sapientia absconsa est et thesaurus in∣uisus: que vtilitas in vtris{que}. Sequitur Melior est qui celat insapientiam suam / {quam} homo qui abscondit sapientiam suam. Sapyence hydde is a treasoure where a man seeth not what prouffyte is in ye one & in the other. Better is he the whiche hy∣deth his vnwysdome than the man ye whi¦che hydeth his sapyence. Et legitur eccle. iiii. Non abscondas sapientiam tuam in decore eius: in lingua enim agnoscitur sa∣pientia: et sensus et scientia et doctrina in verbo sensati. Thou shalte not hyde thy wysdome in his honour / certaynly wyse∣dome is knowen in the tongue / & the wyt
and the scyence and the doctryne in ye elo∣quence and worde of wysdome. An aduo¦cate ought be verytably & to susteyne ve∣ryte. Also he ought to kepe and defende ye iuste cause that it perysshe not. And after¦warde he maye take gyfte for the trauayl of his body as it is sayd without to exce∣de the boundes of reason as many done ye whiche demaunde and take salayres and gyftes outrageously / more than they ne sholde / and that they ne haue deserued to haue. And therfore they sholde drede dam¦nacyon / for they ne ben iuste and accom∣plysshe not iustyce in thēselfe to be in wyll to haue that thynge yt they haue not wōne and the whiche ne apperteyneth vnto thē ¶Also they sholde drede yf they haue ha∣ted and broken Iustice / iugement / ye good cause and ye good ryght to receyue yertes. For they synne mortally and renne in ma¦ladyccyon. Vnde ysaie .v. Vequi iusitii∣catis impium pro muneribus: et iustitiam iusti aufertis abeo. ¶Also they sholde dre¦de yf they haue no wyll to lede / to coūsayll to kepe the causes of the poores / as they done those of the ryche / for that yt they ha∣ue no goodes to gyue vnto theym. It is wryten eccle. In iudicando esto pupulis / misericors vt pater et eris iu velut altissi¦mi fiius obediens et miserebitur tui. In iugement be thou mercyfull vnto the or∣phelyns in lyke wyse as a fader and thou shalt be obedyent. And also as the sone of the ryght hye god / and he shall haue mer∣cy on the. ¶Also yf these aduocates haue made the ylle causes good by theyr cautel∣les / malyces and subtyltees / and maketh to lese the good ryght they synne and ben vniuste and corrupters of iustyce. And yf they haue nourysshed / defended and sus∣teyned of certayne scyence to be good. It is grete synne withoute doubte for to sus∣teyne dysloyalte / yll and iniustyce. And in soo doynge the aduocate yeldeth hyms culpable / and bryngeth hymself in with malefactoure. By the whiche he is dyg of punycyon and synneth mortally. Vnde paulus ad roma. i Non solum qui fac peccata: sed qui consentiūt facientibus d¦gnisunt morte. Not alonely those the whi¦che do the synnes / but those the whiche al¦so consenteth vnto the doers / ben worth of dethe. Those synneth mortally / how be it that a man ne sholde vnderstonde that ye sayd aduocates cōmytteth symonye. &c Example how the deuyl bare awaye in bo¦dy and in soule a cursed coueytous these aduocate. Quere .lxxxi. e. Another exam∣ble of an aduocate insacyable the whiche ledde a cause vnto a man ye whiche ne dy∣de brynge vnto hym moneye vnto his ap∣petyte and he wronged hym and toke the proces and brake of the lectres / and trode vpon it by dyspite in saynge. Vyllayn the¦re is thy processe the whiche ne broughte me but this. The good man in wepyng excused hym by pouerte. But to be shor anone after the aduocate deyed mysche¦uously. Also the mayster of a scole ne shol∣de sell the scyence but the labour that he ta¦keth of his body. And in lyke wyse of other semblables. Quia omnis operari{us} dign{us} est mercede iua: vt dictum est. Also ye pre¦chers ne sholde selle the scyence that they speke in prechynge for the cause fynall to haue the gayne temporall / or in lyke wy¦se for to haue fauoure humayne or for va¦ynglorye / and not for charyte and reconsy¦lyacyon of the poore synners / commyt symonye. But for as moche as they haue hadde payne corporall for to studye / to pre¦che and to walke they may take that that men and women vnto them gyue for the sustentacyon of theyr lyuynge. Quia de ordinauit his qui euangelium anuncta de euangelio viuere. Vt dicitur .i. corinth.
Et augu. dicit. Non debimus euāgeliza∣re vt vt uam{us}: sed viuere vt euāgelizem{us}. We sholde not preche the gospell to then∣de that we lyuen / but to lyue to thende yt we preche. Also we sholde preche to then∣de that the rewarde of predicacyon be not the mete the whiche is appetyted & desy∣red / but the thynge necessarye the whiche foloweth / that is sustentacion vnto ye tem¦poralytes the whiche is requysyte vnto a precher. Item augu. Euangelizare debe¦mus vt non sit merces {pre}dicationis cibus qi appetit{ur}: sed necessariū quod seqitur id est substantatio in temporalibus que necessa¦ria est predicatori. Also those clerkes that letteth to preche / to shewe / to reprehende / & to correcte the vyces for ony fauours / or for false loue / or for drede / or for ony other thynge mutyle / and also holde theyr peas to se and to here ye yll. The prophete ysaye them calleth dogges not wyllynge to bar¦ke / that is to preche. Vnde ysaie. lvi. Ca∣ues muti non valentes letrare. Sequitur Oēs in viā suā declinauerūt vnusquis{que} ad auaritiā suā a sūmovs{que} ad nouissimū &c. A dogge the whiche bayeth not for to susteyne his mayster is not good vnto hȳ no more is a precher vnto god the whiche is dombe to susteyne veryte. And therfore he is called dogge. Et legit{ur} ihere .iiii. Sa∣pientes sunt vt faciant mala / bene autem facere nescierunt. They ben wyse to do yll but not to do good. Example in the gospel of hym the whiche hydde ye talent he was called an yll seruaunt and a slouthfull / & was cōmaunded that men sholde take a∣waye from hym the talente. Vnde math. xxv. Auferte ab ille talentū. And for as∣moche as the haboundaunce of the derke∣nes of synne hathe ouerclouded the veryte of the cōmaundementes of god in ye more parte of the crysten people lyuynge at this daye. Noo man ne sholde suffyse to wryte in partyculer the cautellous decepcyon of this condampned synne of symonye. But these thynges spoken here shortly iustifieth vnto people of good conscyence to make them enquyre more playnly after the occa¦syons & dyuers maneres the whiche vnto theym maye in this thynge come vpon or happen. &c. More ouer people symony ac∣ques sholde drede maledyccyon & excom∣munycacyon. Also they sholde drede irre∣gularyte the whiche shall not be declared bycause of shortenes. Also they sholde dre∣de to be founde in ye iugement before god Also they sholde drede to lese the ioyes of paradyse. Also they sholde drede punycyō and dampnacyon. ¶Example of a man dampned ye whiche had many benefyces. &c. Quere .lxxxv. e. Another example how fewe of curates ben saued. Quere. lvi. g. Also they sholde drede to be sente for to a∣byde in the fyre of helle perpetually. Tho∣se the whiche hathe offended by symonye / renne they vnto penaunce & they shall ha∣ue grace and mercye. &c. Also doo they of almesdedes for that is a good remedye. A. ¶Of restytucyon that god cōmaun∣deth. Ca. xxxiiii. IT is wryten in the .xxii. chapitre of the gospelles of saynt matheu Reddite q̄ sūt cesaris cesari: et que sūt dei deo. Yelde those thyn∣ges the whiche ben of cesar / the whiche ye haue taken vniustely / yelde thē vnto cesar / yt is to vnderstonde to the lor∣de temporall / vnto whome they apperteȳ & the thynges ye appertayne to god / yelde them vnto hym. To make restytucyon it is necessary for to come vnto paradyse. & for to knowe clerely ye mater of restitucōn
we shall ordeyne it in fyue questyons. Pri¦ma wherfore a man ought to make resty¦tucyon. ¶Secunda what he is yt oughte to make restytucyon. ¶Tertia vnto who¦me a man sholde make restitucyon. Quar¦ta what thynge a man sholde restore. Quī¦ta / whan a man sholde make restytucyon as vnto the fyrste questyon the whiche is. B. ¶Wherfore a man sholde make resti∣tucyon. Ca. xxxiiii. MAn reasonable knowe thou yt it is requysyte to make resty∣tucyon. For asmoche as it is so that to take from another agayne reason and iustyce it is mortall synne. In lyke wyse to haue a stedfaste wyll to witholde frome another whan a man it maye and ought to resto∣re it is mortall synne / ne a man may not be assoylled by ony auctoryte durynge su∣che ordynaunce of wyl. ¶It is wryten in droit. xiiii. q. vi. c. Sires. Nō dimittit{ur} pe¦ctatū nisi restituat{ur} ablatū. The syn is not forgyuen yf ye thynge taken awaye be not restored. And saynt Thomas sayeth scdā scde. q. lxii. ar. viii. Who so euer letteth an¦other vniustly in the vsage of the thynge ye whiche vnto hym apperteyneth / he tres¦passeth the cōmaundement of charyte / & is holden to restitucion. Quilibet tenetur ad restitutionē cuilibet rei subtracte. Eue∣ry man is holden vnto restitucyon. Et ī de¦cre. Infere{us} dānū {pro}oxīo nō ē absoluād{us} nisi dāno pri{us} scdm̄ arbitriū lesi restituto. He yt brȳgeth in dōmage to his neighbour ne sholde not be assoylled yf ye dōmage we¦re not restored to hȳ. Que. xiii. q. vi. c. Cō∣perim{us}. And saynt thomas scdā scdē. ii. q. dicit. {quod} fals{us} testis peccat mortalit{ur}: & tene¦tur ad restitutionē dāni qd ali{us} īcurrit. I fals wytnes sinneth mortally / & is holden vnto restitution. In lyke wyse as yu mayst se in many examples wryten in ye .vi. com¦maūdement of thexemplayre q̄. lxxxviii. a b. c. d. C. ¶The seconde question demaunded. WHat is he yt ought to restore. The answer. It is he that in cause by one or many of maners ye whiche foloweth wher ony is put from his thȳge That is to knowe eyther by commaunde∣ment expres / or by counsayll gyuen / or by faute vycyous for to gyue it / or by consen¦tement / or by adulacion. For to defende or to susteyne / ye endōmages / or by hydynde or reteynynge in his kepynge the thyng of another / or ye whiche gyueth effors / ayde / or refuge vnto ye wrong doers / or wyl not saye the trouthe in iugemente / or in other place wherby restytucyon might be made or the whiche ne gyueth vnto the endōma¦ges / ayde / coūsayll or defence yt appertey∣neth to his offyce. All these maner of peo∣ple ben called generally / fauourables / par¦teners / or consēters. And whan suche ma∣ner of fauoure or of contēnement is suche yt it is the cause of the dōmage soo happe∣ned / euery of ye aforsayd is holden vnto re¦stytucyon / notwtstandynge yt he hathe re∣ceyued but certayne party or all holly ony thynge. But whan they ben many in cau∣se of dōmage yf one restore all holly as he is boūde he dyschargeth al ye other anen the partye endōmaged / but euery of ye par¦teners vnto him is boūden {pro}rata / yt is to vnderstonde in the sōme the whiche vnto hym apperteyneth / where otherwyse he shall not be dyscharged. D. ¶The thyrde questyon demaunded.
WHat thynge sholde a man restore. The answer. The propre thinge yl witholden or his valour vnto ye gre of the partye. And wt that ye fruytes of the same / yf it be a thynge the whiche of it sel¦fe dereth fruyte. But costes myses & dys∣pence made for to estyme the said fruytes sholde be fyrste rebated and compted vn∣to the sayd restituant. Also a man sholde make satysfaccyon playnly vnto ye partye endōmaged of the dōmages & lettynges / bycause of his thynge ylle witholden. For ryght reason it requyreth. E. The .iiii. question demaūded. xxxiiii. VNto whome a man sholde ma¦ke restytucyon. The answer. Vnto hym the whiche is endō∣maged yf he be present / or vn∣to his {pro}pre heyre yf he be deed or yf he were so ferre of that the dyspence sholde be more grete for to go towarde hȳ or in many places thanne the restytucyon sholde amount / or yt a man hathe not the knowlege of them vnto whome restytucy¦on sholde be made. Than a man shold gy¦ue vnto the poore for the spryrytuell wele of hym or of those vnto whom may apper¦teyne the sayd restytucyon. For as sayeth saynt thomas. These poore ben very hey∣res in suche case. Vn̄ tho. ī. iiii. sēten. Qn̄ incert{us} est dn̄s re{rum} ablatarū tūc pauperes sūtillarū heredes. Some hathe wylled to say yt suche restytucyon sholde be made by the dysposycyon of ye bisshoppes diocesaīs but reuerence kepte it is not foūde by wor¦des expres in ony droit wryten. And ther∣fore in lyke wyse as sayeth the scot whan dyuyne lawe or lawe of the chirche ne bin¦deth vs to do ony thynge determynetly / a man sholde folowe naturell reason ye whi∣che is in this matere presente vs telleth yt by his good & dyscrete confessour or other man of reason or by hymselfe a man ma∣ke the sayd restytucyon anenst the poores The scrypture sayeth that the droit posy∣tyf in place there where it dyffreth not as in droit natural. Ibienī ius positiuū locū hm vbi nichil differt {quam}tum ad ius naturale vnū sic vel aliter fiat. Thomas scdā scē. q lx. articulo primo ad primū. F ¶The .v. questyon demaunded. xxxiiii. WHan a man sholde make restytu∣cyon vnto onye. The answere. / It sholde be made incontynent & withoute ony taryenge as vnto the wyll. For in lyke wyse as he the whiche is in sin mortall sholde repent hym incontynent / and to purpose to make confessyon whan place and tyme. In lyke wyse he ye whiche taketh frome another sholde haue a wyll prest that as soone as he may goodly he it shall restore entyerlye. A man may dyffer by some tyme the execucyon for to restore that is to vnderstonde yt he vnto whome he ought to make restytucyon wyll wele / or sholde wyll by ryght & iuste reason that restitucyon were dyfferred for a more gre¦te good. As for example. Yf a man of ar∣mes hathe dystressed a marchaunt of the sōme of a thousande crownes / or gyueth cōmaundement / ayde / fauour / counsayll / or comforte yt to do after the forme before declared. The whiche fynaūce he ne may restore yf he ne sell hors & harneys. Wher∣by he shall be vnprouffytable vnto the ser∣uyce of the kynge for the wele of the real∣me in suche case or semblables. The mar∣chaunt sholde more sooner be in wyll that ye sayd man of armes dyfferre for a tyme restytucyon to be made vnto hym than yt he sholde yelde the man vnprouffytable so
For as men say and it is very true by the defaute of a nayle a man leseth a sho / by a sho an hors / by a hors a man / by a man a batayll / by a batayll a realme. And for as moche as the marchaunt wyl not content hym but that restytucyon be vnto hym re¦dely made / yet it shall not folowe that the other were not absoylled / and in the estate of grace by the dyspleasaunce of his synne & good purpose to restore in tyme & place G. ¶By these thynges before spoken of restytucyon a man may wele knowe that lordes and offycers the whiche knowe to haue seruauntes & subgectes the whiche pylleth the small people / whome men da∣re not to make them restore for drede of ye sayd lordes & offycers / yet they ben boun∣de to restore. Saynt Austyn sayth. Whan Iustyce is exclused and taken awaye gre∣te lordes ben excessyue pyllers. Remota iustitia qid sūt magna regna nisi magna latrocinia. vn̄ dicit augustinus in quarto libro de ciuitate dei. Those the whiche ha∣ue founde ony goodes apperteynynge vn¦to another also sholde curyouslye enquyre vnto whome they may apperteyn / and yf they ne may fynde hym / they may retayn suche thinge for a tyme and longe ynough with suche conscience that alwayes whan that they knowe vnto whome it appertey¦neth they it shal restore. Those the whiche by thynges yt haue ben stolen / rauysshed / or elles taken awaye where vnto ye seller hathe no ryght synneth mortally / yf they haue not entencyon to bye them for to res∣tore them vnto whome they apperteyne / And notwithstondinge that they haue suf¦fycyently gyuen the valoure also they ben bounde to restore them vnto them to who¦me suche thynges apperteyneth. Those ye whiche by hontynge or haukynge endom∣mage the cornes ye vynes & other laboura¦ges / or that theyr dogges straūgle a shepe geese or other besty all be holden vnto res∣tytucyon yf the grefe be not soo lyght that it sholde seme very semblable how the la∣bourers it bereth gracyously. He the whi∣che malycyously hurteth another in his bo¦dy wherby he leseth his iourneyes or is mu¦tyle of ony of his membres he is holden to paye the barbers / and also to saue harme∣les of iniurye & of the iourneys. And he ye whiche sholde put to dethe ony man whi∣che hathe to nourysshe or to susteyn fader or moder / & chyldren ouer the penaunce sa¦cramentall sholde be bounde to puruay al these beforsayd yf it vnto hym be possyble And for asmoche as suche restytucyon is ryght harde to estyme it sholde be expedy∣ent for the saluacyon of the soule of suche homycyde to bere pacyently & wyllyngly in iustyce the payne of tallyon that sholde be to endure dethe / or to go to dyspose his lyfe for hym that he hathe slayne / & for the lawe of Ihesu cryste. The scot reproueth them the whiche absoylleth somtyme mo¦re lyghtly an homycyde than they ne shol∣de hym ye whiche malycyously hathe slain his neyghbours dogge. He the whiche ma¦lycyously letteth ony to come vnto benefy¦ce / or offyce / or other good he is holden to restore not egally as moche grete good as is the good in suche wyse letted / but after the estymacyon of some of good conscyen¦ce or by hymselfe. ¶Foure cas foloweth without gyuynge diffynyte. ¶The fyrste is of them yt reysen in theyr herytages of newe douuehouses / or warennes / vnto ye grete preiudise of his neyghbours. ¶The seconde case is of theym the whiche wyn∣neth grete fynaunces in playes defended as of cardes / dyse / & other playes of fortu¦ne. ¶The thyrde is of ye woman maryed the whiche conceyueth lygnee of another than of her husbande. ¶The fourth is of them the whiche by the vyce of detraccyon
taketh awaye the good renomme of theyr brother crystyen. Legitur prouerbiorum. xxiiii. Cum detractaribus non cōmiscea¦ris: quoniam repente consurget perditio eorum vbi glosa dicit hoc vitio fore totum humanum genus damnatur. These befor sayd maye in theyr conscyences by goode counsayll other than by ye shortnes of this present treatyse the whiche ne may bere ye explycacyon than sholde be necessary in ye dyffyculte of suche case and of other ye whi¦che may come vpon. Of the whiche is not here made mencyon. Examples of restitu¦cyon. And fyrste of a man named Fredry¦cus tormented in purgatorie for that that he hadde not restored tho thinges yll bego¦ten .lxxxviii. a. Another example of a chyl∣de in purgatorye by defaute to restore mo¦ney borowed .lxxxviii. b. ¶Other exam∣ples of restytucyon in the .vi. commaunde¦ment of the exemplayre. Quere par tabu∣lam .lxxxviii. c. d. e. A. ¶Here foloweth the .vii. commaunde∣ment of god the whiche treateth of leche∣rye that a man cōmytteth in operacyon. ¶Kepe the from lecherye & thoughtes yll Mysuse not thy body with wife ne mayde In this good mynde be thou euer styll Be she neuer so nycely arayde IN the auncient testament is wri¦ten this cōmaundemente. exodi. xx. ca. And in the newe. math: v. et luce: xviii. Non mechaberis. Thou ne shalte do aduoutrye / or rybaudrye where yf thou do yll shall come vnto the yf thou deye wtoute correccyon & amendement. In lyke wyse as thou shalt fynde here after by many examples. Que¦re .lxxxxii. a. b. All lecherye that a man cō∣mytteth in operacyon is defended by this cōmaundement. That is to vnderstonde fornycacyon / aduoutrye / defloracyon / in∣cest / sodomye. And al these other braūches and maners the whiche shameles people commytten. Wherof speketh ysydore the whiche sayeth. Nulla libidine poluaris si ne maculeris. Thou shalte not be polluted or soylled by ony lecherye. Et paulus dicit ad roma. xiii. Non incubilibus & impudi¦ciis non in contentione et emulatione: sed induamini dominū nostrum thesum chris¦tum et carnis curam ne feceritis in deside¦riis. Not in beddes & shamefull thynges / not in stryfe & in enuye / but clothe ye oure lorde Ihesu cryst and make ye not the de¦syres of the flesshe. B. ¶Of fornycacyon that god defendeth ca. xxxv. SAynt poule saith in ye .vi. chapi¦tre of his fyrste pystyl vnto the corīthiens. Fugite fornicatio¦nē. Fle fornycacyon / for god it defendeth. Fornycacyon gene∣rally taken comprehendeth all these leche∣ryes that a man cōmytteth in operacyon / & that the whiche is taken here in party∣culer is whan those yt cōmyt lecherye ne be in maryage / of affynyte / of gossiprede / or vnder other lyne & enhabyteth vnlefully / It is grete mortall synne to knowe ye con¦cubynes & the sclaūdre yt therof procedeth It is a more greate synne to go vnto we∣dowes / & they lese theyr honoure / and the syn is right grete & infame to goo to those that ben cōmune / for they ben foule vyle & stynkynge whiche receyue all people / & some are maryed whiche is aduoutrye. &c
The stewys or brodelhouse of the sayd cō∣munes ben taken from the lawes cyuyles in some cōmunytes for to eschewe & auoy¦de a more grete yll. But it is not to be vn∣derstonde that god ne punyssheth the syn by eternell dampnacyon. Vn̄ psal. Per∣dedisti omnes qui fornicator abs te. Thou haste loste from the al those the whiche do fornycacyon. And a man sholde wele kno¦we that the man the whiche hathe compa¦ny carnell of a woman is of affinite of all the consanguynes that is of all the paren∣tes of the woman in that degree of affyni¦te the whiche apperteyneth vnto the sayd woman in consanguynyte For the systers of the sayd woman ben his systers / & the germayns his germayns / and so of other degrees. And a lyke thynge is it of the wo¦man in regarde of the parentes of ye man with whome she hathe cōmytted lecherye And yf that afterwarde the one or ye other abandone theym with ony of the sayd pa∣rentes and affynes vnder the .v. degre he sholde cōmytte inceste the whiche is a ca∣se reserued vnto the bysshop. Legitur .i. co¦rin. vi. Qui adheret meretricivnū corpus efficitur. Sequitur erūt duo in carne vna He the whiche draweth vnto a strompet is made one body / two shall be in one fles¦she. C. ¶This fornycacyon is to fle for many thynges. The fyrste is for that that those yt cōmytte it go agayn the cōmaūdement of god / wherof speketh ye scryptures. Vn̄. pau. i. co. vi. Fugite fornicationē. seqitur. Qui autē fornicat{ur} ī corp{us} suū peccat. Fle fornication. He yt cōmytteth fornycacyon / synneth in his body. And agayne he sayth in the .v. chapitre of ye ephesyens. Fornyca¦cyon ne none immundycyte or auaryce be named in you / in lykewyse as it appertey¦neth vnto sayntes. Et le. i. co. vii. Propt{er} fornicationē euitādē vnus{que} vxorē suā ha∣beat & vnā{quam}{que} suum virū. That is to saye euery man hathe his wyfe for to fle forny¦cacyon / & euery woman hathe her husban¦de. Also fornycacyon dyspleaseth vnto god for those ye whiche it cōmytteth fyleth his temple / yt is the conscyens of persones the whiche is the place yt he hathe chose for hȳ to rest in. Vn̄. i. ad co. iii. Tēplū dei estis & spūs dn̄i habitat ī vobis. That is to say ye be ye temple of god / & the spyryte of our lorde habyteth in you. & sequit{ur}. Si qis aūt templū dei violauerit disperdet illū deus. Empti estis {pre}cio magno: glorificate por¦tate deū ī corpore suo. Yf ony hathe fyled ye temple of god / god shall destroye hym / ye be bought by a greate pryce / gloryfye ye & bere ye god in your bodyes. D. ¶Secondly fornycacyon is to flee for that yt it displeaseth vnto ye aūgelles of pa¦radyse wherof we rede. ¶Example in ye lyfe of the faders of an aūgell yt as he wal¦ked with a man by the wyll of god whan they met a lecherous man wele clothed / ye sayd aūgell stopped his nose / & he stopped it not afterwarde whan they met a grete carayne so stynkynge yt a man ne myghte approche vnto it. And yelded ye cause and sayd yt for ye lecherye of ye sayd yonge man he had stopped his nose. For lechery is mo¦re stynkynge before god than all other in∣feccyons. Also lecherye dyspleaseth moche vnto the aungel the whiche hathe the com¦myssyon of god to kepe vs & to counsayll as in his presence the horrour & abhomy∣nacyon of synne is done in forsakynge his counsayll & admonycyon. Legitur in psal. Angelis suis deus mandauit de te vt cus¦todiant te in oībus viis tuis. God hathe sente his aungelles vnto the that they ke∣pe the in all thy wayes. And therfore whā the iugement shall come of the sayd leche∣rous man the sayd aungell shall wytnes agayne hym yt he wolde not obey vnto hȳ
E. ¶Thyrdly fornycacyon is to flee for yt that it pleaseth vnto the deuyll. For leche∣rye is so stronge a lyne by the whiche ye de¦uyll holdeth these harlottes that with gre¦te payn may they escape / wherof it is wri¦ten osee .v. Non dabunt cogitationes su∣as: vt reuertantur ad dn̄m deū suū: quia spiritus fornicationū in medio eorum est. ¶These lecherous people ne sholde gyue theyr thoughtes that they retornen vnto theyr lorde god / for the spyrytes of fornica¦cyon ben in the myddle of them. ¶Also a man bestyall apperceyueth not the thyn∣ges the whiche ben of god. Vn̄ legit{ur}. i. co. ii. {quod} aīalis hō non {per}cipit ea que sunt spiri∣tus dei. ¶Example of hym yt excused him to goo to the souper whan he was boden. Vn̄ luce .xiiii. Vxorē duci et ideo nō possū venire. The lechery thē holdeth so strongli & byndeth yt they ne maye thynke on god ne leue yt synne / as afterwarde more plaȳ¦ly shall be declared. Quere .xliiii. f. Also le∣chery pleaseth vnto the deuyl / for by it he wynneth two persones at a tyme ye whi∣che thynge he dothe not of other synnes: it is a stroke the whiche is worthe two as ye hazardours he wynneth the man and the woman by the sayd synne. F. ¶Fourthly fornycacyon is to flee for yt that it noyeth in many of maneres vnto those that it cōmytteth. ¶Fyrste they lese the Ioyes of paradyse as sayeth the scrip¦tures. Vn̄. pau. i. co. vi. Nolita errare: qia ne{que} fornicarii ne{que} ydolis seruiētes: ne{que} adulteri: ne{que} moles: ne{que} masculorū {con}cu∣bitores. &c. regnū dei possidebūt. Erre ye not for the fornycatours / ne the seruaūtes vnto ydoles / ne these aduoultres / ne tho∣se the whiche cōmitteth the synne of sodo∣mye with masles. &c. ne shall possede the realme of god. And he sayeth .v. ca. ad gal. That the operacyons of ye flesshe ben ma¦nyfest the whiche ben fornycacyon / vnclen¦nes / vnchastyte / & lecherye / & it foloweth / those yt do so shall not haue paradyse and he sayeth ad ephe. v. Scitote ītelligentes qm̄ oīs fornicator: aut īmund{us}: aut auar{us} quodē ydolo{rum} seruit{us} nō habet hereditatē in regno christi. That is to say vnderston∣de you that euery fornycatoure / or vncle∣ne / or auarycyous the whiche is seruytu∣de of ydoles hathe not of herytage in ye re∣alme of Ihesu cryste. Also these fornyca∣toures leseth god and the company of aū¦gelles / and all the sayntes of heuen / and of all the thynges celestyall / & spyrytuall / they lese theyr good renōme theyr vertues & good operacyons / yf they deye impeny∣tentes they lese the ioye / the hele & the hel∣the of the soule. Also by lecherye they feble theyr bodyes / engendre sekenes / corrupte the theyr blode / shorteth theyr lyfe / they les¦se theyr rychesses & theyr temporell godes they chase awaye sapyence / scyence / & the gyftes of the holy ghost / they assocyate wt deuylles with all maledyccyon / & with the dampned of perdicyon / they put theyr sou¦les in grete myserye & dystresse / they byn∣de theyr soules to dethe of dampnacyon e∣ternell / & to be in the fyre & in the paynes of helle without ony remyssyon / yf they in suche wyse deye without contrycyon con∣fessyon & satysfaccyon. Vn̄ ysodorus. Ad penas tartari hominem libido perducit. Lecherye brynge a man vnto the paynes of helle. ¶Example. It is wryten in the seconde boke of kynges that Abner knew the concubynes of his fader Hysboreth & within a lytell tyme after bothe twayne were slayne. ¶Also the prodygal man of whome it is wryten luce .xv. Who soo dys∣pendeth and vseth his substaunce in lyuin¦ge lecherously yeueth example that leche∣rye dymynyssheth the rychesse and the go¦des of the meschaunt fornycatoure / for it is gyuen vnto harlottes and nouryture /
And he lyueth delycyously whyle he hathe wherof. Also the fornycatour maketh gyf¦tes vnto promoters / offycyalles / deanes / & payeth a grete amendes & loseth to gay¦ne for the occasyons of his lechery. &c. A. ¶Of aduoutrye that god defendeth. Capitulo. xxxvi. NOn adulterabis. Thou shalt not cōmyt of rybauldyse. Ad¦uoutrye is cōmytted whan ye one of the partyes / or bothe twayne ben in ye lyne of ma∣ryage / & they cōmytte lecherye with ano∣ther than with theyr partye / and it is said aduoutre quasi ad alteri{us} thorū tēdere. vn̄ marci. x. & math. xix. Quicū{que} dimiserit vxorē suā: & aliā duxerit adulteriū cōmit∣tit su{per} eā. Et si vxor dimiserit virū suū: & alii nupserit mechat{ur}. It is to knowe that men fynde by wrytynge yt seuen mortall synnes maye folowe in brekynge his ma∣ryage. ¶The fyrst synne is fraccyon of ye commaundement of god in two places. / That is coueyte not the wyfe of thy neigh¦boure. exodi. xx. Non concupisces vxorem proximi tui. And do thou not the synne in operacyon mathei. v. Non machaberis. ¶The seconde synne is pariurye / for tho¦se yt breketh theyr maryage transgresseth ye fayth yt they haue receyued in baptysme & promysed vnto theyr party solemply in the face of the chirche before theyr preest & frendes / the whiche is a grete synne as to breke ye crysten fayth. For it is wryten ad hebreos .xi. Quod sine fide īpossibile ē pla¦cere deo. It is impossyble to please god wtout faith. & ye faith of a person is nothȳ¦ge worthe wtout doynge ye operacyons as it is wryten iacobi .ii. Sicut enī corp{us} sine spū mortuū ē: ita & fides sine operib{us} mor tua est ī semetipsa. In lyke wyse as ye bo∣dy is deed whan it hathe no spyrite. In ly¦ke wyse the fayth is deed without opera∣cyons. Those yt breketh ye fayth gyuen in maryage ne byleue wele in god / by fayth operant wherfore they shall be condamp∣ned in to helle yf they deye impenytentes ¶The thyrde is lyenge & infydelyte / for those yt breketh theyr maryage shewe them to be lyers & infydeles to breke the loyalte of the body and of the goodes that they ha¦ue promysed to kepe the one with ye other the whiche is a greate synne moche to be blamed. For it is writen .iiii. ethicorū {quod}oē mēdatiū prauū ēet fugiēdū & sequit{ur}. Ve¦rax ē laudand{us} / mēdax vero vituperand{us} Euery lye or lesynge is yll & to be fledde / & it foloweth yt ye true man is to be praysed & the lyer to be shamed. Et legit{ur} {pro} .xxviii. Vir fidelis multū laudabit{ur}. The man yt kepeth loyalte on his party shall be moche lauded and praysed before god & the worl¦de / & shall haue retrybucyon in lyke wyse as it is wryten math .xxvi. Euge serue bone et fidelis qia su{per} pauca uisti fidelis supra multa te {con}stituā itra ī gaudium dīu tui. O good & faythfull seruaunt enioye ye for thou haste ben faythfull of a lytell thin¦ge. I shall ordeyne the aboue a grete thin¦ge / entre in to the ioye of thy lorde And vn¦to the contrary the persone a lyer & infyde¦le shall be dyffamed before god & the worl¦de as we rede de villece. luce .xvi. Qui di famatus est apud dn̄m suū quasi dissipas∣set bona ipsius. And there foloweth dam∣nacyon vnto those whiche deye impeniten¦tes. ¶The .iiii. synne is thefte the whiche is whan ony man dothe vnto his neygh∣boure theuysshely / fraude / nuysaunce / tre¦son / & decepcyon secretely & hydyngely a∣gayne his wyll and it is done in suche wy¦se also whan ony is gyltye on his partye
hydyngly and taketh possessyon & saysyne of the body and of ye flesshe the whiche vn∣to hym is vnyed by the sacrament of ma∣ryage / & the whiche vnto hym is gyuen & graunted of god and of the chirche / wher∣of it is wryten. gen̄. ii. & math. xix. Propt{ur} hoc relinquet homo patrē et matre & adhe¦rebit vxori sue & erunt duo in carne vna. That is to vnderstonde a man shall leue fader and moder for maryage / & to drawe hym to his wyfe / and they shall be two in one flesshe / also they be not two / but one flesshe. The thyng yt god hathe comoincte man shall not departe it. Vnde. marci. x. Ita{que} iā non sunt duo: sed vna caro quos deus conuinxit homo non separet. Et legi¦tur primo. corinth. vii. Mulier non habet potestatē sui corporis sed vir: similiter vir¦nō habet potestatē sui corporis sed mulier The woman hathe no power of her body / but the man. In lykewyse the man hathe no puyssaūce of his body / but the woman For yf the one or the other be prycked / or tempted of the flesshe they sholde obeye ye one vnto ye other for to fle synne. &c. Sith that the people maryed ne ben but one self flesshe as it is said and that the one is not mayster of his body / but it is the puysaun¦ce of the other. It behoueth to saye yt auou¦trye is a grete synne whan the harlot ste∣leth from hym fraudelently the thyng the whiche vnto hym apperteyneth agayne ye commaundement of god. Vnde leui. xix. Non facies furtum. Thou ne shalt do of theft ne of fraude vnto thy neyghbour. vn̄ mar. x. Ne fraudē feceris {pro}ximo tuo. Al∣so it is grete synne vnto ye harlot to do vn¦to his neyghbour that thynge yt he ne wol∣de vnto hymselfe to be done. Vn̄ ysodorus Quod nō vis pati nō facias: Saynt pou¦le sayth: {quod} fures & latrones: regnū dei non possidebūt. That is to saye yt conuert the∣uys & watches of wayes shall not possede the realme of god yf they deye impenyten¦tes. &c. ¶The .v. synne is sacrylege ye whi¦che is cōmytte whan that a man hurteth soylleth or violateth the holy thynges / or whan a man theym steleth. In lyke wyse dothe the harlot the whiche hurteth / soyl∣leth or vyolateth maryage the whiche is a holy thynge whan he cōmytteth ye stenche & fylth of lecherye in good and lawfull ma¦ryage. Who so putteth vnder ye fete of hog¦ges the sacrament of the aulter / the corpo¦races or ony holy thynge to thende yt they were soylled & hurte moche he sholde sȳne Legit{ur} math. vii. Nolite sanctū dare cani¦bus: ne{que} mittatis margaritas ante por. cos: ne forte conculcent eas pedibus suis. Ne gyue you not holy thynges vnto dog∣ges / & put ye not margaretes before the tete of the hogges yt they ne soylle theym with theyr fete. In lyke wyse is it to hurte and to soyle the holy sacrament of marya¦ge in the stynche of lecherye the whiche is more foule than donge ne dyrte. Vn̄ legit{ur} eccle. ix. {quod} oīs mulier q̄ est fornicatoria q̄si stercus in via ab oībus pretereūtibus con∣culcabitur. Euery woman the whiche is a fornycatoure shall be soylled in lyke wyse as a torde in the waye. Maryage is an es∣tate of greate auctoryte the whiche sholde be treated and maȳteyned holyly / for god it establysshed in paradyse terrestre in the estate of innocence before that man had euer synned. And therfore a man it sholde holyly kepe for the reason of god ye whiche it establysshed & of the place where it was establysshed. And after it is an estate of grete dygnyte. For god wolde be borne of a woman maryed / that was of ye blyssed vyrgyn Marye. &c. ¶The .vi. synne the whiche also may folowe is incest ye whiche is a man to knowe his kynneswoman / or a woman her kynnesman carnally as do∣ne these dogges. For yf ye harlot engendre
a doughter on the wyfe of his neyghbour it is possyble that one of his sones marye with ye doughter the whiche is hys owne syster ygnorantly / for he knoweth nothyn¦ge / or parauenture hathe her company as with a harlot wenynge that she were no∣thynge to him / so sholde it be inceste ye whi¦che is the synne of a dogge or hounde. The vii. synne is dysherytynge of theyr owne heyres whan lygnee foloweth. For whan the harlot engendreth a chylde on the wyf of his neyghbour / the sayd chylde shal pos¦sede the herytage wherin he hathe nothyn¦ge / & the true heyres shall be dysheryted & put out. The poore man fraulded the whi¦che weneth to gete for his chyldren is spen¦ded & wasted. For aduoutrers shall posse∣de his goodes & herytages ye whiche is so grete a case harde it is to fynde therin re∣medye & it to counsayll wele that ye moost sage clerkes therin ben excessyuely letted. For all maladyccyon / dyffame / dampnaci¦on / & perdicion foloweth as wele vnto har¦lottes / rybauldes men & women the whi∣che haue cōmytted the synne as vnto the chyldren aduoultres the whiche be seased of the sayd goodes and herytages wherin they haue nothȳge / so nothynge wyll they do for that / yt theyr moder was in lyen of maryage whan they were begoten & born It is wryten eccle. xxiii. Mulier oīs relin¦quēs vitū suū & statuēs hereditatē ex alie∣no matrimonio ī lege altissimi īcredebilis fuit virū suū derelīquit ī adulterio fornica¦ta est et ex alio viro filios statuit sibi. Nō tradēt filii ei{us} radices / et rami ei{us} non da∣bunt fructū derelīquēt ī maledictū memo¦riā eius & dedec{us} illi{us} nō delebit{ur}. That is to say. Euery woman leuynge her husban¦de & establysshynge ye herytage of a straū∣ge maryage hathe be incredyble in ye lawe of god / she hathe left her husbande / she ha¦the cōmyt fornycacyon in aduoultre / and she hathe taken a sone of another husban¦de, her sones ne shal take rote & the bows ne shall gyue of fruyte. They shal leue the memorye of her in malediccyon & the dys¦honour of her shal not be esaced. Et l. {pro} vi. Qui aūt adult{ur} ē{pro}det aīam suā turpuu dine & ignominiā {con}gregat sibi / & opprebri¦um illi{us} nō delebit{ur}. That is to say / he yt is a rybaulde shal lese his soule / his good fame & his reproche shall not be done awaye yf he deye impenytente. Also he yt cōmytteth aduoutre hathe maledyccyon in lyke wyse as it is wryten deute. xxvii. Maledict{us} q̄ dormit cū vxore proximi sui: & dicit oīs po¦pul{us} amē. Note wele yt the sȳne of aduou¦tre noyeth in .ix. maners vnto those yt it cō¦mytteth. Que. p. ad nu. b. c. d. e. f. g. h. i. k. B. ¶Examples we rede tertu regum. xi. how salamon was a moche harlot & loued women straūge ye whiche vnto hym were defended of god. And therfore his realme was deuyded after his dethe in two par∣tyes / & his sone had moche trouble for hȳ. C. ¶Also men fynde in wrytynge in the auncyent testamente of an aduouterer a moche harlot named iudas / not he ye whi∣che solde our lorde Ihesus / the whiche as he yode to cōmyt the sayd aduoutre in the presence of his wyfe / ye erthe opend vnder hym and he felle in to depnes all clothed. ¶Another example of a woman maried the whiche vsed her lyfe in lecheryes & glo∣tonyes / & therfore was she dampned .xiii. a. ¶Another example of a burge is aduou¦trer / and of another woman maryed / the whiche were dampned for theyr lecheryes lxxxxi. b. Many other examples of aduou¦trye shall be foūde in the exemplayre and by the table the whiche is all alonge. The punycyon of those the whiche dydde breke theyr maryage and wedlocke in the aun∣cyent and olde testamente was that they were stoned & put vnto deth incontynent
the whiche sholde be a thynge ryght cruell yf it sholde be vsed as nowe a dayes. For many sholde be punysshed ye whiche ben a lyue. Legit{ur}. leui. xx. & deutero. xxii. Si me chatus qis fuerit cū vxore alteri{us} et adulte riū {pro}petrauerit cū cōiuge {pro}ximi sui morte morient{ur} & mechus & adultera. Those and they yt haue broken theyr maryages by le∣cherye sholde haue contrycyon & make cō∣fession sacramentally & do penaūce & they shall haue grace & mercye. ¶Example of a woman aduoultres yt was saued by ma¦kȳge cōfessyō sacramental. Que. lxxxxii. b ¶Another example how dauid ye prophe¦te yt cōmytted auoutrye with the wyfe of vrie was sauid by repentaūce. He reknow¦leged his defaute & sayd peccaui. In lyke¦wyse as it is wryten in the .xii. cha. of the boke of kynges. &c. ¶Of thynges meritoryous & of offences lecherous that a man cōmytteth with his owne wyfe. Ca. xxxvi. SAynt poule sayeth in his epys∣tylles. Satagitevt {pro} bona ope¦ra certā faciatis vocationē ve∣strā. Procure ye that ye make your vocacyon certayne by go¦de operacyons. Maryage is certayne vo∣cacyon whan it is kepte holyly / clenly / and honestly. And it is dampnacyon whan pe¦ple the whiche ben knytte & vnyed in ma∣ryage ne kepeth the honeste & the chastyte the whiche apperteyneth vnto ye sayd ho∣ly sacrament. The dede of maryage may be merytoryous in .iii. maners. Fyrst whā the pryncypall cause of yt is for to concey∣ue lygnee. Secondly whan it is for to yel∣de ye deuoyre of ye sacrament the one with the other. Thyrdly whan it is by good dys¦crecyon to eschewe synne in hymselfe or in other. In this laste manere yf they therin haue no meryte yet may he do it without synne. Some tyme the dede of maryage is alonely venyel synne as whan ouer the thre maners beforsayd a man secheth the pleasaunce of his sensualyte / how be it in suche conscyence that the man ne wyll ex∣cede ye termes of honeste of maryage. som¦tyme there is mortall synne & many ma∣ners. A metrifiour sayeth. Quī{que} modis peccatī vxorē maritus: abutens. Tēpore: mente: loco / cōditione / modo. The husban¦de abusynge hym with his wyfe synneth in fyue maners. That is to vnderstonde by tyme / by mynde / by place / by condycyō bi the maner. Bi this worde here tempore is to vnderstonde yt in the tyme yt his wyf is seke / feble / and weyke / a man sholde ab¦steyne from the operacyon of maryage / & the woman sholde excuse her / for it sholde be grete sȳne in lykewyse as it is wryten leui. xx. ¶Also it is to absteyne him in the tyme of fastynges for to take awaye the pleasures of the body / & for to gete anenst god more grace & vertues. ¶Also in ye ty∣me of the feestes solempnelles for to san∣tyfye & honoure the sayd feestes the better ¶Also in tyme that the woman is layed in chyldbedde or redy to chylde. This wor¦de mente denoteth yt whan the thought & concupyscence is carnall & lecherous / that it is out of the boundes of maryage / yt is yt the man sholde accede also wyllyngly & promptly vnto a harlot yf he holde her as he dothe his wyfe / the synne is grete for ye thought is ylle in all maneres where it is out of mariage. This worde loco denote∣the whan a man knoweth his party in pla¦ce holy / as in the chirche / or chircheyarde / it is synne for the holynes of the place. Al¦so conditione / for to knowe it by condycyō of vnhoneste as openly before the people: or by condycyon vnlefull. It is a grete of∣fence. Also this worde / modo / denoteth yt
a man ne sholde knowe his party in other maner than nature it techeth: for it is gre¦te synne. vn̄. au. Vsus qi est {con}tra naturam execrabiliter fit in meritrice: sed execrabi∣lius fit ī vxore .xxx. q. v. adulteri. The vsa∣ge yt is agayne nature is done execrablye in ye harlot / but it is done more execrably in his owne wife. E. ¶Examples men rede in thobye .vi. of the wyfe vnto lytel thobye yt was meruay¦lous fayre & maryed vnto .vii. husbandes successyuely. The whiche the deuyll stran∣gled all seuen the fyrst nyght that they we¦re layde togyder / for that yt the sayd hus∣bandes acceded with her / not vnder ye en∣tencyon of the honeste of maryage / but for to accomplysshe the voluptuolyte of their bodyes as they vse somwhyle to doo with a harlot. The lytell Thobye dyde not so by the counsayll of the aungell raphaell / and therfore the deuyll slewe hym not. vn̄ tho. vi. Illa mulier tradita ē septēviris & mor¦tui sūt: sed et hoc odiui qia demon occidit il∣los. &c. F. ¶Another example saynt Gre∣gorye sheweth in the fyrste boke of ye dya∣logue yt a woman in Catane of newe ma¦ryed was conuayed with other women to goo vnto the dedycacyon of the chirche of saynt Sebastian / & the nyght yt she sholde go in the mornynge she was pricked with the flesshe that she ne myght holde her frō her husbande. And in the mornynge she hadde more greate shame of men than of god & yode theder. And anone as she was entred in to ye oratorye where the relyques of saynt Sebastyan were / the deuyll toke her & began to tourmente her before all yt there were. Than the preest of the chirche toke the couerture from ye alter & couerde her / & anone ye deuyll assaylled ye preest / & than the frendes of yt woman sayd vnto ye enchauntours yt they sholde enchaunt the deuyll by theyr enchaūtementes / but ano∣ne as they enchaunted by the iugement of god a legion of enemyes .vi.M.vi.C.lxvi deuylles entred in to ye woman & tormen¦ted her asprely. And an holy man named Fortunate heled her by his prayers. G. ¶Another example saint gregorye tel¦leth in his dialogue how a woman lefully was knowen of her owne husbande at sa¦terdaye at nyght / & whan she accompany¦ed with the other at the processyon of the sondaye the deuyll entred in to her & tour∣mented her strongly before all the people. By this example it is to note that in holy tymes a man sholde absteyne hym somty¦me from thȳges lefull. ¶Also a man shol¦de vnderstonde yt maryage is one of ye .vii holy sacramentes / & for as moche as it is holy he sholde drawe hym honestly & holy∣ly / & accede on his partye in good entency∣on. Those & they the whiche done the con∣trary sholde drede to lese paradyse and ye rewarde yt the good shall haue the whiche haue kepte the sayncete of the sayd sacra∣ment. ¶Also they sholde drede punycyon & dampnacyon / for all mortell synne byn∣deth vnto dampnacyon. H. ¶Example of a man maryed moche deuoute / by the voluptuosyte of his flessh yode vnto his wyfe in other manere than nature ne techeth hym / & therfore he was dampned in the ende of his dayes. As it was after shewed by vysyon vnto his sone relygyous by his prayers and by the holy lyfe that he was of. I. ¶Another example that men fynde in wrytyng of a man maried yt vsed his wyf dyshonestly as ye sodomytes / & moche dys∣pleased vnto his wyfe. & one tyme agayn her wyl cōmyt in her the synne of sodomy and incontynent after that he arose from his bedde to goo in to the chambres in the whiche his bowelles fell from hym & dys∣cended by the foundement with grete tor∣ment
than he began to crye / the people ca¦me & of the doloure yt he felte he tolde hys sayd synne / & that god hym venged & pu∣nysshed / & my scheuously he deyed. ¶Ano¦ther example of a man yt knewe his wyfe on ester euen. Que. lxxxxiii. a. ¶Another example how ye chyldren of a man and of a woman ne myght haue baptysme for ye synne that they commytted in maryage / Que. lxxxxiii. b. Those yt haue offended in theyr maryages make they true confessiō & they shal haue mercye. Que. viii.c. A. Of defloracion yt god defendeth. xxxvii NOn mechaberis. kepe ye from doynge lecherye in ony wyse what soo it be / he yt dothe the werke of nature out of mary¦age deceyueth hymselfe. ¶A man cōmytteth defloracyon whan one of the partyes or bothe twayne ben vyrgins & they cōmyt lecherye out of mariage. In the auncyent testament she the whiche suf¦fred yt she were deflored was brent. vn̄ le. xxi. Puella si depreheusa fuerit in stupro et violauerit nomē patris sui: flāmis exu∣ret{ur}. For yt that sychem deflored dine ye dou¦ghter of iacob / he & his fader with them of his house were slayne as it is wryten ge. xxxiiii. He yt defloreth a vyrgyne vnto her dothe dōmage inaprecyable / so yt ther nys golde ne syluer ne ony thinge temporel of what valoure so euer it be yt may be com∣pared vnto the valoure of one soule conty¦nent as a vyrgyn mayden. Of whome it is wryten eccl. xxvi. Oīs pōderatio sclm cu¦iuslibet rei t{pre}oralis cuiuscū{que} sit pōderis & valoris: nō e digna aīe cōtinēti. Saynt ie∣rome sayth yt vnto these vyrgȳs is promy¦sed fruite a. C. tymes / & whan they be one tyme corrupte or brused they shal neuer re¦couer the sayd fruyte ne theyr vyrgynyte / no more than a man may repayre a lam∣pe broken in peces how be it it is to be vn¦derstonde but that they maye be saued in doynge of penaunce / but they shall neuer be of the nombre of vyrgyns in paradyse▪ they shal be of the nombre of those yt haue done penaōce. Vnto wedowes yt haue we∣le kepte chastyte is promysed fruyte thre¦score tymes. This sayeth saynt Iherome And vnto women maryed fruyte thyrtye tymes & euery one shall haue after theyr deserte. Also the harlot the whiche corrup∣teth a vyrgyn is cause of all the payllardi¦ses & ylles yt the sayd vyrgyn doth euer af∣ter / as he the whiche maketh a breche in ye corne wele closed is cause yt the said bestes entren in to the sayd corne & there done of dōmage / & for to satyffye of the said ylle ye said harlot sholde close the breche vnto his power / yt is to withdrawe ye sayd woman from synne. And after ye droitm he her shol¦de marye with his goodes / or to take her in mariage yf she be not maried: or he shol¦de entre in to a monastery for to do penaū¦ce perpetuell. ¶Examples how ylle is co∣men vnto many the whiche haue dyspoyl¦led vyrgyns of theyr maydenhede. Fyrste how a knyghte was dampned for that / yt he hadde deflored a vyrgyn. Quere .lxxxxi b. ¶Another example how a vyrgin was rauysshed in the daunce and fyled & after henge herselfe. Que. lxviii. f. Many other examples ben wryten in the examplayre / Quere. lxxxxi. a. b. c. B. ¶Of inceste yt god defendeth. xxxvii. NOn mechaberis. Fle al synne of le¦cherye & loue clene lyfe and pure / A man cōmytteth inceste whan ye parties the whiche accomplysshen lecherye ben of
lygnage / or of affynyte or vnder from the fyfte degre / or whan there is betwene thē gossiprede by the meane of the sacrament of baptysme or of confyrmacyon. After ye auncyent lawe those the whiche cōmytted this synne were put vnto deth. vn̄ leui. xx. Qui dormierit cū nouerca sua cum muru sua vter{que} moriatur / quia scelus operati sunt sanguis eorū sit super eos. He ye whi∣che hathe slepte with his stepmoder / or wt his syster in lawe / the one / the other shall deye / for they haue done synne / theyr blode be vpon them. Also he the whiche hathe ta¦ken his syster the doughter of his fader or the doughter of his moder ben they slayne before ye people vn̄ in dicto. ca. Qui acce∣perit sororē suam filiam patris sui vel fili∣am matris sue. &c. Occidatur in cōspectu populi sui. For this synne Ammon the so∣ne of dauyd was slayne by the cōmaunde¦ment of his broder Absalon / for he had de¦flored theyr syster Thamar as it is wrytē ii. regum. xiii. Also all malediccyon dyscen¦deth vpon them the whiche cōmytte thys synne as it is wryten deutero .xxviii. Ma¦ledictus qui dormit cū vxore patris sui et cū sorore sua filia patris sui vel matris sue et dicit omnis populus amen. That man is accursed the whiche slepeth with the wy∣fe of his fader / & with his syster ye dough∣ter of his moder. And all the people shall saye amen so be it. ¶Also punycyon and dampnacyon foloweth vnto them ye whi∣che knowe theyr gossyppes men or womē or god sones / or god doughters as we rede in the dyalogue of saint Gregorye that for the lecherye of a curyal the whiche corrup¦te a fayre doughter that he had holden on the fonte of baptysme he deyed sodaynly in the chirche before the people. Que. post ad numerum .lxxxx. b. ¶Another example of a woman dampned and terrybly tour∣mented the whiche had cōmytte lecherye with one of her kynnesmen. Quere. lxxx a. Yf thou haue offended in this vyce goo vnto penaunce. Quere .viii. b. B. ¶Of sacrylege as vnto lecherye yt god defendeth. Ca. xxxvii. SAynt Bernarde sayeth. Tan¦gere qui gaudens meretricem qualiter audes. Palmis pollu∣tis: regē palpare salutis. Thou man of the chirche the whiche enioyest ye to touche an harlot / how darest thou touche the kynge of helthe with thy handes soylled. Thou arte sacryleged the whiche soyllyst the holy sacramente of or∣dres that thou haste receyued. Sacrylege is cōmytte in many maners / but yt which toucheth the synne of lecherye / is whan a man hurteth / soylleth / or vyolateth ye holy thynges / as those the whiche ben in holy ordres halowed vnto god / preest religious man or woman / & they cōmytteth ye sinne of the flesshe. Suche people synneth gre∣uously they ben to punysshe. ¶Example how a preest fornycatour deyed sodaynly in sȳ as he wolde haue sōge masse. lxxxxiii d. ¶Another example of the punycyon & dampnacyon of a nōne the whiche cōmyt¦ted lecherye .lxxxiii. f. ¶Of thynges the whiche greueth ye sȳne of ye flesshe. in people of the chirche. xxxvii SAynt Iherome saith. In ma¦iori gradu: maior sīe dubio pe¦na Of asmoche more as leche¦rye is cōmytte in grete degre of a persone / vnto hym there
apperteyneth the more grete payne & pu∣nycyon. Many thynges aggreueth ye sȳne of the flesshe in theym of the chirche. The fyrste thynge is that they breke the vowe of chastyce that they promysed vnto god in receyuynge the holy ordres. Whan ony them receyueth he renoūceth vnto maria¦ge / & vnto all copulacyon of woman. And yf euer after he go therto he is a breker of his auowe the whiche is a grete case. The psalmyst sayeth. Couete et reddite dn̄o deo vestro. Vowe ye & yelde ye vnto oure lorde god. It is greate synne vnto lay peo¦ple to cōmytte lecherye oute of maryage / for they go agaynst the lawe & cōmaunde¦ment of god / but the synne is more grete vnto the people of the chirche ye whiche bre¦keth theyr vowe & the cōmaundement of god. ¶The seconde thynge the whiche ag¦greueth the synne vnto ye people of ye chir∣che / is whan dyrectly and wyttynge they go agayne the wyll of god & agayne ye scy¦ence and ye good that they knowe. Theyr sinne is greter than that of symple people the whiche ne knowe ne yet vnderstonde the scryptures and synneth by ygnoraūce Saynt gregorye sayeth. Meli{us} est viā ve¦ritatis nn cognoscere: {quam} eam cognitā nō seruare. It is better thynge not to knowe the waye of trouthe / than not to kepe it after that it is knowen. And saynt peter sayeth. Meli{us} erat illis nō cognoscere viā iustitie {quam} post aguitionē retrorsū cōuerti / It were better vnto those synners not to knowe ye waye of Iustyce than to conuer¦te them vnto ye contrarye after the know¦lege. And iaco. iii. Sciēti bonū facere & nō faciēti peccatū est illi. Synne it is to hym knowynge to doo wele and not doynge it ¶The thyrde thynge ye whiche agreueth the synne in people of the chirche is for yt / that they ben the example of all derkenes derysyon / sclaundre / and synne. And they sholde be the lyght / the lanterne / and ye ex¦ample of all chastyte / bounte & holynes & vertues after yt the whiche is writen mar. v. Vos estis lux mūdi. Sequiui. S lu∣ceat lux vestra corā hominib{us} vt videant opera vestra bona et glorificent patrē ve∣strum qi est in celis. You be the lyght of the worlde / your lyght shyneth in suche wyse / before men that they se your good opera∣cyons and yt they gloryfye your fader the whiche is in heuen. And saynt augu. saith Quicqid vidēt laici vobis displicere dicūt procul dubio sibi nō licere. Quicqid vos in opere vident ad implere: credūt esse licitū et culpa carere. What thynge yt this laye people se dysplease vnto you / they se with¦out doubte that it is not lefull vnto them and ony thynge that they se you to accom¦plysshe in operacyon they byleue to be le∣full & without gylte. Whan the candyll or the lyght of a house is put out it is occasy∣on that all those of the sayd house ben in derkenesse. Also whan the curates / chape∣layns / clerkes / & people of the chirche ben harlottes the whie sholde be the lyghte of chastyte / of purenes / of clennes as it is sayd / it is the occasyon that lytell people ben yll and harlottes. And by this ye synne is ye more greuous vnto pleople of ye chir∣che the whiche ben the example of sclaun∣dre and of synne / wherof foloweth mala∣dyccion. Vnde mathei. viii. Ve mundo a scandalis. Sequitur. Ve homini per quē scandalum venit. Maledyccyon vnto the worlde for these sclaundres. Maledyccion vnto hym by whome sclaundre cometh. / Whan a preest is lecherous by hym there procedeth grete sclaundre the whiche is a thynge that pleaseth vnto the deuyll and dyspleaseth moche vnto our lorde. Exam∣ple how the deuyll charged a woman for to cōmytte lecherye with preestes for the greate yll the whiche therof dothe procede
Quere .lxvi. f. ¶Also the wounde or hurt is wors more vyllayne & apparant whan it is within the eye than in another mem¦bre / so is the synne of lecherye in people of the chirche than in the laye people. Ihero. dicit. {quod} cleric{us} aut honestior ē ceteris aut alus fabula. The clerke eyther he is more honeste than these other / or he is the tale vnto other / yt is the example wors than ye other. ¶The fourth thynge the whiche a∣greueth the synne is for yt that the people of the chirche ben mynysters of god and of his housholde deputed vnto his seruyce & lyue of his godes & haue the grete wages: benefyces & reuenues. Whan the houshol∣de seruaunt of the kynge of grete lorde go¦uerneth dyshonestly and dysobeyeth vnto his mayster he is more to blame & to pu∣nysshe than is another straunger / for that that he lyueth vnder hym & hathe grete sa¦layre / in like wyse is it of the people of the chirche. Vn̄ psal. Verba dn̄i. Si inimicus me{us} maledisset mihi: sustinuissē vti{que}. and for asmoche as the worde of god is dyspy∣sed of his owne housholde seruauntes he is the more yll content. &c. Also whan for∣nycacyon is done in the chirche the syn is more greate than yf it were done in other place. For the chirche is blyste & deputed vnto ye seruyce of god. Also lecherye is mo¦re grete synne in people of the chirche the whiche ben blyste in receyuynge the holy ordres & deputed vnto seruyce of god than in symple people. Au. Plus peccat cleric{us} multerē {con}cupiscēdo {quam} carnalit{ur} layc{us} ipsam attīgēdo. The clerke synneth more in cou¦ueytynge the woman than ye laye man in touchynge her carnally. Also ye barkynge of dogges is nuysyble vnto ye oxe. ye wayl∣lynge of hogges pleaseth more to god thā these lecherous clerkes. Au. Plus placet deolatrat{us} canū / mugit{us} bouū / gemitus porcorū / {quam} vox clericorū luxuriantiū. Also these ryche people haue in hate & abhomy¦nacion theyr seruaūtes whan they ben fou¦le & vyllayns / & loueth ye pure & clene. In lyke wyse god hathe in hate his seruaunt foule / stynkynge / & soylled by lecherye. Le. eccle. xii. {quod} altissimus odio habet pctōres. The ryght greate / yt is god ye whiche hath in hate the synners. Also the synner & his synne be in hate vnto god. vn̄. sapien. xiiii. Odio sunt deo impius & impietas eius. ¶The .v. thynge the whiche agreueth the synne is the dygnyte of the offyce wherin ben ordeyned these preestes the whiche is soylled in cōmyttynge lecherye. The prees¦tes ben so dygne that they excercyse the of¦fice of aūgelles / wherof it is wryten ma. ii. Labia enī sacerdotis custodiūt sciētiā & legē requirent ex ore eius qia angel{us} diū excercituū est. The lyppes of the preest ke¦peth science & these other requyreth ye law of his mouthe / for he is an aūgell / yt is to vnderstonde messenger of our lorde of the offyce of compaygnyes. The offyce and ye excercyse that these aungelles haue ye whi¦che kepeth vs to admynystre vnto vs & to counsayll to lyue after the scyence and the lawe and the cōmaundementes of god / & vnto preestes is betaken this offyce. And therfore they sholde lyue chastely or theyr synne shall be ryght greuous. Also ye prees¦tes haue more grete dygnyte than the aū∣gelles in as moche as they haue the offyce to consecrate the body of Ihesus the whi∣che the aungelles haue not. For they haue not receyued the ordres. And for asmoche as these preestes haue soo greate dygnyte they sholde be full of grete valour & boun¦te more than the laye people / or theyr sȳne shall be more greate. Also a pyece of golde is more worthe & more dygne than a pece of lede or metall / so is ye preest for his dyg¦nyte / than a seculer / wherby his synne is more grete whan he offendeth ayenst god
Also no man ne here the masse of a preest the whiche he knoweth vndoutfully to ha¦ue concubyne. Vn̄ luci{us} dicit. {quod} nullus au∣diat missā sacerdotis quē scit idubitantur cōcubinā habere. Also these preestes / cura¦tes & prelates ben vycayres & lieutenaū∣tes of god the whiche haue puyssaunce in many case to absoyle & to vnbynde ye syn∣nes frome theyr subgectes. And yf ony be defayllynge and inobedyentes for to byn∣de them & to excōmunycate as it is wrytē mat. xvi. Quodcū{que} ligaueris su{per} terrā erit ligatū et ī celis & quodcū{que} solueris su per terram erit solutū et in celis. et iho. xx. Quo{rum} remiseritis pctā remittūtur eis: & quorū retinueritis retēta sūt. whan a lieu tenaunt gouerneth hym ylle in his cōmys¦syon in dysobeynge vnto his mayster hys synne is more grete than yf he had not the offyce. These prestes haue the offyce befor¦sayd ye whiche ye aūgelles haue not / wher∣by theyr synne is the more greuous yf they gouerne them ylle. Example how two of the preestes of the auncyent lawe couuey∣ted vnshamefully & prayed Susanne of dyshonour / & bycause she resysted agayne them they thought to haue made her deye but they themselfe were slayne / theyr syn was grete for they were preestes aūcyen∣tes & iuges. Que. lxxxxvi. c. The .vi. thyng ye aggreueth the syn is whan these prestes lodge & put to reste theyr god & maker af¦ter ye celebracyon in theyr bodyes ye which is vyle / & stynkinge / & in dede yf he be pol¦luted by lecherye. Vn̄. i. corin. xi. Quicū{que} māducauerit panē vel biberit calicē dn̄i ī∣digne re{us} erit corporis & sāguinis dn̄i seqi∣tur. Qui enī māducat & bibit īdigne iudi ciū sibi māducat & bibit. A man sholde say yt it sholde be greate synne to put the body & the blode of Ihesus in a chalyce soule in dede / & by a more stronge reason in the bo¦dy lecherous. Augu. Meli{us} ē spūalia peni¦tus emiti: {quam} impure tractari. It is better vtterly to leue in all thynges spyrytuelies than to entreate them foulely. E ¶Example how two prestes lecherous were punysshed. It is wryten in ye prom∣tuarye of the dyscyple yt Guyslaume recy∣teth how a preest lecherous & soule by sin receyued the body of Ihesu cryste in hys mouthe also as euery daye / & the venge∣aunce of god came vpon hym. His mouth his lyppes torned towarde the nose and ye chynne & his tonguestanke soo strongly ye with payne his frendes myght endure hȳ And he recyteth agayne of another preest ye whiche was in suche wyse in wales. vn∣to whome it happened that as his handes were vpon the aulter they were brent tyll vnto ye elbowes by punycyon dyuyne. Pe¦ple of the chirche ben the seruaūtes of god & of his housholde. And therfore they shol∣de be holy / chaste / pure / & clene in folowyn¦ge theyr mayster. Vn̄. leui. xx. Sanctifica mini et estote sancti / quia ego sanctus sū dicit domin{us} / et leui. xxi. Sancti erūt deo suo et nō poluent nomen eius. The people of holy chirche ben holy vnto theyr god / & the name of hym they ne soyllen. Exam∣ple how a vyrgyn sawe a preest / chast / cle¦re / & fayre in singȳge masse. Que. lxxxxiiii a. Another example how a bisshop was so chaste / pure / & clene that he sawe on ester daye some men confeste the whiche were blacke / & the other whyte. Quere. lxxxxiii c. The vertue of chastyte is agreable vn∣to god and vnto men. And therfore we it sholde kepe curyously. Mayster hugues sa¦yeth. Qui perdit puditiam perdit animā suam / perdit deum / perdit seipsum. He ye whiche leseth chastyteleseth his soule / le∣seth hymselfe. F. ¶Example for to kepe chastyte / and for to flee the stynkynge synne of lecherye the whiche is cause of soo many euylles /
It is wryten in ye lyfe of faders that a re∣lygyous wrapped his handes in his maū∣tell of drede to touche his moder whan he passed with her ouer a water And she axed hym wherfore he was so wrapped / he an∣swerd yt the body of a woman is fyre / & at yt houre that I touched yt it came to my re¦membraunce of other women / wherfore yf we wyll kepe chastyte it behoueth to fle the loke / the company / and the touchynge of the woman. The pope innocent layeth yt these clerkes ne abyden with these wo∣men but with those the whiche ben auncy¦ent without voluptuosyte carnall. And sa¦ynt Augustyn sayeth in the rule of chanoy¦nes whan ye be in the chirche where these women ben kepe togyder youre chastyte. Qn̄ estis in ecclesia vbi et feminini sūt i∣uicē puditiā vestrā custodite. &c. Those ye whiche haue offended god by lechery done they penaunce and they shall be saued. Ex¦ample how a relygyous apostate and le∣cherous hadde mercy by penaunce. Que∣re. xlviii. e. G. ¶Of the synne agayne nature and of sodomye that god defendeth. THe mayster of sentences sayth in his fourth boke. Peius est enī cū matre {quam} cū aliena vxore dormire: sed oīm ho{rum} pessimum qd cōtra naturāsit. It is wors to slepe wt his moder than with another woman / but worste of all aboue all these other is that the whiche is done agayn na¦ture. The synne agayne nature is cōmyt in many maners / the whiche synne is soo horryble & detestable yt men dare not wry¦te ne preche yt that the scriptures telleth & for cause / for many therin maye offende. But in confessyon it sholde be declared by the synner yf ye synner wyll saue his soule yf he be fallen in to suche sȳne by atouchȳ¦ge vpon hymselfe / or wt bestes / or in other maners agayne the ordonnaunce yt god & nature hathe put in suche case. Those yt co∣myt this synne after ye faith sholde be put vnto dethe. vn̄ leui. xx. Qui dormierit cū masculo coitu feminco vter{que} operat{us} est nefas morte moriat{ur} sit sāguis eorū super eos seqitur. Qui cū tumēto et peccore coie¦rit morte moriat{ur}: pec{us} quo{que} occidite. &c. Also they haue maledyccyon as it is wry∣ten deutero. xxvii. Maledict{us} qi dormit cū oī iumēto et dicet oīs popul{us} amē. Sodo∣mye was loste for this synne ye whiche dys¦pleaseth vnto god yt he made to fall .v. cy∣tes. That is to vnderstonde Sodome / go more / segor / boym / & oleale. And all this was for theyr cursed synnes / as it is wry∣ten in gene. xix. Thou shalt fynde this exā¦ple wryten at length in ye exemplayre. que¦re. lxxxv. a. Another example of ye warre & slaughter yt was made vpon ye sodomites of Beniamin for ye lechery yt they cōmyttē with ye wyfe of leuite. Que. lxxxxv. b. Ano¦ther example of a man yt vsed his wyfe so¦domytly .lxxxxv. c. Many other examples ben wryten in ye exemplayre. lxxxxv. d.e.f. A. ¶Of ye vertue of chastyte ye whiche is agayne the synne of lecherye. Ca. xxxviii. IT is wryten luce. xii. Sīt lūbi ve¦stri {pre}cīcti & lucerne ardētes ī ma¦nib{us} vestris. &c. Let your rayns be gyrde wt the gyrdyl of chastyte & the lyghtes brenne in your han¦des by good operacyons. God wyll that al persones men & women lyue chastely. cha¦styte maketh ye soule fayre / whyte / pure & clene / & loued of god. And of ye soule chaste & vyrgyn is wryten. can̄. ii. Sicut liliū int spinas: sic amica mea īter filias. The lely is a fayre floure ye whiche hathe .vi. leuys
whyte the whiche sygnyfyeth the chasty∣te of ye body / and hathe syxe granes with in gylte the whiche sygnyfyeth the chasty∣te and clennesse of the thought. ¶Of this chastyte and vyrgynyte speketh the sayge sapiētie. iiii. O {quam} pulcra est casta genera∣tio cū caritate: immortalis enī est memo∣ria illi{us}: cm̄ apud deū nota ē & apud hoīes And this worde here is to be noted ye whi¦che sayeth cū caritate. For the tooles vyr∣gyns the whiche haue not of oyle in theyr lampes the whiche sygnyfyed charyte we¦re strongly closed / & they entred not with the spouse with the vyrgyns sage in chari¦te. Vn̄ math. xxv. Clausa est ianua. Also the estate of vyrgynyte is fayre / whyte pu¦re / and clene without ony spotte. Vnto ye whiche estate a man maye saye that there apperteyneth a whyte robe. Of this esta∣te it is wryten howe saynt Iohan lawe a grete hepe of people chastes and vyrgyns the whiche songe melodyously a newe lon¦ge / and vnto hym it was sayd illud apoca¦lipsis. xiiii. Hi sunt qui cū mulieribus nō sunt coinquitati virgines enim unt. Hi se¦quūtur agnum quocun{que} ierit. sequit{ur}. Si ne macua sunt ante thronum dei. A why∣te robe is more clene than another / ye whi∣che ought to be kepte from soyllynge. For the spotte therin is more foule than in ano¦ther robe. In lyke wyse chastyte vyrgyny¦te ought to be kepte from the soyllerye of lecherye. Of ye beaute of vyrgynyte is wry¦ten can̄. ii. T'ota pulchra is amica mea: et macula non est in te. ¶Example is the blyssed vyrgyn marye the whiche is the ex¦ample of virginite and of all chastyte the whiche was all fayre without ony spotte for neuer origynal synne / venyel / ne mor tell ne entred in to her. Also chastyte is a treasour inaprecyable. Wherof it is wry∣ten ecclesa. xxvi. Omnis ponderatio scʐ cuilibet rei: temporalis cuiuscun{que} sit pon∣deris & valoris non est digna anime conti¦nenti. There is neyther golde ne syluer ne precyous stone ne other thynge corporell / of what valour and pryce so euer it be / yt is to be compared vnto onesoule chaste & contynente as a vyrgyn & mayden. ¶Ex¦ample men rede in ye legende of saynt ber¦narde that there was a fayre man ye whi∣che came to lodge in an ynne / and in the nyght he began to crye / a these theues the∣se theues / for his hostesse came to hym in the nyght for to haue had his company / & thre tymes in suche wyse he cryed / wherfo¦re the people rose vp whiche foūde no the∣ues. And in the mornynge his dyscyples hym demaunded the cause of his crye. He them answerde that his hostesse wolde ha∣ue stolen from hym his precyous treasour of vyrgynyte. Of this treasour of chastite that a man sholde loue it is wryten math. xiii Simile est regnum celorum thesauro abicondito in agro. Thesaurum in agro est castitas in corde. &c. A treasour ye whi∣che is hydde in a poore place / as the body ye whiche is frayll to synne ought be kepte ye theues stele it not. A loule contynent as a vyrgyn ought wele to be kepte it eme ylle thoughtes / or she shall lese her sayd trea∣soure. Quia augusimus dicit. Nichil pro¦dest virginitas corporis vbi operatur cor∣ruptio mentis. Also to lyue chastely and to kepe vyrgynyte in our corruptyble bo∣dyes the whiche of it selfe is lecherous is not a lyfe erthely nor terryenne / but it is a lyfe angelike. Vnde therono. In seimone de assumptione beate marie ait sic. Bene angelus ad virginem mittitur: quia ange¦lis semper ē cognata virginitas profecto ait. Incarne preter carnem viuere non ē terrena vita: sed angelica. Wherfore you vyrgyns / and men and women the whi∣che loueth chastyte beware of exces of me¦tes & drynkes for yt prouoketh lecheryes. /
And for asmoche as those and they ye whi∣che kepeth vyrgynyte and chastyte ledeth a lyfe angelyke / they shall be semblables vnto aungelles. Vn̄ math. xxii. In resur∣rectione nō nubent ne{que} nubētur: sed erūt sicut angeli dei in celo. Also these aūgelles kepeth the vyrgyns and the people chaste by grete curyosyte. In lyke wyse as saynt Cecyle sayd vnto valeryan. Vnde legitur in legenda cecile. Angelū dei habeo ama¦torem qui nimio zelo custodit corpus meū &c. Also the soule chaste & vyrgyn ye which hathe stedfast fayth in god is the espouse of Ihesu cryste: wherof it is wryten .ii. ad. co. xi. Despōdi enī vos vni viro virginē castā exhibere christo. Et legitur can̄. iiii. Veni de libano spōsa mea veni corona∣beris. Et in vna antiphona. Veni spōsa christi accipe coronā quā tibi dn̄s prepara¦uit ineternū. The espouse of Ihesu cryste shall be crowned in paradyse for the resys¦tence that she had made agayne her body lecherous & agayne her other aduersaryes ¶Example we rede in ye legende of saint Cecile that an aungell bare two crownes of fayre floures wele smellynge. And the sayd aungell put one vpon ye heed of saint Cecyle. And the other vpon the heed of her husbande Valeryan. Vn̄ legit{ur}. {quod} valetia∣nus inuenit iuxta ceciliā angelū dn̄i stan∣tem flāmeo aspectu radiētem coronas du¦as portantē ī manibus coruscātes rosis et liliis albescentes qi{que} vnā dedit cecilie / et alter ā valeriano dicēs. Has coronas nū∣{quam} marcescētes: nun{quam} aspectus suiflorem amittētes nun{quam} odoris sui suauitatē mi∣nuētes de paradiso dei: vobis allatas mū¦do corde & corpore cusiodite q̄ ab alio vide ii nō poterūt nisi ab eis qibus castitas pla∣cuerit sicut vobis {pro}bata ē placuisse. Vnto the floure of virginite ben appropried the wordes of the sayge. eccle. xxiiii. Flores mei fructus honoris & honestatis. That is to saye my floures bereth fruyte of honou¦re and of honeste. Many floures ther ben the whiche bereth truyte of honoure and of honeste as the lylly / the rose / the vyolet ye gyllofre. These floures here haue in thē foure thynges. The fyrste is beaute in be∣holding them. The seconde is good odour in smellynge theym. The thyrde is yt they worshyp the persone ye whiche bereth them The .iiii. is yt they ben good to make mede¦cynes & water. &c. In lyke maner a perso¦ne vyrgyn and chaste hathe these four pro¦pryetes here. ¶Fyrste his soule is fayre / & so is the body oftymes. Sicut le. ge. xxiiii. Rebecca fuisse puella decora nimis vgo {que} pulcherima & īcognita viro. Another ex¦ample ye saȳt Barbara was fayre of faith of body / & of soule. Pulchra facie: sed pul∣chrior fide. For she vowed and kepte virgi¦nite & refused to be maried. And her fader dyde make for her a toure for to hyde her beaute. O nimiā pulchritudinem fecit la pidcam in qua genitor iilam subliuius col¦locaret. &c. ¶Secondly the persone the whiche kepeth vyrgynyte and chastyte ha¦the the odoure of good renōmee and befo¦re god and the worlde as the vyrgyn ma∣ryed & these other vyrgyns. &c. And vnto the contrary lechery maketh to haue yll re¦nōmee vnto those and them that vse it / & vnto theyr lygnee. ¶Thyrdly vyrgynyte and chastyte worshyppeth and honoureth the vyrgyns / and ye place where they ben entred / and where theyr ymage is / is wor¦shypped and honoured. ¶Fourthly vyrgi¦nyte and chastyte is of valcure / for ye vyr∣gyns do myracles and many good dedes Lecherye is vnto the contrarye of the .iiii. thȳges beforsayd / for she is not to be com∣pared vnto the vyle carcas and flesshe ro∣ten the whiche leseth foure thynges / that is for to vnderstonde / beaute corporell / sa¦uour good & swete odour / & good renōme.
Chastyte is a fayre vertue the whiche ou∣ghte to be gretely appetyted for the good¦nesse the whiche therof procedeth. Vn̄ ma∣gister hugo de sācto victore dicit. Magna est pudicitie virtus nam hominem a terre∣no subleuat / angelis sociat deo coniungit / et de terreno celestem de carnali spiritualē facit. Chastyte is a grete vertue celestyall and spyrytuall / it lyfteth vp the man from erthly thynges and felawshyppeth hym wt the aungelles / and conioyneth hym wt god from erthly and maketh hym celestyall / & fro carnall espyrytual. ¶A questyon / who so sholde demaunde what vyrgynyte is / & what rewarde vnto it apperteyneth. The answere. Vyrgynyte is to haue thought to kepe perpetuall chastyte in his body corru∣ptyble. And of the rewarde saynt Iherom sayth that vnto the vyrgyns is promysed fruyte and hōdred tymes. Vnto wydowes lx. And vnto the maryed men and women xxx. For to be a vyrgyn and to haue the re∣warde that therunto apperteyneth it beho¦ueth to kepe two thynges the whiche ben chastyte of body and of thought. And a mā sholde note here many thynges. Fyrst that whan a persone hath commytted one only tyme lechery by delyberacyon and by ope∣racyon he loseth the rewarde of vyrgynyte Howbeit that a man sholde not vnderston¦de but that he may be saued by penaunce. And whan the thought of a vyrgyn is cor∣rupte and not the body yf she be repayred by penaunce with purpose for to kepe her she loseth not the rewarde the whiche ap∣perteyneth vnto vyrgyns. And whan ony persones maryeth them and that they doo the operacions of maryage in lykewyse as god and the chyrche hath ordeyned / in su∣che case they doo theyr saluacyon / but they haue not the rewarde the whiche appertey¦neth vnto vyrgins. And of those and them the whiche haue theyr bodyes entyer with¦out corrupcyon / and the whiche ne ben ma¦ryed but haue theyr wylles stedfast to ma¦ry them / they ben not worthy too haue the rewarde the whiche aperteyneth vnto vyr¦gyns. Vnde hiero. Nichil prodest habere virginem si mentem quis nupserat. Et au¦gustinus in libro virginitate sic ait. Felici or michi videtur esse mulier nupta {quam} virgo nuptura habet enim illa {quam} ista cupit. The vyrgyns haue the moost gretest rewarde in paradyse / and of good ryght. For theyr bodyes haue not ben soyled ne corrupt by lechery / and also they haue opteyned ye bet¦ter party / that is to please and to serue god and not vnto the body and vnto the worl∣de. Vnde hieronim{us}. Bona est castitas cō∣iugalis / melior est vidualis / {sed} optimus vir¦ginalis. Et paulus .i. corinth. vii. Qui sine vxore est sollicitus que domini sunt quomo do placeat deo. &c. sequitur. Mulier innup∣ta et virgo cogitat que domini sunt / vt sit sancta corpore & spiritu. Qui cum vxore est sollicitus est que sunt mundi quomodo pla¦ceat vxori & diuisus est. Alibi. Dico autē nō nuptis et viduis bonum esse illis si perman serint sic quod si se non continent nubent / meli{us} est enim nubere {quam} viri. And yf a vyr¦gyn be corrupt by force she loseth not the re¦warde of chastyte by suche wyse that after¦warde she be not vnto the sayd dede agrea¦ble / and that she humble her towarde god. Quia peccatum est actio voluntaria / & nō est peccatum nisi voluntarium. Et legitur primi regum .xvi. Homo enim videt ea q̄ parent deus autem intuetur cor. ¶Exam¦ple in saynt Luce the whiche lyed not / for ye holy goost was in her / sayd vnto the tyraūt Si inuitam me violare feceris castitas mi¦chi duplicabitur ad coronam. Et leo a dicit. Virgines dei q̄ oppressione barbari∣ca integritatem carnis perdiderunt pudo∣ris laudabilioris erunt si se incōtaminatis non audeant comparare virginibus. &c.
B. ¶The vyrgyns sholde drede many thȳ¦ges for feere to lose paradyse and theyr re∣warde. The fyrste thynge that they sholde drede is pryde espyrytuall and vayneglory Vnde Augustinus in libro de virginitate sic ait. Non solum predicanda est virgini∣tas vt ametur verum et mouenda est ne ī∣fletur. The seconde is slouthe / tedyousnes and ydlenes wherby the deuyll hath entrȳ¦ge for to tempt and deceyue. Whan ye per∣sone is occupyed the deuyll hathe none en∣trynge / that is too vnderstande folysshely to beholde / to here / to speke / to touche / and to goo in to euyll companyes. &c. Who soo wyll kepe chastyte ought to haue good clo∣sure that cursed beestes and the venym of lechery entre not in to the gardyn of theyr conscience. Vnde can̄. iiii Ortus conclusus soror mea sponsa / ortus conclusus fons si∣gnatus. Whan a gardin is well closed ther¦in entreth no beestes. &c. The vyrgyns ke∣pe clennesse of herte and of conscyence to thende that they haue beatytude. Vnd ma¦thei. v. Beati mūdo corde quoniam ipsi deo videbunt. And yf theyr sayd hert be soyled by lechery they ne do nothynge. Vnde au∣gustinus. Nichil prodest virginitas corpo¦ris vbi operatur corruptio mentis vt dictū est. ¶Example how Iudyth kepte wel her fyue wyttes of nature / for after that her husbande was dede she made her secretes and her bedde in the heyght of her hous for to euyte and fle companyes of people / and lyued solytaryly with her maydēs without beynge in wyll to mary. She kepte chaste∣ly her wydowhede. Vnde iudith vltimo. Erat iudith virtuti castitas adiuncto / ita vt non cogno sceret virum omnibus diebus vite sue ex quo defunctus est manasses vir eius. & cetera. The fourth thynge that these vyrgins sholde drede is to moche grete nou¦rysshement / for the good wyne and the de¦lycyous meetes draweth thē vnto lechery And therfore these vyrgyns sholde fle dryn¦kynge of wyne in lykewyse as venym. Vn¦de Hieronimus. Virga ipsa vinum fugiat vt venenum. Example in Loth the whiche defloured his owne doughters whan yt he was dronke / and he apperceyued it not in his dronkennes. The fyfthe is imperseue∣raunce / for it suffyseth not too kepe vyrgy∣te in somtimes / but it behoueth to perseuer Vnde mathei. x. & .xxiiij. Qui perseueraue¦rit vs{que} in finem hic saluus erit. C. ¶Examples of vyrgynyte. And first a man may say by fygure and symylytude that the soule the whiche is vyrgyn / chaste pure / and clene without synne is loued of Ihesu cryst and shall be crowned in para∣dise yf he perseuer in boūte. As Hester was beloued of kynge Assuerus / of whome it is wryten in the byble. Quod hester erat pul¦chra nimis facie{que} decora & omnium oculis gratiosa / hec enim dicta est ad cubiculum regis et adamauit eam rex super om̄es mu¦lieres et posuit dyadema regis in capite ei{us}. ¶Another example how saynt Agnes vyr¦gyn and martyr was moche loued of Ihe∣su crist. Also she reputed her to be his espou¦se whan she refused the sone of the prouo in maryage / her frende / and his rychesses vnto whome she sayd that she was preuen¦ted vnto another louer better than he of kynde and of dygnyte the whiche vnto her offred better ournementes than he ne dy∣de. And that was Ihesu cryst the whiche promysed her paradyse and the rewarde of vyrgynyte. Vnde legitur in legenda eius. Discede a me fomes peccati nutrimentū facinoris pabulum mortis quia iam ab alio amatore preuenta sum qui satis michi me¦liora ornamenta offerens fidei sue anulo s¦barrauit me / longe te melior et genere et di¦gnitate po fuit signum in faciem meam vt nullum preter eum amatorem admittā. &c ¶Another example that saynt Luce was
so chaste of body of thought with the ayde of the holy goost that noo strength of man ne myght lede her vnto the stewes or bor∣delhous. The holy goost her fastened and helde so strongely that noo men ne myght moeue her from thens where she was re∣sted / the whiche was stedfaste as a moun∣tayne. And in lykewyse these women shol∣de be so ferme and stedfast in good purpo∣se to kepe chastyte that noo men ne myght drawe theym for to commytte lechery. &c. ¶Another example how saynt Iustyne kepte her chastyte and resysted agaynst ye deuyll & agaynst Cypryan the whiche her tempted to commyte lechery in lykewyse as it is wryten in her legende. ¶Another example how thre fayre vyrgyns systers were kepte of god in suche maner that the prouost of Rome ne myght defloure them / & as he wende to dyspoyle them in his ke∣chyn he dyde his synne in the pottes & cau∣drons. Quere in the examplarye. lxxxxi. E. ¶Other examples how saynt Margaret and saynt Peronell kepte theyr vyrginyte and resysted soo well that they ben worthy to haue the rewarde eternal / to the whiche we may go. Amen. A. ¶Of dronkenes and glotony that god defendeth. xxxix. IT is wryten eccle. xxi. Amari∣tudo anime vinum multum po∣tatum. Wyne dronke to excesse is bytter vnto the soule / and also also it is contrary vnto chastyte For whan the wombe is replete lyghtly it is moeued vnto lechery. Vnde hieronim{us}. Venter mero repletus de facili spumat li¦bidinem. And saynt Poule sayth ad ephesi¦os .v. Nolite inebriari vino in quo est luxu¦ria. Be ye not dronke by wyne / wherin is lechery. That is to wete yt the wyne heteth & moeueth the body to comytte lechery / & the man that so delyteth is not wyse. Vnd prouerb. xx. Luxuriosa res vinū et timul¦tuosa ebrietas: quicū{que} hus delectat{ur} nō erit sapiēs. The synne of glotony is defended whan a man breketh the fastynges com∣maunded in obeyenge vnto the wombe yt wyll ete whan god commaundeth to faste or whan men ete ony thynges defended as Adam yt ete of the apple agaynst the com∣maundement of god / or as those the which eteth flesshe on the frydayes or saterdayes or butter in lente whan it is defended in ye bysshopryche / or whan some glotōs loueth theyr wombes more than god or egally vn¦to him the whiche is ydolatry / as it is decla¦red in the fyrst commaundemēt. Que. ix.c. Or whan men take the houre as to ete on ye sondayes & festes before masse or before yt they haue serued god / or whan a man se∣cheth vnto superfluyte and is to moche ly∣corous or gredy of good wynes / & of fatre & delycatyue meetes / or prepayreth theym ouer deyntely. To suche sauour & delectaci¦on vnto superfluyte there is synne / but yf ony haue honger and yt he eteth and also de¦lyteth in the meet it is noo synne / for it is a thynge naturall yt behoueth vnto al bestes Yf ony also prepayre the meet in suche ma∣ner & intencyon yt he may ete it after the cō¦plexyon and faculte of hym / for otherwyse he ne may ete it / he it also may do without synne. Vnde au. Vtant{ur} diuites cōsuetudi¦ne īfirmitatis sue: sed doleāt se alit{er} nō posse melius eī facerēt si aliter possent. Also those the whiche hath vowed not to ete egges on the fryday / or flesshe on the wednesday sȳ¦neth as vnto the fraccyon of the vowe: and as vnto glotony. Also the excesse of meet & drynke is defended that is to vnderstande whan a man eteth too moche of breed and of meet that nature be greued / or that a man vomet / or whan a man taketh so mo¦che
of drynke that a man becometh dronke and that the entendement be troubled / or to excede in drynke and mete togyders. A doctour named de vrimaria sayth. Quicū {que} inebriatur vel excedit mensuram in com¦medendo vel bibēdo et hoc facit preposito & intentione / talis peccat mortaliter tociens quotiens / sed si sit ignoranter et siue prepo¦sito vel si causa euenerit aut ex fragilitate sumētis tunc peccat venialiter. That is to saye. What soeuer man that maketh hym∣selfe dronke or excedeth the measure in etin¦ge or drynkynge and dooth it with intency on and purpose synneth mortally by as ma¦ny oftymes as it happeneth. And yf he do it ygnourantly and without purpose dispo¦sed or yf it happen by fraylte he synneth ve¦nyally. And nother doctour named hermā¦num beleueth that whan ony taketh so mo¦che of drynke and meet vnto superfluyte & from than forthe that it greue nature be it by vometynge or not / and that of it yt whi¦che he hath superfluyte and haboundaunce many poore people had ben susteyned the whiche peraduenture hadde therof necessy¦te / he beleueth that it is mortall synne. Qr contra caritatem {pro}ximi. This synne is cal¦led surfyt the whiche is whan men eteth of the meet eschauffed & warme before that it be baked / soden / or rosted ynough / the whi¦che dooth euyll / or to ete so moche mete yt it ne may bake in the dygestyon naturall the whiche causethe corporal infyrmytees and spyrytualles / and maketh men surfytous to deye as sayth ye sage. Vnde eccle. xxxvii. Propter crapulam multi obierunt qui au¦tem abstinens est aduciet vitam. And the gospell sayth that these persones sholde ke¦pe theyr hertes that they be not greued in surfytes and dronkennes. Vnde luce. xxi. Attendite autem vobis ne forte grauen∣ter corda vestra in crapula et ebrietate. Et psal. dicit. Tan{quam} potens crapulatus a vi¦no. A mā surfyteth also by ouermoche drȳ¦ke / whan he taketh so moche that his herte is drouned. Also the excesse of drynke wa∣steth the mynde / breketh the wytte and the thought / confoundeth the entendement it moueth vnto lecherye / it noyeth too speke well and implyeth the wordes / corrupteth the blode / derketh the syght / perturbeth ye vaynes / taketh the strength from the syne¦wes / maketh the eeres deef / troubleth the guttes / subuerteth the person / moysteth ye brayne / letteth the slepe / weyketh all ye mē¦bres / shorteth the lyfe / letteth prayer / the vertue and all good operacyons. Vnde le∣gitur eccle. xxxi. Vinum multum potatū irrationem et iram et ruinas multas facit ebrietas animositas imprudentis offensio minorans virtutem et faciens vulnera. &c Also the sage Salamon sayth that the Ioy of the body and of the soule is whan a man drynketh of wyne moderately without ex∣cesse / sobre drynkynge is helthe of the body and of the soule. Vnde eccle. xxxi. Exulta¦cio amime et corporis vinum modere pota¦tum / sanitas corporis et anime sobrius po∣tus. And saynt Poule sayth that these dron¦ken people shall not possede the realme of paradyse yf they deye impenytentes. Vn∣de .i. ad Corinth. vi. Ne{que} fures / ne{quod} aua∣ri / ne{que} ebriosi / regnū dei possidebunt. And of hym the whiche constreyneth ony to drȳ¦ke to excesse saynt Augustyn sayeth. Qui alium cogit vt plus bibat {quam} opus sit vt bi∣bendo inebriet / melius esset illi vt carnem suam cum gladio vulneraret {quam} animam eius per ebrietatem occideret. that is to say that he the whiche constreyneth ony to drȳ¦ke more than he shold to thende that in drȳ¦kinge he be dronken / better it were for him that he made a wounde in his body with a swerde than he sholde sle his soule by dro¦kennesse. Note well that the synne of dron¦kennesse noyeth and harmeth in many ma¦ners
vnto them the whiche it commytteth Quere ad numerum .xliiii. b.c.d.e.f.g.h.i.k ¶Examples how mani ben come vnto an euyll conclusyon by glotony. ¶Fyrst how grete euyll came vnto Adam for bytynge of the apple. &c. Quere in the examplarye. liiii. A. ¶Another example wryten in the .xii. chapytres of Iudyth the whiche with wyne made Holofernes dronke / and in his dronkennes smote of his heed. ¶Another example how punycyon dyuyne / sekenes / and dethe came vnto the cursed kynge Bal¦thasar in a grete dyner that he had made vnto the grete lordes of his courte in lyke∣wyse as it is wryten. Danielis .v. ca. ¶An¦other example how Amon the sone of Da¦uyd the whiche dyspoyled his syster Tha∣mar was slayne at a grete dyner by his bro¦der Absalon / in lykewyse as it is wryten in the .xiii. chapytre of the seconde boke of kyn¦ges. ¶Another example how the sones of Iob & his doughters were slayne at a gre∣te dyner of theyr oldest broder / in lykewyse as it is wryten in the .xvi. chapytre of the sayd Iob. ¶Another example how ye pryn¦ces of the Phelystyns feested togiders and made a grete dyner / and Sampson ye strō¦ge pulled downe the hous vpon them / and there were thre thousande persones slayne in lykewyse as it is wryten in the .xvi. cha∣pytre of the boke of Iuges. ¶Another ex∣ample how saynt Iohan baptyst was be∣heeded and his heed was borne vnto kyng Herode as he was makynge a grete dyner in lykewyse as it is wryten in the .xiiii. cha∣pytre of the gospelles of saynt Mathewe. ¶Another example of filius prodeg{us} that wasted his substaunce in glotonyes and le¦cheryes / in lykewyse as it is wryten in the xv. chapytre of the gospels of saynt Luke. ¶Another example of a pylgryme ye whi∣che solde his goune for to drynke wyne / & euyll came vnto him. Quere in thexampla¦ry .lxxxxiii. G. ¶Another example that yll came vnto a man named Vodo the which yode to ete and drynke at the tauerne whā he sholde haue gone vnto the chyrche. Que¦re in thexamplary .lxvii. E. ¶Many other examples of glotons shall be founde in the thyrde commaundement of thexamplary. Quere {per} tabulam .lxvii. a.b.c.d.e. B. ¶Of fastynge and abstinence that god commaundeth. xxxix. IT is wryten. Gen̄. iii. ca. De li∣gno sciētie boni et mali / ne come¦das. Incontynent that Adam was fourmed god him defended that he sholde not ete of the fruy¦te of the tree of scyence bothe good & euyll. He dysobeyed vnto the sayd commaunde∣ment and euyll came vnto hym / in lykewy¦se as it is wryten in the examplary. Quere liiii. a. Also god wyll that we fast and do ab¦stynence in some dayes that the chyrche de¦termyneth vs. Fastynge is instytued for ye helthe of our soules / in lykewyse as sayeth the scryptures. Vnde hiero. Ieiunio et ora¦tione sanande sunt passiones corporis et pe¦stes mentis. The passions of the body / and the pestelence of the thought ben heled by fastynge and prayer. And Ysodorus sayeth Abstinentia enim carnem superat / luxu∣riam refrenat / et alia vicia calcat. Abstynē¦ce surmoūteth the flesshe / refreyneth leche¦ry / and fouleth ye other vyces. A man may not well ouercome the temptacions but by fastynges & abstynences. Vnde. Ysidorus. Non potes tēptationes vīcere nisi ieiunus insisteris. Also fastyng lyfteth our thought vp vnto god in deuocyon and contempla∣cyon / and also augmenteth the vertues & the rewarde eternall / in lykewyse as sayth ye preface of lenten. Qui corporali ieiunio vicia cōprimis / mentē eleuas / vtutē largia¦ris
& premia. &c. Also abstynence & fastyng ben moche prouffytable in lykewyse as it appereth by many storyes of the byble. It is writen in the .xiii. chapytre of the boke of Iuges how the aungell of god appered vn¦to the wyfe of Māne brehaigne vnto who¦me he commaūded that she ne sholde dryn¦ke wyne ne sydre and yt she sholde not eete ony vnclene thynge and yt she sholde haue a sone / and so it was done. And she concey¦ued Sampson the stronge. Another hysto¦ry is wryten in the .xx. chapytre of the boke of Iuges that after that the chyldren of Ys∣rael had fasted and wept they fought with the sones of Beniamyn and they had victo¦ry. Another hystory how the prophete He∣lye dyde grete abstynēces whan he demaū¦ded of a woman wydowe a lytell of water to drynke & a shyuer of breed / the sayd wy∣dowe gaue it hym / and her mele or floure multyplyed / as it is wryten in the .xxii. cha¦pytre of the thyrde boke of kynges. And it it wryten in the .xix. chapytre of the sayd bo¦ke how the aungel of god brought vnto hȳ breed and water after that he had moche fasted and trauayled. Another history wry¦ten in the .xxi. chapytre of the .iii. boke of kȳ¦ges that after that kynge Achab had made Naboth to be slayne he was manassed and thretened and knowleged his defaute / he cutte his vestementes / ware the hayre / fa∣sted / and slepte vpon a sacke / and god attē¦pred his payne and sentence. &c. Another hystory wryten in the thyrde chapytre of ye prophete Ionas that whan those of the cite of Nynyue herde that theyr cyte sholde be subuerted & that they sholde be punysshed for theyr synnes / they fasted al grete and ly¦tell / and they clothed them with sackes / & chaūged theyr cursed wayes / and god had pyte on them / and dyde not vnto theym ye euyll yt he wolde haue done vnto them. &c. Another hystory wryten in ye fourthe boke of Iudyth that after yt the chyldren of Ysra¦ell had herde the terryble puyssaunce of Ho¦lofernes they fasted and prayed god & they had vyctory. Another hystory wryten in ye fourthe chapytre of Hester how before that Hester made request vnto the kynge for so∣me people the whiche sholde be slayne she sayd vnto a man Mardocheus that he shol¦de go vnto the sayd people to make theym pray for her / and that by thre dayes they ne sholde ete ne drynke / and yt she and her ser¦uaūtes sholde fast / & so it was accōplyshed and her request vnto her was graūted. &c. Another hystory wryten in the fyrst chapy¦ter of danyell how danyell and his compa∣ny Ananias / azarias / & mysaell also abste∣ned them to ete of metes of the kynge and to drynke of the wyne / and god gaue vnto the thre chyldren scyence in all bokes / and vnto danyell he gaue entendement of visi∣ons & of dremes &c. Another example wry¦ten in the thyrde chapytre of the gospelles of saynt Mathewe how the mete of saynt Iohan baptyst was greshoppes and wyl∣de hony / and he neyther dranke wine ne sy¦dre / and was so full of grete abstynences & holynes that it is wryten of hȳ. Interna∣tos mulierum non surrexit maior iohanne baptista. A question / who soo demaundeth what fastyng dayes the chyrche commaun¦deth to faste / and what people ben bounde to faste them. The answere. The chyrche commaundeth fastynge vnto all those and them ye whiche may do it by helthe of theyr bodyes / the fourtymes of the yere / yt is the ymbre dayes / and the vygylles of ye feestes the whiche foloweth. That is to vnderstan¦de / the vygyll of crystmas / of whytsontyde saynt Iohan baptyst / saynt Laurence / the assumpcion of our lady / the vygyll of saynt Peter & saynt poule / saynt Andrew / saynt Symon & saynt Iude / saynt Mathew / & ye day of saynt Marke / but it yf come vpon
the sonday the fastyng and processyon shal be on the monday after. Also the custome is now to fast all the vygylles of the feestes of our lady / and in many places the thre da¦yes of the crosse. &c. Also the quarantyne of the lenten is of commaundement of the chyrche to faste / in lykewyse as sayeth these doctours. Alijs diebus ieiunare remedium at premiū est / in quadragesima non ieiuna re peccatum est alio tempore qui ieiunat ac¦cipiet indulgentiā / ī quadragesima qi potest et non ieiunat sentiet penā. ¶A questyon / A man may demaunde in what aege a per¦sone is bounde to faste the lenten. Saynt Thomas answereth .ii.ii. q. xlvii. Et dicit quādiu aliquis stat in statu augmenti non tenetur ad oīa ieiunia / scilicet ad finem ter¦cij septēnij .i.xxi. yeres. And after the sayd saynt Thomas sayth / it is conuenable that euery persone vnder the sayd aege of .xxi. yeres excercyse hym to fast the moost that he may doo / as he of xiiii. yeres sholde faste more than he of .x. yeres. And howbeit that a man ne may fast all / yet he sholde enforce hym to do euery of them after his puyssaun¦ce. We rede in the .xxiiij. chapytre of Exodi how Moyses fasted .xl. dayes whan he re∣ceyued the lawe and ye commaundements of god. Also we rede in the thyrde boke of kynges in the .xix chapytre how the prophe¦te Helye fasted .xl. dayes & .xl. nyghtes whā the aungel brought hym meet. &c. Also we rede in the .iiij. chapytre of the gospelles of saynt Mathew that our blyssed sauyour & redemptoure Ihesu cryst fasted .xl dayes. Vnde mathei. iiij. Et cum ieiunasset qua∣draginta diebus et quadraginta noctibus postea esurijt. &c. Also the sayd lenten shol∣de be fasted / and it is of the commaunde∣ment of the chyrche vnto them yt haue aege and that may do it. C. ¶Many persones ben holly excused / as women wt chylde for her fruyte / & also nou¦ryces yf they may not fast they sholde do af¦ter theyr power wt the nuryture of the chyl¦de. ¶A questyon of women yt ben stronge and may well faste it / but theyr husbondes defendeth it them. The answere is / scdm innocen. vbi dicit. Licet dimittere debeāt mulieres vota voluntarie suscepta {pro}pt{er} ha∣bitationē virorū / non tamē ieiunia ab eccle¦sia precepta. Also the seke / & the weyke ben excused. ¶A questyon of pylgrymes & peo¦ple sore labourȳg. The answer after saynt Thomas. Yf ye pylgrymage or labour may be deferred or taken awaye wtout inconue∣nyent fastynges sholde not be broken. And yf it be necessyte to walke & to do the grete Iourneyes or to labour moche & that they ne may do it wt fastyng they ben not boūde¦de to faste. In suche thinges it sholde be su¦rer to haue recours to be dispenced of ye pre¦late. And a man sholde not vnderstande in comyn prouerbe how all the labourers ben excused to faste it. For yf ony be ryche and hath suffycyent nourysshynge & wherwith to kepe the fastyng day he ought to labour the lasse to thende yt he may faste & satysfye vnto the commaundement of the chyrche. But yf he be poore & that necessyte cōstrey∣ne hym to laboure strongly for yt he ne may haue his necessytees for his wyfe & chyldrē yf he dyde not the sayd grete labour he syn¦neth not mortally yf he ete on the fastynge daye sygnauntly so that he haue his coura-and wyll that he wolde obey gladly vnto ye cōmaundement of the chyrche yf he might haue the sayd necessytees. Also it is to vn∣derstande that fastynge is so greuous and so harde vnto some persones that scantely and with grete payne they may faste one daye in the weke in lenten for theyr labou∣res and trauayles that they aledge. Vnto those a man sholde answere that they shall haue the more & greter meryte in paradyse for the grete laboure yt they take to faste / &
that god shal rewarde vnto euery persone the fastynges and the laboures after ye ope¦racyons that they do. Vnde psal. Retribu et vnicui{que} scdm opera sua. And yf he wyll not fast do almesdedes or oraysons or good operacyons in recompence and in shewyn¦ge token that he wolde obeye gladly yf he myght. Questyon of poore beggers yf they ben holden to faste. The answer after Tho¦mas .ii.ii. q. cxlvii. where he sayth yt yf they may haue as moche of almesse togyder as shal suffyce vnto them to ete at dyner / they shall not be excused of fastȳge. And yf they may not soo moche assemble for to suffyce them on that day to fede they ben not boū∣de to fast / or whan they ben weyke for the pouerte therof procedynge they ben excu∣sed. ¶Example of fastynge Quere in the examplarye .cv.C A. ¶The eyght commaundement of god defendeth all wordes the whiche ben a∣gaynst the dyleccyon of thy neyghbour. xl. ¶False wytnesse loke thou none bere Ne yet lye in ony wyse Drede thou also to speke or swere Agaynst thy neyghbour by myn aduyse THis commaundement is wrytē in the auncyent testament. Deu¦tero. v. ca. et exodi. xx. Non loq̄¦ris contra proximum tuū falsum testimonium. Thou shalte not speke ne bere false wytnesse ayenst thy ney¦ghbour. And it wryten. Leuiti. xix. ca. Nō mentiamini nec decepit vnusquis{que} proxi∣mum suum. Ye shall not lye and neyther of you shall deceyue his neyghbour. And it is wryten in ye newe testament. Mathei. xix. ca. et luce. xviii. Non falsū testimoniū di∣ces. Thou shalt not say false in wytnessȳge but that thou be punysshed as many haue ben in lykewyse as thou mayst se by exam¦ples. Quere .lxxxxvii. a.b. In this cōmaun¦dement god defendeth generally all fals & euyll languages in al the maners yt a man may brynge theym forthe with the tongue the whiche ben agaynst ye dyleccyon of thy neyghbour / in lykewyse as it shall be decla¦red in particuler herafter / & vs commaun¦deth the vertue of veryte. For syth that he defendeth in suche wyse al lesynges & euyl languages it foloweth well that he vs cō∣maundeth that we bringe forthe good and verytable wordes. &c. B. ¶Of false wytnessynge that god defen¦deth. xl. NOn falsū testimoniū dices. yu not say fals in witnessȳge. He yt maketh fals reporte in iuge¦ment of certayne conscyence for to noye vnto neyghboure synneth ryght greuously in thre maners. Primo / in as moche as he forswereth hym & falseth his fayth yt he taketh vpon ye font of baptysme & that he renounceth god yt is ful of veryte / & leueth his feaute & the othe that he had made vnto him for to drawe hȳ vnto the deuyll the fader of lyenge and the hande that he lyfteth vp in forsweringe hȳ apperteyneth vnto the deuyll / & whan he blysseth and crosseth hym it is wt ye deuilles hande. Scdo in as moche as he is the cause wherby ye ryght Iustyce is fyled & corrupt wherby falleth grete incōuenyent. Tercio / in as moche as he is a lyer / false / & corrup∣ter of veryte. Those the whiche forswereth them wytyngly in iugement ben infamed as it is wryten in ryght. extra. q̄relā. Et. v q.i. Infames. Also they ne sholde neuer be take in wytnes. extra de testi. Sicut. e. vii. q.i. Quicun{que}. They deceyue thre persones
that is the Iuge / the innocent / and themsel¦fe. They deceyue euyll the Iuge / wors the Innocent / and worst of al themselfe. They deceyue the Iuge by that / that he beleueth that they saye veryte / and he maketh false Iugement agaynst ryght Iustyce the whi∣che is to yelde vnto euery man that thynge the whiche is his. They deceyue yet wors ye Innocent / for by the false witnessynge som¦tyme ye Innocent leseth his herytage / som¦tyme his goodes / his good renounce / or sō¦tyme is slayne and put vnto dethe. They deceyue worst of all themselfe / for they do dampne theyr soules / and they bynde them to make restytucyon of al the losses and do¦mages in the whiche the sayd Innocent rē¦neth by the sayd false wytnessynge. In ly∣kewyse as a thefe or harlot the whiche ta∣keth & withdraweth the goodes of his ney¦ghbour is holden to make restytucyon. In lyke maner a false wytnesse the whiche wt∣draweth the goodes of his neyghboure by false wytnessynge is holden to restytucyon as it is wryten in many places in the decre¦te. Tenetur autem falsis testis ad restitu¦tionem oīm que per suum falsum testimo∣niū proximus eius amisit. extra de elec. si∣gnificati. vlter. med. & .xxviii. di. de syracusa ne. extra de of. orde. ad reprimēdam. & .ii. q. c. presbiter. & non sane / et non res aliena. & .ii. q. notū. & ar. iii. q. ix. nichilominus. Som∣tyme a false wytnesse or a false accusatoure is homycyde or thefe. He is homycide of his neyghbour innocent whan that he deyeth by his false accusynge or witnessynge / as ye Iewes the whiche made Iesu cryst to deye And yf he deye not he taketh from hym & steleth his good renoune / & is holden to ma¦ke restytucyon / or elles he ne may be saued nor he sholde not be absoyled. Qr nō dimit¦titur pctm̄ nisi restituatur ablatū. xiii. q. vii ca. Sires. The synne is not pardoned yf ye thynge taken awaye withdrawen / stolen / or alyened be not restored. The good renou¦ne of a persone is better thā an hepe of gol¦de. Vnde prouerb. Melius est nomen bo∣num {quam} diuitie multe super aurū et argēt ū gratia bona. A good name is better than moche rychesse / good grace is aboue golde and syluer. Yf a man make restytucyon of golde nnd of syluer / by more greter reason a man sholde make restytucyon of ye good renoune the whiche is more precyous than golde or syluer. Also they the whiche make false wytnessynge and lesynge wytingly in Iugement in cause of cryme for to noye vn¦to theyr neyghbours synneth mortally and breketh this commaundemente. For they subuert the trouthe of the Iugement ye whi¦che is vnto the dethe of gylte of all commu¦nyte present. Of the whiche thynge it appe¦reth yf the Iuge speke false thynge wytyn¦gly in vttrynge false sentence or wytnessȳ¦ge it in reportynge vnto the procuroure or aduocate in folowynge and defendinge fal¦se cause they transgresse this commaunde∣ment / and ben bounden towarde hym that suffreth the iniury. Also ye false accusatoure or wytnesse is a thefe whan he maketh to lose the goodes or the herytage of his ney∣bour vniustly by false wytnessynge & is hol¦den to restytucion as it is sayd. For his ney¦ghbour had not lost the thynge yf he hadde ben by reportinge falsely. Whā a wytnesse is called to reporte of a thynge he shold say for ye one & other the good & pure trouthe yt he knoweth of it / wtout puttynge ony wyle or lesynge .iii. q. xi. hortamur. & .iiii. q. iiii. nul¦lus. & .xiiii. q. v. Nō sane. Et legit{ur} deuter. v. Non declinabitis ne{que} ad dextrā ne{quam} ad sinistrā {sed} {per} viā quā precepit dn̄s de{us} vr̄am bulabitis vt viuatis et bn̄ sit vobis. Ye shall not declyne on the ryght honde ne on the lyft hande / but ye shall walke by the waye that your lorde god you hath commaūded to thende that ye lyue and that it be well
with you. Et prouer. xii. Qui qd nouit loqi¦tur iuder est iusticie / qui autē mentitur te∣stis est fraudulētus. He the whiche speketh that / yt he hath knowen is iuge of Iustyce Certaynly he the whiche lyeth is a fraudu∣lent wytnesse. Also a wytnesse shold not re¦ceyue money to bere wytnesse of ony thȳg For in lykewyse as the sentence ne sholde be solde no more sholde wytnesse. Howbeit the wytnesse may receyue ye dyspence of hȳ yt bryngeth hym / as it is wryten .iiii. q. Ven¦turis. And yf the wytnesse take money for to bere wytnesse of ony thynge Raymonde sayth yt fouly and cursedly he taketh it / & yt by his aduyse he sholde make restytucyon. And of those the whiche seeth to lese ye thyn¦ge of theyr neyghbour by defaute of proba¦cyon & say nothynge for fere to haue the ha¦te of one of the partyes they synne mortal¦ly. Vnde au. Quisquis metu cuius{que} optā∣tis veritatē occultat / irā dei super se prouo¦cat qr magis timet hominē {quam} deum / & post pauca vter{que} reus est. Et qui veritatē occul¦tat et qui {pro}fert mendaciū qr ille {pro}desse nō vult / et iste nocere desiderat .xii. q. iii. Quis∣quis. That is to vnderstonde yf ony hyde the trouthe by drede of ony puyssaunce he prouoketh the yre of god vpon hym / for he dredeth man more than god / & it foloweth the one and the other is calpable. And he yt hydeth the trouthe and yt bryngeth forthe lesinges. for he the whiche holdeth his peas ne wyll prouffyte / and the lyer desyreth to noye. In suche a case a persone preuyleged as a preste shold be constrayned for to bere wytnesse .xiiii. q. ii. {quam} {quam}. But it is to vnder∣stonde yf the cause be suche wherin it is le∣full to a preste to bere wytnesse / for it shall not be lefull vnto hym in cause of blode as homycide. Ouer this case bē .vi. cases wher¦in a preste or a clerke may swere as a laye persone / that is for the ryght of the faythe for obedyence / for peas / for the domynacy on of the chirche whan ony is vnbounde of sentence of excommunycacyon / & whan yt an enfamed ought to be purged / these here ben taken. extra de eccle. significa. vlt med. xviii. di. Syracusane. Legitur in .ii. ethi. {quod} in obscuris apertis testimonijs oportet vn In thȳges derke it behoueth to vse by wyt¦nessynge appert. Thou shalt not bere false wytnesse agaynst none in Iugement. Ma∣ny false wytnesses reygneth now in ye worl¦de the whiche forswereth them for lesse thā a pot with ale / and lendeth the conscyence the one vnto the other / and suche shall not abyde vnpunysshed without satysfaccyon vnto god & vnto theyr neyghbour. Vn̄ pro¦uerb. xix. Testis falsus non erit impunitus & qui loquit{ur} mēdatia non effugiet. et al. te∣stis {per}ibit. A false wytnesse yt speketh lesyn∣ges shall not escape / & he ne may flee but yt he haue punycion / also a wytnesse lyer shal perysshe yf he deye impenytent. And yf so be that he demaunde penaunce / after ye ca∣nons for periury manyfest the whiche is so lempnysed a man hym sholde enioyne .vii. yeres of penaunce yf he swere fermely .xxii q. v. Si quis se periurauerit. ¶Examples of false wytnesses & periuryes. And fyrst of a crysten man yt forsware hym on the auter of saynt Nycolas. Que. lxxxxvi. A. ¶Ano¦ther exāple of a frere of doyen of Coleyne yt forsware hȳ for money borowed .lxxxxii.c ¶Another example of wytnessynge how two olde men wytnessed agaynst Susan̄e Quere .lxxxxvi.C. Many other examples of false wytnesses ben wryten in the exam∣plary. Que. lxxxxvii. a.b. Also of .ii. yt made false wytnesse agaynst saynt Stephen for to stone hym / and how they theymselfe fyr¦ste dyde caste stones at hȳ / in lykewyse as it is wryten. Actuum .vi. Also of two ye whi¦che made false wytnessynge agaynst Ihe∣su cryst for to crucyfye hym. Mathei. xxvi. Et psal. Insurrexerūt in me testes iniqui
et mentita est iniquitas sibi. Euyll wytnes∣ses hath rysen agaynst me / and the iniquite is lyengly vpon them. And for that / yt they were cursed lyers and false wytnesses they were punysshed in the vengeaunce ye whi∣che Vaspasyan made. &c. C. ¶Of cursed language that god defen∣deth. xl. DAuyd the prophete sayth in the psalter. Prohibe linguam tuā a malo et labia tua ne loquan∣tur dolū. Defende thy tongue from euyll saynge / and thy lyp¦pes that they ne speke trechery / fraude / ne fallace. It is that thynge the whiche is be∣fore wryten. Ne bere thou noo false wyt∣nesse and lye not in no wyse. Ne mysse say thou by thy language ony creature in noo maner. In this eyght commaundemente god there defendeth all false reportes / all lesynges / all murmures vniustly made / & treasons brought forth for to deceyue other Also all detraccyons the whiche ben made in publysshynge the secrete synnes of his neyghbour / or shewynge them by encrea∣synge or Imposynge vpon hym false cry∣mes / or in denyenge that he dooth good o∣peracyons / or in demynysshynge his good renowne / or by chaungynge the good in to euyll for to noye and harme hym. Suche detractours the whiche taketh awaye the good renowne of theyr neyghbour taketh from hym lyfe honourable / and therfore they ben false wytnesses and homycydes. Vnd bern̄. Durior est līgua detrahētis {quam} lācea q̄ {per}forauit corp{us} x{pre}i in cruce pēdētis. The tonge of the detractour is harder thā the spere yt perced the body of cryst hangyn¦ge on the crosse. Et legit{ur} hiere. ix. Sagitta vulneratis līgua eo{rum} dolū locutū est. The arowe makynge a wounde is ye tongue of them yt speketh yll. Et legit{ur} sa. i. A detra∣ctione percite lingue qm̄ sermo obscur{us} in vacuū non ibit. Spare ye / cease ye of detra¦ction of the tonge / for a derke worde shall not go in vayne. Et legit{ur} prouer. xiii. Qui detrahit alicui i{pre}e se in futurū obligat. He yt maketh detraccyon of ony persone he byn∣deth hym in tyme to come / that is vnto pu¦nycyon. ¶Example how a detractour had cruell Iugement before god for ye holy per∣sones that he had detracted rose ayenst hȳ and demaunded of the Iuge vengeaunce / and he was damned. Quere .lxxxxvii. D. Also god defendeth all flateryes as here af¦ter shall be declared. Also he defendeth su∣surracyon the whiche is whan ony putteth dyuysyon bytwene bredren / kynnesmen / & neyghbours / or for to demynyssh secretely the good of another. Vnde eccl. xxviii. Su¦surro & bilīguts maledict{us} multos eī turba¦uit pacē habentes. ¶Example how a wo∣man cōmytted this syn̄e the whiche put dy¦uysyon in a good maryage. Que. lxxxxix. e. Also god defendeth all defames / iniuryes / & mokeryes. ¶Example how a boucher was dyuynely punysshed for that yt he moc¦ked the holy asshes .lxvii. F. Also god defen¦deth all ydle wordes & noyenges / & all bo∣stynges / praysynges / & shamefull songes / and all euyll counceyle / and to make shorte all wordes yt ben agaynst ye dyleccyō of god & his neyghbour. And of the sayd wordes hȳ behoueth to yelde accōpte before god at ye day of dome / & to haue punycyon yf they be not effaced or raced out by penaūce / as yt holy scryptures wytnesseth in many pla∣ces. ¶The fyrste wytnesse is the gospell yt sayth. Illud mat. xx. Amē dico vobis om̄e verbū ociosū qd locuti fuerīt hoīes reddēt rationem de eo in die iudicij ex verbis enim tuis iustificaberis et ex verbis tuis condē∣naberis. that is to say. Certaynly I tell you that euery ydle worde the which these men
haue spoken they sholde yelde reason at the daye of Iugement / thou shalte be Iustyfy¦ed or condampned by thy wordes. Also the deuyll wryteth all euyll wordes that thou spekest for to accuse the at the daye of Iuge¦ment. ¶Example how saynt Bryce sawe the deuyll the whiche wrote the euyll wor∣des that was sayd in the chyrche. Quere. lxv. E. ¶Another example how a man re∣uyued sayd that incontynent that his soule parted from the body he was presented in Iugement / vnto whome all the synnes yt he hadde done / spoken and thought appe∣red clerely in lykewyse as they had ben pre¦sent / so that there ne abode yt leest thought but that it appered clerely in lykewyse as it hadde ben thought. Quere. C.viii. D. And syth that it is so after the gospel that a man shall yelde accompte of lytell ydle wordes by a more stronger reason a man shall of grete and euyll noysom wordes. ¶The se¦conde wytues is the sage the whiche sayth Illud sapientie .i. Qui loquitur iniqua non potest latere nec preteriet illum corripiens iudicium. He the whiche speketh an euyll thynge he ne may hyde it / & the Iugement correctynge shall not passe from hym / that is to saye / he shall not scape but that he be corrected. Et prouerbiorum .xxii. Qui se∣minat iniquitatem metet mala. He ye whi∣che soweth inyquyte gadereth euylles. Et legitur prouerbi. xxv. Que viderunt oculi ne preferas in iurgio cito ne posteo emen∣dare non possis cum deshonestaueris ami∣cum tuum. The thynges that thyn eyes ha¦ue sene brynge theym not forthe anone in stryfe to thende that thou ne mayst after amende whan thou hast dyshonoured thy frende. ¶The thyrde wytnesse is saynt Ia¦mes. Vnde legitur iacobi. iii. Lingua inqie¦tum malum plena mortifero veneno ex ip¦so ore {pro}cedit benedictio et maledictio. The tongue is euyll without rest full of mortall venim / from the whiche mouthe procedeth benedyccyon and maledyccyon. Also saynt Iames sayeth. Yf ony we ne to be relygy∣ous and refrayneth not his tongue but de¦ceyueth his herte it is vayne relygyon. Le∣te euery man be hasty to here / slowe to spe∣ke / and late vnto yre. The yre of mā dooth no Iustyce. ¶Example of a wrathfull wo∣man the whiche cursed her mayden. Que∣re. lxxxxix. B. ¶Another example of a re∣lygyous the whiche murmured ayenst god and he was punysshed dyuynely. Quere. liiii. I. ¶The fourth wytnesse is the phal∣myst the whiche sayth. Vir religiosus nō dirigetur in terra / virum iniustum malaca¦pient in interitu. The man Iangler shall not be adressed in the londe of the lyuynge or lyuers / euylles shal take the man vniust in the dethe. Iterum psalmus. Dilexisti omnia verba precipitationis lingua dolosa propterea deus destruet te ī finem / euelle te et emigrabit te de tabernaculo tuo et ra¦dicem tuam de terra viuētium. Thou hast loued alway wordes of precypytacyon / & therfore god shall dystroye the in the ende / He shall areche the and drawe the from thy tabernacle / and thy rote from the erthe of those that ben lyuynge. ¶Example how a relygyous man sayd at his dethe that all those the whiche had troubled and suppo∣sed agaynst hym had enforced them to slee hym. Quere. lxxxxix. A. Thou man or wo∣man obeye vnto the commaundemente of god the whiche the defendeth here all euyll wordes to thende that thou be of the nom∣bre of the saued / and thou shalte possede ye Ioyes of paradyse the whiche ben promy∣sed vnto the obedyentes in lykewyse as it is wryten in the ende of this boke. Quere. xlvii. A. Also kepe the from the bryngynge forthe of euyll wordes / of drede to be sent vnto ye fyre of hell the whiche is a tourmēt moche cruell for theym the whiche thyder
shall be sent / in lykewyse as it is declared in the ende of this boke. Que. xlix. b ¶Exā¦ple of a woman the whiche had the vpper parte of her body brente in ye chyrche after her dethe for her cursed language. Quere in the examplarye .lxxxxix. F. A. ¶Of lyenge that god defendeth. IT is wryten leuitici. xix. Non mentiemini nec decipiet vnus∣quis{que} proximum suum. Ye shall not lye / ne none of you shall de∣ceyue your neyghbour. The wy∣se Salamon requyred of god two thinges before that he deyed the which ben that va¦nyte and lyenge wordes were ferre frome hym. Vnde prouerb. xxx. Vanitatē et ver¦ba mendacia longe fac a me. It behoueth to se what lyenge is. Saynt Austyn sayth. Mendacium est falsa significatio vocis cū intētione fallendi. Lyenge is a false sygny∣fycacyon of voyce with intencyon to decey∣ue. In this dystynccyon there ben two thȳ¦ges. That is to vnderstande a false thynge and to tell a lye. Dicere falsū est aliqid esse quod non est ita non distinccio vtrū inten∣dat dicere verū vel falsū. To say a false thȳ¦ge is to say some thynge to be so the whiche is not / as whan a man speketh it without regardynge the intencyon to speke true or false. Et mentiri est contra mentem iri. To lye is to go agaynst the thought after thethymologisement of the worde. Is qui mentitur cōtra id quod animo sentit loqui¦tur voluntate fallēdi. He the whiche lyeth speketh agaynst that / yt he hath in his coura¦ge wt intencyon to deceyue. In lykewyse in the dyffynycyon of lyenge is comprysed to speke a false thynge / and to tell a lesynge / & therfore there is dyfferēce betwene lyenge & saynge a false thynge. For euery persone yt lyeth speketh not a false thinge. Sōtyme he sayth trouth albeit yt he wene to speke a false thinge / & vnto the contrary euery per¦sone ye speketh a false thynge lyeth not. For he weneth sōtyme to saye all bet it yt he say false. So euery persone the whiche lyeth de¦ceyueth euermore by wyll / albeit yt he be de¦ceyued in the trouthe of the dede / & therfo∣re he the whiche lyeth sinneth alway. For ye tongue culpable ne maketh / but ye thought culpable / as it is wryten .xxii. q. ii. Homines He that speketh a false thynge synneth not alwaye mortally. Somtyme he speketh a false thynge wt intencyon to deceyue ye whi¦che is mortall synne. And in lyenge he spe∣keth somtyme a false thynge yt he weneth to be true / & whā after his saynge he enquy¦reth dilygently of the dede / & repenteth hȳ whan he hath apperceyued his falsenes it is but venyall synne / as it is wryten .xxii. q. ii. Homines. For to haue examples of lyers it behoueth to take them the whiche bē per∣iured / for they ben lyers and periurers to∣der. ¶Example how a deuyll lyed vnto a noble man and put hym in errour for to de¦ceyueth hym at his dethe .lx. B. ¶Another example how two marchauntes tolde vn∣to theyr curate yt they ne coude sel ony thyn¦ge without lyenge. Quere. lxxxxix. B. ¶For to knowe the maners of lyenge a man sholde vnderstande ye saynt Austyn assygneth .viii. kyndes. ¶The fyrst kynde of lyeng is whan a man maketh a lye ayēst the fayth / or agaynst ye doctryne of holy re∣lygyon / as who sholde say yt Ihesus is not borne of ye vyrgyn Mary / or yt he hath not suffred dethe and passyon for to redeme vs &c. To speke suche wordes by reason dispo¦sed it is mortall synne & case reserued / & it is the chefe of all lyenges. The seconde kyn¦de of lyenge yt is after the gretest synne / is whan a man maketh a lye for to hurt or hȳ¦der ony persone vniustly so yt suche lyenge ne {pro}uffyteth vnto no creature / but noyeth
vnto some / as too saye euyll of his neygh∣bour by detraccyon in forgynge false lesyn¦ges for to take frome hym his goodes / and his good renoune as it sholde be too accuse hym or wytnesse agaynst hym vniustly of theft or of ony cryme. Those the whiche in suche wyse lyeth synneth mortally & ryght gretely / and may be deputed homycydes / or theues after ye lye or lesynge as it is sayd before. The thyrde kynde after moost gre∣test synne / is whan a man maketh a lye for to ayde vnto some and to noye vnto ano∣ther in cause of money / goodes or heryta∣ges as to wytnes vniustly with ony for to make another too lese his money / suche le∣synge is mortall synne. The fourth kynde is whan a man maketh a lye by delyberaci for to deceyue ony persone in lechery or aua¦ryce / it is also mortall synne. The fyfth is made by couetyse for to please vnto ony per¦sone by flatery / and this flatery is made in thre maners. The fyrst is grauntynge vn∣to ony persone some goodnes that he hath not / as to say thou art wyse / thou art fayre thou arte myghty / and that he were not so The seconde is in approuynge the euyll yt some cursed {per}sone hath done / as yf he hath beten / or pylled his neyghbour. &c. to say yt he hath well done and to prayse hym of the sayd euyll / these two flateryes here ben .ii. mortal synnes / but the last is wors & more grete synne than the fyrst .xxii. q. ii. Primū. xlvi. di. sunt nō nulli. And ye prophete ysaie saythin. v. ca. Ve qui dicitis malū bonum et bonum malū / ponentes tenebras in lucē et lucem in tenebras / ponentes amarū in dulce et dulce in amarum. Maledyccion or wo be vnto you the whiche say the yll to be good and the good to be yl / puttynge derke¦nes to be lyght and lyght to be derkenes / puttynge soure to be swete and swete to be soure / suche flaterers ben called fals wyt∣nesses. The thyrde flatery is to prayse ony persone to hyghly of ony good dede for to please hȳ / this last flatery is venyall synne The syxte kynde of lyenge is whan the le¦synge or lye noyeth not vnto ony and pro∣fyteth vnto some for to auoyde the losse of his money / as yf a pyller wolde take away thy money or that of thy neyghbours and he demaundeth the where it is / and yt thou sayest I knowe not. The seuenth kynde of lyenge is whan the lye noyeth vnto none and prouffyteth vnto some for to auoyde yt he ne be slayne / as yf a murderer wolde se vniustly a persone hydde in thy hous / and demaundeth the where he sholde be / and ye answerest I wote not where he is. ¶The eyght kynde of lyenge is whan the lye hyn∣dreth not vnto ony and prouffyteth vnto some for to kepe him from velany corporall as yf an harlot demaunded a vyrgyn for to corrupte her lyeth vnto her and sayth that he wolde mary her. &c. The fyue fyrst kyn∣des of lyenge the whiche noyeth vnto his neyghbour ben mortall synnes as it is sayd & as it is wryten .xxii. q. ii. Primū ne quis. The thre last the whiche noyeth not but ay¦deth vnto some ben venyall synnes after al the doctours in persone imparfayte / but vnto persones parfayt as cloysterers / re∣lygyous there are dyuers opynyons / for ye one sayth that it sholde be venyall synne & the other mortall / howbeit that there is no venyall synne but yt it may torne in to mor¦tall whan it pleaseth / and yt a man it dooth of custome in lykewyse as it is wryten be∣fore in ye seconde commaundement. There is doubt made what he sholde answere the whiche hathe a persone hydde in his hous whome a man secheth to slee / yf he shewe hym he sholde drede of the cryme of homy¦cyde leest by hym he were slayne in shewyn¦ge hym. Also he sholde drede the synne of them the whiche pursueth for the slee hym. Also he sholde drede yf he the whiche a man
wolde sle were in mortall synne that yf he deyed impenytent and that he were dam∣pned. Vnto that saynt Austin sayth yt how be it that he that lyeth dooth good vnto an other / neuertheles he dooth his owne pro∣pre domage / and in no maner he ne sholde lye for to redeme the lyfe of another in espe¦cyall the persone perfayte. For it is sayd yt none ne shal be brought vnto helthe sempy¦ternall by lyēge / but he sholde holde his pea¦se to thende that in suche wyse he ne lese ne lye / ne sle his soule for to saue the body of an other. Vnde augustinus dicit / quod nullo modo debeat quis mentiri et maxime {pro} vi¦ta alterius redimenda ait enim et sempiter nam salutem nullus est ducendus opitulā te mendatio. Idem augustinus. Ne quis arbitretur perfectū et specialem pro ista tē¦porali vita morte cuius sua vel alterius nō occidatur anima debere mentiri / sed taceat vt sic ne{que} perdat / ne{que} mentiatur / ne{que} oc¦adat animam suam pro corpore alterius. xxii. q. ii. Primū ne quis. Item Ysidorus di∣at. Omne genus mendatu summopere fu¦ge nec casu / nec studio loquaris falsum / nec qualibet fallacia vitam alterius deffendas xxii. q. ii. Omne. Fle by souerayne werke al kyndes of lyenge and speke not false / ne by case / ne by studye / and defende not the lyfe of another by ony fallace. Itē au. Pericu¦losissime admittit{ur} hec cōpensatio vt nos fa∣ciam{us} aliquod malū ne ali{us} graui{us} malū fa¦uat disti. xxiiij. q. ait & ita dicūt siplicit{ur} pluri¦mi doctores. This compensacyon is taken ryght perillously yt we make ony yl ye other ne do more greuous euyll. Some other do¦ctours sayth yt in suche case men sholde lye but Raymond sayth yt sauȳge better Iuge¦ment than his yt he beleueth yt they sholde say nothynge as sayth saynt Austyn / or to transferre his worde in hym questyonynge of other maters or to answere some worde equyuocall sygnyfyenge two thynges. We rede ye Abraham descended ones in Egypt with his wyfe & fered yt Pharaon ne slewe hym for her / & for this he sayd to his wyfe / say yt thou arte my syster & not my wyfe / & he sayd true / but it was equyuokely for his wyfe was his syster for she was doughter of his broder / thus men ought to answere equyuokely without lyenge. Also another dystȳccyon is made magystrally of lyenge of the wordes of saynt Austin playner and shorter the whiche ben deuysed in thre ma∣ners. The fyrst lyenge is aydynge seruya∣ble & pyteous the whiche cōpryseth the .iii. laste kyndes of the dystynccyon beforsayd. The seconde is pleasaunt & ioyous yt is the lyenge of flaterers. The thyrde is noyenge & full of cursednes the whiche compryseth the kyndes of the dystynccyon beforesayd. And in all these thre maners there is synne For euery lye is eyther mortall synne or ve¦nyall. Vn̄ au. Oē mēdatiū est pctm̄. xii. q. ii. Micht nō absurde. I say than yt ye lesynges aydynges ben synnes / the pleasaūt lyes bē greter synnes the whiche ben of bourdes / flateryes / & scoffes / to speke & to flater the∣re is syn̄e wtout doubt / and ye noyenge lyes ben ryght grete mortall syn̄es whan a mā them speketh wytyngly / & vnto thynkȳge for to domage another. Vnto this last lesȳ¦ge all these falsenesses / trecheryes / & falla∣ces yt a man dooth thorowe ye worlde for to deceyue another in to domage eyther in sou¦le or in body / or in goodes or in renoune / or in ony thynge what so euer it be / for euery time yt a man lyeth for to noye another as it is sayd vnto his wytynge it is mortal syn̄e xxii. q. ii. Primū ne quis. Of this lyenge spe¦keth the psal. Perdes om̄s qui loquūt{ur} mē daciū. Et sa. i. Os quod mētit{ur} occidit aīam The mouthe yt lyeth sleeth the soule of deth of gylte. Al ye falseth a man as a man fal∣seth the seale of a kynge or the popes bull / & for as moche yt suche a man bereth false let¦tres
he shal be Iuged as felon or as falsary at the daye of Iugement. Vn̄ au. Nō arti¦ficioso mēdatio nec sīplici vbo oportet {quam} {quam} decipere qr licet mētit{ur} quis occidit aīam suā. It behoueth not to deceyue ony persone by lyenge artyfycyall ne by sȳple worde. For how be it that ony lye he sleeth his soule as it is sayd. Also the lyer is as a false coyner yt maketh money fals & nought. Also he is a∣monge the true people as ye fals peny amō¦ge the good. One good peny is better thā .x tals / also dooth a true man than .x. lyers & fals. With grete payne wyll a man take a fals peny wytȳgly / but wyll say it is noumt it is fals & coper. And he careth not of hym selfe yf he be a lyer or fals / wherby it appe∣reth yt he prayseth more a fals peny thā hȳ selfe whiche is grete foly. Also lyenge is as venȳ mortal / for fro ye tyme yt it is in ye mou¦the it enuenymeth & enfecteth all the perso¦ne Vn̄ psal. Accuerūt līguas suas sicut ser¦pētes venenū aspidū sub labiis eo{rum}. They haue whetted theyr tongues as these serpē¦tes ye sharpe venym of the adder mortal is vnder theyr lyppes. Et iacobi .iii. Lingua īqietū malū plena mortifero veneno. This lesynge was ye venym yt the serpent of hell had in his mouthe whan he deceyued Eue And therfore men say yt lyenge gyueth oc∣casyon yt the serpent hath venȳ in his mou∣the. And those the whiche lyeth hath ye ton∣gue enuenymed of the serpent of hell that tolde vnto Eue the contrary of yt god vnto her had sayd in lyenge. And therby they re¦semble to the deuyl yt is theyr fader by imy¦tacyon. Vn̄ ioh̄ .viii. Vos ex patre dyabo∣lo estis et desideria ptis vti vultis face ille homicida erat ab ūtio et ī vitate nō stetit qr nō est vitas in eo cū loquit{ur} mēdatiū ex pro¦prus loquit{ur} qr mēdax est & pr̄ ei{us}. You be of the parte of your fader the deuyl / & ye wyll do the desyres of your fader / he was homy¦cyde from the begynnȳge & he holdeth him not in veryte / for veryte is not in him whā he speketh a lye he sayth it of hymselfe / for he is a lyer & also his fader. The deuyl is fa¦der of lyers / for the fyrst inuentour of lyēge was the deuyll / & also he forged lyes and taught them to his dyscyples. C. How a man shold fle lyes & loue trouthe xli. IT is wryten ad eph̄. iiii. Depo∣nētes mēdaciū loquimini vitatē vnusquis{que} cū {pro}ximo suo. Take away lyenge / speke truely euery mā wt his neyghbour. And saynt Peter sayth in the seconde cha. of his fyrst epystle. Put away all malyce / all trechery / symulacyons / enuyes / and all detraccyons as reasonable chyldren newly engēdred. &c And it is wryten ad col. iii. Nolite mētiu ī¦uicē. Lye ye not togyders but speke ye true We sholde loue veryte & fle lyenge for ma∣ny thynges. Fyrst in folowȳge our fader ce¦lestyall. It is wryten {pro}uer. vi. how god ha¦teth .vii. thynges wherof lyenge is one / yt is to vnderstande / the eyen lyft vp in pryde / the lyenge tongue / ye handes shedynge blo¦de yt noyeth not the herte ymagenynge yll thoughtes / the fete redy to renne in to ylle the brynger forth of lyes / the fals wytnesse & he ye soweth dyscorde betwene his bredrē. Also god loueth veryte as sayeth Dauyd. Vn̄ psal. Ecce enī veritatē delixisti. Alsoo god is veryce yt deceyueth not ne lyeth. Vn̄ ioh̄. xiiij. Ego sū via vitas et vita. And by yt we sholde hate to lye & loue veryte in fo∣lowynge our lorde. Vn̄ ma. viii. Veritatē & pacē diligite. Loue ye trouth & peas: a good chylde sholde loue the good maners of his fader / than yf we ben the chyldren of god we ben also verytables & not lyers. It is wryten zacha. viii. Loqinum vitatē vnus∣quis{que} cū {pro}ximo suo seqit{ur} iuramētū mēdar ne deligatis. Secondly we sholde fle lyēge
and loue veryte / for lyenge dyffameth the persones yf theyr lesynges ben dyscouered Vn̄ eccle. xx. Opprobriū ne{quam} in hoīe mēda¦ciū et ī ore in disciplinato{rum} assidue erit. Ly∣enge is an euyll rebuke to a man / & it shall be accustomed in the mouche of them not dysciplyned / & verite maketh to haue good renoune before god & the worlde. Vn̄. iiii. hi. Verax est laudād{us} / mēdax vero vitu∣perād{us}. That is to say. The veritable is to prayse / & the lyer is to be shamed or hated Whan a persone is verytable yt for one ne other / for cousyn / kinnesman / ne frende ne swerueth on the one syde ne on ye other / but sayeth ye pure veryte he is to prayse & to lo¦ue & holy thynge habyteth in hȳ. Vn̄. i. ethi. Ambob{us} existātib{us} amicis sctm̄ est preho¦norare veritatē. Saynt Iames sayth in his canons. Si quis in vbo nō offēdit his {per}fe∣ct{us} est. Who so offendeth not in worde he is perfyte. Et legit{ur} eccle. xxxvii. An̄ oīa o{per}a verbū verax {pre}cedat / an̄oēm actū cōsiliū sta¦bile. Thyrdly we sholde fle lyenge & loue ve¦ryte / for lyenge putteth man fro paradyse & departeth him from god / & veryte ledeth man in to paradyse. Vn̄ sap. vi. Cōcupiscē¦tia id est amor sapiētie & vitas ducit hoīem ad regnū {per}petuū. Fourthly we sholde fle ly¦enge & loue verite / for lyenge maketh to ha¦ue perdycyon & dāpnacyon. Vn̄ psal. Per¦des oēs qui loquūt{ur} mēdaciū. Thou shalt le¦se all those the whiche speketh lesynges yf they deye Impenytentes / & veryte delyue∣reth from euyll & dampnacyon. Vn̄ io. viii. Si māseritis in sermone meo vere discipu¦li mei eritis et cognoscetis veritatē et veri∣tas liberabit vos. Yf ye be abydynge in my worde ye shall verely be my dyscyples and ye shall knowe veryte / and veryte shall delyuer you / in lykewyse shall god the whi¦che is veryte the whiche shall preserue you from dampnacyon & shall lede you in to his glorye / wherunto we may all go. Amen. A. ¶The .ix. commaundement of god de∣fendeth all lecherous thoughtes & com¦maundeth clennesse of hete.. xlii. ¶Man beware that thou ne desyre Thy neyghbours wyfe / dought ne mayde In auoydynge eternall fyre God to offende be thou afrayde THis commaundement is wrytē in the auncient testament. Deu¦tero. v. ca. Nō cōcupisces vxo∣rem {pro}xum cui. That is to saye. thou shalt not coueyte thy ney∣ghbours wyfe for to do synne. In this cō∣maūdement god defēdeth all euyll though¦tes disordonate of the synne of lechery and commaundeth chastyte of thought. For as nothynge serueth the chastyte of the body where the thought is corrupt. Vn̄ au. Ni∣chil {pro}dest vginitas corporis vbi o{per}at{ur} corru¦ptio mentis. God defendeth in the seuēth commaundement the operacion of lechery and in yt he defendeth the wyll the whiche cometh of the thought. These two lechery¦es here ben to fle. Dauyd it required of god Vnd psal. Vre renes meos & cor meum. Brenne my raynes & my hert that they ne cōmytte lechery. For to haue the herte blys∣sed / pure / & clene after the gospell. math v. Beati mūdo corde qm̄ i{pre}i deū videbūt. It behoueth to shytte well the gates of ye wyt∣tes or nature that ye lecherous enemy mor¦tal entre not / & that he soyle not ye sayd her¦te by euyl thoughtes. Mayster Hugues de saynt victor sayth yt lechery cometh in to ye herte in .vi. maners. Somtyme by syght / somtyme by herynge / or by touchynge / or by thought / or by worde / or by operacyon / by suche thynges lechery is chauffed & nou¦rysshed / ye soule is departed fro god / & cha∣ftyte is fledde from the maners / and leche¦ry is excercysed in his wyttes. And a man
sholde note that incontynent yt the dylecta¦cyon of lechery cometh vnto the herte by syght or herȳge / or by kyssynge. &c. sodayn¦ly than resyst by pynchynge thy flesshe / or byte thy tongue / pull thyn eere / thynke on the tourmentes of hell. &c. And by suche re¦systynges a man shall kepe his herte from soylynge & geteth a crowne. In lykewyse as yu shalt fynde by the examplary of ye .ix. commaundement. Quere. C.ii. A. B. ¶The concupyscences of ye flesshe how lechery is commyt in thought. xlii. NOn concupisces vxorē {pro}ximi tui. Thou shalt not coueyt thi neyghbours wyfe. A mā shol¦de vnderstande ye concupyscē¦ce carnall is lechery wtout ope¦racyon / & it is sayd in .iii. maners. The first is wtout synne. The seconde is wt synne ve¦nyall. The thyrde is wt mortall synne. The fyrst moeuynges of concupyscence carnall the whiche ben sodaynes wtin the bōdes of nature & of the sensualyte the whiche depē¦deth not vpon the wyll ben not synne / for they ben in ye puyssaunce of nature humay¦ne. But more sooner is mater to purchase vertues vnto whome therin wel resysteth by the meane & grace dyuyne / as vnto the foule thought without dylectacyon / & that it come agaynst his wyll / yt is noo synne yf reason therto consent not. Vn̄ greg. super ezech̄. Quātūcū{que} īmūda sit cogitatio mē¦tē nō polluit si ratio nō cōsentit. Et au. dicit {quam} pctm̄ est actio volūtaria / nullū enī pctm̄ nisi volūtariū. It behoueth somtyme to be holde these women to speke to them / to tou¦che & to thynke on theym / but after as the thought is ordynate or dysordynate / there is synne or there is none. As it is of necessy∣te to ete & drynke / but after the ordonaūce or dysordonaunce it may be well done or yl done. Vn de aug. in libro de nuptiis et con∣cupiscētus dicit. Cōcupiscētia nō est pctm̄ qn̄ ad illicita opera nō cōsentit{ur}. Concupys∣cence is no synne whan the wyll ne consen∣teth vnto the operacyons vnlefull. Than those the whiche lyueth chastely sholde not trouble thē whan there cometh yll though¦tes vnto them / for the deuyll tempteth mo¦re the good than the badde. Bernar. dicit. Nō eī contristari debem{us} si in tēptationi∣b{us} inciderim{us} / sed si ī tēptationib{us} superati¦fuerim{us}. We sholde not be wrothe yf we bē fallen in to temptacyons / but yf we therin haue ben ouercome. Whan temptacyōs co¦meth a man sholde strōgely resyst & fyght agaynst them for to haue rewarde & mery∣te. Vn̄ bernar. Quotiēs resistis totiēs coro¦naberis / nā quotiens resistim{us} totiens ya¦bolū superam{us} angelos letificam{us} deū ho∣noram{us}. By as oftētymes as yu resystest as many tymes shalt thou be crouned / & as of¦tentymes as we resyst so many tymes we surmount the deuyll / we reioyce yt aungels & we honour god. The seconde concupyscē¦ce of the flesshe is whan the moeuynges co¦meth of the dylectacyon vnto thynge vnle¦full wtout propre wyll ne reason dysposed to accomplysshe the operacyon / he is veny¦all synne. Also whan an euyll thought co∣meth vnto ony man wt the dylectacyon all times wtout playne consentement of reasō than is it venyall synne. The deuyll begyn¦neth to shewe the temptacyon / & yf a man cōsent not therto but resysteth incontynēt it is no synne. And yf dylectacyon come af∣ter the temptacyon it is venyal synne. And vnderstande wel yt yf the consentement of reasō be not there / for yf it were there it we¦re of the kynde of mortall synne. The thyr∣de concupyscence of ye flesshe is whan yt de∣lectacyon of euyll is abyden & that reason & the propre wyll ben dysposed it to accom∣plysshe here is mortall synne / albeit yt after¦warde
a man ne may come to do the opera¦cyon / for the wyll is reputed for the dede. In lykewyse is it of all other synnes mor∣talles whan the wyll is dysposed the synne is as who sayth done. And a man sholde he¦re vnderstande yt it behoueth yt all men and women the whiche sholde entre in to ye real¦me of paradyse haue in theyr purpose yt yf they lyued eternally they ne wolde synne mortally in ony maner what so euer it be. Than of necessyte of helth it behoueth that all those & they yt wyll haue saluacyon shol¦de haue in theyr thought yt they ne wyll cō∣mytte lechery in ony maner but in good & lawfull maryage. Yf thou wylt not beleue of symple worde study the scryptures that telleth it in many places. Vn̄ au. dicit {quod} vo∣luntas reputat{ur} {pro} facto. The wyll is repu∣ted for the dede. Ite{rum} dicit. Cōsēsus ī op{us} pctī mortalis est pctm̄ mortale & cōsensus in opus pctī venialis est pctm̄ veniale. Con¦sentement in operacyon of synne mortal is mortal synne / & consentement in werke of synne venyall is venyall synne. Et greg. di¦cit. Qui cōsentit pctōet nō arguit dign{us} est morte. He yt consenteth to synne & stryueth not to resist vnto the contrary is worthy to deye. And it is wryten in the gospell yt our sauyour Ihesus sayd vnto ye auncyentes. Do ye none aduoutry / & I say vnto you yt euery man yt hath seen a woman in desyrȳ¦ge to knowe her he hath cōmytted synne in her in his herte. Vn̄ math. v. Dictū antiqis Non mechaberis / ego aūt dico vobis qr oīs qui viderit mulierē ad concupiscēdū eā me chat{us} est in corde suo. God sheweth here yt the wyll is reputed for the dede / vnto ye dyf¦ference of them the whiche weneth not to synne yf they accomplysshe the operacyon. It is wryten .i. regū. xvi. Nō eī videt ea q̄ patēt / dn̄s aūt ītuet{ur} cor. The mā seeth tho∣se thynge the whiche appereth / & our lorde beholdeth ye herte & the wyl. Et pau. ad ro. i Non solum qui faciūt peccata sed qi consē¦tiunt faciētib{us} digni sūt morte. After that saynt Poule hadde named many synnes he sayd / not alonly they the whiche doo the synne / but also they the whiche consenteth to do them ben worthy of dethe. ¶Exāple how a woman was dampned for the consē¦tynge of wyll to commytte lechery. Quere c.a. ¶Another example of a monke ye whi¦che lost the breed celestyal for hauynge euyl lecherous thoughtes. Quere. C.i. A. C. ¶For to vnderstande clerely the dyffe∣rence of mortall syn̄e & venyall it behoueth to take the wordes of saynt Austin the whi¦che ben wryten in his boke of ye cyte of god the whiche sayth. Whan a man loueth a per¦sone is behoueth yt the sayd loue be good or euyll. It is good whan it is for the loue of god / & therin is vertue And also suche loue is necessary as whan the sone loueth the fa¦der. &c. it is natural / the whiche is not loua¦ble ne vytuperable. Also suche loue is vo∣luptuous & lybydynous / it behoueth to ma¦ke dystynccyon / for yf the dylectacyon and wyll be aboue the loue of god / or egally vn¦to hym / as to say. I loue better suche opera¦cyon of lechery than to obeye vnto god the whiche it defendeth / or of as moche as he endeuereth hym to do it / albeit he do it not here is mortall synne in two maners. And yf the loue be vnder god / that is to say that a man loueth better to obey vnto god than to do it / it is venyall synne. Vnde augusti∣n{us}. Peccatum veniale est libido siue amor voluptas citra deum / mortale vero est libi¦do siue amor voluptatis. supra deum vel e∣qualiter ei. Mortall synne is lechery or loue of volupte aboue almyghty god or egally vnto hym. D. ¶The euylles and domnges that the euyll thoughtes do. xlii.
EVyl thoughtes ben to fle for ma¦ny thȳges. Fyrst for yt they sepa¦rate the persones from god. Vn̄ sapi. i. Peruerse eī cogitatōnes seperāt a deo. Secōdly for that they make to haue maledyccyō. Vn̄michee ii. Ve qi cogitatis īutile & o{per}amini malūm cubilib{us} vr̄is. Maledyccion vnto you ye whi¦che thynke thynges inutyle / & do yl in your couches. Et ec. iii. Ve duplici corde & labus sceleratis & manib{us} malefatiētib{us} & pctōri terrā egrediēti duab{us} viis. Maledyccyō vn¦to men of double herte / and vnto ye lyppes of women synners / & vnto the handes do∣ynge euyll / & vnto the synner entrynge in to ye erth by two wayes Thyrdly yl though¦tes ben to fle for yt they chase awaye ye ver∣tues & goodes spyrytualles of ye soule and letteth all good espyrytuall yt it ne may pro¦fyte. As a man may saye by symylytude yt sekenes corporall chaseth away the helth & the welthe of the body / & to let to ete & drȳ¦ke / & all goodnes yt it ne may prouffyte. &c. in lykewyse as it is declared afterwarde. Que ad nume{rum} .xliiii. b. c. d. e. f. g. &c. Four¦thely euyl thoughtes ben to fle for yt they sle spyrytually the soules of dethe of gylte / for they separate god / his loue / & his grace the whiche is the lyfe of the soule as it is decla∣red in ye cōmaundement of homycyde. que∣re. xxiiii. b. Fyfthly euyll thoughtes ben to fle for yt they blynde the eyen wtinforth of ye soule & of the entendement & maketh ye sou¦le derke & putteth it in derkenes / as it is de¦clared afterwarde. Quere. xliiii. Syxtly yl thoughtes ben to fle for yt they ben publys∣shed & shewed at ye day of Iugemēt before all the worlde / as it is wryten. Math̄. x. et lu. xii. Nichil aūt o{per}tū ē qd nō reuelet{ur} ne{que} abscōditū qd nō sciat{ur} & ī palā veniat. The∣re is nothynge so strongly couered but yt it shal be shewed / ne hyd but yt it be knowen & sene openly before all. Also it behoueth to yelde accompte at the day of Iugement be¦fore god of all euyll thoughtes. Vn̄ sapi. i. In cogitationib{us} īpu īcogitatio erit. Inter¦rogacyon or questyon shall be made of the thoughtes of the synner. Et sa{pre}. iii. Impu¦aūt scdm q̄ cogitauerūt correctionē habebūt qi neglexer āt iustū & a dn̄o recesserūt. The yll shall haue correccyon after the thynges yt they haue thought. ¶Example yt it beho¦ueth to yelde accompt at the Iugemēt of yl thoughtes. Quere. cviii. D. Seuenthly yll thoughtes bē to fle for drede to lese ye Ioyes of paradyse & beatytude eternall / ye whiche Ioyes ben promysed vnto those yt haue pu∣re hertes / & clere fro syn̄e. Vn̄ mat. v. Bti mūdo corde qm̄ i{pre}i deū videbūt. of this ma¦ter. Que. xliiii. & .xlvii. a. Eyghtly yl though¦tes byndeth vnto punycyon & dāpnacyon eternall wtin the fyre of hell the whiche is a tourment moche cruell in lykewyse as it is declared hereafter. que. xlvii. b. Vn̄ eccle. iii. Cor grauabit{ur} in dolorib{us}. The euyll herte shall be greued in dolours. By these thyn∣ges beforesayd it appereth ye a man breketh the commaundement of god by thought le¦cherous / agaynst the whiche a man sholde resyst for to go in to paradyse. Vnto ye whi¦che almyghty god vs conduyte the whiche is reygnynge and benedictus in secula secu¦lorum. Amen. A. ¶The tenthe commaundement of god the whiche defendeth all euyll though∣tes of theft / coueytyse / and auaryce the whiche ben agaynst the dyleccyon of his neyghboure. xliii. ¶Coueyte thou not in ony thynge Thy neyghbours good ne herytage Lete not thy herte in it haue lykynge Lest thou be dampned for suche outrage.
THis commaūdement is wryten in the olde testament. Deut. v. ca. Et ro. xx. Nō cōcupistes rē {pro}ximi tui / nō do¦mū nec agrū / nec seruū / nec ācillā / nec vni¦uersa q̄ illis sūt. That is to say. Thou shalt not coueyt thy neyghbours thȳg / his hous his felde / ne the seruaunt / ne the mayden / ne ony thynge yt vnto hym belongeth. In this commaundement god defendeth al co¦uetyse wtin forthe / yt is to wyte ye wyl dyspo¦sed to haue the goodes of another vniustly agaynst the wyll of hym to whome they be¦longe. Also god wyll yt euery man content hym wt the good yt he hath / or yt to him shal come after ryght / reason / & Iustyce / but a man sholde vnderstande yt the fyrst mouin¦ges coueytynge the goodes of another yt bē wtin the bondes of ye sensualite / yt preuēteth all holly before the delyberacyon of reason they ne ben dampnables / but al wyll dyspo¦sed & consentemēt of reason beynge in wyl to haue them vniustly it is mortall synne & fraccyon of this cōmaundement. Nō cōcu¦pisces rē {pro}ximi tui. Some coueyteth ye thȳ¦ge of another in .iii. maners. The first some there ben ye it coueyteth / but for yt / yt they knowe well yt they can not haue it they ne pursue it. And yf they wyst wel yt they shol¦de haue it they sholde put it in effecte / suche synneth mortally. Secondly some other co¦ueyte the thinge & enforce them in effect to haue it / albeit yt they ne may haue it yet syn¦nen they mortally & more greuously than ye fyrst. Thyrdly some other there ben to who¦me it suffyseth not to coueyte the thynge / but by fals enforcȳge done so moche yt they possede it / & suche synneth more greuously thā these beforesayd. They ben as those the¦ues & rauysshers after yt they haue couey∣ted comen to effe to take it. It is wryten of these maners here beforsayd .i. ad thym̄ .vi. Qui voluit diuites fieri īcidūt in tēpta∣tionē et laqueū dyaboli & desideria mlta īu∣tila & nociua q̄ mergūt hoīes in īteritū & {per}¦ditionē. Saynt Poule sayth yt they ye whi¦che wyll be ryche falleth in to temptacyōs & in to the deuyls gynnes in many desyres vnprouffytables & noyenges whiche plon∣geth these men in dethe & perdycyon. Ano∣ther exposycyon vpon these sayd wordes. Nō cōcupisces rē {pro}ximi tui. Thou shalte not coueyte ye thynge of thy neyghbour for to possede it vniustly. It is agaynst ryght / Iustyce / & reason / & for to ordeyne it or too vse it vnto an yll ende / as those yt appety∣teth goode for to lede grete pompes & esta∣te in vaynglory / or for to vse lechery / or to haue dylycatyfe metes / as ye cursed Dyues yt was dayly serued delycyously & rychely / or as ye clerkes yt appetyteth ye benefyces & dygnytees / not for to dystrybute ye goodes to ye poore as they sholde. Qr bona ecclia{rum} sūt bona paupe{rum}. But for to lyue fatly and pōpously in su{per}fluytees & synnes. &c. vlsic. Thou shalt not coueyte to haue ye thȳge of thy neyghbour vniustly for to wtholde it as these auarycyous yt kepe & assemble wtout gyuynge & dystrybutinge. Morouer a man sholde vnderstande ryght clerely yt as ma∣ny tymes as ony is disposed in his thought to go agaynst ony of the cōmaundements of god he synneth mortally & is a breker of this cōmaundement ayenst the whiche he wyll go / albeit yt he ne come to do ye opera∣cyon. Verbi gr̄a. Yf yu in thy herte hate thy neyghbour in desyringe his dethe or his do¦mage yu brekest yt .v. cōmaundemēt. Vn̄. i. ioh̄. iii. Qui odit fr̄{rum} suū homicida est. Also yf yu be wrothe in thy herte ayenst thy ney∣bour in desyringe to venge ye vniustly by de¦lyberacyon yu brekest ye .v. commaundemēt & synnest mortally. Vn̄ math. v. Oīs qi iras¦cet{ur} fr̄i suo scilicet ī corde re{us} erit iudicō. This mater is suffyciently declared in ye {pre}cedent commaundement & in the thynges before¦sayd where it speketh yt the wyll is reputed
for the dede. ¶Here is the ende of the ten commaundementes of god ye a man shold kepe for to come vnto the glory celestyall / vnto the whiche we may go cum illo qui est benedictus in scla sclo{rum}. Amen. B. ¶How those the whiche haue broken ye commaundements of god & the whiche ben in mortall synne ne sholde not with drawe to do alwayes good dedes / how¦beit that they sholde be dampned. xliii. SAynt poule sayth in his epystle ad heb. iiij. ca. Oīa nuda et ap∣perta sunt ante oculos dei. All thynges the whiche ben naked & hydde ben before the eyen of god. He seeth & knoweth our thoughtes & operacyons / and shal yelde vnto euery mā that / yt he hath deserued. Vnde psal. Tu reddes vnicui{que} iuxta o{per}a sua. Et alibi scri∣bitur. Nullum malū remanebit īpunitum et nullum bonū irremuneratū. That is to say. that none euyll shall abyde vnpunys∣shed / & no good dede but that it shall be re∣warded / be it in this worlde or in the other And therfore ye persone yt is in deedly syn̄e sholde not withdrawe to do wel. Vn̄ vers{us} Non amittuntur / q̄ pro dn̄o tribuuntur. Om̄ia que fiunt / in mortali bona pro sunt. Nam mūdi bona dāt demonijs arma re∣frenāt. Mētes ūlustrant / etiā tormēta mi¦norāt. Ad maiora bona / dāt vsū facienda Non tamē eternā / possunt acquirere vitā Vel sic. Versus. Cōdita peccato mortall dant bona terre. Augmētant vitam mi∣nuunt tormenta gehēne. These metres or verses beforesayd hathe ben made & taken vpon the scrypture the whiche sayth yt they the whiche do good dedes in mortall synne bē rewarded in .v. maners / albeit yt yf they deye impenytentes they shal not be saued. The fyrst reumneracyō yt they shal haue ye whiche done good dedes yt god shall sende them the sooner erthly goodes in this worl¦de / & greter haboundaunce than yf they ne dyde good dedes. The seconde remuneraci¦on is yt by doynge of dedes they refrayne / wtdrawen / & tary the assautes of the deuyll that is to say yt the deuyll hath not so grete puyssaunce & force vpon theym the whiche dooth or sayth good as yf they ne so dide ne sayd / & also is wtdrawen. ¶Example how an holy man sawe by the suffraunce of god at a grete dyner how the deuylles drewe a backe whan those the whiche dyned spake of god & good wordes / & the aungelles dre¦we them nere. And whan they spake of de¦traccyon & of euyll ye deuyls came agayne. &c. Quere in thexamplary .lxxxxix. H. The thyrde remuneracyon is that the good de∣des yt they doo shyneth vnto them / & enlu∣myneth theyr entendementes to reknowle¦ge theyr defautes / and to se the good yt they lose / and the euyl that they gete. Also theyr entendementes ben not enlumyned whan they doo no good dedes as whan they doo. The fourth remuneracōn is yt yf these per¦sones the whiche do good dedes in mortall synne were dampned in hell they ne sholde be soo greuously punysshed and tourmen∣ted as yf they ne had done noo good dede / for the good dedes dooth quenche the syn∣nes as the water the fyre. Vnde ecclesi. iii. Ignem ardentem extinguit aqua & elemo¦sma resistit peccatis. ¶Example of a man deed the whiche fell in goynge ouer a bryd for whome there was grete stryfe for his al mesdedes & euyll dedes the whiche he had commytted in lykewyse as it is wryten in the examplary. C.x.C. A man sholde note here ye more that a persone dooth of euyl in this worlde the more cruelly shall he be tor¦mented in hell. Quere in thexāplary .xlix. c. And the more that he hath done of good de¦des and the lesse of euyll he shall endure &
fele the lesse doloure yf it were soo that he were dampned / and therfore a man sholde neuer drawe backe to do euermore good de¦des. The fyfth remuneracion that those ha¦ue the whiche done good dedes in mortall synne is that god theym sendeth the more sooner grace to correcte them and amende them and to come vnto saluacyon than yf they ne dyde ony good dedes / in lykewyse as a man shall fynde by many examples. ¶Fyrst example by Cornelyus the whiche was paynym / and for that yt he gaue almes¦ses he sawe an aungell the whiche sayd vn¦to hym that he shold go vnto saynt Peter the whiche sholde tell hym what he sholde do. Vnde actuū. v. ca. Corneli mitte et ex∣cersi symonem qui cognoīatur petrus / hic dicet tibi quid te oporteat facere. And he dy¦de soo and was conuerted vnto the faythe of our lorde Ihesu cryst. ¶Another exam¦ple is wryten in the legende of saynt Syl∣uester how the cause of the helthe and salua¦cyon of ye emperour Constantyne was for yt he had pyte on the chyldren that men wol¦de haue slayne to thentent that he were ba∣thed in theyr blode for to haue remedi ayēst his lepreheed. The sayd emperoure wolde not that the sayd chyldren were slayne for hym & made to delyuer them agayne vnto theyr moders the whiche wept / & morouer made to gyue vnto them gyftes. And the nyght folowynge he sawe saynt Peter the whiche sayd vnto hym that he sholde call ye pope Syluester and that by hym he sholde be conuerted / baptysed & heled of his lepry and meselry. And in lykewyse was it done as it appereth in the sayd legende. ¶Ano∣ther example. It is wryten in the legende of saynt Eustace how the cause of his con∣uercyon was for the almesdedes that he dy¦de. The begynnȳge of the lyfe of saynt Eu¦stace was that he was an ydolatre and syn¦ner / but he was a grete gyuer of almesse & full of pyte & of mercy / and for the good de¦des that he dyde god wolde not that he we¦re dampned / but gaue hȳ grace to conuert hym / to correcte and to amende / & appered vnto hym the whiche sholde be to longe to tell / and for an ende & conclusyon he is holy and saued. &c. C. ¶Another example. It is wryten in ye legende of saynt Iohan thalmosyner of ye conuersyon of the riche man chaunger and exposytour named Peter / the whiche in ye begynnynge of his lyfe was ryght cruel vn¦to poore people and chased them out of his hous wt grete yre and Indygnacyon. And on a time the poore men complayned them togyders yt neuer in theyr lyfe they myght not haue so moche as one onely almesdede of hym. The one of them sayd. What wyll ye gyue and I this daye may gete ony al∣messe of hym. Than they made couenaunt with him / & he yode vnto the hous for to de¦maunde almesse. And whan the sayd ryche man came & sawe the sayd poore man befo¦re his gate he coude fynde no stones to cast at hym / so as one of his seruauntes passed by the whiche bare barly loues to his hous he toke one of those loues and smote ye sayd poore man by grete wodenes. Than ye po∣re man toke vp the lofe and so ranne vnto his neyghbours vnto whome he shewed ye almesse that he hadde goten of his hande. And two dayes after ye sayd ryche mā was seke to ye dethe & sawe in vysyon yt he was in Iugement & blacke men put his ylles in balaunce / & on the other parte of ye sayd ba¦launce some other clad in whyte / & the one of them sayd. We haue but one barly lofe yt he gaue vnto god by constraynt two dayes passed. And whan they had put ye sayd bre¦de within the sayd balaunce it semed vnto hym that the balaunces were egalles / thā they sayd vnto the sayd ryche man. Mul∣typlye this barly lofe or these blacke men
shall take the and than he awoke & sayd. Alas yf one barlylofe that I kest by wode¦nes hath so moche auayled me / how moche auayleth the almesdedes the whiche ben gi¦uen lyberally. &c. For to make short ye sayd ryche man conuerted hym & was a ryght grete gyuer of almesses after and a veray good man. ¶Another example of another ryche man the whiche serued the deuyll a∣bout .xl. yeres / and for goynge to here a pre¦dycacion he conuerted hym and was saued As it is wryten in the examplary. Quere. lvi. K. ¶Another example by that yt a man dyspayred had serued saynt Domynycke / he appered vnto hym / conforted hym / and put hym in the waye of saluacyon / as it is wryten in the Legende of the sayd saynt. ¶Another example of a man that was sē∣tencyed & Iuged vnto dampnacyon / and was delyuered at the request of the vyrgin Marye / as it is wryten in her myracles. ¶Another example of a fayre mayden pō¦peously arayed and cladde vpon a sondaye after that she was wery of daunsynge the deuyll wolde haue taken and borne her a∣way in body and in soule / and she began to crye for helpe of the vyrgyn Mary / for her moder had lerned her to serue her / and she was delyuered from ye deuyll / as it is wry in thexamplary. Quere. lxviii. c. d. ¶A que¦styon. What deference is there betwene ye good dedes the whiche ben done in deedly synne / and those the whiche ben done in ye estate of grace. The answere. There is gre¦te deference / for the one is ryght lyuely & merytoryous for to haue the rewarde eter∣nall in paradyse. It is that the whiche is do¦ne in thestate of grace without synne. The other the whiche is doone in mortall synne is a good dede / deed and without rewarde eternall / for it is done without grace & cha¦ryte. Also synne is a venym so mortall vn∣to the soule that it mortyfyeth all goodnes spyrytuall / and departeth god his loue and his grace / wherby the synner loseth his re∣warde eternal. But the good dedes that he dooth in mortal synne serueth hȳ / for there ben the .v. retrybucions beforesayd. ¶For to vnderstande well this mater the perso∣nes the whiche shall be saued at the day of Iugement shall haue meryte and rewarde eternall that they haue done in the worlde in thestate of grace. And yf they had com∣mytted ony mortall synnes & after doo pe¦naunce all those good dedes yt they haue do¦ne in thestate of grace in precedinge ye sayd synnes come agayne vnto theym in theyr good valour by the penaunce. And of those good dedes the whiche ben comen agayne in conualescence ben saued and they shall haue rewarde eternalle in paradyse. And not of those the whiche they haue doone in mortall synne / for that / yt whan they were done they were deed by synne as it is sayd / & by that the meryte eternall is lost. Vnde sctūs thomas. Nullus pōt mereri nisi me¦diante gratia vt dictū est. quere .xlv. b. Vn̄ versus. Illa remiscūt que mortificata fue∣runt. Viuere nō possunt q̄ mortua nata sūt That is to say that those good dedes reuy∣ueth in god cōualescence by penaunce / the whiche haue ben mortyfyed by synne. But those good dedes the whiche were done in synne may not lyue / yt is reuerte in conua∣lescence after penaunce to haue rewarde e∣ternall. It foloweth than that the good de¦de yt is done in the estate of grace is better than the other deed. And therfore those the whiche dyfferreth to confesse them in lentē or in other tymes ben to be reprehended to do a good dede in synne. Also a man sholde vnderstande that noo good dede is loste / but the one good dede is moche better than another. &c.
A ¶The thynge mouynge for to kepe the cōmaundementes of god. Ca. xliiii. ¶Those that lerne ne wyll. The cōmaundementes & lawe to kepe And in euery poynt them fulfyll In hell shall lye ryght depe IN that aege that an enfant is ca¦pable of the cōmaundements of god he is holden to lerne theym / for that that he sholde kepe hym that he breke them not vpon the payne of dampnacyon. Vn̄ legit{ur} in secun∣do libro sententiarū. distī. xvii. Statī enī cū quis fit capax {pre}cepti dei tenetur ad ei{us} noticiā et obseruantiam. Et dauid dicit in psal. Tu mandasti mādata tua custodi∣ri nimis. Thou haste cōmaunde moche to kepe thy cōmaundementes. Whan yt ony temporell kynge maketh to bane proclay∣me / or shewe ony cōmaundement thorow¦oute his realme his subgectes moue them to obeye vnto hȳ of drede to renne in pay¦nes and dōmages that they may haue for theyr inobedyēce. Also many thynges shol¦de moue vs to kepe the cōmaundements that the kynge of heuen and of erthe hath made to proclayme / and to crye ouer all the worlde. ¶The fyrste thynge the whi∣che sholde moue vs to kepe the cōmaunde¦mentes of god is for the grete goodnes in fynyte that is in hym / that is to saye that there is soo moche of goodnes in god that it is innumerable. For a man ne can fyn∣de the ende soo moche there is of goodnes in hym. Of this matere is somwhat spo∣ken in the ende of this treatyse / and howe the sayntes of heuen beholde aboue them the fayre myrrour ye whiche is god. quere. xlvii. a. Example .xlvii. b. c ¶The seconde thynge esmouynge to kepe the cōmaunde¦mentes of god is for to obeye to his wyll / he is our fader celestyall the whiche hathe create our soules as it is sayd before. Also it is he yt whiche nouryssheth vs with his godes that he maketh to growe / and it is he the whiche hathe agayne vs bought vs by his precyous blode / and ye whiche wyll that we possede his herytage in paradyse as his dere chyldren. It is good reason yt the chyldren obeye vnto the fader / and by that yt we ben the chyldren of god we shol∣de obeye vnto his cōmaundementes. The thyrde thynge ye whiche moueth vs to ke∣pe the cōmaundementes of god is to the ende to be in his loue and in his grace / for he loueth those the whiche kepe them in ly¦ke wyse as it is wryten iohannes .xv. Si precepta mea seruaueritis manebit is ī di¦lectione mea. Yf ye haue kepte my cōmaū¦dementes ye shall dwelle in my loue & dy∣leccion. Iterū in codē capitulo. Vos ami¦ci mei estis si feceritis que precipio vobis / Ye be my frendes yf ye doo that thynge ye I commaūde you. Example by that / that abraham was obedient vnto god / he was so parfytely in his loue that he had his be∣nediccion. Quere .lxi. a. Another example by that that saynt Mor was obedyent he dyde many myracles amonge the whiche he ranne one tyme vpon the water wtoute synkynge or ylle hauynge. Que. lii. c. Ano∣ther example by the obedyence of a relygy¦ous / god loued so moche that a drye belet blocke that he arroused with water bare floure and fruyte. Quere in the exemplay¦re .lii. e. God sayd in the gospell / yf ye loue me kepe my cōmaundementes. He ye whi∣che loueth me not / kepeth not my cōmaun¦dementes. vnde iohannis .xiiii. Si diligi∣tis me mandato mea seruate. Sequitur Qui non diligit me sermones meos non seruat. Ony lorde or kynge ne maye loue his seruaūt whan he dysobeyeth vnto his cōmaūdementes / no more doth god / how
maye he loue ydolatres blasphematoures chyldren vnnaturall / inobedientes / mur∣drers / theuys / payllars / and false witnes∣ses / whan they dysobeye vnto his wyll & breke his cōmaundementes he ne may lo∣ue them. Beholde what hate and inconue¦nient that there came vnto adam for a bit of an apple that he dyde agayne the com∣maundemente of god. Quere .liiii. a. Also beholde how chore / dathan / and abyron / were punysshed for the inobedyence and murmure that they made agayne god & Moyses. Quere .liiii. God ne may loue hȳ the whiche dysobeyeth vnto his cōmaun∣dementes. But he loueth hym the whiche obeyeth vnto hym. We rede how god de∣maunded of saynt peter yf he loued hym / Petre amas me. He answered thou kno∣west that I loue the. Tu sis quia amo te. And by that that saynt peter loued god / & obeyed vnto hym / our lorde Ihesu cryste sayd vnto hym in this maner of wyse. pa∣sce agnos meos: pasce oues mea. I shall gyue the keyes of the reame of heuen vn∣to the / and that that thou byndest in erthe shall be bounde in heuen &c. For that that he was obedyente vnto oure lorde Ihesu cryste / god gaue vnto hym the gouerne∣ment of the chirche and the keyes of para¦dyse. Also we sholde kepe the commaun∣dementes of god to the ende that it wolde please hym to abyde with vs / for to kepe vs and saue vs. Vnde iohannis .xiiii. Si quis diligit me sermonem meum seruabit et pater meus diliget cum et ad cum venie¦mus et mansionem apud cum faciemus. That is to saye / who so loueth me kepeth my wordes and my fader shall loue hym sayeth Ihesus / and vnto hym we shall co¦me and we shal make with hym our dwel¦lynge / and it is wryten. iohānis .xv. Ma∣nete in me et ego in vobis. Dwel ye in me and I shall dwelle in you. Et legitur. ioh. iiii. Deus caritas est: et qui manet in ca∣rytate in deo manet: et deus in eo. God is charyte and loue / and who so dwelleth in charyte / he dwelleth in god and god in hȳ We rede that our lorde sayd vnto the ap∣postles that they sholde goo to preche and to conuerte the infydeles. And that they ne sholde thinke what they sholde answer vnto the tyrauntes / and that it sholde be gyuen vnto them that that they shold an¦swer of the holy ghost the whiche abodem them as sayeth the gospell. Dabitur enī vobis in tīla hora quid loquamini. Non enim vos estis quiloquimini: {sed} spirit{us} pa¦tris vestri qui loquitur in vobis. So it ap¦pered that god abode in theym. And who so dothe agayne the wyll of god he ne aby¦deth in hym. &c. ¶The fourth thynge yt sholde moue vs to kepe the commaunde∣mentes of god / is to thende that the good dedes that we done be vnto hym agrea∣ble / and vnto vs vtyle and prouffytable / For yf we dysobeye vnto hym our opera∣cyons pleaseth hym nothynge. Thre thyn¦ges ben requysyte before that we may do thynge the whiche is vnto god agreable / ¶The fyrst is the good dedes that we do be done genere bonorum. That is that it procede of a good kynde or stocke as to gy¦ue almesdedes of his owne laboure with∣oute doynge it of thefte or pyllery. ¶The seconde is: quod sit ad laudem dei non ad vanam gloriam. That is that it be done vnto the preyse of god / & not vnto vayne glorye. The thyrde thynge is that a man be in the estate of grace. For the good de∣des that a man dothe in synne is not me∣rytoryous vnto the eternyte vnto the per¦sone the whiche dothe it. Also it is not ag∣greable vnto god: how be it yt a man shold not drawe backe to doo euermore of good dedes as it is declared before. Quere .xliii. b. The pope pius sayeth de consecratione
distinc .v. Nichil prodest ieiunare & orare et alia religionis opera agere nisi mēs ab iniquitate reuocatur. It prouffyteth no∣thynge as vnto saluacyon to faste / and to praye / and to do other good dedes of rely∣gyon yf the thoughte be not called agayne from synne / that yf a man cease hym not to cōmytte mortall synne. &c. And saynt poule sayeth .i. corinth. xiii. Si linquis ho∣minum loquar & angelorum. &c. Carita¦tem autem nō habuero nulis michi {pro}dest vt dictum est ante: quere .iiii. ca. After the scryptures it behoueth to do the good de∣de in estate of grace / in doynge the pylgry¦mage of the worlde as it is sayd in ye fyrst condycyon of the pylgryme of paradyse. Quere ibi post. ¶The .v. thynge that shol¦de moue vs to kepe the cōmaundements of god it is to thende that it wolde please hym to here & to vnderstonde oure reques∣tes / prayers and oraisons / & that he them graunte vnto vs and exalte whan we re∣quyre hym. Vnde. ioh. xv. Si manseritis in me et verba mea in vobis manserint: quodcun{que} volueritis petetis & fiet vobis That is to say yf ye abyde or dwell in me that is in my loue. and that my wordes be abydynge in you / that ben my commaun¦dementes / ye shall demaūde what so euer thynge that ye wyll and it shal be done to you. Et legit{ur} mathei. xxi. & marci. xi. Om¦nia quecun{que} peneritis in oratione creden¦tes accipietis. God sayeth you byleuynge in me by fayth operant / take ye in oraysō all thynges what so euer ye demaunde / & the psal. sayeth. Occuli domini super ius∣tos & aures eius ad preces corū. The eyen of god ben vpon the iuste / and his eres vn¦to the prayers of them. Et legitur luce. xi. Petite et dabitur vobis: querite et inue∣nietis: pulsate et aperietur vobis &c. Exā¦ple how at the prayer of a man a moun∣ayne was remeued from one place vnto another. Quere .xli. a. Another example how a good preest catholique entred with¦in the fyre to conferme the faith / and was not brente. Quere .lxi. b. And in dede con∣trary the orayson of hym the whiche wyll not kepe the cōmaundementes of god ne shall be exalted / and ne shall gete graunt anenste god of that that he demaundeth. Vnde augu. Qui preceptis auertitur qd in oratione postulat non meretur: nec im∣petrat ab illo bonum quod poscit: cuius le∣gi non obedit. Example. The request of ye cursed diues was not graunted hȳ whan he demaunded a droppe of water & that the lazar sholde go vnto his brederne. &c. Quere .lxxxiiii. a. ¶The syxte thynge mo¦uynge vs to kepe the cōmaundements of god is to thende to haue the grete benedic¦cyons that god prometteth vnto those the whiche here with good wyll and kepe his cōmaūdementes the whiche ben wryten after. Quere .xlv. f. ¶The .vii. to the ende to haue grete rewarde in paradyse / wher∣of it is spoken afterwarde. Quere .xlvii. a. ¶The .viii. is to haue drede of the male∣dyccyon and excōmunycacyons the which ben caste vpon the synners inobedyentes vnto god & vnto the chirche. Quere .xlviii b. ¶The .ix. of drede to haue punycyon as pharaon the whiche had the harte so har∣de and was so obstynate in yll yt he wolde not obeye vnto god and vnto his seruaūt Moyses. And therfore god sent vnto hym many punycyons and in the ende he was drowned diuinely he and his people. Que¦re in ye exemplayre .liiii. f. ¶Also these dys obeysantes sholde drede to be sente in to ye fyre of helle ye whiche is a torment moche cruell in lyke wyse as it is wryten in ye en∣de of the treatyse. Quere .xlix. b.
B. ¶How many thynges ben nuysaūtes vnto those the whiche ben inobedyentes & breketh the cōmaundementes of god / the whiche ben wryten herafter by psalmes. Capitulo. xliiii QVi in vno mandato peccauerit multa bona perdet. Ecclesiasti∣sis .ix. ca. Who so hathe synned mortally in one cōmaūdement shall lose many of good dedes / That is to vnderstonde that ye transgres∣syon of euery cōmaundement that a man commytteth in synnynge mortally by dy∣lectacyon and delyberacyon noyeth vnto the soule in many maners yt whiche shall be herafter declared and put by psalmes / Fyrste the fraccyon or brekynge of ony cō∣maundement putteth the soule of the bre∣ker vnto pouerte of spyrytuall goodes. for it chaseth and maketh to be forgoten hys vertues and good operacyons lately gotē and the whiche rested in hym. Saynt ysy¦dore sayeth. Per vnum enim peccatum multe iustitie pereunt. That is to saye yt by one synne many of iustyces peryssheth and saynt poule sayeth ad galatas quinto Modicum fermentitotam massam cor∣rumpit. In lyke wyse as a lytell of leuayn or soure dough corrupteth a grete dele of paste / euen so the brekynge of the cōmaun¦dement corrupteth a greate hepe of fayre vertues. Example how ye aungell sayd to a vyrgyn chast deuoute / a gyuer of almes and charytable that she ne myght be in su¦che wyse saued yf she were not pacyente / for ye sinne of ire abode in her. Que. lxxxxix b. circa finem. Another example of a mon¦ke the whiche was so moche replenysshed with vertues that god sente vnto hym e∣uery daye celestyall brede. And after that he hadde commytted synne he loste ye sayd brede. Quere in the exemplayre ad nume¦rum .ci. a. ¶Another example how the so¦ne of a ryche man the whiche serued god in fastynges and oraysons and in doynge operacyons was in thende dampned for that that he kepte ire in his herte / & for yt he wolde be venged. Quere .lxxix. a. Holde thou for certayne that the dysobeysaunce that a man commytteth in synne mortall is an infeccyon & sekenes mortall the whi¦che taketh awaye chaseth and anientith & maketh to be forgoten the vertues and ye goodes spyrytuelles that ony man hathe before goten and the whiche resteth in hȳ For the scrypture sayeth yt these vertues ne maye dwell with the vyces. Virtutes cum vitiis remanere nō possunt. And the∣se logicyens sayeth two thynges opposy∣tes and contraryes the one vnto the other ne maye enhabyte ne dwelle togyders in one selfe subiect but that the one chaseth a waye the other. Duo opposita nun{quam} pos¦sunt esse in eodem subiecto. The synnes & the vertues ben contrary the one vnto the other / than they may not dwell togyders. Yf I be than in mortall synne / my synne chaseth away the goodes spyrytuelles fro¦me & maketh it to be forgoten before god whyles yt it regneth in me / for I ne maye be hole and seke togyders / good and ylle / gouerned of god and of the deuyl / of good spyryte and of ylle. In lyke manere I ne may be in grace and in synne / for they ben thynges contraryes that whan the one ru¦leth it chaseth and putteth awaye ye other what so euer it be. Vnde bernardus. Si∣cut ignis et aqua simul esse non possunt / sic spirituales et carnelis delitie non se cō∣patiuntur ad inuicem. In lyke wyse as ye water quencheth ye fyre / or bytternes cha∣seth awaye swetnes and all thynges dely∣cyous / or the traycle the venyme / or the derkenesse the lyght / or the hete the colde /
In lyke wyse mortal synne chaseth away the vertues and the goodes spyrytuell of the soule. Example also as the water de∣parteth it from the pot the whiche is per∣ced or holed. In lyke wyse dothe good ope¦racyons from men by mortal synne. Que¦re .cii.x. Also mortall synne is by symyly∣tude as infeccyon and venym mortell / for in lyke wyse as venym corrupteth ye helth and the goodes of the body / in lyke wyse synne corrupteth the helthe & goodes spy∣rytuelles of the soule. And in lyke wyse as those yt whiche ben inuenymed ben in daū¦ger of dethe yf they ne go to seche of trya∣cle / so ben they in mortall synne yf they ne goo vnto penaunce. Quere .viii. a whiche is the tryacle and the remedye agayne sin Augustinus dicit. Omne seminarium vo¦luptatum venemim puta. Et luce .xiii. Ni¦si penitentiam egeritis omnes simul {per}ibi¦tis. Also mortall synne is a rotennesse the whiche corrupteth the beaute of the soule the ende of vertues / the odour of good re∣nomme and the sauoure of glorye. And in lyke wyse as rotēnesse gothe vnto nought and leseth all beaute and bounte of an ap¦ple so dothe mortall synne of the soule. vn∣de iob. xiii. Qui quasi putredo consumen¦dus sum: et quasi vestimentum quod co∣medit{ur} a tinea. Example how an erle was dampned for an herytage ylle witholden albe it that he hadde done of good opera∣cyons. Quere .lxxxii. a. Another example how a woman the whiche fasted & excer∣cysed her in oraysons and good operacy∣ons was dampned for the kepynge of Ire without beynge in wyl to pardon. Quere lxviii. d. Also a man may say by symylytu¦de that mortall synne noyeth vnto the sou¦le / in lyke wyse as epedyme or pestylence: or other sekenes mortall noyeth vnto the body. For in lyke wyse as the sekenes cor∣porall taketh awaye the helthe and al the goodes of the body. In lyke maner ye dy¦beysaunce the whiche is hin mortall synne is so grete a sekenes vnto the ue that it taketh away and chaseth vertues and good spyrytuelles the whiche restth in her. Vnde ezechielis .xxxiii. Inquat{ur} {que} die peccaueit iustus omnes iustitie ius obliuioni tradentur. In what houre that the iuste hathe synned all his iustices ben forgoten. Also whan one membre is seke / all the body feleth it and playneth. Cum patitur vnum membrum cōpatiuntur oīa membra. Also whan a man cōmytteth o∣ne mortall synne in brekynge one of ye cō∣maundementes of god a man dampneth the body and the soule / he leseth god / he le∣seth paradyse and all good spyrytuell / the whiche ben forgoten as vnto saluacyon. Vnde iacobi .ii. ca. Quicun{que} totam legē obseruauerit offendat autem in vno fact{us} est omniū reus. Qui enim dicit non me∣chaberis dicit & non occides quod si nō me¦chaberis occidas autem factus es trāgre∣ssor legis. Example how a woman a gre∣te gyuer of almes the whiche wende to be saued in doynge the almesdedes that she dyde & in the ende was dampned by mor¦tall synne not confeste. Quere .lxxxxii. d. Also one ylle or synne that a man cōmyt∣teth maketh all the persone to be culpable and dygne of punycyon. And also as one cyrcūstaunce ylle maketh all ye dede to be yll / in lyke wyse one synne bryngeth vnto nought all vertues & good spyrytuell. Vn̄ magister nicholaus de lyra dicit super il∣lud ad galla. Modicum fermenti totam massam corrumpit. Malum enim consi∣stit ex singulis defectibus ita {quod} in congre¦gatione fidelium vnus peruersus in fide corrumpit alios per suam malitiam. E ali¦bi. Vnica sola pecus inficit omne pecus. Whan that a towne is taken with assault those the whiche taketh it putteth vnto de¦the
and chaseth awaye those the whiche it possedeth. In lyke wyse done the synnes & deuylles whan they haue possessyon of a persone / and that they rulen / they slee the dethe of gylte and chaseth awaye the ver∣tues. Vnde ad roma .vi. Qui mortuus est peccato mortuus est semel. He the whiche is deed by sȳne / is one tyme deed / that is to vnderstonde of dethe of gylte / for gra∣ce and vertues ben departed from him. &c. Also whan ye iewes / sarazyns / or paynȳs haue the dominacion of crysten men they slee them and take from them theyr goo∣des / in lyke wyse done the synnes and de∣uylles whan they haue domynacion vpon a persone to speke spyrytually. &c. Exam∣ple how the body the whiche is a fole ma∣keth the soule to lese all her spyrytual goo∣des and putteth her in dampnacyon and perdycyon. quere .lxvi. a. For to reherse in partyculer vpon the synne of lecherye. A man sholde vnderstonde that in commyt¦tynge lecherye a man breketh the cōmaun¦demente of god / and also a man synneth mortally / and suche sinne maketh the ver¦tues and good operacyons goten before to be forgoten. ¶In lyke wyse as a man may saye by symylytude / as yf they were brente / broyled / loste & brought vnto nou∣ghte. For in lyke wyse as ye fyre of ye worl∣de brenneth / consumeth and putteth in to asshes and vnto nothynge these wordes & these other materes combustybles that a man gyueth vnto it. In lyke maner yt bo∣dy the whiche is chauffed to do the opera∣cyon of lecherye that god defendeth bren∣neth and bryngeth vnto nought the good operacyons and vertues of the soule / yf ye sayd fyre be not put out by penaunce. Of the whiche it is wryten iob. xxx. Crimen luxurie fax est et iniquitas maxima ignis est deuorans vs{que} ad perditionem et om∣nia eradicans gemmina virtutum. Whā a house is enbraced strongly with fyre / yf the sayd fyre be not quenched by water i brenneth and consumeth all the goodes & materes combustybles tyll vnto the erthe and vnto the stones / in lyke maner the fy∣re and embracement of lecherye brenneth and dystroyeth all ye goodes spyrytuelles of the soule of the lecherous man / or wo∣man / in suche wyse that the germe and en¦gendrement of vertues ben taken awaye and enrached / and it is vnderstonde by ye wordes before spoken. Eradicās omnia gemmina virtutum gemmen geminis id est germen: vel genero generas. Also the blyssed and holy man saynt Ierome saith Gladius igneus ē species mulieris. The glayue of fyre is the beaute corporall of a woman. Vnde ecclesiastici .ix. Concupis¦centia carnis quasi ignis exardescet et se∣quitur. Colloquium mulieris quasi ignis exardescet. The whiche is for to saye / who so wyll kepe hym from brennynge / drawe he a ferre from the fyre / that is from com¦pany of harlottes. For as ye fyre brenneth those the whiche toucheth it / in lyke wyse to touche or to handle a woman harlot or enclyned to synne / and to take pleasure in her face and langayge / a man brenneth & dystroyeth hymselfe. And yf parauenure some there ben that therwith ben touched the more ferther lette them drawe backe / from the company of euyll women. For a bronde that one tyme hathe ben brente ye more lyghtely taketh it fyre yf it be not wt drawen ferre backe from the fyre. A man ne maye be better exyled & dystroyed than by fortune of fyre. Nor the good spyrytuel of the man and of the woman to be loste / as by the embracemente of lecherye. For mayster Hugues of saynt vyctor sayeth. / Qui perdit puditiam: perdit animam su¦am: perdit deum: et perdit seipsum. He ye whiche leseth chastyte leseth his soule / he
leseth god and hymselfe / he is as he ye whi¦che brenneth hymselfe vnto his wyttynge his house and his goodes within it. Vnde scryptura. Qui peccatum committit qua¦si qui ignem in propria domo ponit. And the moo of synnes that he cōmytteth he is he the whiche putteth as many of fagotes and byllettes of wodde in his house for to brenne it that is for to brenne his soule in helle. Example of the doughter of a kynge the whiche was a ryght grete gyuer of al∣messe / and also moche deuoute towarde god in her prayers and oraysōs that was dampned bycause yt she conceyued a chyld and deyed impenytent without confessyō Quere .lxxxxiii. h. ¶Another example of a woman the whiche was a greate gyuer of almesse that was dampned for the de∣lyberacyon of wyll to commytte and doo lecherye. Quere .c. a. Also he the whiche sȳ¦neth mortally as he the whiche hateth his broder euen crysten / or his neyghboure in desyrynge the ylle of his body / or the losse of his temporel goodes / he quencheth and bryngeth vnto nought charite and ye other vertues and good operacyons the whiche resteth in his soule. In lyke wyse as it is declared and shewed in the synne of hate Quere ante .xxvii. b. And how be it that mortall synne adnychyllateth in suche wy¦se the vertues and maketh so many of yl∣les yet sholde not a man drawe backe nor cease to doo euer more of good dedes yf it so were that a man sholde be dampned as it is declared before. Quere ad numerum xliii. b. C. ¶Secondly inobedience the whiche is mortall synne letteth and kepeth for to ge¦te vertues and goodes spyrytuelles / the whiche ben merytoryous vnto the  Capitulo. xii PEccatum meum contra me est sēper. Dicit dauid ī psal. Miserere. After that the kȳ¦ge Dauyd had commytted mortall synne / he sayd that his synne was euermore agayne hym. Al∣so thou man reasonable knowe thou and holde thou for certayne that yf thou be in ony synne mortall thy synne shall be euer more agayne the and noyeth vnto the sou¦le in al maners and sortes that a man can tell it the. For yf thou wylte gete paradyse and to possede the ioyes the whiche there ben thy synne shall kepe the from goynge theder ony synne mortall what so euer it be. And yf thou wylte not haue of payne / ne punycyon temporall / or dampnacyon eternell / thy synne shall make the to haue in this worlde punycyon. And yf thou ha∣ue not by penaunce / correccyon and amen¦dement / thou shalte haue dampnacyon e∣ternall and shalt be constrayned to be in ye fyre and tormentes of helle wylte thou or not. And yf thou haue goten of vertues yt tyme that thou commytte in wyll or dede ony mortall synne / incontynent withoute ony delaye as thou haste commytted it / it bryngeth to noughte all the good dedes yt thou hast done before / as it is specifyed a∣boue. And yf it soo be that thou wylte pur∣chase here in this valeye of myserye of ver¦tues and of goodes spyrytuelles / thy sȳne shall kepe the in al the sortes and maners that thou woldest gete as thou shalte here herafter soo that thou synner mayste saye with dauyd the prophete. Peccatū meum {con}tra me ē semper. Synne is sayd mortall bicause it mortefieth good dedes acquired
And also it sleeth the meryte & the rewar¦de eternell of the good dedes that a man wolde gete. And therfore a man may saye by symylytude that mortall synne is a se∣kenes spyrytuel vnto the soule the whiche letteth all his goode dedes as the sekenes corporell letteth all the goodes of the body Verbi gratia. Yf a seke body drynke or ete also the sekenes letteth / that thynge that he taketh that it ne gothe vnto ye nourytu¦re of the body. Also the synne letteth the taste / the appetite / the sauoure and the o∣doure and taketh awaye the strengthe / ye beaute and courage of the body. Also it let¦teth to saye his matynes / his seruyce / to go vnto ye chirche / to laboure / and to wer∣ke. In lyke wyse dothe the sekenes and in¦feccyon of mortall synne to speke spyrytu∣ally. For yf mortall synne regne in a per∣sone it taketh awaye the taste / the appety¦te / the sauour / and the odoure of glorye / & draweth backe the wyll for to do good de∣des. Also it taketh awaye all strengthe / & deuocyon to do good operacyons / and ke∣peth that they ne prouffyte vnto meryte & vnto the nourysshynge of the soule in lyke wyse as sayeth these scryptures. Vnde pa¦pius dicit de consecratione. v. Nichil pro¦dest ieiunare scʐ quantum ad meruum et orare et alia religionis opera argere: nisi mens ab iniquitate reuodetur. That is to saye that it prouffyteth nothynge to faste as vnto merite and rewarde eternel / and to praye vnto god and to doo other opera∣cyons of relygyon / yf the thought be not taken awaye and called incontinent with out ony delaye from synne / and saynt pou¦le sayeth in his epystyll. i. ad corinth. xiii. Si linguis hominum loquar et angelorū &c. et si distribuero ī cibos pauperum om∣nes facultates meas. &c. Caritatem autē non habuero nichil michi prodest quantum ad salutem. This same auctoryte is expoū¦ded and declared before all alonge. Quere ad numerum. Et sanctus thomas dicit. Nulius homo potest mereri nisi median te gratia. ¶There is no man the whiche may do a thynge merytoryous but by the meane of grace beynge withoute mortall synne. ¶Example how the fastynges / o∣raysons and good operacyons that a wo∣man dyde prouffyted her nothynge as vn¦to saluacyon for the synne of hate and ran¦coure that she had within her herte. Que∣re. lxxviii. d. ¶Also another example how that these almesdedes and good operacy∣ons that the doughter of a kynge dyde vn¦to poore folke prouffyted her nothyng as vnto saluacyon for the mortall synne that she commytted and dyde. Quere. lxxxxiii. h. ¶For to knowe clerely how mortall in letteth to gete of good dedes vnto the sou¦le in many maners / it behoueth in party∣culer to goo vppon the good dedes that a man wolde haue. ¶Fyrste mortall synne and the deuyll letteth to gete scyence / and sapyence dyuyne / for the deuyl letteth his scolers in worldly connynge vayne and di¦abolyke of tables and tryles and mocke∣ryes. And yf ony scoler beynge in mortall synne studye dyuyne scyence that that en∣treth at one ere gothe agayne cute at the other. Vnde sapientie. i. ca. In animam maliuolam non introibit sapiētia: ne cha∣bitabit in corpore subdito peccatis. ¶Exā¦ple also how the water renneth from the pot that is perced / in lyke wyse dothe the vertues of the man. Quere. cii.x. Also the wyse salamon sayeth in his prouerbes yt he the whiche delyteth him in wyne ye whi¦che is a lecherous thynge / and dronkenes ne shall be wyse. prouerbiorum. xx. luxurio sares vinum et tumultuosa ebrietas cui∣cun{que} his delectatur non erit sapiens. Se¦condly mortall synne & the deuyll yf they haue lordshyp and domynacyon of a per∣sone
they drawe backe the deuocyon of fas¦tynge and sayeth. Thou arte tendre and of fele complexion thou ne mayst laboure studye / walke / and faste? or doo suche ope∣racyon. And yf ye persone yonge be in mor¦tall synne it letteth and kepeth that it be not merytoryous vnto hym in dede. How men fynde by example in the byble yt sȳne letted that the fastynge of the people was not agreable vnto god wherof it is wrytē ysaye. lviii. Quare ieiunauimus et non aspexisti humiliauimus animas nostras & nescisti. &c. Sequitur. Ecce ad lites et cōtentiones ieiunatis & percutitis pugno impie: Wherfore haue we fasted and thou haste not regarded vs / we haue humbled our soules and thou haste nothynge kno∣wen vs. And the answer vnto them was gyuen. You doo your fastynges in hates / stryfes / contencyons / synnes / and ylles / & therfore your betynges and tormentes be as nothynge. For god wyll that the good dede be done in the estate of grace. Exam¦ple how a religyous was dampned for his glotonye / for he ete in secrete whan men wende that he had fasted. Quere ad nu∣merum. cv. e. Thyrdly mortall synne let∣teth penaunce and confessyon / for he put∣teth before the persone shame and horrou¦re to cōmytte suche synne / or drede to ha∣ue grete penaunce / or fere to lese his good renomme. And yf the persone hathe done penaunce he bryngeth agayne the dylecta¦cyons of synne for to waste the said penaū¦ce. Vnde augustinus dicit. {quod} inanis est pe¦nitentia quam sequens culpa cōmacuiat nichil{que} prosunt lamenta si replicant{ur} pec∣cata. That is to vnderstonde that penaū∣ce is vayne / that is it shall not saue ye per¦sone whan synne is cōmytted after and ye wayllynges and the wepynges ne prouf∣fyte ne thynge as vnto the saluacyon yf ye synnes be agayne recōmenced / and he the whiche wepeth his synnes & leueth theym not he submytteth hymself vnto more gre¦te payne. Vnde grego. Qui peccata plan¦git nec tamen deserit pene grauiori se su∣biicit. And how be it that penaunce done in synne is not meritoryous as sayeth the scot yet sholde not a man leue to do it / for it maye be satysfactoyre. Examples how by the shame to haue cōmytte mortall sȳ many persones hathe lefte to confesse thē and to do penaunce wherby they ben go∣ne vnto dampnacyon and perdycyon. que¦re ad numerum. lxxxxiii. h. &. c. a. Fourthly mortall synne letteth and kepeth to do al∣mesdede to lesse his brede / his syluer / and his good for to betake vnto suche truande and maketh to dyspyse and to rebuke the poores. Also synne letteth the rewarde the meryte eternel of almesdede and it anien¦tyth and bryngeth vnto nought. Vnde ysi¦dor{us} dicit. Nulla scelera elemosinis posse redemisi in peccatis quis{que} permani erit. No synnes ne maye be agayne bought by almesdede yf he the whiche gyueth it be in synne. And no pardon of trespas is giuen whan mercy procedeth / so that the sȳnes cometh after. Vnde ysidorus. Nulla est delicti venia qn̄ sic precedit misericordia vt eam sequantur peccata. Example of a woman a gyuer of almesse dampned for the delyberacyon of wyll to cōmytte leche¦rye. Quere. c. a. ¶Fyftely mortall sȳne let¦teth yt orayson is not agreable vnto god & merytoryous vnto hym the whiche do∣the it. Vnde ioh. ix. Scimus quia peccato¦res deus nō exaudit. We knowe that god hereth not gracyously ne exalteth the syn¦ners. Et psal. dicit. Iniquitatem si aspexi in corde meo non exaudiet dominus. Yf yt I beholde synne in my herte and kepe it styll in my mynde / our lorde Ihesu cryst shall not gracyously here me / nor accepte my prayer. Et legitur prouerbiorū. xxviii.
Qui declinat aurem suam ne audiat le∣gem: oratio eius erit execrabilis. He ye whi¦che declyneth his ere to thende that he no∣ye the lawe his oraison is execrable and in fructuous. &c. Whan a chylde dysobeyieth the fader and that he demaunde a newe robe / or shoes / they ne be gyuen vnto hym ne accorded by his dysobedyence. Also god ne graūteth vnto vs that thynge that we hym demaunde for the synnes and ylles / that we do agaynst his cōmaundemente. This mater is approued by many exam∣ples. Fyrste how the orayson of an hermy¦te ne prouffyted vnto him for that thynge that he made it fore. For he delyted in his synnes without resistynge there vnto. que¦re. c. e. Another example semblable how o∣rayson is not exalted by synne. c. d. D. ¶Thyrdly inobedyence the whiche is mortall synne noyeth / for it dyffameth ye persone the whiche it cōmytteth. ca. xliiii. PEccator transgrediens mā∣data dn̄i incidit in promissio¦nem ne{quam}. Ecclesi. xxix. The synner trespassynge or offen¦dynge the cōmaundements of god shall falle in to ylle promyssyon in dyffame and reproche as by maner to say thou art a blasphematour / a thefe / an har¦lot / murdrer / false wytnes / infamed / dig∣ne of punycyon / and it is wryten. eccle. vi. Improperium & contumiliam malus he redit abit et omnis peccator inuidus et vi¦linguis. That is to saye. The yll man shal haue in herytage reproche and noyse and euery synner enuyous / & he the whiche ha∣the two tongues the whiche sayeth le pro. & le contra. Mortall synne is so grete vyce the whiche so moche noyeth vnto the per∣sones the whiche it cōmytteth yt it taketh from them theyr good renōme as wele in this worlde as in the other. We rede luce xvi. De villico qui diffamatus est apud dn̄m suum quasi dissipasset bona ipsius. / There was a man the whiche was dyffa∣med anenst his lorde for he dispended and wasted his goodes. Whan a persone dys∣obeyeth vnto god in synnynge mortally / he wasteth and dystroyeth the good ver∣tues and goodes spyrytuell of his soule / or whan he purchaseth of worldly godes vn∣iustely / or whan he putteth them forth pro¦dygally in cursed langayges / or whan he ne dysposeth the goodes vnto the poores / as he sholde / he is dyffamed anenste god his lorde the whiche hym shal rebuke at ye daye of iugemente & shall saye vnto hym illud mat. xxv. Ite maledicti in ignem e∣ternum: esuriui et non dedistis michi mā∣ducare. &c. I haue had hongre and ye ha∣ue not gyuen me to eate. &c. Many sȳnes regneth the whiche dyffameth the perso∣nes the whiche them cōmytteth in like wy¦se as the experyence techeth it vs. A man knoweth openly that the synne of lechery is a dyshonour before the people in ye coū∣tree where it is commytted / and infame vnto those the whiche doo it and reproche vnto the lygnee the whiche of it procedeth Example the synne of the sodomytes dyf∣famed them before god and ye worlde ine∣ternum and dyshonoureth theyr londe & countree. Also it is a reproche vnto theyr lignee and vnto all those ye whiche folowe them in cōmyttynge theyr synne. legi. eccl xli. Cū semīe pctō{rum} assiduitas opprobrii erit. That is to say. With ye sede of sȳners accustomaunce of reproche shalbe. It is a thynge manyfeste yt whan a mayden bre∣keth her virginite / or a wyfe her mariage they dōmage theyr chyldrē whiche bereth the rebukes of theyr synnes and crymes /
And those chyldren ben pryued of goodes and heritages of bothe the fader and also of the moder / and frome holy ordres / and frome all dygnyte yf he be not dyspensed with of our holy fader the pope. &c. Also ye synne of thefte dyffameth moche the the∣uys / whā they ben hanged and strangled for theyr theftes. Soo dothe pariurynge whan it maketh to pylle and to infame ye pariurers. Soo dothe murdre the whiche maketh the homycyde to be beheded. In lyke wyse sorcerye / heresye / and the synne agayne nature ye whiche maketh to brēne these sorcyeres / heretykes and sodomites For to be shorte many other synnes there ben these yll knaues to beten thorowe out the stretes / or to cut theyr eres / or to be en¦prysonned / to clȳme / or to preche / wherby they ben noted / dyshonoured / and dyffa∣med. Example how filius prodigus was dyffamed for his glotonnye and lecherye / as it is wryten in ye gospelles of saynt lu∣ke in the .xv. chapitre. Another example of a sone the whiche hadde in his foreheed a tode .xiiii. yere ouer all the coūtree of fraū¦ce by punycyon dyuyne for that that he de¦faylled vnto his fader and moder. Quere lxx. b. Another example in ye proude amā the whiche wolde be honoured and that al men sholde bowe them before hym and to be worshipped / and he was soo dyffamed that he was hanged as it is wryten in the thyrde booke of Hester. Mortell synne no∣yeth moche whan it taketh awaye ye good renōmee of the persone the whiche is bet¦ter and more precyous than golde or syl∣uer / as it is writen prouer. xx. ca. Melius est nomen bonum {quam} diuitie multe: super aurum et argentum gratia bona. Et legi tur eccle. vii. Melius est nomen bonum: {quam} preciosa vnguenta. Et augustinus dicit Crudelis est qui famam suam negligit. He is ryght cruell the whiche dysprayseth his good renōmee. And whan a man by prayseth his good renōmee / it is a token yt he is fallen in to the profoūdyte of sȳnes And that he is posseded of the deuyll / the whiche hym holdeth in his bandes / for it is wryten prouerbiorum. xviii. Impius cum in profundo peccatorum venerit con¦temnit: sed sequitur enim ignominia & op¦probrium. Also it shal be grete dyshonour vnto the synners at the iugemente whan all the synnes shall be sene and knowen a¦pertly in them and vpon theym of all the worlde as yf they were paynted and wry¦ten vpon theyr bodyes. It is wryten luce viii. Non enim est occultū quod non ma∣nyfestetur: nec absconditum quod nō cog∣noscatur et in palam veniat. That is for to saye that at the iugemente there hathe not ben synne done so hydyngly or secrete¦ly but that it shall be shewed and knowen and that it shall come in aperte before all A man shall knowe appertly the synnes of one and of other as a man knoweth in a greate hepe of people that suche one is clothed in graye / or in blacke / or in whyte / For these synners shall bere vpon theym theyr confusyon and theyr synnes. as it is wryten ezechielis. xliiii. Peccatores por∣tabunt confusionem suam et scelera sua q̄ fecerunt. Et ezechiel. xviii. Iustitia iusti erit super eum: et impietas impii super eū erit. et cetera. E. ¶Fourthly inobedyence the whi∣che is mortall synne noyeth. For it aueugleth and derketh the in∣warde eyes of the soule. ca. xliiii.
QVi odit fratrem suū in tenebris est et in tenebris ambulat & nes¦cit quo eat quoniā tenebre obce cauerūt oculos eius. vt dicitur ioh. i. c. He the whiche synneth mortally by dylectacyon and delyberacyō as he the whiche hathe his broder or neigh¦boure not wyllynge to socoure hym in his necessyte / or in desyrynge his ylle / his ruy∣ne / his dyffame / the losse of his goodes or herytages / or the ylle of his body / or ye dāp¦nacyon of his soule agayne that the whi∣che is wryten ad ro. xiii. Dilige proximū tuum sicut teipsum. That synner or hater is in derkenesse and walketh in derkenes and knoweth not wheder he gothe. For ye derkenes hathe put oute his eyen within forth of his soule. The reason is so abused and made derke by hate or other mortall synne that the synner is bestyall withoute dyscernynge the good that he leseth and ye yll the whiche is in hym / & the whiche shal come vnto hym yf he perseuer in suche es∣tate. vn̄ dauid in psal. Homo cum in ho∣nore esset nō intellexit comparatus est iu∣mentis insipientibus et similis factus est illis. By mortall synne ye soule is blynded and reason made derke as a beest the whi¦che ne dyscerneth betwene the good and ye ylle the whiche a man ledeth to sle and he perceyueth it not. Example the sage sala∣mon sayeth in the .vii. chapitre of his pro∣uerbes yt he sawe by the wyndowe of hys house a yongman walkynge by a waye / & whan he came vnto a tornynge backe the¦re was a woman acurned and appareyl∣led with the habyte of a strompet for to ta¦ke the soules the whiche came to her / and she began to laugh and to flater with hym and spake vnto him ydell wordes & kissed hym and handeled hym / and incontynent reason was so ouercome and the soule a∣uengled of the sayd yonge man that sala∣mon hathe wryten in ye sayd chapytre. Et ecce iuuenis statim sequitur eā: quasi bos ductus ad victimam: et quasi agnus lasci¦uiens & ignorās & nescit {quod} ad vincula stul¦tus trahit{ur} velut si auis festinet ad laqueū. And therfore mortall synne is to flee the whiche putteth out his eyen within forthe of the soule as it is sayd / and abuseth the entendement and maketh hym to be besti¦all. Vnd dauid in psal. Nolite fieri sicut equus & mulus quibus non est intellectus Also mortall synne is so grete a sekenesse fylthynes and infeccyon vnto the soule yt it taketh from her all beaute / whytenes & boūte / ioye / and lyght / & maketh it blacke derke / hydeuse / and dȳme. vn̄ au. Vna sunt deteriora omni malo scʐ aīa in pecca¦to perseuerans q̄ nigrior est corno: dyaboli qui eam rapiunt et locus in quo ducitur. Saynt Austyn sayeth that thre thynges ben wors than al yll / that is to vnderston¦de the soule perseueraunt in synne ye whi∣che is more blacke than the rauyn / the de∣uylles the whiche it rauyssheth / and yt pla¦ce the whiche is hell where vnto she is led ¶Example by symylytude. In lyke wyse as Lucyfer became blacke / derke / and vyl¦layn / and abhomynable and loste all beau¦te incontynent that he had cōmytte synne euen so cometh it vnto the soule by synne in dysobeynge vnto god. For she leseth her lyght / that ben her vertues and good ope∣racyons the whiche gyue lyght vnto man and is in derkenes as he that is blynde ye whiche hathe loste his eyen his clarte and the ioye of this worlde. And yf the blynde man leseth his conductoure he falleth and tombleth in inconuenyence / as in water / dytche / or myre / and yf he be soylled yet se¦eth he nothynge. In lyke wyse the soule yt whiche is in mortall synne she hathe her inwarde eyen put out / made dȳme in der¦kenes she seeth not where she gothe / nor
she seeth the good that she loseth / ne the yll wherin she falleth / she hath lost her condu¦ctour the whiche is god / and also she seeth not how she is soyled / albeit yt the body ly∣ue in the worlde. Vn̄ psal. Cōprehēderūt me iniqitate mee & nō potui vt viderē. Also these synners as theues / robbers. &c. ye whi¦che ben in suche wyse blynded leueth to do theyr operacyon by nyght in derkenes pry¦uely as beestes & byrdes that goo by nyght for drede yt they ne be rebuked and sharped as it is wryten. Ioh̄. iii. ca. Dilexerunt ho¦mines magis tenebras {quam} lucē erāt enī eo∣rum mala opera. &c. And therfore god shal punysshe them in hell by derkenes in ye lan¦de of mysery / of ye whiche it is wryten. Iob . ca. Verrā miserie et tn̄brarū vbi vmbra mortis et nullus ordo sed sempitern{us} hor∣ror inhabitās. The remedy for to gyue sy∣ght vnto blynde syn̄ers is pryde. Vn̄ paul. ad ro. xiiij. Abuciamus opera tenebra{rum} & nduamur arma lucis. Put we out by con∣fessyon the operacyons of derkenes those ben of synnes / and be we clothed with ye ar¦mours of lyght they ben vertues of good dedes and in suche wyse perseuer we vnto the dethe to thende that we ben in the nom¦bre of ye saued the whiche ben the chyldren of lyght / of whome speketh saynt Poule in his epystle ad Ephesios. Eratis aliquādo tenebre nūc aūt lux in dn̄o vt filij lucis am∣bulante. This mater is largely aleged and declared in ye synne of hatred. Quere ante. xxviii. D. F. ¶Fyfthly inobedyence yt is mortal syn̄e noyeth / for it is that / yt holdeth ye soules of the persone yt it commytteth. xliiii. INiquitates capiūt īpiū et funib{us} pec¦cato{rum} suo{rum} vnusquis{que} cōstringitur vt habet{ur} {pro}uer. v. c. That is to say. These īi¦quytees taketh the cursed synner & euery of them is constrayned & bounde by the cor¦des of his synnes. And saynt Austin ye whi¦che was more than .xx. yere in his yonge ae¦ge without beynge in wyll to be baptysed sayth in his cōfessyonary yt he was boūde / not wt straunge yron / but with the yren of his one wyll that is harder than yren. Vn̄ au. Ligat{us} erā nō ferro alieno / sed ferrea mea volūtate. And Dauyd yt commytted aduoutry & homycyde sayth in the psalter Hunes pctō{rum} circūplexi sūt me. The cor∣des of my synnes hath beset me or compas¦sed about / holdeth me & byndeth me. After the scryptures mortall synne is by symyly∣tude as a lyen / a shakle / or an halter wher∣by the deuyll holdeth the man & woman in his seruytude / in his thraldome / & in his ca¦ptyuyte / or to dysobey vnto god it is a lyen wherby the grete hongman the deuyll han¦geth the synners on the gybet of helle / or it is a lyen wherby these synners ben bounde in the fyre & tourmentes of hell without ha¦uynge power to ayde hym selfe / to euade / or escape in ony maner. The synne holdeth the man & woman in the seruytude of the deuyll. In lykewyse as the oxe is boūde by the hornes with ye lyen / or the byrdes taken wt snares & grēnes and put vnto dethe and perdycyon / or as these yrens or fetres hol∣deth ye prysoners in pryson and captyuyte. We fynde in wrytynge yt suche puyssaunce as a mā hath in his {pro}pre beest / suche puys∣saunce hath the deuyll in the synner whan he is in mortall synne. Qualem potestatē habet hō in pecore {pro}prio / talē hm dyabolus in peccatore. Whan the deuyll hath tēpted ye man / surmounted: & beten doune by mor¦tall synne the deuyll is mayster of the sayd synner & holdeth hym in his hondes by the rope of synne / & the synner is obedyent vn¦to him as a seruaunt vnto his mayster. Vn̄ ii. petri. ii. ca. Aquo eī su{per}antis est ei{us} seru{us} est. That is to say. Of hym of whome thou
shalt be surmounted thou shalt be his ser∣uytour. Yf thou be surmounted of ye deuyll by mortall synne than yu shalte serue hym. Et legit{ur}. i. ioh̄. iii. ca. Qui facit petm̄ ex dya¦bolo est qm̄ dyabolus ab initio peccat / He yt dooth synne is of the party of ye deuyll. &c. Et legit{ur} ioh. viii. ca. Oīs qui facit pctm̄ ser¦uus est peccati. He that dooth synne is ser∣uaunt vnto synne / so as a seruant / a page / or a mayden do not theyr wylles but ye wyl¦les of theyr mayster / who soo putteth hym in seruyce leueth his frewyll and fredome. ¶Example how the deuyll gaue in charge to a woman four thinges after that he had surmounted her / the whiche was obedient to the deuyll tyll vnto the dethe. &c. Quere lxv. F. A colte the whiche was neuer ryden for to be ouercome & put vnder a sadle shal serue wyll he or not. Also yf the deuyl vayn¦quysshe the by his temptacions and yt thou be fallen in mortall synne thou shalt obeye hym and serue hym. That is to vnderstan¦de whan he shall say vnto ye / serue me. whe¦re thou hast the company of suche a womā The lecherous shall obey vnto his power / & shall do as the seruaunt vnto ye mayster Vn̄ paul. in epi. ad ro. Nescitis qm̄ cui ex∣hibuistis vos seruos ad obediendum serui estis ei{us} cui obedistis siue peccati in mortem siue obeditionis ad iusticiā. Whan oni man of warre is beten doune / vaynquysshed / & ouercome his mayster taketh from him his harneys and all the goodes the whiche ben vpon hym / after he putteth hym in lokkes and feters. More ouer he his obedyent and seruaunt of his mayster / so that he ne may¦ne dare go in to place what so it be but by ye leue of his mayster. At the last he is put to raunsom and he must nedes paye it before that he may escape. In lykewyse is it in this purpose whan ony mā is vaynquysshed & surmounted of the deuyll by mortall synne Fyrst he loseth his vertues and godes espy rytualles of his soule as it is sayd here befo¦re. Eccle. ix. Qui in vno peccato peccau multa bona perdet. Secondly he is put in yrons and bondes & holden in pryson of ye deuyll / & seruaunt and obedyent vnto him without goynge in place what so it be but by his commaundemēte / but vnderstande well how. Whā a beest is drawen he gooth noo ferder than the length of his draught / no more dooth he the whiche is in the bon∣des of the deuyll. But note well that the de¦uyll alyeneth the in thy draught for to goo vnto fornycacyon / or for to do theft / or for to pleed falsely / or to bere fals wytnesse /  or to haunte tauernes / or to werke on the feestes / or for to do homycyde / stryue / deu¦syon / & all euylles and synnes / or for to goe vnto ye chyrche / not for to pray to god / but for to speke there euyll wordes / and to per∣tourbe and trouble the deuocyons of other And yf the deuyll se that there be predycati¦on or feruent orayson he shall drawe out of the chyrche his seruaunt & prysoner. ¶Ex∣ample of one of the monkes of the ordre of saynt Benet that the deuyll drewe out of ye chyrche whan ye other prayed. Que. lxv. g. ¶Another example how the deuylles hel∣de a man bounde in a chayne & led hym wt grete Ioy. Quere. C. ii. z. ¶Another exam¦ple how a man beynge in mortall synne is lo bounde that he ne may do ony good ope¦racyon that is merytoryous to hym. Que∣re. C. ii. &. And here sholde a man note that in lykewyse as the hangman ledeth ye thefe by the corde / and by the corde he him ledeth vnto the galowes / in lykewyse dooth ye de∣uyll the whiche is hangeman of soules by synne holdeth vs and ledeth vs vnto ye ga∣lous of hell / and vnto the paynes and tour¦mentes as the boucher ledeth the oxe by ye hornes with a corde for to kyl hȳ. ¶Exam¦ple of auaryous vsurers hanged in helle. Quere in the examplarye. lxxxvi. A. Other
examples of people hanged in hell. Quere. lxxxi. g. &. lxxxxiiii. d. Moreouer a man shol¦de knowe that the deuyll hath throughout the worlde so many coltrappes / instrumen¦tes and baytes for to take the soules in his gynnes / snares / and strynges as there ben delectable thynges thorowout the worlde by the whiche men commytte mortall syn∣nes. That is to vnderstande yt as many as there ben delectable goodes throughout ye worlde that man taketh or coueyteth to ta¦ke vniustly by theft or pyllery. &c. The de∣uyll hath in the worlde as many instrumē¦tes caltroppes & snares for to take & lede ye soules in cordes & bondes / and euery thefte or mortal synne yt a man cōmytteth ben as many of snares as it is sayd. Or a mā may say that as many of beautes as men & wo∣men haue throughout the worlde so many instrumentes & slynges hath the deuyl for to take the soules. ¶Exāple how the deuyl sayd vnto a fayre doughter pompeously a∣rayed the whiche daunsed on the sondaye-Thou arte our armes & our doughter for to take soules. &c. Quere. lxviii. c. Vnto pur¦pose of this mater the sage sayth in the .ix. chapytre of the ecclesyastes. Inueni mulie¦rem morte amariorem que laqueus vena∣torū est / sagena cor eius vincula sunt man{us} eius / qui placet deo fugiet eam qui peccator est capiet{ur} ab ea. That is to say. I haue foū¦de a woman more bytter than the dethe ye whiche is the threde & lease of hunters / the herte of her is the nette / her handes ben the bondes / who so wyl please god fle her / and he that is a synner shall be taken of her. ✿ ¶Another example how saynt Anthony sawe the worlde replenysshed with snares and halters of the deuyl. Quere in thexam¦plary. C. ii. Q. And whan ony man cōmyt¦teth mortall synne he is caught / he is boun∣de and fallen in to the deuylles trappe / as the wylde beest the whiche is taken in the bukstall / or the fysshe in the lepe or nette. Vnde psal. Cadent in reciaculo eius pecca¦tores. Et Iob xviii. Tenebitur planta ei{us} laqueo. And whan a man is fallen by syn̄e in to the lynes of the deuyll he shal not esca¦pe whan he wolde of hymselfe without the ayde of god and of the sacramentes. Vnde grego. Qui dedes in rethe mittit non cum voluerit exit. The fysshe hath power of hȳ¦self to entre within the nette / but whan he is within he may not gete out by hym selfe no more dooth the synner from synne. Hȳ behoueth to be assoyled & vnbounde of the preste. and of the prelates of the chyrche the whiche haue the power. Vnde math̄. xvi. Quodcū{que} solueris super terrā erit solutū et in celis. And a man maketh orayson vn¦to god to vnbynde hym from synne forsa∣kynge them. Absolue q̄s domine animam famuli tui ab oī vīculo peccatorum. For to be shorte the soule is vnbounde from sinne by true repentaunce / confessyon / and satys¦faccyon. ¶Example how saynt Bernarde the holy man sawe a synner the whiche had a chayne about his necke the whiche hadde mo than an hondred lynkes / and at euery teere that he wept he brake a lynke the whi¦che fell downe Quere in thexamplary. lv. a And after that the soule is vnbounde from synne it is free and mery as a lytyll byrde the whiche is escaped from the pytfalles & nettes of the fouler. Vnde psamista. Ani∣ma nostra sicut passer erepta est de laqueo venantium / laqueus contritus est et nos li¦berati sumus. G. ¶Syxtely Inobedyence noyeth for it sleeth the soule spyrytually of the dethe of gylte. xliii. QVi odit fratrum suum homicida est Primo Iohannis. iii. capitu. He the
whiche synneth mortally is he the whiche hath his broder or his neyghbour in desyrȳ¦ge the euyll of his body or of his goodes he synneth mortally and sleeth spyritually his owne soule of dethe of gylte. For he separa¦teth god the whiche is the lyfe of the soule / and mortifyeth grace and the vertues and the good esperytuall of hym / in lykewyse as it is declared in the fyfthe commaunde∣ment. Non sis occisor. And also in ye synne of hatred. Quere. xxvii. C. H. ¶Seuenthly inobedyence noyeth / for it maketh to curse and to excommunica¦te ye persones the whiche dysobey vnto the commaundementes of god. xliiii. VE vobis viri impii: qui dereliqi∣stis legem dei altissimi / & si mor¦tui fueritis in maledictione erit pars vestra. Ecclesiastice. xli. That is to say. O ye mē ryght cursed the whiche haue left the ryght hygh god / maledyccion be vnto you / & yt shall ha¦ue ben deed your partye shall be maledycci¦on. &c. This mater shal be declared here af¦ter. Quere. xlviii. B. I. ¶Eyghtly inobediēce noyeth / for it pry¦ueth from paradyse. xliiii. SI vis ad vitam ingredi serua mandara. Mathei. xix. Yf thou wylte entre in to the lyfe eter∣nall kepe thou the commaūde∣mēts of god. Yf thou breke one or many by deectacyon and delyberacyon & that thou in suche wyse deye impenytent yu shalt be put from paradyse / from the vy¦syon of god / from the swete amyte & felaw¦shyp of aungels / from all sayntes / & from all heuenly thinges & spyrytualles from on hye as shall be herde here after by scryptu∣res / reasons / lettynges / & examples. Fyrst god hathe made to crye and to proclayme all about the worlde yt all his commaunde¦mentes to kepe vpon payne to be put from paradise. Vn̄ psal. Tu mandasti mādata tua custoditi nimis. And yt the thynges ye whiche procedeth from his mouthe shal be accomplysshed wtout that there lacke ony thynge / wtout tryfle or mockery. Vn̄ psal. Que {pro}cedūt de labus meis nō faciā irrita. Whan a kynge temporall maketh too pro∣clayme or to shewe his sayenge or commaū¦dement echone therto obeyeth for drede of payne and domage. And god the whiche is kynge of heuen & of erthe commaundeth yt that yu kepe his commaundementes in ly∣kewyse as sayth the scryptures. Vn̄ leuiti. xix. xx. &. xxv. Custodite oīa precepta mea et vniuersa iudicia mea & facite ea / ego do∣min{us} qui sctītico vos. Et legit{ur} deut{ur}ono. xiii. Dn̄m deū vr̄m seqiminiet i{pre}m timete / et mandata illi{us} custodite / & audite vocē eius ipsi seruietis et i{pre}i adherebit{is}. Ite{rum} deu. v Custodi precepta dn̄i dei tui / vt vn sit tibi et tiliis tuis post te. Kepe the commaunde∣mentes of thy lorde god to thende that yu be well to the and to thy chyldren after the. Yf a seruaunt dysobey vnto his mayster and that he be of cursed gouernaūce he putteth hym oute of his hous. In lykewyse dooth god / he putteth from paradyse them ye whi dysobeyeth his commaundementes. Also a kynge temporall for banyssheth frome his realme them the whiche dysobeyeth vnto his commaundements / so dooth god from the realme of paradyse. Also for the cryme and synne of some man he is hanged and loseth his lyfe / his goodes & herytages yt bē cōfysked at ye prynces wyll. Also by synne man is pryued fro paradyse. ¶Example yt in Cayn yt slewe his broder Abellis pryued fro heuen for he brake gods cōmaūdemēt. Nō sis occisor. lxxvi. a. After writȳge syn̄es
mortelles and all inobedyences done ayēst god putteth man & woman fro paradyse. Or legitur iob. xxxvi. Deus nō soluat im¦plos. Et legit{ur} ysaie. xxvi. Tolatur impius ne videat gloriam dei. Et psal. Non habi∣tabit iuxta te malignus ne{que} permanebat iniusti an̄ oculos tuos. Thou art in mortall synne & vnobedyent vnto god I put ye case than it foloweth that yu shalte be put from paradyse yf thou deye in suche wyse Impe¦nitent. Also those the whiche renneth in the indygnacyon & in ye hatred of god for theyr cursed lyfe shall be put from paradyse yf yt they deye without makynge appoyntemet Man and woman renneth in his hate and Indygnacyon by inobedyence and mortal synne as sayth ye scryptures. Vn̄ psal. Odi¦sti omnes qui operātur iniquitatē. Et eccle. xii. Altissimus odio habet peccatores. Et sapien. xiiii. Odio sunt deo impius et impie¦tas eius. Than it foloweth wel that man & woman shall be put from paradyse yf they remedy not vnto theyr case before theyr de¦the. Also paradyse is a place pure and clene and therin entreth nothynge that is soyled by synne. As it is wryten appocali. xxi. Nō intrabit ī regnū celorum aliquid coinquina tum & faciens abhominationē et mendatiū Thou arte soyled and spotted with sinne I put the case for thou hast cōmytted it. Thā shalte thou not go in to paradyse. The solu¦cyon of all the layd argument is suche / yt it is true that all mortall synnes that man cō¦mytteth putteth hym from paradyse yf he wyll not do penaunce / in lykewyse as it is writen. Luce. xiii. Nisi penitentiā egeritis oēs simul peribitis. But yf he repent hym / correcke / and amēde whyles that he lyueth in this worlde and that he do penaunce he shall be saued and shall go in to paradyse. As it is wryten. ysaie. lv. Derelinquat im¦pius viam suam & vir iniquis cogitationes suas et reuertatur ad dominum et misere∣bitur ei{us}. &c. ¶Example after that Adam and Eue had biten of the apple and broken the commaundement of god they were put out of paradyse terrestre and pryued from paradyse celestyal / they and theyr lygnage tyll vnto the tyme yt the sone of god agayn bought by his passyon the sayd Adam the whiche dyde penaunce / and all those ye whi¦che had well lyued. Of the inobedyence of Adam quere. liiii. A. Fyue thȳges letteth to mounte in to paradyse. The fyrst is for yt / that a man is in the Indygnacyon of god by mortall synne. The seconde is for that yt the synne mortall is a lyne the whiche hol∣deth the persone that it commytteth as it is sayd here before. The thyrde is for that yt mortal synne maketh the soule seke & deed of the dethe of gylte as it is sayd / and a per¦sone seke may not clymbe hye ne go at his pleasure. &c. The fourth thinge the whiche letteth to mounte in to paradyse is for that yt the mortall synne is a heuy burden ye whi¦che greueth the soule and it kepeth and hol¦deth from hye mountynge. Vnde dauid in psal. Iniquitates mee super gresse sūt ca∣put meū et sicut ouis graue grauate sūt su∣per me. ¶Example of a man in purgato∣ry the whiche had an helmet that weyed vp¦on hym more than a mountayne. Quere. lxxvii. F. ¶Another example how sinne is heuy or weyghty as he the whiche putteth of wood in his burden whan he myght not lyft it vp. Quere. C. ii. Y. ¶Another exam∣ple how a scoler dampned had a cope ye whi¦che weyed more than a toure vpon hym. Quere. C. viii. A. The .v. thyng the whiche letteth man to mount in to paradyse is for yt / that the place is so hye & that it is so grete a way in goynge vpwarde that it is impos¦syble to euery persone thyder to mow come ne may mounte of his propre vertue wtout that god hath gyuen hym the puyssaunce. Quia om̄is per ipsum facta sūt et sine ipso
factum est nichil / vt dicit{ur} iohā .i. The aun∣gelles & sayntes of paradyse mounte & des¦cende in one onely moment. In momento ī ictu oculi. Not of theyr propre vertue / but of the puyssaunce that god vnto them hath gyuen. There ne is but god that hath puys¦saunce thyder to mounte of his propre ver¦tue thus sayth saynt Iohan. Nemo ascen¦dit in celū scilicet {pro}pria vtute nili qui descē∣dit de celo filius hois qui est in celo. Also be∣twene this & paradyse there ben many he∣uens after scryptures. There is celū aereū ethereū / olimpiū / igneū / sidereum / christal∣linum / et empireū. And eche of these heuēs are in meruaylous heyght / and the place of paradyse is the hyghest heuen where god abydeth & where the aungelles ben / & all ye sayntes holy men & holy women. And in to that place no persone gooth but by god as it is sayd. And god shall not suffre the syn∣ners thyder to come the whiche ben dyso∣bedyent vnto hym thus sayeth the poete. Serua mandata / li tu vis regna beata. Qui non obedit / celesti sede carebit. Also betwene this and paradyse there is an he∣uen the whiche is of fyre / & people boted wt hey ne these synners ne can thyder passe ne mounte of thēselfe. For one can not mount in to a chambre wtout some meane as on a stayre or laddre. &c. Wherfore they shall be pryued from paradyse yf they obey not vn¦to god. Vn̄ math̄. xix. Si vis ad vitam in gredi serua mandata. ¶Examples Iudas was priued from paradyse albeit yt he was the dyscyple of our lorde / & the cause wher¦fore was for his synnes. He was a thefe & traytre vnto his mayster / he was fayntyfe and deceptyfe / for for the coueytyse of .xxx. pens he toke and delyuered Ihesus vnto his ennemyes for to put hym vnto dethe yt whiche was Innocent good and Iust / and therfore he had maledyccion and he dyspay¦red and hanged hymselfe & was put from his dygnyte / offyce / and from the compa∣ny of god / from the sayntes of paradyse / & from the Ioyes the whiche there ben / & ano¦ther was put in his place / as it is wrytē in the dedes of the appostles. Fiat habitacio illius deserta et episcopatū ei{us} accipiet ali. Also by the cursed synnes of cursed Dyues he hath ben pryued from paradyse & is bu∣ryed in hell / and there is tourmented with¦in the fyre for euermore. Quere. lxxx. A. Al¦so Iulyan the appostate is pryued from pa¦radyse. Quere. lvui. Also Egeas. Diascor{us} Symon mag{us} ben pryued from paradyse Quere. lvii. c. d. e. Also for to fynde of exam¦ples how mortall synne is pryued from pa¦radyse it behoueth shortly to vnderstande that ye cause wherfore all persones ben put from the realme of paradyse is for cōmyt∣tynge mortall synne. Take hede in all the examples of this present boke & thou shalt fynde yt it is true. Also in ye nombre. lxxxx. c wherfore a woman tourmented with a to∣de & lytel serpentes was dampned and pri¦ued from paradyse / and thou shalte fynde that it was for her synnes. Also loke in the nombre. C. a. wherfore a woman was dam¦ned and terrybly tourmented and pryued from paradyse / and yu shalte fynde that it was for a cursed thought of lecherye. The prophete Dauyd made a questyon in de∣maundynge. What shal he be yt shall moun¦te on hye in paradyse. Vn̄ legit{ur} in psalmo. Quis ascendit in mōtem dn̄i / aut quis sta¦bit in loco sancto ei{us}. And incontynente he yelded he answered & sayd. It shall be he yt whiche dooth the good operacyons as the werkes of mercy / and he the whiche dooth none euyll operacyōs with his two handes as to werke on the feestes commaunded. He also yt dooth no thettes / homycydes. &c. Innocēs manib{us}. And sayth after. Et mū¦do corde. He yt hath the herte pure & clene wt¦out thynkynge ony yll thoughtes agaynst
the loue of god & of his neyghbour / the whi¦che in no wyse wyll breke the commaunde¦mentes of god / the whiche ne wyll none euyl vnto his neyghbour / & that is not Ioy¦ous of his domage the whiche ne wyll but all good / he shall mounte in too paradyse. And it foloweth after of hym yt vttreth no yll wordes agaynst the helthe of his soule ne for to deceyue his neyghbour by fraude trechery / ne in lyenge ne swerynge. Qui non accepit in vano aīam suam nec iurauit in dolo {pro}ximo suo. That man shall mount in to paradyse & shal haue the benedyccion of god & his grace and mercy. Hic accepiet bn̄dictionē a dn̄o et mīam a deo salutari suo ¶Example how our blyssed sauyour Ihe¦sucryst and the prophetes were at ye dethe of an holy fader the whiche they ledde in to paradyse. Quere. C. iii. a. ¶Another exam¦ple how god and his aungelles came to fet¦che ye soule of a holy fader at his dethe. Que¦re. C. iii. b. Many other examples ben wry∣ten in the sayd chapytre of people the whi∣che ben gone in to paradyse by that yt they haue obeyed vnto god & accomplisshed his commaundementes. Quere. C. iii. &. C. iiii. a. b. c. d. e. f. g. h. For to fle swyftly as the aū∣gelles in to paradyse & to haue the benedyc¦cyon & glory of god is behoueth to haue the handes / the herte / & the mouthe hole / inuo∣cantes / pure / & clene from all synnes with¦out yt the handes be seke or vndone by cur∣sed operacyons / ye herte from euyll though¦tes / ye mouthe enuenymed from foule wor¦des. A byrde or an hawke the whiche hath the becke / the herte / & the wynges hole / pu¦re & clene is ryght nymble for to fle. In ly∣kewyse a man yt hath the mouthe clene wt∣out bryngynge forthe cursed wordes / yt her¦te wtout thynkynge yll thoughtes / the han¦des wtout doynge yll operacyons is ryght nymble to fle in to paradyse. Of this selfe questyon speketh the prophete Dauyd in a place where he sayth. Dn̄e quis habitabit in tabnaculo tuo aut quis reqiescat in mōte sctō tuo. The answere is suche yt it shall be he the whiche hath so well lyued or wel pur¦ged & made clene his synnes by penaunce in this worlde that his soule shal not be soy¦led by synne whan he shall deye. Qui īgre¦ditur sine macula. And sayth afterwarde / et operatur iusticiā. That is whan ye dethe shall come to take hym he shall be founde doynge the operacyon of Iustyce / yt is not wyllynge to haue ony thynge of other men¦nes & to yelde vnto euery man that yt is his Also he yt speketh veryte in his herte / he yt hath not done decepciō in his tongue. Qui loquit{ur} veritatē in corde suo / qui nō egit do∣lū in lingua sua. Also he yt hath not done yl vnto his neyghbour / and hath not takē re¦proche towarde his neyghbours Nec fecit {pro}ximo suo malum et opprobriū non acce∣pit aduersos {pro}ximos suos. Also he the whi¦che swereth vnto his neyghbour and decey¦ueth hym not / he the whiche hath not gyuē his money vnto vsury / and hath not taken gyftes vpon the Innocent. Quiturat {pro}xi¦mo suo et nō decipit / qui pecuniā suā nō de¦dit ad vsurā et munera su{per}innocētem non accepit. Qui facit hec non mouebit{ur} inet{ur}nū He yt shall be founde doynge ye thynges be¦foresayd whan the dethe shal come to take hym shall not be dampned / but shal moun¦te in to heuen. ¶Example of a charytable man yt yode vnto heuen at his dethe or that his body was colde. Quere. lv. B. ¶Ano∣ther example of a relygyous the whiche yo¦de in to paradyse incontynent that he was deed. Quere. lxiii. A. ¶Another example. Quere. C. iiii. G. For to go all ryght in to ye lyfe eternall wtout goynge ony thynge out of the way it behoueth to haue the condyci¦ons of ye pylgryme of paradyse the whiche foloweth here after .xlv. A. Those the whi∣che do the contrary ben ye pylgryms of hell
and they shall not go into the lyfe eternall ¶How may a man mounte in to paradyse the whiche hath commytted mortall synne in operacyons / in thoughtes / and wordes The answere is suche yt he shall not thyder mounte for the contempnynge / & dyspray∣synge and dysobedyence that he maketh / yt he sayeth / and thynketh anenst god / or for the offence / the inyquyte / & cursednes that reygneth in hym for his syn̄es. For mortall synne is a sekenesse / a venym / a poyson / & an infeccyon soo grete that it dystroyeth ye strengthe / the vertue / & the goodes of the soule the whiche ne holdeth him from clym¦bynge / but more sooner vylaynsly to faile. ¶Example of a byrde the whiche hath the bec / the herte / the wynges seke he forceth not to fle / but more sooner to fall. In lyke∣wyse the man the whiche hath the herte se∣ke and vndone by yll thoughtes / ye mouthe enuenymed of yll wordes / the handes scab∣bed / croked / & vndone by yll operacions he ne is able to fle in to paradise. Saynt Pou¦le sayth yt they the whiche do the operaciōs of the body the whiche ben of syn̄e shal not mounte in to paradyse. Vn̄ ad gal. v. Ma∣nifesta sūt o{per}a carnis q̄ sunt fornicatio / im¦mundicia / impudicitia / luxuria / ydolorum seru{us} / veneficia / iimicitie / cōtētiones / emu∣lationes / ire / rixe / dissentionis / secte / īuidie: homicidia / ebrietates / cōmessationes / & his similia qm̄ qui talia agunt regnū celo{rum} non cōsequent{ur}. Also saynt Poule sayth. i. ad co. vi. Nolite errare' qr ne{que} fornicaru / ne{que} y∣dolis seruiētis / ne{que} adulteri / ne{que} molles / ne{que} masculorum cōcubitores / ne{que} fures / ne{que} auari / ne{que} ebriosi / ne{que} maledici / ne{que} rapaces regnū dei possidebūt. ¶Example of a womā yt vsed her lyfe in lecheryes / glo¦tonyes & pleasaunces carnall that was dā¦pned / & her husbande was saued yt lyued so brely & well. Quere. lxxxxii. A. ¶Another example yt ye body of a fole pryued his soule from paradyse. Quere. xlvi. A. Also we ap¦petyte to be well heryted / & well lodged in a fayre hous / and by mortall synne who so deyeth impenytentes leseth the fayre hery∣tage of paradyse and the fayre lodgynges the whiche there bē. He is a fole yt shytteth his hous so strongly that he may noo more entre therin / or who so selleth or gyueth his herytage for nothinge. In lykewyse dooth he the whiche commytteth mortall synne / he hym closeth or shytteth from paradyse / & yf he sell it and gyue it for nothynge / that is for synne. And there is no persone in all the worlde soo euyll but that ryght gladly he wolde haue paradyse / ne the whiche wol¦de lese his parte. And for certayne they the whiche commytteth mortall synne & yf in suche wise they deye they lese it as it is sayd before. Quia deus non saluat impios. Vt legit{ur} Iob. xxxvi. Et etiam legit{ur} ysaie. xxvi. Tollatur impi{us} ne videat gloriam dei. Al¦so we appetyte to be fayre / clere / shyninge wel clothed be sene & aorned. Also we desyre to haue rychesses and honours / also helthe agylyte & all other thynges delectables / & by mortall synne all is lost vnto theym the whiche deye Impenytentes as it is sayd be¦fore. &c. K. ¶Nynthly inobedyence the whiche is mortall synne noyeth / for it byndeth vn¦to payne & punycyon. xliiii. Iniusti punit{ur} vt dicit dauid in psal. The vniuste shall be punysshed. Euery persone ye whiche wyl not haue payne & punycyon lete hym kepe hym from dysobeynge vnto god / vnto the chyrche / and vnto his supery¦ours in commyttynge mortall synne. For from the tyme that ony man hath cōmyt∣ted mortall synne he is soo bounde vnto payne and punycyon that he may neuer
escape but that he haue punycyon corporal the whiche is transitory in this worlde / or punycyon & dampnacyon eternall in the o∣ther worlde. For it is wryten. Nullū ma∣lū remanebit impunitū. That is to saye / yt none euyll shall abyde vnpunysshed. And it is wryten in the gospell yt god shall lese ye yll euylly. Vn̄ math. xxi. Malos male per∣det. Iterū dd dicit. Tu reddes vnicui{que} iuxta opera sua. ¶Example how god ma∣de to rayne fyre and sulfre vpon them of Sodom for to punysshe thē for theyr syn∣nes. Quere. lxxxxv. a. ¶Another example how Pharaon & his people had many puni¦cyons for yt they ne wolde obeye vnto god. Quere. liiii. F. ¶Another exāple of the pu∣nycyon of Chore. liiii. H. Whan ony hath cō¦mytted blaspheme / homycide / theft / forny¦cacyon / or ony mortall synne / he is bounde body and soule to receyue payne & punycy∣on before god for his synnes. And as yf he were bounde before ye notaryes to pay ony somme of money / so that he shal neuer esca¦pe without hauȳge punycyon as it is sayd Dauyd the prophete sayth in the psalter ye wordes of god. Si iusticias meas {pro}phana uerint ipit et mandata mea non custodierīt visitabo in virga iniquitate eorū. That is to say. Yf the cursed inobedyentes haue ta∣ken in scorne my Iustyces and take no he∣de to my commaundementes / I shall vysy¦te in a rodde the inyquytees of them in stry¦kynge theyr synnes. Also a man sholde vn¦derstande after the scryptures that god pu¦nyssheth the synners for theyr Inobedyen∣ces & cursednesses. Quicqid patimur pecca¦ta nostra meruerūt. And yet they appercey¦ue not from whens procedeth suche puny∣cyon / as it is declared before where is trea¦ted that they the whiche breketh the festes oen punysshed. Quere ad numerū. xix. A. Also god punyssheth ye synnes in this worl∣de by famyne / warre / & mortalyte. By fa∣myne for he maketh the cornes to fayle / ap¦ples / vynes & other fruytes and laboures / by frost / myst / heet / ayre corrupt. &c. Vnde deutero. xi. Cauete ne forte decipiatur cor¦vestrū et recedatis a domino et mandata ei{us} / iracus{que} dn̄s claudat celum & pluuio nō descendant / nec terra det germen suū pere atis{que} velocit{ur}. &c. ¶Example how the son∣nes of Iacob were punysshed by famyne / for that they solde theyr broder Ioseph and made theyr fader to beleue yt a beest had de¦uoured hym / & that beest was enuy. Vn̄ ge¦ne. xxxvii. Fera pissima deuorauit filium meum ioseph dicit iacob. &c. ¶Another ex¦ample wryten in the thyrde boke of kynges how grete drynesse & famyne came vnto ye people for ye ydolatryes & synnes the which reygned in ye tyme of ye cursed kyng Achab and of his wyfe Iesabell yt made to sle the good man Naboth / and it was at the pra∣yer of ye prophete Helye. Vn̄ iacobi. v. Mul¦tum valet deprecatio iusti assiduo / helyas erat homo passibilis similis nobis / et oratio¦ne orauit vt non pluerit su{per} terrā / & nō plu¦it annos tres et menses sex / et rursum ora¦uit et celum dedit pluuiā et terra dedit fru¦tum suū. Secondly god punyssheth ye syn∣ners inobedyentes by mortalyte / as he dy∣de vnto the people of Rome the whiche peo¦ple after Eester went to play / to be dronke to excercyse lecheryes / synnes / & euylles in suche maner yt god wrothed hym agaynst the sayd people / & made to come grete wa¦ters & grete multytude of serpentes & sna∣kes the whiche deyed and enfected the ayre After there was so grete mortalyte yt innu¦merable people deyed / & many deyed in ya¦nynge sodaynly. After that saynt Gregory was pope yt institued the {pro}cessyon & fast on saynt Markes day. ¶Another exampe of ye punycyon of some yt retorned after ester to theyr ylles & synnes. Cu. t. Also of them yt brake goddes commaundements. lxiiii. k
¶Another example wryten in the last cha¦pytre of the seconde boke of kynges how af¦ter yt Dauyd had vyctory of his ennemyes he made to nombre his people by vayne glo¦ry god sent vnto hym the prophete Gad yt sayd vnto hym yt he sholde chose of thre ylle thȳges one whiche he wold / yt is to haue. vii yeres famyne & honger in his lande / or .iii. mōthes so stronge warre yt he sholde fle be¦fore his aduersaries yt sholde persecute hȳ / or thre dayes of mortalytee in his people. Than Dauyd sayd. I am anguysshed & harde beten on all sydes. He toke mortaly∣te yt was so grete yt in. iii dayes there dyed of his people .lxx. M. men by sekenes of pe∣stelence. And Dauyd sayd vnto god. Ego sū qi peccaui ego iiqui egi. Isti qi oues sūt qid fecer̄t / vertat{ur} obsecro man{us} tuas cōtra me & cōtra domū meā. ¶Another exāple wry¦ten in the boke of Moyses how the chyldrē of Israell had punycyon by mortalyte for theyr murmure. &c. Thyrdly god dooth pu¦nysshe the inobedyent sinners by warre as we haue by example how by the proude an¦swere yt kynge Roboam gaue vnto the peo¦ple of Israell they raysed another kynge & the sayd Roboam hadde warre all his lyfe. Que. lxxxxix. m. ¶Another example wry∣ten in the .xix. chapytre of the boke of Iuges yt mo than .lx. M men were slayne in batay¦le of the people of Beniamyn for to punys∣she them of the sinne of lechery yt they com¦mytted in the wyfe of Leuyte. que. lxxx. b For to be shorte god punyssheth the inobe∣byent sinners in many maners / for they bē bounde to punycyon by synne as it is sayd ¶Example wryten in ye thyrde boke of Io¦nas how god sent vnto ye people of Nyny∣ue yt they sholde be dystroyed / they & theyr cyte wtin xl. dayes for theyr syn̄es. Adhuc xl. dies et nyniue subuertet{ur}. &c. They dyde penaunce & god had mercy on theym. The punycyon of synners is sōtyme temporall & transytorye. And somtyme it is eternall. The punycyon temporall is somtyme vo∣luntary / as that the whiche is done by pe∣naunce the whiche is merytoryous. Som¦tyme it is done by constraynte as ye theues the whiche ben punysshed & hanged ayenst theyr wyll / this punycyon & payne is not merytoryous. Vn̄ legit{ur}. {quod} oīs act{us} merito∣ri{us} oportet qd sit volūtate īperat{us}. But yf a thefe bere wt good wyll the dethe & suche payne for his owne synnes as yt good thefe yt was put to dethe whan our lorde deyed / suche payne & dethe sholde serue for penaū¦ce / ye whiche is greter than to fast. &c. The good thefe sayd. Illud luce. xxii. Nā digna tactis recipim{us} mortē / hic aūt nichil malife¦cit / and for that: yt god knewe and sawe his faythe / his contrycyon & the dethe that he bare so wyllyngly for his synnes of good ry¦ghte he sayd vnto him. Hodie mecum ens in paradiso. &c. Of the punycyon eternall that the synners Inobedyentes shall haue it is wryten herafter. Quere ad numerum xlix. a. ¶Examples shall be wryten towar¦de the ende of the boke. Quere in penis in∣ferni. A. ¶The cōdycyons yt the pylgryme of pa¦radyse sholde haue touchynge yt a man sholde apply his .v. wyttes of nature vp¦on the commaundementes of god / as a good pylgryme dooth on his way .xlv. IT is wryten in ye .xix. cha. of saȳt mathew how a mā axed of cryst what good dedes he sholde do to gete eternall lyfe. And he answe¦red. Yf yu wylt entre in to eternal lyfe kepe the cōmaundements. Si vis ad vitā ingredi serua mādata. For the obser∣uacion ye cōmaūdements is the ryght way wtout goynge by in ony wyse. yu arte here ly¦uynge as a pylgrym yt tēdeth to go to heuē
or in to hell / for thy lyfe is but a pylgryma∣ge of lytel durynge. And therfore yf yu wylt go to se god / the vyrgyn Mary / the aungel¦les & holy places of paradyse / & to haue he∣rytage in that contree there & not in helle / employe thy fyue wyttes of nature vpon ye commaundementes of god / & take the con¦dycyons of the good pylgryme. It is wry∣ten. eccl. xxix. Pone the sau{rum} tuū ī {pre}ceptis altissimi / et {pro}derit tibi magis {quam} aurū. Put thy treasour in the commaundementes of god / & it shall prouffyte the more than gol∣de. Also folowe the lyfe of god / his maners & condycyons. He appered vnto two of his dyscyples in semblaunce of a pylgrime. Vn̄ luce. xxiiij. T'u solus {per}egrin{us} es in inthrlm et non cognouisti ea q̄ facta sūt in ea his die¦bus. &c. He descended from paradyse for to accomplysshe the pylgrymage of the worl¦de / he was borne of the vyrgyn Mary & ly¦ued in the state of grace without ony synne xxxii. yeres and an halfe / & at his dethe his pylgrymage was accomplisshed / and after retorned in to paradyse his contree. He she∣wed vnto vs by example & by worde how we sholde lyue in this worlde. Cepit dn̄s facere et docere. to thende yt we be pylgry∣mes of paradyse / & that we goo to dwell wt hym in his glory: A good pylgryme sholde haue many condycions for to make his pyl¦grymage of the whiche we shall tell. viii. B. ¶Fyrst a good pylgryme sholde cōfesse hym & put hym in thestate of grace & soo to do his sayd pylgrymage. Also in doynge ye pylgrymage of this worlde we sholde con∣fesse vs oft tymes / & we sholde lyue in the∣state of grace to thende yt the good dedes yt we do be vnto god agreable & to vs proufy¦table. For mortall syn̄e is an infeccyon & se¦kenes vnto ye soule so yll yt it letteth all spy¦rytual good dedes yt it vnto hȳ ne may pro¦fyte as a mā seeth by symilytude how bodi¦ly sekenes letteth to labour / to walke. &c. & that meet & drynke in noo wyse can profy∣te vnto the body / so yt a man seke corporal∣ly & spyritually ne may do his pylgrymage tyll he haue helthe / yt is to be well confest & yt he haue charite wtout the whiche no good dede ne may prouffyte / as is declared in ye chapytre of charyte. que. iiii. c. & in ye fourth thynge yt moeueth to kepe ye commaunde∣mentes of god. que. xliiii. a. Vn̄ aug. in libro de natura & gr̄a. Nullū op{us} quātūcū{que} de se bonū sūmo opifici est acceptū / nisi agat{ur} ī gr̄a. No werke how good so euer it be of it selfe it is not agreable vnto the souerayne werker yf it be not done in grace. And saȳt Thomas sayth. Nullus hō pōt mereri nisi mediāte gr̄a. No man may deserue to haue rewarde eternall but by ye meryte of grace And howbeit yt good werkes done in sinne ben not merytoryous vnto eternyte yet a man sholde not lette to do them as it is de¦clared here before. Of this mater example of a pylgryme yt lyued in this worlde in the state of grace after ye cōmaundementes of god / and he was conforted of aungelles of paradyse the whiche bare his soule in to he¦uen. And of an ypocrite that pleased to the worlde & dyde synnes secretely / the deuyll drewe his soule from hs body wt an hoke & bare it in to hell. For he was pylgrym. Que¦re in thexam. C. iiii. C. ¶Another example of a wydowe that was cōforted & vysyted at her dethe of the vyrgyn Mary. And of a ryche man yt was vesyted of deuylles in ly¦kenes of blacke cattes. &c. Quere. C. v. A. C. ¶Secondly ye good pilgryme sholde ta¦ke clothynges the whiche ne may greue hȳ in his vyage. And sholde take away frome hym al weyght or heuynes of burden / & al thynge yt myght lette hym to walke well. Also in doynge ye pylgrymage of this worl¦de a man sholde not take vestyments / gyr∣dylles shoes. &c. full of pompes / fro whens doth procede pryde and elacion the whiche
letteth to goo in to the realme of paradyse as sayth saynt Poule in his epy. ad thi. Nō ī tortis crinib{us} aut auro / margaritis / vl ve¦sta preciosa. Et psal. Nōhītabit ī medio do¦m{us} mee qui facit su{per}biū. He yt commytteth pryde shall not enhabyte in the myddle of my hous. ¶Example how a woman pom¦peously arayed & clothed was enuyroned and set about with deuylles / & she bare ma¦ny vpon her tayle. Quere. lxv. D. ¶Ano∣ther example how the cursed dyues clothed in purple was the pylgryme of hell / & there is buryed. Quere in thexāplary. lxxxiiii. A. ¶Another example how saynt Iohan ba¦ptyst yt was clothed wt sharpe vestements is in paradyse for he was a pylgryme. &c. And a man sholde vnderstande that ye no∣blesse of habyllementes is not defended vn¦to euery man after his estate. But the su{per}∣fluyte & pryde is defended the whiche may be taken in those habyllemēts. Also theues the whiche ben charged of ye godes of theyr neyghbours ne may well walke ne moūte into paradyse. Vn̄. pau. i. ad corī. vi. Ne{que} fures / ne{que} auari regnum dei possidebunt. ¶Example in Achar ye whiche was a thefe & therfore he was stoned & all his goodes brent by the cōmaundement of god. Que∣re. lxxx. a. ¶Another example how ye thefe zacheus was a pylgryme of paradyse and is saued / for he dyscharged hym & restored the theftes that he had done. Vnd luce. xix. zache{us} dixit ad iesū / ecce dimidiū bonorum meo{rum} dn̄e do pauperib{us} / & si quid aliquem defraudaui reddo quadruplū. &c. Also glo∣tons / dronkerdes / the whiche eateth & drin¦keth vnto excesse walketh not into parady¦se / but falleth in to hell. Saynt Poule say¦eth. i. ad corī. vi. Ebriosi regnū dei nō possi¦debūt. ¶Example of a pilgrym yt solde his gowne for to drynke wyne. Quere. xcii. G ¶Another example how a frere was a pyl¦gryme of hell for that he wont hym to dryn¦ke & ete whan the other occupyed they mat the seruyce of the chyrche / at his dethe he sa¦we hell open / & the tourmentes. &c. Quere lxvii. C. A man yt is to moche fed may not wel walke / nor he mounteth not in to para¦dyse. Also these mortall synnes ben burdēs moche heuy the whiche greueth the soule & kepeth it from mountynge in to paradyse Men knoweth by experyence how a heuy burden greueth ye body / in lykewyse dooth synne the soule. Vn̄ da. Iniquitates me su¦{per}gressūt caput meū & sicut ou{us} graue gra∣uate sunt su{per} me. Put awaye the synnes ye whiche ben in ye for to walke well. The pyl¦gryme of paradyse sholde put from aboue hym all thynges the whiche letteth to do ye commaūdementes of god the whiche ben the way of the sayd paradyse as it is sayd / to thende yt he may well prouffyte. Whan a man cutteth the superflue of the vyne / or ye burgeons of the tree they encrease / growe & fructyfye the better. In lykewyse dooth a man spyrytuall for to put from aboue hȳ all vestementes & araye replete of pryde & of vanyte. &c. D. ¶Thyrdly the good pylgryme sholde oft tymes wt his mouthe demaunde ye way for drede to go out of it. Also the pylgryme of paradyse sholde demaunde and lerne ye commaundemētes of god and the salutary thynges / as dyde a man the whiche demaū¦ded of our lorde Ihesu crist. Good mayster what good dedes shall I do to thende that I haue eternall lyfe. And he answered. Yf thou wylte entre in to lyfe eternall kepe ye cōmaundementes. &c. as it is sayd before. Also Dauyd the prophete axed of god yt he wolde teche hym his Iustyfycacyons to ye ende yt he hym selfe were Iustyfyed. Vnde psal. Doce me iustificatiōes tuas. Thou arte not so grete a lorde as Dauyd / for he was kynge of Israell. Thou arte not soo wyse ne so lerned ne so holy as he / & he de∣maunded
for to be instructe for to haue sal¦uacion & therfore demaunde ye commaun¦dementes. And I tell the for certayne the way for to fle ryght in to paradyse is obe∣dyence the whiche is ye ladder for to mount thyder and the ten cōmaundementes ben the pynnes of steppes as it is declared in ye begynnynge of thexamplary where it spe∣keth of ye obedyence of Abraham. Quē. li. a Also euery persone yt cometh to the aege of dyscrecyō sholde holde / kepe / & accōplysshe the cōmaundementes of god vpon payne of eternall dampnacyon. And therfore eue¦ry man & woman shold lerne them for dre¦de to breke them. Vn̄ ligit{ur} in scdo libro sen∣tēci. di. xvii. Statī eī cū quis sit capax {pre}ce∣pti dei tenet{ur} ad noticiā et obseruātiā. The poete sayth. Serua mandata / si tu vis re∣gna beata. Qui non obedit: celesti cede care bit, Kepe ye commaundementes yf yu wylte haue the blyssed realmes. He yt obeyeth not shal not haue a syege celestyall in paradyse ¶Example how the deuyll slewe a chylde of .v. yere olde in his faders lappe for that yt he was a blasphematour. Quere in thexā∣plary. lxii B. Yf the fader had correcked his chylde / & also yf he had taught hym the cō∣maundementes of god ye deuylles had not slayne hym. And therfore a man sholde de∣maunde and lerne. Whan a pylgryme wyl not demaunde ne lerne his way he ofte ty∣mes swerueth & gooth out of the way. Also good pylgrymes sholde speke of god & of good wordes in makinge theyr vyage / and god abideth & is amonge them as it is wry¦ten. Mathei. xviii. Vbi duo vel tres cōgre¦gati sunt in noīe meo: ibi sū in medio eorū. ¶Example how god appered vnto Cleo∣phas & vnto saynt Marke in spekynge of hȳ as they yode vnto Emaus. As it is wry¦ten. Lu. xxiiii. ¶Another exāple how god was in ye myddes of two relygious at cryst¦mas in spekȳge of his natyuyte. lxxxxiiii. b And to the contrary whan ye pylgrymes of hell speketh detraccyons / mockes / & ylles the deuyll theyr mayster is by them yt shall lede them in to hel that is theyr cyte & coun¦tree to dwell in. ¶Example how a detra∣ctour was sēt thyder & had cruell Iugemēt Quere. lxxxxviii. Also the gospell of saynt Mathew taketh the way for to go in to pa¦radyse & sayth. Illud. math̄. vii. Intrate {per} angustiā portā qr lata portat et s{pre}osa via ē¦que ducit ad {per}ditionē / et multi sūt qui ītrat per eā: quā angusta porta et arcta via est q̄ ducit ad vitā et pauci sūt qui īueniūt eam. That is to say. Entre ye by the strayte gate for ye large gate & spacyous is that yt ledeth vnto perdycyon / & many there ben the whi¦che entreth by yt. The anguysshous gate & strayte way is that yt ledeth vnto lyfe. And fewe people entreth by yt. ¶For to vnder¦stande well this strayte gate / it is to lede a lyfe of austeryte & hardnes in fastȳges / ab¦stynences / sobrenes / chastyte / & penaunce. And the large way is to lyue in all voluptu¦ousnes / carnalytees / lecheryes / glotonies / daunses. &c. ¶Example of a fole & a wyse man whiche toke the way in to hell. lxvi. A Other exāples yt it is well taken vnto ma¦ny for to demaunde ye worde of god / & fyrst How a woman demaūded of a relygyous a good exhortacyon yt prouffyted so moche yt her husbande yt was of yll conscyence cō∣uerted hym. Que. lv. B. ¶Another exam¦ple of a relygyous yt asked oft tymes the fa¦ders to tell vnto hȳ some admonycyō. q̄re lvi. C. ¶Another example how he the whi¦che techeth ye worde of god shal haue grete rewarde in paradyse. lvi. G. ¶Another ex¦ample of a monke the whiche reknowleged his synnes in shewynge theym to another. Quere. C. i. A. E. ¶Fourthly the good pylgryme sholde euermore take hede yf he be wel in the way ye is taught hym. Also the pylgrymes of pa¦radyse
sholde euermore take hede yf they accomplysshe well the commaūdementes of god the whiche ben theyr ryght waye & conductour the whiche shal conduyte them & the whiche shall enlumyne theyr eyen to walke well. Vn̄ dd. Preceptū dn̄i lucidū il¦luminās oclos. Also the worde of god is ye lanterne yt shyneth & gyueth lyght vnto ye fete for to go well. Vn̄ dd. Lucerna pedi∣b{us} meis verbū tuū. Et legit{ur} pro. vi. Māda¦tū lucerna est et lex lux. What thynge that a man dooth in this worlde he sholde euer∣more take hede yf he do that yt god cōmaun¦deth. For they ye whiche therto taketh hede shall not be confoūded / thus sayth Dauyd Vn̄ psal. Tūc non cōfūdar cū {per}spexero in oībus mādatis tuis. Et eccl. xxiii. Nichil est dula{us} {quam} respice in mādatis dn̄i. That is to saye. Nothȳge is more sweter than to take hede vnto the commaundementes of god They the whiche take hede therunto & abu¦seth them in worldly vanytees & pleasaun¦ces / as daunces / playes / & folyes / lyghtly gone out of the way & leueth the way of pa¦radyse. ¶Example Eue our fyrst moder toke none hede on ye commaundemente yt vnto her was gyuen & was deceyued by tē¦tacion / & for the beholdȳge of ye fayre fruyt And therfore she was put out of paradyse terrester. liiii. A. Also they the whiche ben le¦cherous & abuseth them to beholde the be∣aute of women (vl ecōuerso) or the women ye beaute of the men swerueth & leueth the way to paradyse. It is wryten. ec. ix. Nec aspicias mulierē mltiuolā ne forte ī laque os ei{us}. Cū sallatrice ne assidu{us} sit nec audi∣as illā. That is to saye. Beholde not yt wo∣man the whiche wyll many thynges that yu fall not in her laces / ne accustome the to be with a woman yt is a daunser / or leper / ne here her not synge. &c. ¶Example by that that Synchem behelde the beaute of Dyne the doughter of / Iacob / he coueyted her and slepte with her as it is wryten gen̄. xxxiiii. Quē in thexamplary. lxxxx. d. ¶Another example by that yt the wyfe of Pharaon be¦helde the beaute of Ioseph / she prayed him of dyshonoure as it is wryten. gene. xxix. Saynt Gregory sayth. Nō licet ītueri qd non licet cōcupisci. And therfore Dauyd re¦quyred of god that he wolde torne his eyen from prosperytees yt he behelde not the va¦nytees of the worlde by the whiche he shol∣de be abused. Vn̄ dauid. Auerte oclos me¦os ne videāt vanitatē. &c. The appostles & sayntes of paradyse haue so well loked on the commaundements of god that they ha¦ue not ben abused and yt they ben gone all ryght in to paradyse / & in lykewyse sholde we do. F. ¶Fyfthly the good pylgryme sholde ta¦ke payne to here / to vnderstāde / & to retay¦ne those the whiche techeth hym his waye. Also the pylgrym of paradyse sholde with good wyl here ye cōmaundementes of god▪ the prechynges / & theym the whiche vnto them sheweth it / for all benedyccyon & sal∣uacyon therof procedeth. In lykewyse as sayth these scryptures. Vn̄ luce. xi. Bean qui audiūt verbū dei & custodiūt illd. That is to saye. Those the whiche hereth the wor¦de of god & kepeth it ben blyssed. Et legitur deute. xxviii. Si audieris vocē dn̄i dei tui / vt facias at{que} custodias oīa mandata eius veniēt super te vniuerse bn̄dictiones iste et apprehendent te. Bn̄dictus eris in ciuitate et benedict{us} in agro / bn̄dictus fructus ven¦tris tui / et fructus terris tue / fructus{que} iu∣mento{rum} tuo{rum} / greges armento{rum} tuo{rum} / et caule ouiū tuarū / bn̄dicta horrera tua / & bn̄¦dicte tue reliquie / bn̄dictus eris & ingrediēs et egrediēs. That is to say. Yf yu here ye voy∣ce of thy lorde god to thende yt thou do and kepe al his commaundementes his benedic¦cyons vnyuarsalles shal come vpon the & shall apprehende the / thou shalte be blyssed
in the / thou shalt be blyssed in the felde / the fruyte of thy wombe shall be blyssed / and the fruyte of the erthe / and ye fruyte of thy mares / of thy bestyall / & of thy shepe / thy garners shall be blyssed / & thy relykes shal be blyssed / yu shalt be blyssed in entrynge & goynge forthe of al places. Many other go¦des shall be wryten in the sayd chapytre yt abydeth bycause of shortnes. Et le. {pro}. xxix. Qui custodit legē beat{us} est. He yt kepeth ye lawe is blyssed & that dredeth god / & excer¦cyseth hym in his cōmaundementes ye sede of hym shall be puyssaunt in the erthe / the generacyon of the good shal be blyssed. Vn̄ dd ī psal. Beat{us} vir qi tunet dn̄m in māda∣tis eius volet nimis. Potēs in terra erit se¦mē ei{us} gn̄atio rectorū bn̄dicet{ur}. ¶Example in ye blyssed Magdaleyne yt toke grete plea¦sure to here ye worde of god & set her at his fete by humylyte for to here him speke. Vn̄ luce. x. Maria sedēs sec{us} pedes dn̄i audie∣bat verbū illi{us}. Also it is wryten iohā. viii. Qui ex deo est vba dei audit. He yt is of god hereth his worde & it foloweth of theym yt wyll not here it. Propt{er}ea vos non auditis qr ex deo non estis. Ye here not the worde of god / for ye be not of his party. Et legit{ur} io x Oues mee vocē meā audiunt. My shepe / those ben ye good persones the whiche here my voyce. &c. Of this mater it is writen in the thyrde commaundement. Quere. xv. c. All saluacyon procedeth to here the worde of god & many persones hath ben saued for herynge of it. In lykewyse as men fynde many examples. First how a grete syn̄er re¦pented & was saued for to here a predycaci¦on. Quere. lv. a. ¶Another example of an erle yt conuerted hym by the herynge of the worde of god. Quere. lv. e. ¶Another exā¦ple of a ryche man yt serued the deuyl. xl: ye¦res and in a sermon he repented hym. Quē lvi. k. Those the whiche haue shame to here speke of god / our sauyour Ihesus shall ha¦ue shame of hym at the day of Iugement. Vn̄ luce. ix. Qui me erubuerit & sermones meos / hūc fili{us} hoīs erubescet cū venerit in maiestate sua. Also he yt wyll not here the faythe & the commaundementes his oray∣son shall be execrable / & vnto him it ne shal be accorded. Vn̄ {pro}uer. xxviii. Qui declinat aures suas vt nō audiat legē or̄o eius erit execrabilis. ¶Example of a carle yt wolde not here the worde of god in his lyfe / & the crucyfyxe stopped his eres vnto the seruy∣ce that men dyde for hym in his buryenge in betokenynge yt he ne wolde here ye oray∣sons that men made for hym. Quere. lv. f. The sayd carle & all those the whiche wyll not here to speke of god / but ben redy to he¦re of detraccyons & yl sholde vnderstande yt they synne gretely / & ben worthy to haue grete punycyon yf they deye Impenytētes ¶Example wryten in the sermons of the dysciple of a bysshop yt was borne in to pur¦gatory after his dethe for to do his penaun¦ce and he was there gretely tourmented of the stynke of his clerke beynge in hel the whiche mounted vnto hym for that he her∣de somtyme his detraccyons & had not ey∣grely ynough correcked hym / howbeit yt a∣boue al other thynges the sayd bysshop had be good. ¶Another example of a mā that was tourmēted in hell within his eeres for that yt he had folysshely herde of symphoni¦es & Instrumentes. Quere. Cvii. d. ¶Ano¦ther example of a man yt was terrybly tor¦mented for ye vayne songes & syngynges yt he had herde in the worlde. Cvii. d. All yll {pro}cedeth to speke & to here yll wordes. And all goodnes procedeth of the worde of god as thou mayste here in the camplary. Quē lv. a. b. c. G. ¶Syxtely ye good pylgrym sholde thȳ¦ke vpon his way tyll that his pylgrymage be accomplysshed. Also the pylgryms of pa¦radyse sholde thynke vpon the commaun∣dementes
of god and them sholde plante & roote in theyr hertes without forgetynge them / wherof it is wryten ī deuteronomu. Audi israel precepta dn̄i et ea in corde tuo quasi in libro scribe / et dabo tibi terrā fluen¦tem lac et mel. O Israhel here ye cōmaun¦dements of god and wryte theym in thyn herte as in a boke / & I shall gyue vnto the ye londe / flowynge mylke and hony. These wordes spoken toucheth thre thȳges. The fyrst is that men sholde here gladly the cō∣maundementes of god. Audi israel. The seconde is yt men sholde put them in mȳde Et ea in corde. The thyrde is yt the rewar¦de foloweth. Et dabo tibi terrā. &c. Of ye whiche rewarde shall be here afterwarde spoken. xlvii. a. And it is wryten eccl. Que precepit de{us} illa cogita s{per}. Thynke euermo¦re vpon those thynges yt god hath cōmaun¦ded. ¶Example in the blyssed vyrgyn Ma¦ry the whiche helde all the wordes of god & kept them in her herte. Vn̄ luce. ii. Maria autem conseruabat oīa verba hec cōferens in corde suo. They the whiche haue ye herte and the thought to breke the commaunde¦mentes of god be not the pylgryms of pa∣radyse / but of hell / the whiche shall go to se lucyfer / the deuylles / & the dampned / and shall haue herytage in that countre there / yf they deye impenytentes wtout correccy∣on and amendement. This mater is decla¦red in the nynth commaundement and in the tenthe. H. ¶Seuenthly the good pylgryme shol∣de walke on his fete & do the operacyon of his way in trauaylynge his body. Also the pylgrymes of paradyse sholde lyue in this worlde in doynge the operacyon of the cō∣maundementes of god and they shal haue benedyccyon and saluacion. Vn̄ psal. Bea¦ti qui ābulant ī lege tua dn̄e. They the whi¦che walke in thy lawe bē blyssed. Ite{rum} {pre}s. Bti īmaculati in via qi ābulāt in lege tua dn̄e. Blyssed ben they not soyled in the way yt walketh in ye lawe of our lorde. ¶Exam¦ple in Dauyd yt ranne in the way of the cō¦maundementes & loued the lawe of god. Vn̄ psal. Viā mādato{rum} tuo{rum} cucurri. & le¦gē tuā dilexi. ¶Another example in Abra¦ham that dyde in operacyon ye wyll of god & he had his blyssynge. li. a. ¶Another exā¦ple of the good man of an hous yt receyued the pylgrymes & set them at his table recey¦ued god. Quere ī q̄rto {pre}cepto. in ye werkes of mercy. ¶Another example of a monke yt bare god vpon his sholdres in semblaūce of a mesell or lepre. Que. xxiii. e. Many exā¦ples shall be founde in thexamplary of peo¦ple the whiche haue done in operacyon the wyl of god & of theyr superyours / as saynt Mor. Ioseph. Thobye. Quere. lii. c. d. e. f. &c Also for to be saued & Iustyfyed it sufficeth not to here the commaundementes but it behoueth to fulfyll them in operacyon. Vn̄ ad ro. ii. Nō eī auditores legis iusti sūt apd deū sed factores iustificabūtur. Saynt Ia¦mes sayth in his .ii. cha. In lykewyse as the body is deed wtout soule / euen so faythe is deed wtout operacyons. Also he sayth in his fyrst cha. Estote fcōres verbi & nō audit¦res tm̄ fallentes vosmeti{pre}s. Ite{rum} di. Ex o{per}ibus legis hō iustificat{ur} et non ex fide tm̄. That is to saye. Be ye the doers of ye worde of god & not alonely the herers deceyuinge your selfe. ¶Example of a wrothfull lady that yode often to here ye sermons & she ne correcked her for thyder goynge. Also exā∣ple of her mayden yt desyred thyder to go & god appered vnto her. Quere. lxxxxix. b. Al¦so eche man yt calleth god lorde & mayster shall not entre in to heuen / but he yt dooth in operacyon his wyll there shall entre / as it is wrytē in ye .vii. cha. of saynt math. The pylgrym of paradyse yt loueth god kepeth & dothe his worde / & he yt loueth hȳ not dothe thē not. io. xiiii. si qis diligit me sermonē meū
seruabit / qui nō diligit me sermones meos non seruat. ¶Example how Mathatias yt kept the lawe of god persecuted the sȳners the whiche brake it. Quere. lii. a. Those the whiche ne wyll do the operacyon of the cō∣maūdements of god ben pylgrymes of hel and thyder shall be sent for too dwell wyll they or not / yf they deye without correccy∣on and amendement. ¶Example in cayn yt slewe his broder Abell. I. ¶Eyghtly the condycion of a good pyl¦gryme is to bere a bordon or a staffe for too defende hym from dogges & from his en∣myes. Also the good pylgryme of paradise sholde haue a good staffe yt is stedfast fayth for to defende hym from deuylles. Vnd. i. petri. v. ca. Aduersari{us} vester diabol{us} tā{quam} leo rugiēs circuit querēs quē deuoret cui re∣sistite fortes in fide. ¶Example how saynt Anthony was strongly tourmented & be∣ten of deuyls / but he had vyctory agaynst theym by the grete faythe yt he had in god. Also he had in hym al the condycyons of a good pylgryme / wherfore he is in the glory of paradyse. Vnto the whiche we may goo cum illo qui est benedictus in secula seculo∣rum. Amen. A. ¶Example how the body the whiche is a fole draweth the soule in to the waye of hell. xlvi IT is wryten eccle. xxxvii. A {con}sili¦ario malo serua aīam tuā. Kepe thy soule from an yll councelour for yf yu beleue yll counceyle thou shalte be deceyued & in daunger of perdycyon. Et legit{ur}. i. io. iiii. Nō oī spūi¦credēdū est. A man sholde not beleue ne gy¦ue credence vnto euery spyryte. For the yll persone ne counceyleth but yl the whiche in hȳ resteth. ¶Example of a fole & a sage yt made a vyage togyders / the whiche yode vnto a cyte wherin men sayd yt many goo∣des vnto them were promysed / & in goyn∣ge in the sayd vyage came to demaunde ye way of pastures or herdmen the whiche to them sayd. Ye shall fynde .ii. wayes the one moche large / the other ryght strayte. Yf ye go ye strayte way anone ye shall be at your cyte. And yf ye go by the other large waye it is way full of bypathes the whiche shall brynge you out of your way / & also it is ful of theues the whiche shall take frome you your godes and peraduenture shall make you deye & ye shall not go vnto your cyte / how so euer it be go ye not that way. Than sayd the sage vnto the fole. Go we by this streyte waye. The fole sayd yt wyll we not do / here is a fayre way and a large it is bet¦ter to beleue that yt we se than that yt men tell vs. And the sage sayd / thou seest how ye pastoures sayth. Than sayd the fole / fy / fy on these pastours they wote not what they say / thou arte more fole than I come on / come on thy way. And the sayd fole drewe the sage & went the large way. And anone they were out of the way and fell amonge theues the whiche toke from them al theyr godes / helde them prysoners & put them in theyr bondes / seruyce and captyuyte. And they were so longe yt the fole deyed / and in contynent the cause was put in Iugement before the Iuge / and was declared as it is sayd that for as moche as the sage beleued the fole / and yt they wolde not beleue ye pa∣stoures yt they were fallen in suche inconue¦nyent. Than the Iuge gaue sentence yt the sayd fole and the sage were cast togyder in to the fyre to be brente and broyled wtout mercy / & it was done. Here is the example but it behoueth to expounde it. By the fole is vnderstande the body of euery of vs / by the sage is vnderstande the soule / ye vyage is this worlde the whiche is but a pylgry∣mage / the cyte is paradyse / the Iuge yt con¦dempneth
theym is god. The pastoures ben these bysshoppes curates / prelates / & prechours the streyte way is to lede a lyfe of austeryte in fastynges / abstynences / so bryete / chastyte / and penaunce. The large way is to lyue in all voluptuosytees / & car¦nalytees / of lechery / glotony / daunses. &c. that the body appetyteth / the enmyes ben the deuylles / the worlde / & the flesshe / the theues ben the .vii. deedly synnes the whi∣che taketh from them al theyr goodes / yt is all good vertues & paradyse / the Iuge the whiche them condampneth is god yt shall condampne the body & the soule at ye Iuge¦ment to be brent togyders. &c. More open¦ly it behoueth to expounde it. That yt these prelates counceyleth the strayte way / is yt thynge that ye gospell of Mathew speketh vii. Arecta et angusta est via que ducit ad vitam / lata et spaciosa est via que ducit ad perditionē / vt dcm̄ est. Et prouer. xii. Iter impio{rum} decipiet eos. Sequit{ur}. Iter aūt de∣uiū ducit ad mortem. A fole ne wyll beleue tyll that he receyue. In lykewyse these fo∣lysshe synners wyll not beleue the clerkes & prechers tyl that they be in the fyre of hel in dampnacyon. By that yt is the sage yt is the soule the whiche wolde go by the streyte way / & the body the whiche is a fole gayn∣sayeth it. It is yt the whiche is wryten ad gall. v. ca. Caro cōcupiscit aduersus s{pre}m. &c. & illd roma. viii. Sisecundū carnē vixe ritis moriemini. By that ye the theues yt syn¦nes take a way the vertues / it is that yt is wryten ecclesiastes .ix. Qui in vno pecca∣to peccauerit multa bona perdet. By that that they were put in seruytude is yt that is wryten. Ioh̄. viii. Oīs qui facit pctm̄ seru{us} est peccati. Et .ii. petri. ii. A quo eī quis su∣perat{us} est ei{us} seru{us} est. And that yt god shal Iuge it is writen. Marci. xvi. Qui credide¦rit / & baptizatus fuerit salu{us} erit / qui vero non crediderit condempnabitur. B. ¶How the pylgryme of paradyse shol¦de consyder .iiii. thynges. xlvi. DAuyd the prophete sayth in ye psalter. In corde meo abscon∣di eloquia tua / vt non peccem tibi. I haue hydde thy wordes that ben thy cōmaūdements in my herte to thende that I syn̄e not ayēst thy wyll. Thou synner for to kepe the from synne and for to bere lyghtly all the labou∣res / paynes / trybulacions / sekenesses / and aduersytees the whiche cometh vnto the in doynge the pylgrymage of the worlde. Cō∣syder .iiii. thynges. ¶Fyrst consyder ye shor¦tenes of thy lyfe / & how at thy dethe all en¦deth. That is to vnderstande all fastinges wakynges / erly rysynge / sekenesses / aduer¦sytees & tourmentes that thy body hathe borne and endured. What thynge is it as of thy lyfe / it is a vapour apperinge in a ly¦tell thynge. Vn̄ iacobi. iiii. Queest vita ve¦stra / vapor est ad modicū parens. And to sayd. Remembre the how lyfe is wȳde. Vn̄ iob. vii. Memento qr ventus est vita mea. For in lykewyse as a blaste of wynde is soo¦ne paste / so is our lyfe in regarde of eterny¦te. Itē iob. vii. Parce michi dn̄e nichil sūt enim dies mei. Good lorde spare me my da¦yes ben nothynge / they ben ryght shorte. Breues dies hominis sunt. &c. Thou man labour strongly whyle that thy lyfe dureth and bere all sekenesses & trybulacyons pa∣cyently / for yu shalt haue the rewarde eter∣nall of yt that yu hast laboured & borne for ye loue of god. ¶Secondly consyder ye labou¦res / paynes / trybulaclons / & dethe yt Iesus for to agayne bye the & vs all. He yt is ye sone of god eternal / kynge of aungelles / and of sayntes of paradyse. Yf a grete kynge bere for thy sake a grete weyght or burdē / yu ou¦test to bere for his sake a strawe. And ye kȳ¦ge celestyall hath borne for the ye crosse / fa∣sted
laboured / {pre}ched / & suffred deth. Thā sholdest yu endure euyll for the loue of hym. ¶Thyrdly consyder the paynes / laboures & trybulacyons yt the dampned bereth in hell / for the whiche paynes we may be de∣lyuered for to labour & to endure aduersy∣te in this worlde for gods loue. Vn̄. ec. xxix Minimū {pro} magno placeat tibi. Lytel thȳ¦ge the pleaseth for a grete thynge. For all ye paynes of this worlde be nothyng in regar¦de of them vnto ye dampned the whiche bē eternalles. ¶Example of a man dampned yt spake of the fyre of hell & of the dampned the whiche ben brent & broyled. lvii. ¶Ano¦ther example of tourments yt a womā had that was dampned. lxxxx. a. ¶Fourthly cō¦syder the grete Ioyes that ben prepared in paradyse vnto those the whiche labour wel in this worlde for the loue of god. Wherof speketh saynt Isidore in the boke of soue∣rayne goodnes & sayeth. Qui vite future premia diligent{ur} excogitat mala oīa pn̄tis vite equanimit{ur} portat qm̄ ex illius dulcidīe hui{us} amaritudinē tēperat. That is to saye. He that thynketh dylygently on the rewar¦des of the lyfe to come bereth egally in his courage all the ylles of this presēt lyfe. For it attempereth the bytternes of yt by ye swe¦tenes of paradyse. And saynt Poule sayth Ad romanos. viii. Non sunt condigne pas¦siones huius tēporis ad futuram gloriam. The passyons of this tyme be not cōdygne vnto the glory to come / of the whiche is spo¦kene hre after. A. ¶Of ye rewarde eternall that they shal haue the whiche kepe the commaunde∣ments of god. xlvii IT is wryten in the .xliiii. chapytre of Ysaie. And in the seconde chapi¦tre of ye fyrst epystle of saynt Pou¦le ad co. Quod ocul{us} nō vidit nec auris audiuit / nec in cor hoīs ascendit q̄ pre parauit deus diligētib{us} se. This auctoryte speketh grete thynges. Fyrst it sayth that neuer eye ne sawe in the worlde soo moche good as god hath prepared vnto those yt lo¦ue hym. That is to saye. yf it were possyble yt ony had ben in the popes courte / & of all ye patryarches / cardynalles / archebisshops bysshops / & of all the kynges / dukes / erles quenes / ladyes / and gentylwomen of all ye worlde / & that he had sene theyr treasours honoures and goodes yt they haue and that vnto them is done / it sholde be but shame to haue al those goodes in regarde to haue one daye in paradyse of the leest Ioye that is in it. There is. Qd oculos non vidit / af∣ter foloweth. Nec auris audiuit. Yf it were possyble yt thou were as fayre as was Ab∣salon ye sone of Dauyd the whiche had not in all his body one spotte ne foule thynge / but was all whyte / sanguyne / tendre / and laughynge / & his heeres were so fayre that whan they were shorne they were solde for an hondred cicles of golde. And yf thou we¦re as swyft as was Absael the whiche was so swyfte to renne that he passed an harte to course in playne countree. And yf thou were also stronge as Sampson fortyn the whiche at one tyme ouercame a. M. men of armes. And yf thou were also doubted as Augustus Cesar vnto whome all the worlde obeyed. Of whome it is wryten (nō habem{us} regē nisi cesarem) sayd the Iewes And yf thou were also ryche as was kinge Alexander the whiche was moche ryche. And also wyse as Salamon yt whiche was the wysest of the erthe whan he lyued. And also hole as Moyses the whiche neuer loste one tothe / ne his syght waxed derke. And yf thou sholdest lyue as longe as Matussa le the whiche lyued. ix. hondred yeres / or as Enoch and Helye the whiche ben in para∣dyse terrestre / & shall not deye vnto thende
of the worlde / and yf all the worlde loued yt as moche as dyde Dauyd Ionathas who∣me he loued as hym selfe. And yf yt all were accorded vnto the in lykewyse as Helyse{us} and Cypre accorded togider / for that yt the one wolde the other wolde. And yf thou we¦re lorde of all and loued as Ioseph was in Egypt. Yf all that yt I haue spoken were in the as yet as moche as a man myght tel vn¦to the / yet sholde it be but a thȳge of no va¦lour in regarde to be one houre in the Ioyes of paradyse. Vn̄ psal. Meli{us} est dies vna ī atriis tuis su{per} milia. After foloweth. Nec cor hoīs ascendit. That is to saye. Yf all the wysest clerkes & people that euer reygned in the worlde ymagyned the gretest Ioyes that they myght they ne coude comprehen¦de ye leest Ioy of paradyse yt the saued haue Also those the whiche in this worlde hath done and accomplysshed the commaunde∣mentes of god shall haue consolacyon at theyr deth of god & his sayntes as it is wry¦ten in thexamplary & approued by many examples. And fyrste of an holy fader that sawe as his dethe the prophetes and Ihesu cryst. Quere. Ciiii. a. And a man sholde vn¦derstande yt the rewarde of the saued shall not be egall / for euery man shall haue after his desert. Appoc. xiiii. O {per}a eī illo{rum} sequū¦tur illos. Et paul. i. ad co. xv. Alia est clari¦tas solis / alia est claritas lune / alia est cla∣ritas stellarum. Stella enim a stella differt claritate / sic et resurrectio mortuo{rum}. In ly¦kewyse as in the fyrmament there is a cle∣renes of the sonne & another of the moone and one of the sterres the whiche differreth the one from the other in clerenes / in lyke∣wyse shall dyfferre the resurreccyon of the saued. That is to saye. That soo moche the more as they haue obeyed vnto god / and endured aduersyte for the loue of hym / of so moche the more shal they be in paradyse fayre / clere / and nere vnto god / & the more clerely shall they se hym and haue of scyce and of retrybucyō. And therfore sayth our lorde. Ioh̄. xiiii. In domo pr̄is mei mansio¦nes multe sunt / scʐ pro diuersitate virtutū. Many mansyons ben in the hous of my fa¦der for the dyuersyte of vertues And how be it yt god vs gyueth by worde in ye gospel Math. xx. that he repreued the ydle people and that he sent them at dyuers houres to werke in the vyne. The one in ye mornynge the other at tyerce / mydday / and euen / and in the ende of the Iourney euery of theym had a peny / as well those of the euentyde as they of the mornynge. Of yt a man shold not murmure yf god gyue paradyse vnto synners at all aeges whan they wyll repēt them / to leue theyr synnes & to put theym to do wel. This peny that they all had was paradyse / they all had Ihesu cryst yt which was crucyfyed in theyr possessyon / as well those of the euentyde as those of the mor∣nynge. In lykewyse as sayth saynt Austȳ But they had retrybucyon in beaute / clere¦nes / bounte / scyence. &c. but vnto the egali¦te of the good dedes that they had done in the worlde as it is sayd / & as the scryptures declareth. Vnde daniel. xii. Qui docti fue∣rint fulgebūt sicut firmamētum / et qui ad iusticiam erudiūt multos: quasi stelle in per¦petuas eternitates. They the whiche haue ben sage and wyse shall shyne in lykewyse as the fyrmament / and they the whiche te¦cheth ony vnto Iustyce as ye sterres in per¦petuall eternytees. Et legit{ur} ezechiel. xviii. Iusticia iusti erit super eum / et impietas impu super eum erit. The Iustyce of ye iust shall be vpon hym / and the synne of ye wyc¦ked shall be vpon hȳ. Also euery man shall bere his charge. Thus Ezechyell sayeth in his. vi. chapytre. Et legitur Ihe. xxv. Red¦dam eis secundum opera eorum et secun∣dum facta manuum suarum. I shal yelde vnto the saued and dampned after the ope¦racyons
of them / & after the dedes of theyr handes. Et psal. Tu reddes vnicui{que} iux∣ta opera sua. Thou shalt yelde vnto euery man after his operacyons. The saued shall haue Ioye on all partes. Fyrst they shall ha¦ue Ioye aboue them of god yt they shall be∣holde / & of the grete glory that shal procede of hȳ. For Dauyd sayth in the psalter. Ex¦celsus dn̄s et super celos gloria eius. Et ap∣pocali. vii. Iusti sūt an̄ thronum dei / et ser¦uiūt ei. &c. Sequitur. Qui sedet in throno habitat super illos. The lorde is lyfte vp & the glory of hym is aboue the heuens. Also the Iust ben before ye throne of god & serue hȳ. And it foloweth. He the whiche sytteth on the throne abydeth vpon them. Also the saued shall fe god clerely face to face in his grete honour and in his grete glory infyny¦te / wherby they shall be replenysshed with all Ioyes. Ysaie. xxiii. Begem in decore suo videbūt. It is wryten. i. ad corin. xiii. Vi∣demus nūc per speculū et in enigmata / tūc autem facie ad faciem videbim{us}. Also in se¦ynge hym clerely there they shall take par¦fyte delectacyon & loue / and they shall loue hym so perfytely yt they shall neuer leue hȳ and they shall not go agaynst his wyll / in suche wyse that they shal haue sure holdyn¦ge. Augustinus dicit. Videbimus / amabi∣mus / et laudabimus. Also in beholdynge this fayre myroure the whiche is god they shall se all them of paradyse / and of hell / & so they shall drawe & take of the fountayne of scyence and sapyence soo strongely that they shall knowe the thynges past / present & some to come. And also they shall knowe all the persones of paradyse / those the whi¦che they neuer sawe as the other and theyr name / and what they were / and of what o¦peracyons and merytes. &c. Too speke of this mater to moche forthe it is not good. And for bycause that the wyse Salamon sayth prouerb. xxv. Sicut qui comedit mel multū non est ei bonū sic qui scrutator est maiestatis opprimetur a gloria. In lykewi¦se as it is not good vnto him yt eteth moch hony / in lykewyse to hym the whiche is to enquyre of the mageste shall be put from ye glory. And sayd Poule yt was rauisshed vn¦too the thyrde heuen & in paradyse as it is wryten ii. ad corint. xii. Audiuit archana verba que non licet homini loqui. And also he sayth ad ro. xii. Dico oībus qui sunt int{ur} vos non plus sapere {quam} oportet sapere / sed sapere ad sobrietatē et vnicui{que} sicut de{us} di¦uisit mansurā fidei. I say vnto al them the whiche ben amonge you / ne sauour ye noo more than it nedeth to sauour / but sauour ye vnto sobrenes / & vnto euery one as god hath deuysed the measure of ye faythe. And Cathon sayth. Mitte archana dei celum{que} inquirere quid sit. Cū sis mortalis que sunt mortalia cura. That is to saye. Leue to en∣quyre the secretes of god / as what thynge is the heuen / syth thou arte mortall haue in thyn herte those thynges that ben mortal¦les. Also the saued shall haue Ioye vnder them to se the tourmentes & paynes of hel from the whiche they shall be preserued & kept / & in suche wyse to haue passed & auoy¦ded the daunger of the worlde wherin they were whan they lyued. Also they shal haue Ioye by them to be assocyate wt so grete no¦ble / & amyable company / as in the compa∣ny of aungelles & sayntes of paradyse / the whiche shall be so fayre / clere / shynynge / a ourned / elegaunt / & amyables / than there ne is tonge yt it may declare ne entendemēt comprehende. It is wrytē apo. vii. Vidit turbā magnam quā dinumerare nemo po¦terat ex omnibus tribubus populus et lin∣guis. etcetera. Saynt Iohan in the appo∣calypse sayth. I sawe a grete turbe or mul∣tytude of people the whiche no man might esteme ne nombre of all lygnages / peoples & tongues. Also more ouer we fynde yt it is
wryten in the gospell yt they shall be sem∣blables vnto aungelles. Vn̄ mar. xii. Cum a mortuis resurrexerint ne{que} nubent / ne{que} nubentur sed sūt sicut angeli dei in celo. Al¦so the place of paradyse is soo fayre pure / & clene / & delectable yt a man ne may take sy¦mylytude ne cōparayson: ne yt entendemēt may comprehende / wherfore it is better to holde my peas than to speke vnduely. The good Thoby sayth in his .xiii. chapy. Bea∣tus ero si fuerīt reliquie seminis mei ad vi∣dendū claritatem iherusalē. I shall be blys¦sed vpon the relykes of my sede whan they shall se the clerenes of Iherusalem / that is paradyse. And in the sayd place of paradise the whiche is pure & clene there shal no per¦sone entre yf he be not well purged & made clene from all spotte of synne / as it is wry∣ten apoca. xxi. Non intrabit aliquid coinqi natū et faciens mendatiū et abhominatio∣nem: Also the saued shall haue Ioye moche meruaylous in themselfe that they shall se themselfe so fayre / bryght / and shynynge. Also of that yt they shall be so swyft / subtyl¦les / immortalles / and impassybles. &c. Also they shal be in the place of peas / bounte / be¦aute / loue / honoure / lyfe / lyght / franchyse / suerte / swetenes / rychesse / helthe / concorde dysporte / wysdome / rest / glory / Ioye / glad¦nesse / they shall haue peas without warre ne dyuisyon. Vn̄ ysaie. xxii. Sedebit pplus meus in pulchritudine pacis & in taberna∣culis fiducie & in requie opulenta. My peo∣ple shall sytte in the beaute of peas / in ye ta¦bernacles of fyaunce / in rest / habondaunt in goodes. They shal haue bounte without ony malice / synne / cryme / ne blame. Quia cū sūmo bono non potest intrare malū. Al∣so they shall haue beaute wtout foulenesse. Quia iusti florebunt sicut sol in regno pr̄is eorum. vt legit{ur} math̄. xiii. And the prophete Ysaie sayth. Ysaie. xxx. Eret lux lune sicut lux solis / et lux solis septēplicit{ur} sicut lux sep¦tem dierū. The Iust shall flourysshe as the sonne in the realme of theyr fader. That is to vnderstande that after the Iugement yt lyght of the moone shall be as clere as the sonne is nowe / and the sonne shal be seuen tymes clerer than it is at this tyme / wher∣fore the Iust shall be moche clere and fayre And saynt Poule sayeth ad philip. iii. Sal∣uatorē expectam{us} dn̄m nr̄m ihesū x{pre}m qui reformabit corp{us} humilitatis nostre cōfigu¦ratū corpori claritatis sue. We abyde ye sa∣uyour our lorde Iesu cryst the whiche shal reforme the body of our humylyte confygu¦red vnto the body of his clerenes. Also they shall haue strength without debylyte or fe∣blenes. Quia mutabūt fortitudinē in forti¦tudinē diuinā. Vn̄ psal. Dn̄s fortitudople bis sue. The saued shall chaunge theyr strē¦gthe in to strength dyuyne. Also our lorde is the strength of his people. They shall be so stronge that al that they wyll do god vn¦to them shall gyue ye puyssaunce / so yt they shall be as all puyssauntes / but they wyl no¦thȳge do but yt it please vnto god. Also they shal haue perfyte Dyleccyon the one with ye other without hate / enuy / rancoure / ne yll wyll so that theyr sayd loue shall be so con∣fermed togyders that they shall enioy thē of the good dedes, of theyr neyghbours as yf it were vnto themselfe. It is an excellēt goodnes as to be assocyate with so amya∣ble a company & to be of suche fraternyte & amyte the whiche is in god & after hym. Al¦so the sayntes shall haue honour praysyng without shame ne dyshonour. Vnde psal. Nimis honorati sicut amiti tui deus. God thi frendes ben moche honoured. Also they shal haue lyfe wtout dethe. For it is wryten sapientie .v. Iusti autem in perpetuum viuent / et apud dominum est merces eorū Et sapient e. iii. Iustorum anime in manu dei sunt et non tanget illos tormentum mortis. The iust people shall lyue and be
in perpetuite / and theyr rewarde is anenst our lorde. Also the soules of the Iust ben in the handes of our lorde / & the tourment of dethe shall not touche them. Also they shal haue lyght & day without derkenes / night without obscurete. Vn̄ psal. Lux orta est iu¦sto. Et appoca. xxi. Ciuitas illa nō indiget sole / ne{que} luna vt luceat in ea. Nā claritas dei illuminabit illam. The cyte of paradyse hath noo nede of the sonne ne of the moone there for to shyne / for the clerenesse of god shall enlumyne it. Also they shal haue fraū¦chyse / lyberte without subgeccyon ne seruy¦tude. Vn̄ ad ro. viii. Creatura liberat{ur} a ser¦uitute corruptionis ī libertatē glie filiorum dei. Also they shall haue suerte wtout drede Vn̄ iohan. xv. Gaudiū vr̄m nemo tollit a vobis. No man shall take frome you your Ioye. Et aug. dicit. Qd ibi erit sūma securi¦tas / secura tranquilitas / trāquilla / iocūdi∣tas / iocūda felicitas / etna beatitudo. In pa¦radyse shall be souerayne surete / sure tran∣quylyte / ioyouste / felycyte / debonayre eter¦nyte / & eternall beatytude. Also they shall haue swetenes on all partes without byt∣ternesse. Vn̄ psal. Quā magna multitudo dulcedinis tue dn̄e quā abscondisti timenti¦bus te. O lorde how grete is the multytude of thy swetenes the whiche thou hast hidde vnto those that drede the. Also they shall ha¦ue rychesse spyrytuall & habondaunce of al goods celestyalles wtout pouerte. Vn̄ psal. Glia et diuitie in domo ei{us}. Vn̄ psal. Re∣plebimur in bonis dom{us} tue. Glory and ry¦chesse in the hous of god yt is in paradyse. Also we shall be replenysshed wt the godes of thy hous. Also they shall haue helthe wt∣out sekenes. Vn̄ appo. xxi. Absterget de{us} oēm lachrimarū ab oculis sanctorū et iam non erit ampli{us} / ne{que} luctus / ne{que} clamor / ne{que} vll{us} dolor. &c. God shall wype awaye all the teeres from the eyen of his sayntes / and there shall be no more wepynge / ne cla¦mour / ne ony dolour. Also they shall haue concorde without dyscorde / for that yt the one wyll the other wylleth it / suche concor¦de shall be bytwene them as there is betwe¦ne the two eyen whan the one torneth the other torneth also incontynent. Also they shall haue dysporte without enoy. Augusti¦n{us}. Sine fine videbit{ur} deus / sine fastidio a∣mabit{ur} / sine fatigatiōe laudabitur. Et psal. Mille anni an̄ oculos tuos tan{quam} dies he∣sterna que preterut. God shal se wtout ende he shall be beloued without anoye / he shall be praysed & lauded without beynge wery. Also a thousāde yeres before thy eyen shall be in lykewyse as the day of yesterday yt is paste. Also they shall haue wysdome with∣out foly as it is beforesayd & perfyte know¦lege. Gregorius dicit. Qui claritatē condi∣toris sui conspiciūt nichil ī creatura agitur quod videre non possint. They the whiche beholdeth the clerenes of theyr condytoure nothynge is made but they may se it. Also they shall be in the aege of youthe without oldnes / for in the aege that our lorde was crucifyed. Ad ephesios. iiii. Resurgent oēs in mensurā etatis plēitudinis christi. They shall haue rest without labour. Appoc. xiiii. Amodo iam dicit spiritus vt requiescant a laboribus suis. Also they shall haue glory and gladnesse eternal without ende in lyke¦wyse as sayth these scriptures in many pla¦ces. Vnde psalmista. Exultabūt sancti in gloria. The sayntes shall enioye theym in glory. Et legitur Iohannes .xvi. Tristicia vestra vertetur in gaudium. Your heuines shal torne in to Ioye. Et legit{ur} Ysaie. xxxv Gaudiuin & leticiam obtinebūt. The sayn¦tes shall haue and obtayne Ioye and glad∣nesse in paradise. Vnto the whiche we may go cū ille qui est benedictus in secula seculo¦rum. Amen. B. ¶Example of a man saued the whiche spake & declared of the Ioyes of paradyse.
It is recyted in the promptuary of the dys¦cyple that there were two monkes the whi¦che spake togyder of the lyfe eternall / and they agreed betwene theym yt the fyrst the whiche deyed of them sholde come agayne to notyfy vnto the other of his estate yf it pleased vnto god. Whan the one was deed he that lyued sorowed & was heuy / and the deed appered to hym clerer than the sonne & he salued hym benygnely. And whan the quycke monke axed hym of the lyfe eternal He answerd. Sicut audiuimus sic vidim{us} quod oculis nō vidit nec auris auditut. &c. In lykewyse as we herde so haue we seen. Neuer eye in the worlde ne sawe / ne ere her¦de / ne in the herte of man ascended ye grete Ioyes yt god hath prepayred vnto theym ye whiche loue hym / whan he had spokē these wordes he departed. C. ¶Another example of a relygious that was .CCC. yere to here a byrde synge. The dyscyple recyteth in his sermons that it is wrytē how a relygyous man ryght deuout requyred of god yt he wolde shewe hȳ some swetenesse of the Ioye celestyall. And on a day as he was in orayson he herde a lytell byrde synge by hym / so he arose fro his pra∣yer & wolde haue taken her / and ye sayd byr¦de flewe vnto the forest the whiche was ne¦re vnto the monastery and set her vpon a tree / and the sayd relygious yode after and rested hym vnder the sayd tree for to here the songe of the sayd byrde or aungell / & af¦ter yt he had songe as moche as pleased god he flewe away. And the sayd relygyous re∣tourned vnto the sayd monastery wenȳge to haue be vnder the sayd tre but the space of an houre or two / and was all abasshed whan he founde the gate of the monastery masoned and stopped & another gate on ye other syde and that he ne knewe the porter ne the relygyous ne abbot / he was axed of whens he was & what he demaūded. And he sayd I a am relygyous of this mona∣stery & parted from hens at suche an hour &c. Than they demaunded the name of the abbot that reygned in that time. He answe¦red he had suche a name. Thā they serched theyr cronycles and they foūde yt he hadde fayled in the sayd monastery and had ben to here the songe of the sayd byrde ye space of .CCC.xl. yeres without hauynge heet ne colde / and without that his vestyments were worne. &c. What swetnes shall they of paradyse haue whan they shall here the songe of all the nyne ordres of aungelles a¦bout the dyuyne magesty. D. ¶Another example of the clerenes of god. It is recited in the promptuary of the dyscyple yt as mayster Iordan frere of the ordre of prechours passed by a towne for to go and preche he was prayed of the people yt he wolde vysyte a woman posseded of the deuyll. And whan he approched ye deuyll sa¦lued hym litterally. And it was so yt the wo¦man had neuer lerned ony lettres. And ye sayd Iordan questyoned the deuyll lytteral¦ly. Wherfore tormentest yu this woman / & wherfore delytest thou to dwell in her. The deuyll answered yt he was constrayned of his creatour there to be / & that he ne might be elles where. And ye sayd Iordan questyo¦ned hym of many thynges amonge ye whi∣che he hym prayed yt he wolde tel hym some thinge of the clerenes of the face of god for yt he had ben in paradyse & had sene it clere¦ly. The deuyll answered Neyther I ne all the aungelles the whiche it beholdeth and ben in paradyse / yf they were here in erthe ne coude tell ony thynge that myght suffy∣se / but I shall tell the some symylytude by the whiche thou mayst vnderstande that his face is clere. And he sayd vnderstande. Yf all the floures of al the herbes and trees of tymes past and to come / and all grene∣nes of all graynes and herbes / and all the
coloures of all the precyous stones / & of all metalles / and the shynynges of the sonne & of the moone / of the sterres / & all the cle∣renes of all lyghtes ye whiche euer dyde shy¦ne to gyue lyght in the erthe / all that clere¦nes sholde be but a derke nyght in regarde of the clerenes of the true sonne the whiche is god. Than mayster iordan sayd. O how vnhappy is that man yt loseth that / and yt geteth not that grete Ioye. &c. A. ¶Also the rewarde of them the whiche well or yll hath enployed theyr .v. wyt∣tes of nature vpon the commaundemē∣tes of god. xlviii. ALso it is wryten. Eccle. xv. Si voluetis mādata {con}seruare con¦seruabunt te. Yf thou hast wyl¦led to kepe the cōmaundemen¦tes of god they shall kepe ye fro hauȳge euyll. And yf thou hast not wylled to kepe them they shall make the to haue punycyon. To consyder well the holy scry∣ptures all those the whiche pretende to go vnto paradyse sholde enploye theyr .v. wyt¦tes of nature vpon ye commaundementes of god. For those the whiche well enploye them in accomplysshynge them shall haue grete retrybucyon in paradyse. Vnde. dd. Etenī seruus tu{us} custodit ea in custodien¦dis illis retributio multa. And those which do vnto the contrary shall be strongely pu¦nysshed in hell. The mouthe of the good yt well hath enquyred / demaunded & taught the sayd commaundementes of god shall laugh & prayse god / they shall enioye them in paradyse. And he yt hath counceyled or commaunded to breke them shall crye and howle & shall be dyscōforted. Vn̄ Ysaie. lxv Hec dicit dn̄s de{us} / ecce serui mei comedēt: et vos esurietis / ecce serui mei bibēt: et vos sitietis / ecce serui mei letabunt{ur}: et vos {con}fū¦dimini / ecce serui mei laudabūt {pre}exultatio ne cordis: et vos clamabitis {pre} dolore cordis et pre cōtritione spūs vllulabitis. My ser∣uauntes shall ete & drynke / not of breed & of wyne / but shal be refeccyoned of my glo¦ry. Vn̄ psal. Satiabor cū apparuerit glia tua. And you dampned shall haue honger & thyrste of my glory. My seruauntes shall enioye them & ye shall be confounded My seruauntes shall prayse me for ye grete Ioy of herte that they haue / and ye shal crye for grete dolour of herte & shall howle for con∣trycyon of spyryte. Also the dampned shal wayle and sorowe as a woman the whiche trauayleth of chylde. Vn̄ Ysaie. xiii. Tor∣tiones & dolores tn̄bunt / quali perturiens dolebunt. ¶Example of Tongdalus that was ledde to se the tourmentes of hel / & af¦terwarde brought agayn in to his body tol¦de that he sawe the soules tourmented wt∣in ye wombe of a cruel beest / & within a pon¦de ysy and frosen the whiche soules cryed so horrybly yt they fylled hell of the noyses & howlynges. &c. Que. C.xi. e. And it is to be noted yt the membre yt hath offēded moost shall be tourmented. Vn̄ ber. In quo mē∣bro creator plus offēdit{ur} in eodē pctōr graui¦us puniet{ur}. The eeres of the good the whi∣che wt good wyll hath herde the worde & ye commaundementes of god shal here in pa¦radyse swetenes of songes & inobrable me∣lodyes. Vn̄ dauid. Quā magna mltitudo dulcidinis tui dn̄e quā abscōdisti timētib{us}¦te. And the eeres of the cursed shall here in hell brayenge / cryenge / howlynge / & grete tempestes of people out of witte & enraged for the grete tourmentes of hell / of the whi¦che shall be wryten here after. Que. xlix. B The eyes of the good the which hath behol¦den to do & accomplysshe the sayd cōmaun¦dementes shall be enlumyned & clere shall se god / the holy places / & all delytes & boun¦tees. And those of the cursed yt hath loued
to se dauncynge or folysshe vanytees shall be blȳded in suche maner yt they shal neuer se Ioyes ne bountees / ne thynges the whi∣che may comforte them / but somtime they shall se the thynge the whiche may tormēt them. Also theyr eyen shall wepe and theyr tethe shall grynde and gnasshe for the an∣guysshes that they fele sayth god in the go¦spell. Math. xxii. Ibi erit flet{us} et stridor dē¦tiū. ¶Example of a soule yt bewept the ty∣me yt it had lost. It is writen in the boke of drede yt as an holy man was in orayson he herde by the wyll of god a voyce horrybly wepynge. He demaunded who it was yt in suche wyse wepte. The answere was gyuē yt sayd. I am a soule damned / & he demaū∣ded. Wherfore wepest yu so horrybly. He an¦swered & sayd / one of the thynges wherfo∣re I & all the dampned wayle moost for is for that yt they haue lost & wasted vnprouf¦fytably the tyme of grace in sinne where in one houre by repentaūce they myght haue goten grace & escaped ye tourmentes wher¦in they ben & shall be eternally. &c. ¶Ano¦ther example of a woman dampned that had two todes in her eyen for the folysshe lokes yt she had made. Quere. lxxxx. A. The nose of the good shall smell good odoures / and those of the cursed foule stynkes. The hertes of the good shall enioye them so gre¦tely of the grete Ioyes that they haue that they ne shall cease to prayse god. And vnto the contrary the hertes of the yll shall be so sory & soo wrothe of ye tourmentes & of the contrycyon yt they haue that with hye voy∣ce theyr mouthes shal cry as before is sayd in the auctoryte prealeged. Ysaie. lxv. Ser¦ui mei. &c. Also the hertes of the dampned the whiche hath thought the synnes & takē delectacion ne shall thȳke but vpon payne & dolour. Vn̄ hiero. Tāta erit ī īferno vis doloris {quod} me{us} aut aliud dirigi non poterit / nisi ad qd vis doloris īpulerit. The fete the handes / & the body of the good shall haue lyberte & fraunchyse to renne by the clemē¦tes & places where it shall seme them good & vnto goddes pleasure. Vn̄ sapi. iii. Iust florebūt sicut sol / et tan{quam} scintilem arūd∣neto discurrēt. And those of the yll shall be in the derkenesses of hell bounde / not with cordes but with the dyuyne Iustyce wtout power to remeue / ne to ayde / ne to auoyde ye place for to go from one place to another Vn̄ math̄. xxii. Ligat{us} manib{us} et pedib{us} proucite enim / scʐ impiū in tn̄bras exterio∣res / ibi erit fletus et gridor dētiū. Cast the synner in to derkenes exteryoures the fere & the handes bounde. wepynge & gryndyn¦ge of tethe shall be there. For to be shorte ye dampned shall be so tourmented that they shall desyre ye dethe & shal seche it / but they shall not fynde it / it shall fle from them / & they may neuer deye. Vn̄ apo. ix. In die∣bus illis querēt hoēs mortem et non īuenie rat eā / et desiderabūt mori et mors fugies ab eis. By these thinges before spoken it ap¦pereth yt the pylgrymes of paradyse yt whi¦che hath well enployed theyr fyue wyttes of nature vpon the commaūdementes of god shal haue Ioye & retrybucyon in those fyue wyttes of nature. And the pylgryms of hell the whiche hath dysobeyed vnto the commaundementes of god shalll haue pay¦nes and tourmētes eternally in theyr sayd wittes of nature. And therfore it is a good thynge to labour in the way of paradyse / & to fle that of hell. ¶Example of a woman moche tourmented in hell in her fyue wyt∣tes of nature. Quere in the examplarye. B. ¶The maledyccyons & excommunyca¦cions of those yt whiche haue dysobeyed vnto god and the chyrche. xlviii
IT is wryten eccle. xli. ca. Ve vo¦bis viri impii qui dereliquistis le∣gē dei altissimi. Ye men yt whiche haue forsaken and lefte the lawe of the ryght hye god maledyccy∣on is vnto you. And it is wryten in ye fyrst of the prophete Ysaie. Ve genti peccatrici pplo graui iniqitate / semini ne{quam} / filiis cela¦ritatis. That is to say. Maledyccyon vnto people syn̄ers / vnto people greuous of iny¦quyte / vnto the cursed sede / vnto the chyl∣dren synners. What is that maledyccyon. Maledyccyon is pryuacyon from benedyc¦cyon / & from all spyrytuall goodnes & asso¦cyacyon with all yll. And whan a persone loueth / serueth & obeyeth more soner vnto the deuyll than vnto god he is moche acur¦sed / or whan he leueth god for to folowe ye deuyll / or whan he hath loued ye euyls / the syn̄es / & the cursednesses / & that he leueth the good dedes / the vertues / & operacions Vn̄ psal. Dilexit maledictionē & veniet ei et noluit bn̄dictionē et elōgabit{ur} ab eo. The persone yt dyobeyeth vnto the commaun∣dementes of god loueth maledyccyon and it shall come vnto hym. And he hath not wylled to haue benedyccyon and it is elon¦ged from hym & shall be pryued from pa∣radyse & from the company of the blyssed sayntes of paradyse. Vn̄. i. ad corīthios. vi. Ne{que} maledicti regnū dei possidebūt. For to speke of excommunicacion & of maledic¦cyon it behoueth to se foure thynges. The fyrst is wherfore a man is excommunicate The seconde the maners how ony renneth in the lesse excommunycacion. The thyrde how he renneth in the grete excommuny∣cacion by sentence of the Iuge. The fourth by sentence of ryght wryten. C. ¶As vnto the fyrst. Yf thou demaunde wherfore a persone is excōmunycate. The answer. It is wryten in the droit that excō¦munycacyō ne shold be brought in but for mortall synne. Excōmunicati nō nisi pro mortali culpa affligi debet. Vt habet{ur}. xi. d. iii. ca. Nemo episcorū. And whan ony is cyted of offyce & that he is excomunyed by the defaute of none apparaunce at a daye that is for the synne of inobedyence / for he sholde obey vnto ye chyrche & there answer We ben all membres vnto the chyrche vn¦to the whiche we sholde obeye. Also whan ony is a thefe / fornicatour or synner and yt he ne dredeth to offende god by synne he is excommunycate by medycyne for to gyue hym shame & drede / that is yt he knowlege his faute and yt he haue soo grete shame to be separate that he hym correcteth & amen¦deth. Excōmunycacyon cast of wronge or of ryght is to drede / for suche weneth not to be accursed yt is. ¶Example of two mē the whiche gelded them at theyr aduyse in good intencyon / for the whiche thyng they were excōmunicate / as it is wryten in thex¦amplary. lxxxix. F. D. ¶As vnto the seconde thynge a man sholde vnderstande that some renne in the lesse excommunycacyon incontynent that he companyeth wytyngly with one excom¦munyed agaynst the defence the whiche is made openly of the chyrche / as for to speke to drynke to ete / to come too chapytre. &c. This excommunycacion separateth from the sacramentes of the chyrche. For ye per∣sone excōmunycate of this excōmunycaciō ne sholde in suche estate receyue none of ye sacramentes and the defaute not fyrst as∣soyled in confessyon of that excōmunycacy¦on as of other synnes in saynge. Absoluo¦te a sententia minoris excōmunicationis. But the preste that hath puyssaunce to as∣soyle that persone of mortall synne a man may assoyle. It is sayd the lesse / for how be it that it pryuateth from the sacramentes it ne separateth from entrynge into ye chyr¦che / & to company wt other persones.
E. ¶As to the thyrde a man sholde knowe that the grete excommunycacyon the whi¦che is of the sentence of the Iuge wryten & sealed separateth the persone excommuny¦cate from the sacramentes / from entrȳge in to the chyrche / & from the company of al faythfull crysten people. It is moche to dre¦de for many thinges. Fyrst for that / yt these excōmunyed ben cursed of god the fader / yt sone / & ye holy goost. For that / yt the chyrche mylytaunt curseth & byndeth it is also cur∣sed and bounde of all the blyssed trynyte. Vn̄ math̄. xvi. Quodcū{que} ligaueris super terrā / exit ligatū & in celis. Also they ben ta¦ken & delyuered vnto the deuyll as saynt Poule betoke a fornycatour / & as men fin¦de in wrytynge. Also they shall be separate from the company & cōmunycacyon of the faythful crysten people as lazers / or lepres infecte & corrupt not worthy to be amonge the other / & pryuate from the partycypaciō of all the masses / prayers / oraysons / almes dedes / & from all the other good dedes of ye chyrche without power in suche estate to re¦ceyue ony of the sacramentes / ne to be bu∣ryed in holy grounde the whiche is a grete infame / to be buryed as a dombe beest / wt∣out solempnyte / wtout prayer / & oraysons / not worthy to ēhabyte ne to be in holy groū¦de & blyssed. Also they ben as a membre cut & separate from the body yt taketh no parte of the good of yt sayd body. Where they ben as a bough or a braunche cut from the tree the whiche dryeth & is no more worthe for nothynge than to brenne. Vn̄ io. xv. Ego sum vitis vos palmites / sicut palmes non potest ferre fructū a semetipso nisi manse∣rit in vite sic nec vos nisi in me manseritis Also a man may well speke with a lepre wt¦out ony synne ne daunger / the whiche thȳ∣ge a man may not do with one that is excō¦munyed / his company is more daūgerous than that of a serpent. For as to company and habyte with a serpent a man synneth not mortally ne dampneth his soule / as he dooth with a persone excommunyed. Also one excommunyed dysobeysaunt vnto god & vnto the chyrche is cursed in his body / in his membres / & in his goodes and fruytes and he bereth maledyccion wt hym in al pla¦ces / and in all stedes where he entreth and abydeth. Vnderstande the scryptures & go seche them in the chapytres the whiche fo∣lowe. It is wryten deutero. xxviii. ca. Si audire nolueritis verbum domini dei tui vt custodias et facias omnia mandata ei{us} / ve¦nient super te om̄s maledictiones iste & ap¦prehendent te. Maledictus eris in ciuitate maledictus eris in agro / maledictū horreū tuum / et maledicte reliquie tue / maledict{us} fructus ventris tui / et fructus terretue / ar menta boum tuorū / et greges ouiū tuarum maledictus eris ingrediens / et maledictus egrediens / mittet dominus super te famen et esuriem / & increpationē in oīa opera tua que facies dnec conterat te & {per}dat te velo¦citer propter adinuentiones tuas pessimus in quibus reliquisti me / plura alia mala po¦nuntur ibi. &c. That is to say. Yf thou wylt not here the voyce of thy lorde god to then¦de that thou do & kepe all his cōmmaunde¦mentes all these maledyccyons the whiche foloweth shall come vpon the & shal take yt Thou shalt be cursed in the cyte / thou shalt be cursed in the felde / thy garner shal be cur¦sed / thy relykes shall be cursed / the fruyte of thy wombe shall be cursed / and the fruy¦te of thy erthe shall be cursed / & the fruyte of thy kyen / shepe / and bestyall / thou shalt be cursed in goynge in / & in goynge out of all places. God shal sende vpon the hongre pouerte / blame / reproche in all thyn opera∣cions that thou shalt do tyll vnto that that he putte the oute hastely for the synnes that thou hast founde / for the whiche thou haste lefte god. ¶Example how the floure
of an apple tree falleth / dryeth / and leseth the beaute incontynent that it is excōmu∣nyed for a portous the whiche was in the sayd apple tree. Quere. lxxxix. D. By this example a man sholde vnderstand that ye soule of ye thefe excommunicate the whiche had stolen ye sayd portous was in yl poynt whan the floures toke parte of his maledic¦cyon. ¶Another example of breed fayre & whyte the whiche was incontynent blacke & musty as it was excommunyed. Quere. lxxxix. A. In shewynge the yll yt is wtin the persone excommunycate. Dauyd the pro∣phete sayth in the psal. Increpasti su{per}bos maledicti qui declinant a mandatis tuis. thou hast blamed those yt ben proude / they ben cursed the whiche declyneth from thy commaundementes. And it is wryten in the seconde chapytre of the prophete Mal¦chyas. Yf thou wylt not here my commaū¦dementes sayth god / & also yf ye wyll not put in your herte yt ye gyue glory vnto my name I shall sende you honger / pouerte / & curse vnto your benedyccyons. And it is wryten Ysaie. iii. ca. Ve impio in malum. Maledyccyon vnto the cursed synne in yll And it is wryten in the .x. chapytre of Iob Yf I be yll maledyccion is vnto me. ¶Ex¦ample of a fader & of his sone the whiche curied eche other in hell. Quere in the exā¦plarye. lxxi. Also theues / coueytous / auary¦cyous / pyllers / & false tythers / and many other people dysobeyeng vnto god ben cur¦sed and excommunyed in lykewise as these scryptues sayen. It is wryten in the secon¦de chapytre of the prophete Abacuch. Ma∣ledyccion vnto hym the whiche assembleth cursed auaryce in to his hous / to thende yt his nest be on hy / & he weneth to be delyue¦red from the hande of euyll. And it is wry∣ten in the .v chapytre of Ysaie. Maledyccy¦on vnto youthe whiche assembleth hous wt hous / & couple felde wt felde. Ye sholde not enhabyte you all alone in the myddle of the erthe. And it is wryten in the .xxiiii. chapy∣tre of Ysaie. Maledyccyon vnto ye that pyl¦lest / for thou shall be pylled. And it is wry∣ten in ye .vi. chapytre of the gospels of saynt Luke. Maledyccyon vnto you yt be ryche the whiche haue in this worlde consolacion for yf ye deye in suche wyse without cōtry¦cyon & amendement the ende shall be yll in desolacyon. ¶Example how the deuyl dre¦we the soule from ye body of a cursed ryche man wt an hoke. Quere. C. v. a. ¶Another example how Chore. Dathan. and Abiron descended into hell hosed & cladde for that they murmured & dysobeyed vnto god / & vnto Moyses in lykewyse as it is wryten in thexamplary. Quere. liiii. H. ¶Another example for that yt Adam dysobeyed vnto god the erthe was cursed in his operacyon Quere. liiii. a. ¶Another exāple how cayn was cursed for that / yt he slewe his broder Abell and also he tythed yll. Quere. lxxvi. a F. ¶As vnto the fourthe thynge that spe∣keth of persones excōmunyed by sentence of ryght. A man sholde vnderstande not al onely those the whiche ben denounced by ye cōmaundemente of the bysshoppes / prela∣tes / and Iuges ben excōmunyed of ye grete excommunicacion / but also in many cases after the droit canon some fall in the grete excommunycacyon. Also many sentences ben wryten in droit canon the whiche hath ben ordeyned by popes and counceyloures vpon them the whiche cōmytteth ony syn∣nes determyned. And the persones yt whi∣che commytteth the synnes ben excommu¦nyed ipso facto / but the curates sholde not put them out of the chyrche tyll that they ben declared of the Iuge for some causes ye whiche ben not here wrytē. And for as mo¦che as those sentences the whiche ben wry¦ten in droit canon sholde be to longe to wry¦te / many shall abyde for to fle the lengthe
and some the whiche hath ben drawen fro the sayd ryghtes here foloweth. Fyrst these heretykes & lollers ye whiche beleue / sustay¦ne / and touche ony thynge agaynst the ar∣tycles of the faythe ben excōmunyed by sē¦tence of ryght. Also al those the whiche put¦teth faythe & credence vnto the sayd here∣tykes in reputynge theym to be good & to haue good faythe. Also those the whiche de¦fende them in worde & in dede ben also ex∣communied. Also those the whiche putteth in holy grounde the sayd heretykes & theyr alies by credence / or those the whiche them hath receyued and defended ben also exco∣munyed / & sholde not not haue the benety∣ce of absolucyon / yf they ne vnbury them wt theyr owne handes. Also yf ony say that the chyrche of Rome is not ye heed and that he wyll not obey it / or yf he say yt it ne may ordeyne the canons / suche is an heretyke excōmunyed by sentēce of ryght. Also tho∣se the whiche false or make to false yt lettres of the pope / & those the whiche them sustay¦ne & defende ben excommunyed. Also those the whiche falseth the lettre or seale of a car¦dynall is excōmunyed. Also those ye whiche gyueth lettynge vnto messagers & ambas∣sadours of the holy syege appostolycal ben excommunyed (i{pre}e facto). Also ydolatres / wytches / inuocatours of the deuyll / & they the whiche hym demaundeth his helpe and wylle haue his aliaunce / or the whiche ma∣keth couenaunt wt hym / or those the which vnto hym do sacryfyce / or yt worshyp hym And those the whiche vnto hym dooth ho¦mage or honour / or that demaundeth an∣swere of ony demaunde / suche people ben excommunyed of dede by sentence of right Of this mater thou shalte fynde many ex¦amples in the nombre .lviii. & .lix. Also they the whiche putteth vyolently the handes on prestes / relygyous / & clerkes ben excom¦munyed. And yf there be (atroci) yt is hurte enorme it is a case reserued vnto the pope. Also those they the whiche stryketh no cler¦ke / but by theyr commaundement be stry∣ken and with holden ben also excōmunyed Also those the whiche ben ye cause or ye whi∣che giue the counceyle to ayde or put ye han¦des on clerkes ben excōmunyed. Also those the whiche ne counceyleth ne cōmaundeth but after that the dede is done ben agrea∣bles ben excommunyed. Also a relygyous that leueth folysshely the habyte of his rely¦gyon is excōmunyed and apostate. Also ye mōkes and chanons & regulers the whiche hath not of admynystracion the whiche go & gyue them vnto courtes of prȳces wtout hauynge ony lycence especyall of theyr pre¦lates / yf they do ony domages vnto theyr sayd prelates and monasteryes in the sayd courtes where they ben betaken / the texte sayth that in yt dede they renne in sentence of excommunycacion. Also all relygyous yt whiche brynge forthe wytyngly ony thyn∣ges in theyr predycacyons or elleswhere to thende that they withdrawe the auditours & herers to pay the tythes ben excōmunied And those relygyous the whiche sayth vn∣to them that go to confessyon vnto those yt sholde make conscyence to haue payed the tythe sholde be suspended from the offyce of predycacyon tyll yt they haue made cōscy¦ence & that they haue sayd vnto those con∣fessed yt they haue not well counceyled not for to pay the sayd tythes yf they may fyn¦de them ne to haue the oportunyte. And af¦terwarde yf they were wtout repentaunce & that they presume to preche the sayd ne∣clygence / they ben excōmunyed by senten∣ce of ryght (ipse facto). Also a clerke ye whi∣che knoweth carnally his concubine that is opēly excōmunyed / for that yt he departeth not from the sayd concubyne is excōmuny¦cate. Vt habet{ur} extra de sen. ex. ca. Si concu¦bine. Also those the whiche maketh fraccyō
in a chyrche / or the whiche it brenneth ben excommunyed. Also those the whiche dra∣weth ony persone vyolently out of the chyr¦che the whiche thyder was comē for to wa¦raunt hym ben excōmunyed. Also those the whiche gone ayenst the lybertees of ye chyr¦che / or the whiche makth to kepe oni custo¦mes agaynst the sayd lyberte ben excōmu∣nyed. Also the rectours of the chyrches the whiche taketh away suche customes ayēst the sayd lyberte / and it may defende abate and do it not ben excommunyed. Also the lordes temporalles whiche constreyne ony to synge the thynges dyuynes in places in¦terdyted / or the whiche dyffendeth that the persones excōmunyed openly go not forth of the chyrche whan he that syngeth masse them commaundeth or maketh to tel them ben excōmunycate. And those the which bē named excōmunyed yf they go not out of ye chyrche aggreueth them in greter excōmu¦nycacyon. Also those the whiche steleth the oblacyons from the auter / some say yt they ben to be excōmunyed. Also those the whi∣che buryeth in a chyrchyarde enterdited / or the whiche buryeth those yt ben excōmuny∣ed openly or inderdyted named by worde expresse. Or those the whiche buryeth vsu∣rers the whiche ben open & the whiche wyl not restore the vsuryes / suche people ben ex¦communyed. Also false makers of money the whiche falseth the kynge coyne of En∣glonde / or those the whiche bereth false mo¦ney for to deceyue other ben excōmunyca∣tes in that dede. For to shorte this mater al persones the whiche ben cursed and excom¦munyed shall be dampned & sent in to the fyre and tourment of hel yf they so deye wt¦out absolucyon / correccyon / & amendemēt Thou arte cursed & excommunyed I put the case / than thou shalt be dampned & sēt in to the fyre of hell yf yu correct the not. Vn̄ athana. Qui mala egerūt ibūt ī ignē et{ur}nū. vel sic. They shall be strongly cursed yt shall haue lyke sentence / punycion: & dāpnacion as the deuyl of hell. They the whiche breke the cōmaundementes of god shall haue ly¦ke sentence & punycion as ye deuyls yf they deye impenytentes. Than they shal be mo¦che accursed. Vn̄ mat. xxv. Discedite a me maled: cti in ignē et{ur}nū qui parat{us} est dyabo¦lo et angel{us} ei{us}. This sentēce that god shal caste at the day of Iugement vpon the dā∣ned cōteyneth .vi. clauses. ¶The fyrst clau¦se is vnderstande by (discedite a me) ye whi¦che is that god shall departe & shal sende ye euyll out of his company / the whiche shall be vnto them a terryble thynge for to here For after yt they shall be departed they shal be put from the vysyon of god / yt is yt they shal neuer se hym ne his sayntes. The secō¦de clause is to vnderstande by this worde (maledicti) the whiche is yt god shall caste his grete fulmynacyon / excōmunycacion / and maledyccion vpon the dampned. The thyrde is vnderstande by this preposicion (in) the whiche god shall assygne / lodge / & put ye synners wtin the prysons of hell. The fourth clause is vnderstande by this worde (ignem) the whiche is ye god shal put them in possession of a terryble tourment that is the fyre that shall brenne them for the ylles that they haue done. The .v. is vnderstāde by (eternū) the whiche shall make the yll to dyspayre / for after yt they ben entred in to hell they shall neuer go forthe / ne neuer ha∣ue grace / mercy / helpe / socoures / ne cōfort For in hell shall be theyr bedde / hous / and dwellynge. The .vi. is (qui parat{us} est diabo¦lo et angelis eius). That is yt the dampned shal be assocyate & assembled to be in hel pu¦nysshed with the deuylles. ¶Example of a cursed ryche man that brente in the fyre of hell .lxxxiiii. A. Other examples of peo∣ple excōmunyed Quere .lxxxix. f. g. h.
A. ¶Of the punycyon eternall that those the whiche haue broken the commaun∣dements of god shall haue. xlix. DAuyd the prophete sayth in the psalter the wordes of god. Si iusticias meas prophanauerīt impii et mandata mea non cu¦stodierint vilitabo in virga ini¦quitates eorum et in verberib{us} peccata eo∣rum. Yf the cursed synners hathe taken in scorne my Iustyces & that they haue not ke¦pte my commaūdementes I shall vesyte theyr inyquytees in a rodde and in strykyn¦ge theyr syn̄es. Creatures reasonables we sholde obey to do that yt god wylleth & cō∣maundeth for the loue hym the whiche is full of bounte infynyte / & of drede to haue punycyon and dampnacyon eternall. For it is a thynge certayne that euery man yt synneth mortally in brekynge one or many of the commaundemētes of god by delybe¦racyon. And yf in suche wyse he deye impe¦nytent / obstynate & arested that he shal be put from paradyse & sent in to the fyre and tourments of hell wtout ony remyssyon as is beforesayd. Thou hast commyted theft or lechery / or broken ony cōmaūdemente / I put the case & so thou deyest impenytent Than thou shalt be brought in to the fyre of hel the whiche is a tourment moch cruel Vnde appo. xx. Qui non est inuentus ī li∣bro vite scriptus missus est in stagnum ig¦nis. He that is not foūde wryten in ye boke of lyfe is sente in to the ponde of fyre bren∣nynge. And Athanaise in the psalme of qui cū{que}. Qui mala egerūt ibunt in ignem et{ur}∣num. Those the whiche haue doone euyll & synne in theyr lyues shall go in to the fyre eternall yf they deyen impenytentes. Vn̄ luce. xiii. Nisi penitenciam habueritis om∣nes simul peribitis. None of vs ne wolde be brent / ne broyled / ne cast in a fyre bren∣nynge there for to dwell / and soo to abyde without euer goynge forth. And it is a thȳ¦ge certayne that all those and they ye which deye in mortall synne impenytentes / obsty¦nate and arested shall be sent in to the fyre of hell by the sentence before wryten. Ite maledicti in ignem eternum. And shall be constrayned there for to dwell and there to holde them wyll they or not. God shall not spare them at the daye of vengeaunce the prayers shall do nothynge / ne the wrathe / ne the golde ne the syluer / ne gyftes / ne pro¦mysses. Vnde prouerbio. vi. Zelus et furor viri non parcit dominus in die vindicte nec acquiescet cuius{quam} precibus nec suscipiet {pro} redemptione dona plurima. Also he yt whi∣che hath broken one of the commaundemē¦tes of god shall be dampned and put from paradyse / for it as for many yf he be deed impenytent without correccion and amen¦dement / for he hath be transgressoure of ye lawe. And god wolde that that the whiche he hathe broken were as well kepte as all ye other. Vnde iacobi. ii. Quicun{que} autem to¦tam legem seruauerit offendat autem in vno factum est omnium reus. Qui enim di¦cit. Non mechaberis / dixit et non occides: {quod} si non mechaberis occides autem / factus es transgressor legis. &c. Also he the which hath broken the commaundement of god shall fele terryble dolours at his dethe in ly¦kewyse as a man shall fynde in the exam∣plary where it speketh of the dethe of euyll persones. And fyrst. ¶Example how ye de∣uyll drewe the soule from the body of a cur¦sed ryche man with an hoke. Quere in the examplary. C.v. A. B. ¶A questyon. Who so sholde demaun∣de what is or shall be the fyre of hell where vnto the sayd inobedyentes shall be al sent The answere is after the holy scryptures that it doth deferre in many of maners vn¦too that fyre of this presente worlde here.
Primo that of this presente worlde dothe gyue clerenes  & that the whiche is of hell is blacke / obscure / & tenebrous the whiche gy¦ueth no lyght vnto no consolacyō. And by somtimes it casteth lyght but it is for to gy¦ue more greter tourmentes / payne / drede / and desolacyon. Saynt Gregory sayth in his moralles. Hic flamma que succendet il¦luminat illic / ignis qi cruciat obscurat. The flambe the whiche brenneth in this worlde gyueth lyght / & the fyre that tourmenteth in hell waxeth derke. Secundo the fyre of this worlde quencheth / & it must be holden togyders with wood & with maters com∣bustybles to blowe & to kyndle. And ye fyre of hell is vnto the contrary / for euermore it dureth without quenchinge / wtout wood & without to be blowen ne to be kyndeled / and the mater combustible of the sayd fyre of hell where it taketh & where it brenneth cruelly / yt is all synne / all yll / and inobedy∣ence. It is wryten Ysaie vltīo. ca. & mar. ix. Qd vermis eorū scilicet dānatorū non mo¦net{ur} / et ignis non extinguit{er}. That is to saye The remors of the conscience & the worme of the dampned deyeth not / and the fyre ne quencheth nor gooth out / that is incessably it dureth & it holdeth in estate / & euermore it brenneth. The gospell of saynt mathewe sayth that god shall sende them in to ye fyre of hell that is inextynguyble. Also it is wry¦ten Iob. xx. Demorauit illū scilicet īpium ignis qui non succenditur / super quod ait gregorius. Gehenne ignis cū sit corporeus et in se missos reprobos corporaliter exurat nec humano studio succēdit{ur} / nec lignis nu¦tritur / sed semel creatus duratinextingui∣bilis / nec ardore caret. The fyre the whiche is not lyght shall deuour the cursed dāpned Saynt Gregory expoundeth this ye which sayth. The fyre of hell as it is of body & brē¦neth corporally the dampned sent in to it is not lyghted by study humanye / nor nourys¦shed by wood / but ones created inextȳguy¦ble hath not of indygence successiuely to be holden togyders / & it is not without heet. Et math. iii. dicitur paleas .i. peccatores cō¦buret igni inextinguibili. Tercio the fyre of this worlde cōsumeth / putteth in to asshes maketh to dye & to defayle. And that of hel is vnto the contrary / for though that it be moche cruell / eygre / sharpe / & hote yet con¦sumeth it not / ne maketh too defayle ne to deye the dampned. Saynt Iohan Cryso∣stome de reparatione lapsi. Ignis iste qui in presenti vita est consumit cuncra que re∣cipit / ille vero quos suscipit semper cruciat et pene sue semper integros reseruat. For the soule is immortal the whiche shal be clo¦thed with a body uncorruptyble & immor∣tall at the resurreccyon of the grete Iuge∣ment / not vnto the honoure of lyfe but to ye grete langour of tourmēt. The psal. sayth. Sicut oues in inferno positi sunt / mors de pascet eos. And sayni Gregory sayth how the dampned shall haue dethe without dy¦enge / ende without endyng / defaute wtout defaylynge. The dethe euermore shal lyue The ende euermore shall begynne. The de¦faute ne may defayle. And euermore in dy¦enge they shall lyue / & in lyuynge they shal dye / and dye may they neuer. Grego. Sit miseris sine morte / finis sine fine / defectus sine defectu / quia mors semper viuit / finis semper incipit / et defectus deficere nescit. Quarto the fyre of hell is so brennynge ho to the regarde of that in this worlde and aboue it that our entendement ne may cō∣prehende and esteme it / the whiche shall broyle the cursed dampned / not egally / but as euery one of them hathe of synne with hym the whiche synne is mater combusty∣ble wherof the sayd fyre holdeth as it sayd is / and in lykewyse as it shall be declared here afterwarde. Quinto the fyre of hell is stynkynge / and so is not that of this {pre}sent
worlde. ¶Examples. Primo how one of the dampned tolde vnto saynt Machayre the gretenes of the fyre of hell / & the dyffe∣rence of tourmentes of theym the whiche there do brenne. Quere .lvii. A. ¶Another exāple of the cursed Dyues ye brenneth in the fyre of hel. Quere .lxxxiiii. a. ¶Another example .C.vii. A. ¶Another exāple how a preste sawe his moder that was dāpned & tourmented cruelly for arayenge & ma∣kynge gay atyre vpon her heed / for shewȳ¦ge her brestes / for daunsynge / lepynges / & vnshamefull enbrasynges. Quere .lxxxx.c ¶Another example of a womā aduoutres damned & cruelly brenned & tourmented .lxxxx. A. And the dampned endureth wyll they or not ye sayd fyre of hell / so haue they many tourmentes. They shall haue with the sayd fyre derkenes / stynke / smoke / tem¦pest / honger / thyrste / colde / & froste. They shal haue foulenes / horrour / heuynes / wey¦kenes / drede / and fere. They shal haue ter¦reur of deuylles / serpentes / & foule compa¦ny wherof the soule shall be enuyroned & set about. They shall haue dyffame / shame reproche / euilles innombrables wtout ende They shall crye & bray / they shall deye wt∣out deyenge. They shall haue yre / dyscorde hate / cofusion / they shal blaspheme & curse for the punycyon / they shal haue seruytude dolour / bytternes / desolacyon / they shal be sory / enraged / oute of wytte / & despayred. Also the sayd dāpned shal neuer haue peas for all euylles shal renne & warre vpon thē They shal neuer haue bounte / for they shal be cursed & euyll / they shall neuer haue be∣aute / but euer hydeous / vylanous / blacke / & horrybles. They shal neuer haue force ne vertue / but euermore weyke & feble / they shall neuer haue loue / but euermore shall be in hate / ne honour but dyshonour. They shall neuer haue Ioyous lyfe / for they shall haue dethe without deyenge as it is sayd / ne lyght for they shall be in derkenes the shal neuer haue lyberte to go ne to do they wyll / for they shall be at the subgeccyon▪ obedyence of all euylles & aduersytees vn∣to the whiche they must obeye wyll they or not. They shall neuer haue suerte / but be in drede & fere / ne swetenes for they shalbe in bytternesse / ne rychesse but euermore in pouerte. They shall neuer haue helthe / but euermore sekenes / ne concorde but euermo¦re discorde / ne dysporte but euermore enoy ne wysdome but euermore foly / they shall neuer haue swyftnesse / but alwaye shall be weyghty & heuy / ne subtylyte / but alwaye euyll subtylles. Also they shall be euermore passybles / immortalles howbeit yt they de∣syre dethe it fleeth fro them. Also they shall neuer haue paradyse / rest / glory / ioye / glad¦nesse / but euyll & heuynesse. Who so sholde speke of euery of the euylles yt they shall ha¦ue in pertyculer as the scryptures determy¦neth it sholde be to longe a thinge to wryte And therfore this suffyseth of thinges thee be spoken in generall. C. ¶Here foloweth a questyō for to vnder¦stonde yf those the whiche commytteth in this worlde many synnes in dyspysynge ye commaundementes of god yf they shal ha¦ue punycyō eternal in hell for eche of those synnes / by suche wyse yt yf they deye impo∣nytentes wtout contrycyon ne confessyon. The scrypture gyueth the answere yt sayth Qd nullum malū remanebit ipunitū. Et legit. i. ad co. iii. Vnusq{que} aūt propriā mer¦cedem accipiet scdm suū laborē. And ye psal¦mist sayth. Vureddes vnicui{que} iuxta o{per}a sua. Wherby it foloweth yt all synne shalbe punysshed. And for to dyscerne of the puny¦cyon how grete it shal be it passeth our wyt but god in whome all the treasour of scyen¦ce & sapyence resteth & that is full of boun∣te infynyte ye whiche is Iust & the foūtayne of all Iustyce the whiche seeth & knoweth
the hertes & operacyons of euery one & in what intencyon they ben made shal yelde vnto euery man after his laboure be it in well or in yll. That is to saye. that in suche measure yt ony hath synned that is to com¦mytte of grete synnes & of grete nombre and taken delectacyon & is longe tyme in suche measure he shall be punysshed wtout that he fayle ony thynge. Vn̄ luce. vi. Ea¦dē mensura qua messi fueritis remitietur vobis. Vbi dicit basil. Qua mensura vnus¦quis{que} peccat aut bn̄ agit / eadē premia aut penam sumet. ¶Example a man yt hathe done an hondred synnes shall fele an hon∣dred tymes more grete payne than he that hath done but one. Vn̄ deut. xxv. Pro mē¦sura peccati erit et plagarū modus. After the measure & quantyte of the synne shall be the maner of ye woundes. Also of as mo¦re as the synne shall be done in the greter degrees of persones they shal be the more greuously punysshed. Vn̄ Ihero. In maio u gradi / maior siue dubio pena. As he that is maryed or preste synneth more in cōmit¦tynge lechery than other persones. Also of as moche more as they haue takynge mo∣re greter delectacyon / or that they shal glo¦ryfye them in theyr synnes & vanytees / or of as moche more that they therin haue bē more longly / of as moche more shall they haue in hell more grete payne & tourmen∣tes. Vn̄ appoc. xvii.. Quātum glorificauit se scilicet peccator in petō & in deliciis fuit ī diurnitate tm̄ date illi tormētum & luctū. Also of as moche more as they haue sought newe delectacyons not accustomed of as moche shal they be tourmented. Vn̄ iob. xx Iuxta multitudinē adiuentionū suarum sic et sustinebit. Also those membres ye whi¦che hath moost habounded in synne moost shall habounde in tourmentes as sayeth ye scrypture. Vn̄ Isodor{us}. In membro quo quis amplius peccauit / in illo amplius tor∣menta patietur. Et ber. dicit. In quo mē∣bro creator plus offendit / in eodē peccator grauius pumetur. And euery man shal be punysshed (per penā talionis) for his offēce to thende that he there haue euermore ree¦mors in his conscyence that he endureth so moche euyll by his owne operacyon. Vnde sapi. xi. 'Per que peccat quis / per hec et tor¦quetur. And in the persone in whome there is moost of synnes & of cursednesses ye fyre of helle moost terrybly shall take & cruelly shall bren̄e and tourment. For as it is sayd the mater combustyble of the fyre of hell / and wherfore it is create: & where it taketh for to doo yll / that is for to brenne synne & the persone yt it commytteth. Also we se by experyence that the fyre of this worlde is more grete & sharper where as is moost of fagottes & of maters combustybles. In ly¦kewyse is it of the sayd fyre of hel where the¦re is moost of synnes & grete sharpenes of fyre / wherfore the grete synners ben more brente & tourmented than they in whome there is lesse of sinnes. And yf saynt Peter were within the fyre of hell euen by Lucy∣fer he sholde haue none harme / for in hym there is no mater combustible / yt is no syn̄e And therfore yf ony persone were all assu∣red and certayne too be dāpned yet sholde he cease to do yll & synne / and sholde do the moost of good dedes that he myght to the ende that he haue the lesse of payne in the tourmentes of helle. He the whiche thathe noo moo but one sore / botche / or sekenesse hath not to suffre soo moche of payne and anguysshe as he the whiche hathe on hym x. or .xx. D. ¶A questyon. What dyfference is the∣re betwene the fyre of helland that of pur¦gatory / and of the soules the whiche there ben brente / broyled and cruelly tourmen∣ted. The answere after some scryptures is in this maner of wyse. ¶The sayd fyre
is egally hote ye one as ye other / but it hathe a dyfference in as moche as the one is eter∣nall & the other is but for a tyme. And they yt ben in purgatory go in to paradyse after yt theyr penaunce is ended / but they of hell go not out of the sayd fyre. And wherfore abyde they & the other gone forth. The rea¦son is suche yt those that ben in purgatorye hath goten grace or they departed fro this worlde / & haue taken away ye culpe or gylt of synne by contrycyon & confessyon / & for that they haue not doone the payne yt they haue deserued after penaūce thider they go to do it in the sayd fyre of purgatory. And whan they ben wtin it ye fyre taketh and be¦gynneth to brenne the delectacyon & spot of synne the whiche is his mater combusty¦ble as it is sayd / & neuer shall cease to bren̄e and to broyle tyll yt it fynde no more mater of synne. As a man may se how the fyre of this worlde wel kyndled brenneth ye wood & all the mater combustyble that vnto it is admynystred tyl yt the mater be consumed & brent and yt al be purged. And whan the sayd fyre of purgatory hath cōsumed and purged all the mater of synne the persone is delyuered / & so gooth in to paradyse pu∣re and clene. And it is to be noted that it be¦houeth to passe through the fyre / & that the fyre shall proue what the operacyon of eue¦ry man is. And yf the operacyon yt he hath edyfyed abyde wtout brennynge / he shal ha¦ue rewarde. And yf the operacyon that he hath edyfyed brenne he shal suffre tourmēt He shall be saued also as the fyre. Vn̄. pau. i. ad corī. ii. Vnusqs{que} opus quale sit ignis {pro}babit / si cui{us} opus manserit quod su{per}edi∣ficauit mercedē accipiet: si cui{us} opus arserit detrimentū patietur: ipse autē saluus erit sic tamen quasi per ignem. The dampned ben vnto the contrary of them of purgato¦ry. for whan they deye they ben impenyten¦tes / obstynate / & abydeth in theyr synnes / and bereth them wt them without takynge away the gylte of the sayd synnes by cōtry¦cyon & penaunce ne without getynge ony grace ne mercy whyles that they lyued in this worlde & that they haue the tyme and the place for to do it. And for as moche as the soule is eternall & immortal the whiche shall be sent vnto the fyre eternall / & that it shall haue with it euermore synne that the sayd fyre shall brenne. In lykewyse ye soule euermore shall suffre payne / and euermore shall brenne with ye sayd synne the whiche neuer shall haue mercy. By these thynges the whiche ben wryten in this boke it appe∣reth that we sholde loue god chyldely and perfytely more than al thynges for ye grete good Infynyte the whiche is in hym / and to loue our neyghbour as our selfe in god / and for the loue of hym. Morouer it appe∣reth that we sholde do & accomplysshe the commaundementes of god for to escape ye tourmentes of hell / and to thende to posse∣de the Ioyes of paradyse. Vnto the whiche we may go & vs to enioye cum illo qui est be¦nedictus in secula seculorum. Amen. ¶Here is the ende of the boke the whiche is called the floure of the commaunde∣mentes of god.
¶Here begynneth the exemplayre of the commaundementes of god. ii. ALmyghty god the fa∣der / the sone and the holy ghost / the whiche is but one only god in trynyte / pleaseth it hȳ to enlumyne the har∣tes and thoughtes of all those the whiche shall studye this boke the whiche is called the exemplayre of the commaundementes of god / for it is all of examples. The whiche examples hathe be extracted & gadered in many bookes / in lykewyse as bereth wytnes euery exam∣ple. And hathe be transmuted and chaun∣ged fyrste frome laten in to Frensshe / and from Frensshe nowe lately in to Englys∣she tongue. To thende that ye symple peo∣ple the whiche knowe no laten them may vnderstonde. And yf ony saye that there are of examples ye whiche ne ben holy scry¦ptures I confesse it wele. But I saye that they ben vysyons or myracles that some persones credybles hathe sene ryally / or knowen by experyence the whiche hath be put in wrytynge. For asmoche as they ha¦ue consonance to approue the holy scryp∣tures. &c. And for that that many exam∣ples ben put in the booke of the dyscyple it is not for to alegge it as holy personne / or holy scrypture / but for that / that it was a greate clerke the whiche founde the sayd examples in bookes the whiche we haue
not studyed. &c. ¶Obedientia. A. ¶Examples of those the whiche hathe obeyed to the wyll of god and of theyr su∣peryours. And fyrst example how Abrahā was obedyent vnto god. Ca. li. IT is wryten in the .xvii. chapy∣tre of gene. how Abraham was obedyent vnto god whan he hȳ commaunded the cyrcumsycion the whiche was a thynge moche harde and cruell. Also he was obedyente whan god sayd vnto hym that he shold le¦ue his frendes and his countree. Egre∣dere deterra tua et de cognatione tua. &c For his obedyence god appered vnto him in an euenynge and sayd vnto hym. It is I that hathe made the heuen and ye erthe &c. I am appered vnto the for that / that yu dredest my name. And therfore I shall gyue the benedyccyon and vnto thy lynce Agayne god sayd vnto hym. Beholde the erthe on the one syde and on the other. I shall gyue the all the countrees that thou beholdest vnto the and vnto thy lygnee. / More ouer god said vnto hym. Beholde ye sterres of the skye & nombre them. Than Abraham sayd that there were soo many that he ne myght nombre them. And god sayd vnto hym. In lyke wyse shall be thy sede vpon the erthe. Of the and of thy wy¦fe shall come forthe a sone the whiche shal haue my benedyccyon and those of his ly∣gnee. Abraham and his wyfe Sarra we∣re auncyent / yt wende lytell to haue had ly¦gnee bycause of theyr aege. After that the said Abraham hadde a sone named ysaac the whiche he loued so moche that he nese hym halfe / for that that he had but hym le¦gytyme / and for that that he had hym in his aege. Also for that that god vnto hym hadde promysed benedyccyon. More ouer for that that he was of greate beaute and full of boūte. Also it is wryten in the .xvii. chapytre of genese how god wolde assaye Abraham and he appered vnto hym and sayd vnto hym. Abraham thou ne mayste haue no mo chyldren I haue gyuen ye one the whiche thou louest moche. I wyll that thou go in to a moūtayne yt I shall shewe the and that thou make vnto me sacrefy∣ce of thy sone. The manere to make sacre¦fyce in that tyme there was that they had a lambe or a gote and dyde cut his throte and brente hym / the whiche thynge was cōmaunded vnto Abraham. Than Abra∣ham wolde obeye vnto god albeit that in his herte he was ryght pyteous to slee his sone for the loue that he hadde vnto hym And he toke hym and his asse and two of his seruauntes and so yede vnto the sayd place that god vnto hym had cōmaunded How be it that they had the space of thre dayes Iourney to walke. Whan they ca∣me vnto the fote of the sayd mountayne / the sayd Abraham lefte his asse and hys two seruauntes and yede he and his sone. And toke a burden of wodde / a swerde & of fyre. And in goynge vp the sayd moun∣tayne Ysaac demaunded of his fader whe¦re the sayd sacrefyce was. He answered yt god sholde prouyde. And whan they were at the place Abraham sayd vnto his sone in wepynge that god hym hadde cōmaun¦ded that he sholde make sacrefyce of hym Than the sone the whiche was good and benyngne answered in wyllynge to obeye vnto god and vnto his sayd fader. ¶My swete and amiable fader it is reason that I submytte me and obeye vnto you / and that the wyll of god be accomplysshed: /
Than they began for to we{pre}e. And Ysaac sayd vnto his fader. Alas my fader wher¦fore had ye not tolde me / to thende that I had sayd farewell my moder. I pray you my fader yt ye recōmaunde me vnto her / And also I praye you that ye bynde me / for that yt I am yonge and stronge and yt ye be auncyent and feble / to thende yt whā ye shall come for to sleeme that I ne doo vnto you thynge the whiche is not good. / Than Abraham with grete teres bounde his handes. And lefte hym on hye vppon the fagotte of byllettes / & drewe his swer¦de for to stryke of his heed. And whan he had lyfte vp his stroke for to stryke ye aun¦gell cryed and sayd. Abraham / abraham stryke not thy chylde / nowe god knoweth that thou dredest him. And Abraham cast his syghte asyde and sawe a lambe by hȳ amonge the thornes the whiche was tey∣de by the hornes in the sayd thornes. He thanked god wt grete ioy. &c. And toke the sayd lambe and made sacrefice in steed of his sone / in lyke wyse as it is writen in ge¦ne .xxii. ca. This example oughte to moue vs for to obeye vnto god and vnto fader / and vnto moder. Yf Abraham were obe∣dyent vnto so cruell a cōmaundement as to slee his chylde / by more stronge reason we sholde obeye vnto thynges the whiche ben light to do. &c. Obedyence is certayne lyfe and waye for to go vnto lyfe eternell And also as Adam was forclosed from ye realme of paradyse by inobence. In lyke wyse Abraham hathe had beatytude and lyfe eternell by obedyence. Also obedyence is the laddre by the whiche men mouūt on hye in to paradyse / in lyke wyse as men maye se by fygure. For it is wryten howe Iacob sawe in his slepe a laddre the whi∣che touched the heuen with the one ende / by the whiche the aungelles ascended and dyscended & Ihesus was there intremed∣led. Vnde gene .xxviii. Iacob vdit in sō∣nis scalam stantem super terram atm ca∣cumen illius tangens celum: angelos quo {que} dei ascendentes et descendentes per eā et dominus innixum scale dicentem sibi ego sum deus Abraham. &c. This laddre is obedyence. For withoute obeynge vnto the commaundementes of god a man ne maye mounte in to paradyse as sayeth ye gospell. Vnde mathei .xix. Si vis ad vitā ingredi serua mandata. That is to saye / Yt thou wylte entre in to lyfe eternell ke∣pe the cōmaundementes of our lorde Ihe¦su cryste. The staues of this laddre ben ye ten commaundementes / vnto the whiche a man sholde obeye redely without dylacy¦on deuoutly without dysdeyne / wyllyngly without contradyccyon / ioyously without heuynes / vertuously without feblenes ne weykenes / perseuerauntly withoute cea∣synge ne ennoye. Also obedyence is ye keye the whiche openeth paradise / and inobedi¦ence is that that shytteth it. Saynt poule sayeth of those the whiche ne wyll obeye. Illud ad thessal .iii. Si quis non obedie∣rit verbo nostro per epistolam hunc nota∣te et ne commiseamini cum eo vt confun¦datur. That is to say. Yf there be ony that wyll not obeye vnto our worde by epystyll note ye hym / and acompany ye not with hym / to the ende that he be confounded / For to be shorte / obedyence is requysyte of necessyte of helthe. And therfore it is in su∣che wyse dyffynyed after mayster Hyon¦de foliot. Obedientia est salus omnium fi¦delium genitrix omnium virtutum: inuē∣trix regni celorum: virtus celos aperiens et hominem in de eleuans cohabitatrix an¦gelorum: cibus omnium sanctorum ex hac enim letati sunt: et per hanc ad perfectio∣nem venerunt. The whiche is as moche for to saye. Obedyence is the helthe of all those that be faythfull / the engendresse of
all vertues / the fynderesse of the realme of heuens / the vertue openynge ye heuens lyftynge vp man from the erthe / the dwel¦ler or nere enhabytaunt of aungelles / the vyande of all sayntes / by her they ben gy∣uen souke / and by her they ben come vnto perfeccyon. Without obedyence noo man maye haue saluacion nor escape dampna¦cyon. And therfore yf thou wylte haue of good & not to haue none ylle / it behoueth that thou be obedient vnto the cōmaunde¦mentes of god and of the superyoures in thynges the whiche ben after god & good maneres as was Abraham and as hathe be the sayntes of paradyse. B. ¶Another example of a monke ye whi¦che caste his sone in to a brennynge ouen by obedyence / yet was he not brende. li. IT is wryten in the lyfe of faders how a seculer man renounced ye worlde and made hym a monke And afterwarde by leue he yede to seche a lytell sone that he had lefte in a cyte / and bare hym vnto the mo¦nastery. And the abbot toke hym betwene his armes and kyssed hym. After sayd vn¦to his fader. Louest thou this childe (he an¦swered ye) After the abbot demaūded lo∣ueste thou hym. And the fader yet answe∣red hym ye. After the abbot sayd vnto hȳ Yf thou loue hym take hym and caste him in to this brennynge fyre. At ye houre they were at the ouen where men make brede. and ye ouen was enbrased with fyre / and the fader caste hym within the ouen. And incontynent ye sayd ouen was in lyke wy∣se as it hadde be roused with water and ye fyre ne dyde no hurte vnto the chylde. In that dede he gate glorye in that tyme / as dyde Abraham the {pre}atryarke by the gre∣te fayth that he hadde in god and obedy∣ence vnto his abbot. C. ¶Another example of the obedyence of Noe. li. IT is wryten the .vii. chapytre of genese that Noe was obedyent vnto god in all thynges that he hym commaunded. Facit noe omnia que mandauerat ei dn̄s. And for yt that he was a good man Iuste and obedyent he ne was taken in the delu¦ge with the ylle. For god hym cōmaunded that he sholde make an arche in ye whiche he sholde entre hymself / his wyfe / his thre sones / and theyr wyues. And they were sa¦ued and preserued from the grete haboun¦daunce of waters the whiche drowned al the worlde. D. ¶Another example of the obedyence of Ioseph. li. YT is wryten in the .xxxvii. chapy¦tre of genese how Ioyeth was prepared to obeye vnto his fader whan he wolde sende hym vnto his brederne the whiche kest him in to an olde cysterne and solde hym vnto straunge people. In the ende and conclu∣syon for yt that he was a good man Iuste and chaste not wyllynge to cōmytte leche¦rye with the wyfe of Pharaon the whiche requyred hym and that he was obedyent vnto god and vnto his sayd fader he had domynacion aboue his brederne. Albeit yt he was the yongest.
E. ¶Another example of the obedyence of yonge Thobie. li. IT is writen in the .v. chapitre of the boke of Thobye that after yt the yonge Thobye had be wele instructe of his fader that he ne sholde cōmytte mortall synne / & that in his lyfe he sholde do many almes∣dedes and good operacyons / & more ouer that he hym had cōmaunded that he shol∣de go in to a place ferre from his worldly besynesses. The good chylde answerde il∣lud thobie. v.c. Oīa quecū{que} precepisti pa¦ter faciam. That is to saye fader I shall do all thynges that thou cōmaundest me By his obedyence the aūgell was assocya¦te with hym / and ledde hym vnto the pla∣ce where his fader had sente hym & after broughte hym agayne withoute hauynge ony ylle. A. ¶Another example of matathias. lii IT is wryten in the .ii. cha. of ye fyrst of Machabees that a man of ye lyg¦nee of Israhell named Matathias was so obedyent vnto god in kepynge ye lawe of his faders that the messagers of ye kyn¦ge of Anthyoche ne myghte make hym to do sacrefyce vnto the ydolles & to leue hys lawe. Vnto the whiche messengers he an¦swered. Et si oēs gēres regi anthioco obe¦diūt & discedāt vnusqs{que} a seruitute legis patrū suorū & cōsentiāt mādatis eius: ego et filii mei & fratres met obediem{us} legi pa¦trū nostrorū. That is to saye yf the people of Anthyoche leue ye lawe of theyr faders to obey vnto the kynge / yet I my sones & my brederne shall obeye vnto the lawe of our faders. This matathias was so wro∣the to se the people erre & goo agaynst the lawe of god yt he slewe the messenger of ye kyng of Anthyoche as he constrayned the people to do sacrefyce / & dyde caste horry∣bly a Iewe vpon the aulter as he sacryfy∣ced. Afterwarde dystroyed the ydoles and fledde he and his chyldren in to the moun¦taynes & called with them all those yt had zele of the lawe & persecuted the synners / This matathias the whiche loued god & obeyed vnto his cōmaundemente more so¦ner than vnto the cōmaundement of a tē∣porall kynge he is to looue / to prayse / and to loue. For a man sholde kepe the lawe & the cōmaundementes of god as it is sayd and to persecute the synnes / and those the whiche them commytte. B. ¶Another example of the obedyence of our lorde Ihesus and of his appostyl∣les. Capitulo. lii. IT is wryten in the .ii. chapitre of ye gospelles of saynt luke that our lor¦de Ihesus was cyrcumcysed & wolde be presented in the temple with oblacyons in shewynge yt he wolde obeye vnto ye lawe / And whan he had .xxii. yeres it is wryten that he was submytte & obeyssaunt vnto the parentes. Vn̄luce .ii. Erat subditis il¦lis. Also it is wryten yt he was obedyente vnto god tyl vnto the dethe for vs. Vn̄ pa. ad phi. ii. X{pre}s factus ē {pro} nobis obediens deo patri vs{que} ad mortē: mortē aūt crucis And of the appostles it is wryten yt incon¦tynent yt our lorde them called they were obedyent & yode after him. Vnde mat. ix & .iiii. Relictis oib{us} secutisūt eū. Also whā the appostylles were reproued of ye pryn∣ces of ye preestes yt they ne kepte theyr cō∣maundement. they answered illud actuū.
iiii. Obedire oportet ded magis {quam} hoībus That is to saye that it behoueth to obeye vnto god more sooner than vnto the wyll of prynces / in lyke wyse sholde we do and we shall haue paradyse. C. ¶Another example of the obedyence of saynt Mor. lii. IT is wryten in the legende of saint Mor howe saynt benoyst knewe in spyryte yt the water of a ryuer bare awaye a chylde yt was fallen in it / he called one of his dyscyples named Mor & cōmaunded hym to renne after ye chylde / whiche was obedyente & yode aboue the water after it He founde hym & brought hym by the heer hole and sounde. And whan he was out of the water he loked behynde hym / he mer∣uaylled & apperceyued ye myracle that he graūted vnto the merytes of his mayster And saynt benoist sayd that it was by the obedyence of saynt Mor. D. ¶Another example of a relygyous the whiche bounde a lyon. lii IT is wryten in the lyfe of faders yt an abbot cōmaūded his relygyous y he sholde go seche hym a lion the whiche was a moche cruell beest / he theder yode by obedyence / he founde hym / & boūde hȳ & ledde hym vnto ye sayd abbot as a man wolde haue do a symple and swete beest / Whan he ranne after hym & that he had sayd vnto hym. Myn abbot hathe cōmaū¦ded me yt I sholde bynde yt and brynge yt vnto hym. Whan the sayd abbot sawe the beest wolde humble hym vnto his relygy∣ous sayd vnto hym. Baneur vnbynde hȳ wherfore hast yu brought hym. In this de∣de here all relygyous maye knowe that it is a grete thyng of ye vertue of obedyence Also it is to be noted that ye good abbot ne praysed his relygyous of drede of vayn glo¦rye / but blamed hym for to meke hym. E. ¶Another example of a relygyous the whiche watered a drye busshe. lii. WRyten it is in the lyfe of faders how an abbot set a drye busshe & cōmaūded vnto his relygyous yt he sholde water it euery day tyll that it ba¦re fruyte. And yt he shold go seche of water in suche a foūtayne ye whiche was so ferre of that whan he parted in the mornynge: it was nyght whan he came agayne. The sayd relygyous was obedient vnto his ab¦bot / & watered it by the space of thre yere euery daye. And by his obedyence ye logge waxed grene & bare fruyte / was giuen to the freres saynge yt they sholde ete of the fruyte of obedyence. By this example it be¦houeth to vnderstonde yt it is a grete thyn¦ge of the vertue of obedyence syth yt a drye logge bare fruyte. For it is a thȳge contra¦ry vnto nature. F. Another example of a religious wryter IT is wryten in the lyfe of faders yt an abbot hadde a dyscyple named marc yt he loued for his obedyence / he had of other dyscyples yt were sory yt the abbot loued better marc than them. After yt the∣se other aūcyentes herde this thynge they came vnto him to shewe how the freres yt were wt hym were sory / & before yt he vnto them confessed ony thynge ledde him into the chambres of euery of them & called thē by theyr propre names / & sayd vnto them brederne come ye forthe / for I haue to be besy with you / & none of them ne wold co¦me oute forthe. After they yode vnto ye do¦re of marc & incontynente yt the abbot had
stryken & called hym by his propre name he came forthe wtout taryeng & the abbot entred & demaunded what he made / & he sayd yt he wrote / & had lefte his lettre im∣parfayte whan he herde hym call. And the other auncyentes sayd vnto hym. Truely we loue hym in the thynge yt thou loueste hym / & also god loueth hym for his obedy∣ence. This example denoteth yt all good re¦lygyous sholde obeye vnto theyr prelates redely without heuynes / or dilacyon / they shal haue praysyng before god & ye world. G. ¶Another example how obedyence {pro}¦cedeth the other vertues in heuen. IT is wryten in ye life of faders how foure brederne came vnto ye abbot pambo wt robes of skinnes / & euery of thē shewed ye vertue yt one of the other in the abscence of hym of the whiche men spake & the one of them fasted moche / the other ne posseded nothynge / the thyrde had gre∣te charite. Of the .iiii. they said yt he had be xxii. yeres in grete obedyence. The abbot pambo answered theym. I saye you yt the vertue of this here yt hathe had obedyence is more grete than the other. For euery of you hathe reteyned his propre wyll wt the vertue the whiche possedeth / & this here re¦nounceth vnto his propre wyll & maketh hymselfe seruaūt of a straunge wyll. Vn∣to a relygyous it apperteyneth greate re∣warde / for at euery houre his wyll is bro∣ken. Whan he is layde in his bedde & wele at ease / also it behoueth yt he aryse to go to matynes by obedyence / & that his wyll be broke. And also of ye masse & of other hou∣res hym behoueth to leue all other wylles for to go theder. And also these relygyous maye not go in no place without lycence / of the prelate / for they ben dyspoylled of theyr propre willes so yt they ne haue. ne{que} velle: ne{que} nolie And therfore they ne may leue more grete thynge than theyr propre wylles. &c. Also it appereth yt vnto a good religious obedyence it apperteyneth to ha¦ue greate rewarde in paradyse. The whi∣che rewarde vnto them is kepte after the dethe. Of the whiche speketh saynt poule in his epystle ad co. {quam} oculos nō vidit: nec auris audiuit: nec ī cor hoīs ascēdit q̄ pre∣perauit deus diligentibus se. H. ¶Another example how relygyous o∣bedience haue grete reward in paradise. IT is wryten in the lyfe of faders yt how a holi fader sawe in heuen. iiii ordres of people. The fyrst was of seke mē whiche yelde thankes vnto god in theyr se¦kenes. The seconde was of men hospyta∣lers yt lodged the poore & mynystred vnto them theyr necessites. The thyrde ordre of people were solytayres yt lyued wtout seyn¦ge ony persone. The .iiii. ordre was of peo¦ple submytte to obeye vnto the people spy¦rytuell for the loue of god. This .iiii. ordre yt was obeyssaunce had in heuen more gre¦te merite & rewarde than ye other. For the∣se obedyentes haue crowne and ceptre of gold. And ye holy fader ye whiche sawe the∣se sayd thynges demaunded of hym that shewed them vnto hym. How hathe thys ordre more grete rewarde ye whiche me se¦meth to be more lytell than the other. He answerde those yt ben hospytalers lyue af¦ter theyr propre wyll / in lyke wyse those ye ben hermites solitayre they lyue in ye worl¦de of theyr propre wyl / but they yt ben in o∣bedyence take awaye theyr owne wylles yt depende vnto god & vnto ye cōmaunde∣ment of ye fader spyrytuel / & therfore they haue more grete glorye than these other / & therfore obedyence is goode whan it is done for the loue of god.
I. ¶Another example of a religyous obe¦dyent and of an abstynent. lii. IT is wryten in the lyfe of faders / how two bretheren carnalles came to dwelle in a monastery. The one was of ryght clere contynence & the other of gre∣te obedyence. Whan the fader of the mo∣nastery sayd vnto the obedyent / doo this thynge / he dyde it / do that there / he obey¦de / ete in the mornynge / he ete / vpon this thynge he hadde grete opynyon. And his brother contynent was punysshed for the enuye that he had ayenste his broder / the whiche thought vnto hym that he sholde proue hym for to vnderstonde yf he were obedyent / and he came vnto the fader of the monastery and sayd vnto hym. Sen∣de my broder with me for to go by ye coun¦tree. The abbot suffred them to go. And ye frere contynent wolde proue hym. Whan they came vnto a grete water wherin the¦re was of terryble beestes the whiche ben called cocodrylles / he sayd. Go downe into the water and passe. And incontynente he dyscended / and the sayd beestes came vn∣to hym the whiche dyde hym none yll / but they licked his body. And whan his broder sawe it he bad hym come out of the water And as they yede they founde a body deed in the waye / & the abstynent sayd. Yf we had ony thynge to caste vpon this body / & the obedyent sayd let vs more soner praye vnto god and parauenture he shall aryse / & as they were in orayson ye sayd deed bo∣dy arose / & the brother abstynent gloryfy∣ed hymself & sayd yt by his abstynence the deed body was reysed. God shewed al vn¦to the fader of the monastery. And how he tempted his broder of ye beestes. And how the deed man was reysed. Whan they we¦re come agayne vnto the monastery ye ab¦bot sayd vnto ye abstynent. Wherfore hast yu done so vnto thy brother. Knowe yu that by his obedyence the deed body hathe be reysed. A. ¶Another example of an abbot ye whi¦che called his relygyous dede ye whiche ca¦me agayne and was obedyent & spake of the Ioyes of paradyse. THe disciple reherceth in his sermō yt the whiche is wryten in libro ce∣saru & sayeth yt there was a relygyous na¦med menigotm a man simple & good / that was so seke yt he had the sacrament of vnc¦cyon. And in yt tyme as ye abbot wolde de∣parte to go vnto the chapytre generall he sayd vnto hym. Brother yu shalte deye but tary at thy departynge tyll I come agaȳ He answered. Yf I maye I shall doo it / & the abbot cōmaūded hym to do it. The ab¦bot yede vnto ye chapytre & taryed longe / he comen agayne beynge at ye gate ye bel∣les range. He demaūded the caue of ye ryn¦gynge. It is for menygotm yt is departed / The abbot said I sholde haue spoke with hym. Than he hasted hym & foūde him de¦de / & cryed vnto hym. My brother meny∣gotz. He ne had in hȳ voyce ne wytte / & se¦condly he repeted his name / & the pryour badde hym torment him no more. The ab¦bot sayd in his eere. I cōmaūded ye not to deye tyl I came agayne. And yet sayd / I cōmaūde the yt thou answere me. And in wayllynge opened his eyes as yf he awo∣ke from slepe & sayd. O fader what hast yu do / wherfore hast thou called me agayne / The abbot sayd where was yu. I was in paradyse in a syege of golde nere ye fete of our lady & as yu caldest me agayne Ysam∣bart our secretayn drewe me from ye sege and sayd vnto me. Thou shalt not be here thou arte hether comen inobedyently / re∣torne to thyne abbot / so am I come agaȳ
And how be it / it is promysed me that yt syege and place is kepte for me where I haue sene the secretayn in grete Ioye. B. ¶Another example how a serpēt was obedyent to a frere iardiner. Also of theft And to do good vnto his enemyes. liii. SAynt Gregorye sayeth in the boke of his dyalogue that the∣re was a monke gardyner in a monasterye of good lyfe. And a thefe had of custome to stele of herbes of the garden and lepte vpon a hedge. For the sayd monke planted many herbes and he founde but lytel. And some were fouled and the other broken / he yede aboute the sayd garden and founde wher¦by the thefe passed / as he walked he foūde a serpente vnto whome he commaunded and sayd. Folowe me. He yode after hym. And whan he was in the place wherby the thefe passed / he cōmaunded vnto the ser∣pent in the name of Ihesus that he shold kepe the entre / & that he ne sholde suffre ye thefe to entre. The serpente abode ouer∣thwarte the waye. And the monke retor∣ned vnto his monasterye. Whan it came vnto the tyme of the myddaye that ye bre∣deren hadde of custome for to reste / yt the¦fe came as he hadde accustomed and lept vpon the hedge. And as he sette his fote in the garden he sawe sodaynly that the ser∣pente closed the waye / and in tremblynge drewe backe his fore so it toke thorowe ye hedge and he abode hanged bakwarde in the sayd hedge tyll that ye gardyner came And whan he was in suche wyse foūde he sayd vnto the serpent. Thou haste accom∣plysshed my cōmaundement / go thy wa∣yes nowe. And forthwith the serpent de∣parted. And he came vnto the thefe & said vnto hym / how is this brother god hathe gyuen the in to my handes / wherfore hast thou presumed to do soo many of tymes thefte vnto the labour of monkes. Than toke he the fote from the hedge and sayd vnto hym. Come thou after me in to the garden. And he gaue vnto hym these her∣bes that he hadde appetyted to stele with grete Ioye. And sayd vnto hym. Goo and do thou no more thefte / and that thynge yt thou shalt appetyte come vnto me and I shal gyue it the without that that thou ta¦ke it in cōmyttynge synne. In this exam∣ple two thynges be to be noted. The fyrst is that syth a serpent was obedyent vnto the sayd relygyous / by more grete reason we the whiche ben reosonable sholde obey vnto our superyoures. The seconde thyn∣ge is that syth that the sayd relygyous ga¦ue of herbes vnto the sayd thefe the whi∣che dyde vnto hym yll. It is to vnderston¦de that we sholde do the good agayne the ylle vnto our enemyes. &c. C. ¶Another example of hym the whiche commaunded vnto two dragons yt they sholde kepe the dore of his house. liiii. IT is wryten in ye lyfe of the faders that a holy fader dwelled in an her¦mytage and the theues came often vnto hym the whiche ete his brede and his sub∣staunce wherof he lyued. After that ye said fader had moche endured of the sayd the∣ues he yode in to the feldes & founde two dragons the whiche he ledde with hym to whome he cōmaunded in the name of our lorde Ihesu cryste that they sholde kepe theym styll at his dore / and that they shol∣de kepe the entre against ye forsaid theuis
Whan the theues came as they hadde of custome and that they foūde the sayd dra∣gons the whiche kepte the entre they had ryght grete drede & fell downe as deed to ye erth without speche Whan the auncient apperceyued it he came vnto them & foū∣de them as halfe deed. And he lyfte them vp and blamed in sayenge. Loke you and beholde that ye are more harde than these beestes here / they obeye vnto vs for the lo∣ue of god / and ye ne drede god and also ye haue no shame of the seruaunt of god. All¦beit the sayd fader made them entre in to the monasterye and set them at the table / and commaunded them that they sholde ete. Than they repented them dyd penaū¦ce and conuerted theym vnto god and soo moche they prouffyted by penaunce that in shorte tyme after they dyde myracles. D. ¶Another example how the water ōf a flode obeyed vnto a bysshop. Ca. liii. IT is wryten in the boke of ye dia∣logue of saynt Gregorye howe a flode or a streme ranne nere vn∣to the walles of a cite and by the dysriuasyons ye water made hys cours to shede thorowe the felde & toke ye that it founde sowen and set. After that ye water had done of grete ylles and that the necessyte constrayned the people of god / ye men began to studye by grete labours to make torne the sayd dysriuasiōs by other places / but they ne myght. Albeit that the¦re they laboured longly. Than the bysshop yt was a deuoute man made a lytell rake afterwarde put hym in orayson & came vnto the laste ende of the streme & cōmaū¦ded vnto the water that it sholde folowe hym by the places that he sholde shewe it and he drewe the rake aboue vpon ye erth The whiche water lefte hastely his propre cours. And all the water folowed hym tyl that it lefte the place accustomed. And ma¦de his course where ye sayd bysshop drewe his rake. And more ouer the said water ne hurted more that the whiche was sowen and planted. Sins that the water obeyde vnto the sayd bysshop wherfore shalt not thou obeye vnto god and vnto thy supery dures. Cesse thou of doynge yll as ye sayd water and obeye vnto god and vnto hys cōmaundementes or thou ne shalte be sa∣ued / so sayeth the gospell. mathei. xix. Si¦vis ad vitam ingredi serua mandata. &c. E. ¶Another example how the fyre yt whi¦che brente a house was obediēt vnto a fre∣er the whiche prayed god. Ca. lii. MEn fynde by wrytynge this ye whiche foloweth that the dys¦cyple reciteth in his prompt¦arye and sayth how a deuout frere precher & lectour was o∣ne tyme in a house of a knight of Englon¦de and the fyre toke sodaynly in the house where they souped / the water to fayll and all the counsayll humayne. And as the fy¦re grewe more and more the compaignon ranne and cryed with the housholde. And the sayd relygyous fell prostrate in oraysō and chased the fyre in suche maner yt there abode none apperceuaunce / the sayd frere¦ne lyfte hymselfe vppe in vaynglorye ne yet tolde it vnto no persone / but wrote it vnto the mayster of the ordre of prechers vnto the edyfycacyon of other. F. ¶Another example how the rayne tou¦ched
not vnto two freres prechers in wal kynge on theyr waye. Ca. liii. IT is wryten in some bookes this ye whiche foloweth how the dyscyple recyteth in his promptuarye and sayeth ye two freres of the ordre of prechers were sente by obedyence vnto a conuert and as they accomplysshed Ioyously ye sayd obe∣dyence it befell that grete impetuosyte of rayne began to sourde / the whiche fered them gretely. And they began to saye the one vnto the other. Parauenture god ha∣the not agreable our obedyence. And whā they see no place where they myghte hyde them / the one thoughte on a myracle that god dyde vnto saynt domynyke in takyn¦ge awaye the rayne from aboue hym and aboue his compaygnon. And he was mo∣ued in hope & put hym in orayson / he ma∣de the token of the crosse agayne the tem∣peste and impetuosyte ye whiche came vn¦to theym / and forthwith the water of the rayne deuyded it on the ryghte hande and on the lefte hande and suffred that they ye de without beynge wete soo that there ne felle one droppe of water vpon them / albe¦it that they sawe on the one parte and on the other fall rayne. By these examples be¦fore sayd and many other the whiche tary bycause of shortenes / it appereth that for to obeye vnto god and vnto our superyou¦res a man dothe myracles. A man geteth also the loue of god / paradyse and Ioye eternel. And vnto the contrary by inobedy¦ence a man byndeth vnto punycyon and dampnacyon. Also a man leseth al goodes & purchaseth all yll. In lyke wyse as men shall here herafter. &c. G. ¶Of the obedyence of a relygyous na¦med Pol: iiii. IT is wryten in the lyfe of faders yt ther was a man simple named pol amonge the dyscyples of saynt Anthonye The begynnynge of his conuersyon was that he sawe a rybaulde lyenge vpon hys wyfe / than he was sory in herte departed from his house and yede vnto the monas∣terye of saynt Anthonye and demaunded to speke with hym / whan saint Anthony vnderstode yt he asked the waye of helthe he consydered that he was a symple man of nature and answered hym that he my∣ghte be saued yf he obeyed vnto the thyn∣ges the whiche sholde be spoken vnto him And the sayd Pol sayd vnto hym that he wolde do all thynges that he sholde com∣maūde hym. And to the entente saynt an¦thony myghte prouue yf he wolde accom∣plysshe his promesses sayd vnto hym. Hol¦de the here before this gate and praye vn∣to god tyll that I come agayne vnto the. And he entred in to his chambre / and pol abode in the place and was so obedyente that he yode not forth all the daye and the nyght from the sayd place / where he pra∣yed god. And saynt Anthony behelde him often by a wyndowe secretely / the whiche knewe that he remeued not / ne in the hete of the daye / ne at the dewynge of ye nyght and helde hym without mouynge in oray¦son as it is said. The other day after saint Anthony yede for the and taughte hym of euery thyng how he sholde lyue. And amō¦ge other thynges he cōmaunded him that he sholde take his refeccyon at the euen ty¦de / & that he sholde take hede yt he ne toke so moche wherby he myghte be full fedde / Pryncypally in drynke and affermed that the fantasyes of the soule were made
neuer lesse for to drynke haboundaunce of water / than of hote wyne. And after that saynt Anthony had wele enstructed hym and largely of euery thynge. And cōmaū∣ded how he sholde lyue / he buylded a lytell habytacle thre myle frome hym where he dwelled. And saint Anthony vysyted him often and enioyed hym for that yt he foun¦de hym accomplysshynge tho thynges the whiche had be taught vnto hym & cōmaū¦ded. Also of the obedyence of the sayd Pol It befell that many freres parfyte men came vnto saint Anthony with whome ca¦me the sayd poule. And as they drewe ma¦ny thynges parfounde and spake of pro∣phetes and of the sauyour. Pol them axed by symplenes of courage yf Ihesu cryste were fyrste or the prophetes. Whan saynt Anthony hadde vnderstonde the folysshe questyon / he had shame and by swete wor¦des sayd vnto hym. Holde thy peas & goo thy waye. And incontynente Pol parted / and yede vnto his lytell chambre and kept scylence: In lyke wyse as yf he hadde be cōmaunded from heuen so that worde he ne spake in the worlde. Whan saint antho¦ny had apperceyued that in no wyse he ne spake / he cōmaunded hym to tell the cau∣se wherfore he kept scylence. Pol answer∣de. Thou saydest vnto me that I sholde go my waye & holde my peas. Than saint Anthony meruayled hym that he kepte ye sayd worde that he had brought forth nec¦lygently. And sayd. This here vs condam¦neth all / we haue not accomplysshed thoo thynges the whiche ben commaunded vs from heuen / & this here kepeth euery wor¦de the whiche procedeth from our mouthe Afterwarde saynt Anthony cōmaunded hym of thynges the whiche were without cause and rayson to thende that his obedy¦ence were proued & sayd vnto him. drawe of the water of this well and cease not to caste it aboute all this daye vpon the erth and he was obedyent. Also he him cōmaū¦ded that he sholde vndo all the roddes of a basket and afterwarde that he sholde tye them togyders and make them agayne / he was obedyent. Also he hym cōmaūded that he sholde cloute or patche his vesty¦ment / and afterwarde that he sholde vn∣cloute it and cloute it agayne. These thin¦ges here ben agayne reason cōmaunded the whiche pol ne agaynsayd. And shortly he came vnto perfeccyon. At the example of pol saynt Anthony taughte that yf ony wolde come hastely vnto perfeccyon / that he sholde be mayster of hymself. And that he ne obeyde vnto his propre wylles / albe¦it that the thynge semed vnto hym to be good and iuste so that he kepe the cōmaū∣dement of the sauyour the whiche is that before all thynges euery man also sholde denye vnto hymselfe and renounce vnto his propre wylles. Vt ante omnia vnus∣quis{que} abneger semetipsum sibi: et reem∣miciet {pro}priis voluntatibus. The blyssed sauyour dyde this thynge in lyke wyse as it is wryten in the gospell. Ego veni non vt faciam voluntatem meam: sed eius q¦misit me. And in lyke wyse sholde we doo for to come vnto perfeccyon. &c. H. ¶Of the obedyence of a man ye whiche bare of the flesshe al naked vpon his body Capitulo. liii. IT is wryten in the lyfe of the fa∣ders how saynt Anthony wolde prouue a man ye whiche demaū∣ded to entre in to religyon. Vnto whome he sayd that he sholde go to bye of flesshe in suche a market / and yt he sholde brynge it vnto hym all naked / ye
whiche was obedyent. And as he bare in suche wyse the sayd flesshe / the byrdes ca∣me from ye skye vnto hym the whiche ren¦te and brake all his body / and he bare the said flesshe vnto saint Anthony as he had cōmaunded hym vnto whome he tolde ye case. And saynt Anthony sayd vnto hym Those the whiche renoūceth vnto ye worl¦de ben in suche wyse punysshed and assay¦led / but they sholde be ferme and constant in the fayth of god for to resyste agaynste them. &c. By this yt Anthony proued those the whiche yelded them vnto him to be re¦lygyous. It is wele to be noted that in ly∣kewyse sholde do these prelates before as to clothe & to receyue of nouyces. For ma∣ny there ben receyued the whiche receyue yll knaues. They make many dyuysyons sclaundres and desolucyons / and breketh the scylences / ceremonyes / and constytu∣cyons / wherby relygyon is lost. Vnica so la pecus. Also as a seke beest vndoth ma∣ny other / in lykewyse in a congregacyon whan one relygyous is ylle inobedyent & rebell he maketh many ylle. Mayster Hu∣gues of saynt vyctor declareth the lyfe of the sayll yll relygyous at the begynnynge of the rewle of chanons and sayth. Sunt quidem in congregatione obstinati in suo senu sapientes in suis oculis. hu hoc quo∣din in animo conceperunt quai ex ratio∣ne defendūt. nec se aliis sed alios sibi apli∣cari contendunt. Et si viderint sibi non ob¦temptari: statim commouentur et alios {per}¦turbant. Tales solent esse rebelles manda¦tis seniorū plurunum{que} regnat in eis pas¦sio inobedientie et impatientie: isti nō sūt ydonei ad concordiam. &c. ¶Inobedientia. E. ¶Examples of inobedyence / and fyrst example how Adam and Eue dysobeyed vnto god. liiii. IT is wryten in the thyrde chapy¦tre of genese how the serpente tempted Eue to ete of the fruy∣te that god her had defended / & eue sayd vnto the serpente. God hathe sayd vnto vs that one what daye yt we ete of it we shall deye / that is to saye / we shall be bonde vnto the dethe. And the serpente sayd vnto them that they sholde not dye and that god knewe wele that on ony daye that they sholde eate of the fruy¦te theyr eyes sholde be open and they shol¦de be as goddes knowynge the good and the ylle. Than eue byleued the persuacyon and temptacyon of the deuyll / and ete of the fruyte defended. And also made adam to ete. And afterwarde god demaūded of Adam wherfore he hadde broken his com¦maundement. He excused hym vpon eue that she had counsaylled hym / but his ex∣cusacyon vaylled hym nothyng. And god sayd vnto hym illud genesis .iii. Eo quod obedisti voci vxoris tue plus{quam} michi: ma∣ledicta erit terra ī opere tuo: in laboribus comedes eam cuntis diebus vite tue spi∣nas et tribulos germinabit tibi: et come∣des herbas terre: In sudore vultus tui ve¦sceris pane tuo donec reuerraris in terrā That is to saye for asmoche as thou haste obeyde vnto ye voyce of thy wyfe more so∣ner than vnto myne ye erthe shal be curst in thy operacyon. Thou shalte ete y• erthe by laboures all the dayes of thy lyfe. The erthe shall brynge forthe thornes & thy styl¦les. And than thou shalte ere the herbes of the erthe. Thou shalte gete thy brede in ye swete of thy face tyll vnto that that yu shal¦te retourne vnto erthe wherof thou arte
come. For thou arte poudre and asshes / & vnto poudre thou shalte retorne. And god axed Eue of her inobedyence ye whiche ex∣cused her vpon the serpente that tempted her but her excusacyon vaylled nothynge / For god said to her illud genesis .iii. Mul¦tiplicabo erumnas tuas et conceptus tu∣os. In dolore peries filios tuos et sub viri potestate eris & ipse dn̄abitur tui. That is to saye / I shall multeplye thy poorenes / myseryes / & thy conceyuynges. Thou shal chylde thy sones in sorowe and thou shalt be vnder the puyssaūce of the man. &c. By this example a man sholde vnderstonde that those the whiche synneth mortally in brekynge the cōmaundementes of god & in obeyenge vnto the temptacyons of the deuyl / of the worlde and of the flesshe shal not haue of execusyō before god for to say I haue be tempted but that they shall be put from paradyse and lente vnto the fy∣re of helle / by the dysobeyssaunce of the by¦tynge of an apple the whiche is a lytel thȳ¦ge as vnto the bytynge / but a grete thyng to do agayne god the whiche it had defen¦ded. Paradyse celestyall was close / and a∣dam and eue were put out of paradise ter¦restre and put in to this worlde full of my¦serie. And by theyr synne it behoueth that we all ben baptysed or put from parady∣se. Vnde iohā .iiii. Nisi quis renat{us} fuerit ex aqua et spyrytu sctō nō potest ītroire in regnū dei. Who soo wele sholde consyder this example he sholde kepe hym to offen∣de agayne the commaūdementes of god B. ¶Another example how by the dyso∣beysaunce of the man of god a lyon straū∣gled hym in the waye. liiii IT is wryten in the .xiii. chapytre of the thyrde boke of kinges that at the prayer of a man of god ye kynges hande was heled ye whi∣che was drye. Whan he had done this myracle the kynge prayed hym to go dyne with hym & that he sholde gyue him of gyftes. He answered / Yf thou wolde gy¦ue me the halfe of thy house yet wolde I not ete of brede ne I shall drynke of wa∣ter in this place / it is in suche wyse sente me in the worde of god the whiche it com¦maunded. Vnde .iii. regū. Nec comedes panem ne{que} bibes aquā nec reuerteris per viā qua venisti. Than he yode by another waye. And the prophete ancyen the whi∣che dwelled in Bethell there as the kynge had be heled herde the said wordes that ye man of god had no wyl ne to etene to drȳ¦ke mounted vpon his asse and yode after hym / and prayed hym to go in to his hou∣se and to drynke & to eate. He excused him and sayd that god hym had defended, and he sayd vnto hym. I am a prophete as yu arte / and the aungel tolde me brynge him agayne in to thy house to the ende that he ete of brede and drynke of water / he dyde so moche that he brought hym with hym and ete of brede and dranke of the water / And as they sate at the table the worde of god was broughte forthe in this manere. Quia nō obediēs fiusti ori dn̄i: & nō custo¦disti mandatū quod precepit tibi dn̄s de{us} et reuersus es: et comedisti panē et bibisti aquam non inferetur cadauer tuum in se¦pulchrum patrum tuorum. That is to say for asmoche as thou haste not ben obedy∣ent vnto the mouthe of thy lorde and hast not kepte his cōmaundement. &c. Thy bo¦dy shall not be borne to be buryed in the se¦pulcre of thy faders. After that they had ete and dronke the man of god mounted vpon his asse and departed for to go / and
founde a lyon in the waye the whithe slew hym the body deed abode in ye waye & the asse by. And the lyon ne ete of the sayd bo∣dy & dyde none yl vnto the asse but sat by him. &c. By this example we sholde vnder¦stonde yt yf god punysshed so holy a man for the fraccyon of so lytell a commaunde∣ment that he shal punysshe of grete obedy¦ences. And for asmoche as the lyon ne ete of the body it is to vnderstonde yt the said man of god is not dampned & that his in¦obedyēce was pardoned hym / but he was punysshed for that yt he was not obedient he byleued to lyghtly vnto ye temptacyon of the other man. Non oī spūi credendum est. A manne sholde byleue vnto euery spi¦rite. C. ¶Another example of the disobeyssaū¦ce of two nonnes the whiche demaunded of the pope that they sholde confesse eche other. Ca. liiii. IT is wryten in some bookes this yt foloweth the whiche the discyple re¦cyteth in his sermons & sayeth yt the non∣nes of a monastery were dysposed one ty∣me that two amongest them sholde go vn¦to the pope to gete yt they myght confesse eche other. For they estymed that it was a thyng vnlefull yt they sholde declare theyr synnes & sekenesses vnto a man / yt is vn∣to a preest. Whan they came vnto ye pope & that he had vnderstonde theyr symples∣se and the fraude of the deuyll he toke vn∣to them a boxe shitte & closed and said vn¦to theim yt they sholde bere it with theym vnto theyr lodgynge / and that they sholde brynge it hym agayne in the mornyge wt our openynge it & that they sholde obteyn that / yt they demaūded. Whan they were at theyr lodginge they behelde it dylygent¦ly and had grete wyll to open it & the one of them sayd vnto the other open w it let vs se what is within it. The other said we dare not / for the pope hathe defended it vs. In the ende by temptacyons they opened the sayd boxe and thought to haue shytte it agayne as it was. And a byrde ye whiche was within enclosed toke her fly∣ghte and fledde / than they had drede. And in the mornynge whan they retourned vn¦to the pope and that he had knowen theyr inobedyence / he sayd vnto them. In thys thynge men knowe your instabylyte and sekenes. In lyke wyse sholde ye do the o∣ne with the other yf ye sholde cōfesse eche other / whan the one sholde offende the o∣ther / she sholde hyde her synne / and so the pope sente them agayne withoute graun∣tynge vnto them theyr demaunde. D. ¶Another example how the kynge Amaleche resysted agayne ye wyll of god / and yll came vnto hym. Ca. liiii. IT is wryten in the .vii. chapytre of exode how the kinge amalech fought meruaylously agayn the people of Israhell / and resysted agayne him as he mounted into Egypte / and ylle came vnto hym the whi∣che shal be declared herafter. Also god tol¦de it vnto Moyses. Delebo enim memo¦riam amalech sub celo. &c. E. ¶Another example of the obeyssaun∣ce of kynge Saule. liiii.
IT is wryten in the .xv. chapytre of the fyrste boke of kynges how god sente vnto kynge saule by the prophete Samuell that he & his armye sholde go to slee and to dystroye the kynge synner Amaleche & all his people / & all his beestes / and that al were dystroyed & loste withoute takynge ony vnto mercye. And without coueytyn∣ge ne takynge ony thynge .vi regum. xv. Vade & percute amalech & demolire vni¦uersa eius et non concupisces ex ipsius ali quid nō parcas ei: sed interfice a viro vs{que} ad mulierem & paruulū at{que} lactantē bo∣uem & ouē & asinū. &c. Than Saule yode he and his armye the whiche was grete & accomplysshed not the cōmaundement of god / for he toke the kynge Gag quycke / & slewe Amalech / & the good bestyall was spared. Also they toke the precyous vesty∣mentes & clothes / & the best of the goodes And slewe the wulgarye people & bestyall & dystroyed all that ye whiche was not go∣de & precyous agaynst the wyll and com¦maundement of our lorde Ihesu cryst by his prophete. &c. This thynge dyspleased vnto god for that yt Saul was inobedyēt where as he punysshed not the synners as it was cōmaunded hym. And for as mo∣che that he pylled and toke theyr goodes the whiche was defended him. &c. After yt that the prophete samuell had spoken vn∣to god / & knewe that he was wrothe of the sayd inobedyence. He came vnto Saule & demaunded hym werfore he had not obe∣yed vnto god / & that he was gone vnto ye pyll erye. Saule answered vnto Samuel & sayd vnto hym. So haue I obeyed vn∣to god. I haue brought Gag the kynge & also Amalech haue I slayne / ye people ha∣the be pylled & brought of fayre shepe and of oxes to thende that he dide sacryfyce vn¦to god. Meliorē enī obediētia {quam} victime / That is to saye obedyence is better than sacryfyce. Also the prophete Samuell re∣proued another tyme the sayd saul for his inobedyence & said vnto hym. illud. i. regū xiii. Stulte egisti nec custodisti mandara¦dn̄i dei tui q̄ {pre}cepit tibi: quod si nō egisses iam nūc {pre}parasset dn̄s regnū tuū su{per} is∣rahel in sēpiternū: sed nequa{quam} consurget &c. Thou haste done folysshely & haste not kepte ye cōmaūdementes of thy lorde god the whiche he cōmaunde the. Yf yu haddest not done it our lorde had prepared thy re∣alme vpon the people of Israhell in eter∣nyte. But from hensforth he ne shall lyfte hym vp. For as moche as the sayd saul lef¦te god & dyde the wyll of the deuyll / the de¦uyl hym posseded & tormented gretely as it is wryten in the bokes of the kynges / & the ende of hȳ was ryght yll / for he drewe his swerde & slewe hymselfe. Saul arri∣puit gladiū suū & irruit super eū. &c. F. ¶Another example of the dysobeyssaū¦ce of Pharaon & of his punycyon. liiii. IT is wryten in exodi in the .vii. viii. chapitre. &c. How the kynge Pharaon had the herte so enha∣ded / rebelle & inobedyent yt he ne wolde obey vnto god / & vnto his seruaūt. For he ne wolde let go the chyldre & people of Israhell by many tymes in ly¦kewyse as god hym commaunded. And therfore at euery tyme that he dysobeyed vnto our lorde Ihesu cryste he sente a pu∣nycyon. ¶The fyrst punycyon that oure lorde sente them was that all the waters and ryuers of the kyngdome of Egypte was chaunged and torned vnto bloode.
¶The seconde that god sent them so ma¦ny of frogges yt they spradde ouer all egyp¦te. ¶The thyrde god sente soo many of gnattes and flyes vpon bestes and people that they ne myght defende them. ¶The fourth other flyes and more terryble or al sortes. ¶The .v. was mortalyte vpon all the beestes of egipte. ¶The .vi. was woū¦des & bladders vpon the beestes & people ¶The .vii. was thondres & lyghtenȳges hayle and fyre in the myddes. ¶The .viii was grasseloppes and other ye whiche ete all the verdure & grenesse of egypte. The ix. was derkenes. ¶The .x. was mortaly∣te vpon ye fyrste borne / & for that yt he had the herte so harde that he ne wolde obeye to god ne by worde ne by punycyon moy∣ses stroke the water of the see the whiche departed on the one side and on the other And syxe hondred thousande men of the chyldren of Israhell without the women passed with drye fote. And pharaon and all his armye entred afterwarde & all we redrowned. Vn̄ exo .xv. Curus pharao∣nis & excertitus eius proiecit in mare. Et electi principes eius sub mersi sunt in ma¦ri rubro: abyssi operuerant eos descende∣rūt in {pro}fundū quasi lapis. Filii aūt israel ambulauerunt {per} siccū in medio mari. By Pharaon the whiche was soo obstynate yt he ne wolde neuer obeye vnto the seruaū∣tes of god / ne hym correcte for plage nor punycyon yt god sente vnto hȳ ben vnder∣stonde ye synners obstynate the whiche ne correcte them for prechynges ne wrytyn∣ges yt a man vnto them myght tel / ne for sekenes of fortune what so euer ye god vn¦to them sente. And for asmoche as they be in daūger to haue in thende & conclusyon as pharaon had / yt is yt god shall punysshe them & make to deye myscheuously and yt they shall descende in to dampnacyon in to helle. &c. G. ¶Another example of the inobedyen∣ce of the prophete ionas. liiii. IT is wryten in the fyrste chapy∣tre of Ionas how god him com¦maunded yt he sholde go to pre∣che in the cyte of Nynyues / the whiche obeyed not redely & fled from the face of our lorde / mounted vpon the see in a shyppe and incontynent these began to moue for ye tempest of the tyme. For to make short Ionas was caste into the see / & a fisshe named a whale him swa¦lowed / & was in his wombe thre dayes & thre nyghtes. And in the wombe of ye said fysshe made his orayson vnto god. After∣warde god cōmaunded vnto the fysshe yt he sholde vomete Ionas. He was obedy∣ent and vometed hym and caste hym on drye londe. And whan Ionas came forthe of the wombe of the whale / god hym com∣maūded secondly that he sholde go to pre∣che in the cyte of Nynyue / and he was obe¦dyent forthwith. H. ¶Another example how chore: dathan and abyron / & theyr alyes dyscended in to hell for theyr inobedyence & murmure. Al¦so how the chyldren of Israhell gadred of the manna agayne the cōmaundemente of Moyses. Ca. liiii. IT is wryten in the .xvi. chapytre of the boke of nombres / how cho¦re / dathan & abyron & two. C. &. l men murmured agaynste god & Moyses & ylle came vnto them. For ye erthe opened vnder them. And they dyscended all quycke in to hell hosed shod and clothed / and in suche wyse they perys∣shed. Vnde numeri .xvi. Dirupta est tra
sub pedibus eorum: et aperes os suum de uorauit eos cum tabernaculis suis: & vni∣uersa substantia eorum descenderum{que} vi ni in infernum operti et perierunt. &c. Al∣so it is wryten in the .xvi. chapitre of ye bo∣ke of exodi how ye children of Israhel mur¦mured that they had not of flesshe and of brede. And god sente vnto them of ye man¦na the whiche dyscended from heuen / and Moyses commaunded them that they ne sholde gadre ne kepe but that the whiche sholde suffyse them for the daye withoute kepynge it tyll vnto the morowe. And ma¦ny were inobedyentes & kepte it tyll vnto the morowe / the whiche manna stanke & therin gadred the wormes. These exam∣ples here shewe that inobedyence & mur∣mure maketh to haue punycyon & damp∣nacyon temporell and eternell and therfo¦re it behoueth to obeye vnto god and vn∣to his seruauntes. I. ¶Another example of a frere ye whi∣che was punysshed dyuynely for the mur∣mure that he made agayne god. liiii. IT is wryten in ye lyfe of faders that there was a frere honest & verytable / after that he had ser∣ued god longe tyme in the ordre of prechours / & that he ne had apperceyued ony thynge of consolacyons and swetnes of god the whiche redde and that he had herde how these other had ta∣sted ofte tymes. In a nyght they were be∣fore the crucyfyxe and lamentably began to enquyre before god in saynge these wor¦des here. My lorde I haue herde of the ye thou procedest al creatures in bounte and mansuetude. And I haue serued the by many of yeres in kepynge harde thynges for the wordes of thy lippes / and wyllyng¦ly I am all mortefyed for the loue of the And my lorde I knowe that yf I had do∣ne as moche of seruyce vnto a tyraunt he wolde haue shewed me some sygne of be∣nyuolence eyther in spekynge swetely / or in gyuynge me some thynge / or in cōmyt∣tynge me to do some secrete / or at ye leest in laughyng on me. And certaynly my lor¦de thou haste not shedde in me ony doul∣sour / thou haste not shewed in me ony be∣nyuolence. Thou lorde the whiche prechest swetnes thou arte in me cruell. Thou arte more harde than yf thou were to me a ty∣raunt / yu lorde what thynge is it or wher∣fore dost thou it. ¶Than as he sayd these wordes and began agayne & many other semblables / he herde one tyme & two gre∣te tremblynges / in lyke wyse as the chir∣che had threted ruyne / and aboue the coue¦rynge of the chirche he herde sco moche of tredynge as & yf many dogges there had grated with theyr nayles and gnawen wt theyr tethe. Whan he herde that he was a ferde hugely and all his body trembled / & sodaynly he sawe behynde hym an horry∣ble vysage. And with a thynge that he hel¦de in his handes stroke it and fell prostra∣te vnto the erthe. And as he wolde haue ry¦sen / he ne myght in no manere / and in bre¦kynge he drewe hym towarde an aulter / And more ouer he ne myght ferther proce¦de for the grete dolour that he had. Whan the freres arose at pryme & that they foū∣de hym replenysshed with dolours / they bare hym in to the fermerye & knewe not the cause of his maladye. He laye the spa∣ce of thre wekes / and vnto hymselfe & vn∣to other he stanke so moche that with gre¦te payne myght they serue hym yf they di¦de not stoppe theyr nosethrylles. ¶After that he hadde recouered his strength and that he was corrected of his presumpcion
retourned vnto the place where he had be stryken and where he hadde deserued the wrathe and ire of god / to the ende that he sholde gete mercy. And he sayd. My lorde I haue synned in heuen and before the I am the leest of all those of whome yu haste pytye / and am indygne of thy greate gra∣ces. My lorde thou haste beten me iustely. but debonayrly thou hast heled me. Than he fell prostrate on his face and requyred pardon many tymes of thynges that he had folysshely thought and lightly spoken agayne god / and a voyce vnto hym was made. Yt thou wylte haue ye consolacyons that thou hast made. And these doulicurs of the holy ghost it behoueth that thou the repute vyle in lyke wyse as a worme and as the myre where vpon yu tredest. Whan he herde that he was strongly comforted he rose hym vp & yelded graces vnto god / And afterwarde dyd the sayd thynges hū¦bly brennyngly / and lyberally he shewed this thynge the whiche happened hym vn∣to the mayster of the ordre of prechours / & men byleue that it came vnto hym as it is before rehersed in the lyfe of the faders / & therfore inobedyence maketh to haue pu∣nycyon. &c. ¶VErbum dei. A. ¶Examples for the worde of god and the prechynges. And fyrste. A. ¶Example how a grete synner repen∣ted hym and was saued by the herynge of a predycacyon or a sermon. lv. MEn fynde by wrytyng in many bo¦kes this the whiche foloweth the whiche the dyscyple recyteth in his promp¦tuarye and sayeth that as saynt Bernar∣de preched in the churcheyarde in a cyte / ii. rybauldes were nere. Of the whiche the one theder wolde go as the other people / the whiche yede theder. And ye other moc∣ked hym and sayd vnto hym. How ledeth the theder nowe the deuyll the whiche ne¦dedyste in all thy lyfe ony good dede. And nowe thou wylt go vnto the predycacyon And he toke no hede of the rebukes that he sayd vnto hym & theder yode. And saynt Bernarde preched agayne those the whi∣che spoke cursed wordes and the whiche le¦de an yll lyfe. The synner began to haue contrycyon and doloure for his synnes / & he began for to wepe. And saynt Bernard sawe that he had aboute his necke a grete chayne the whiche had more than an hon¦dreth linkes / but at euery iere that he wep¦te there fell a lynke from the sayd chayne Than saint bernarde began to preche mo¦re strongely and ardauntly and to deteste his synnes. And the synner more strongly wepte. In the ende the chayne was al vn¦done and broken. After the sayd predyca∣cyon saynt bernarde called hym and com∣forted hym. And by his admonycion he cō¦fessed all his synnes and afterwarde liued holyly and his compaignon abode in sȳne and bonde with a more cheyne than was the other. By this example a man sholde vnderstonde that mortall synne is a bon∣de or a chayne by the whiche the soule of synners is bounde and holden in the han∣des of the deuyll of helle. In lyke wyse as approueth the scrypture in many places / Vnde dauid in psal. Funes peccatorum circumplexi sūt me. The cordes of my sin¦nes hathe beset me aboute and compassed in all thynges. Et legitur prouerbiorū .v.
Iniquitates sue capiunt impium et funi¦bus peccatorum suorum vnusquis{que} con∣stringitur. The iniquytes happen the syn¦ner. And euery one is constrayned by the cordes of his synnes. And saynt Austyn sa¦yeth in his confessionayr. Ligatus eram non ferro alieno: {sed} ferra mea voluntate / I was boūde not with straūge yron / but by my thought harde as yron. B. ¶Another example how a relygyous cōuerted in fewe wordes a man of grosse conscyence. lv. MEn fynde by wrytynge in the promptuarye of the dyscyple and of other bookes that a ry¦che man puyssaunt had a wy¦fe deuoute / & he hymselfe ly∣ued seculerly & withoute deuocyon & it be∣fell that a relygyous the whiche passed ye countree yode vnto theyr house / & they syt¦tynge at the table / the wyfe prayed the re∣lygyous that he wolde saye before her hus¦bande some good exhortacyon / he answe∣red so shall I do yf he wyll. Than the hus¦bande sayd I shall here it with good wyl so that it be shorte. And he sayd. So shall I doo but vnderstonde it wele and put it in effecte. I saye that it is wryten mathei xii. Oīa quecū{que} vultis vt vobis faciant hoīes: & vos eadē facite illis. That is to sa¦ye. The good that thou wylt that men do to the / do it vnto thy neyghboure. Yf thou kepe these wordes here without forgetyn¦ge theym & that thou accomplysshe theym yu shalte be saued. Than he began to thyn∣ke yt he wolde kepe them & he dyde it / after¦warde somtyme as he passed by a way he founde a mylle yt he had made to dystroy he recorded hym of the wordes of the sayd relygyous / he sente his procurour to com∣pounde with hym vnto whome it apper∣teyned. Semblably these other yt he had offended / he them appaysed and satysfied them vnto his power. It befell also that he founde a poore man in the waye as he came agayne he ledde hym in to his house he refresshed hym & made hym to sytte by hym at the table / and gaue him of his me¦tes. After souper he brought hym for to sle¦pe in a place where he and his wyfe slepte yt was nere the yates of the dore. & whan the poore man had a lytell whyle slepte he had thurst. For he had taken good refeccy∣on not accustomed & whan he had not to drȳke he cryed importunatly yt he was tor¦mented by grete thurste / & for asmoche as the housholde slepte & was in a place on ye syde ferre of the hoste all only he herde hȳ crye the whiche was moued vnto mercye he rose hym vp & demaunded hym what he neded / & he sayd vnto him. My lorde I lese by thurste. Than the mayster wolde haue brought hym of water of the cyster∣ne. And as he drewe he felle within it and was drowned. ¶Afterwarde longe tyme whan the seruaūtes sought hym they foū∣de hym within the sayd cysterne / the whi∣che had aboute his necke a cercle of golde in the whiche there was in wrytynge that his soule was borne in to heuen before yt his body was colde after yt he was deed. / By this man the whiche was conuerted from ylle vnto good for to here one goode worde it is to vnderstonde that it is a gre¦te thynge to preche & to shewe ye worde of god. And for that yt he restored ye thynges yll done and that he was mercyful it is to vnderstonde that he had contrycyon and purpose to lyue wele & that he chaunged the ylle in to good. And by that that men foūde the lettre of golde wryten and that he was saued. It is to vnderstonde that
he deyed in good consummacyon as very repentaunte and good catholyque. C. ¶Another example of a mayster dely¦catife the whiche ne wolde here the worde of god ne do of penaūce & was conuerted in fewe wordes. lv. IT is wryten in the boke of drede of a mayster delycatyf / the whiche re∣fused so moche the estate of penaūce that hene wolde goo vnto sermons. And also hene wolde here speke worde of god leste that he were moued to entre in to relygyō And it befell one tyme yt a precher of hys parentage came to vysyte him in his hou¦se. And whan he was in his chambre he dreded that he came to hym to preche / vn¦to whome he sayd. Frere wherfore are ye come / yf ye wyll speke vnto me of god I care not of it / and yf ye speke of other besy¦nesses ye are welcome. And he sayd vnto hym mayster I haue to speke with you of other thynges / and sythe that ye wyll not here speke of god I purpose not to speke vnto you of hym / but by your leue and ly∣cence. Than he receyued hym to speke of other besynesses. And after that these ru∣mours were fyned whan the frere wolde go sayd vnto hym. Mayster gyue me leue to speke one worde of god / with grete dyf∣fyculte he graunted it hym. And the sayd frere sayd to hym. Mayster I pray you yt whan ye be layde this night in your bedde that ye remembre you of the bedde yt these slouthfull men and women haue in helle the whiche ne do of penaunce in this worl¦de. And ye sayd man sayd vnto hym. What bedde haue they / and the sayd frere sayd / The prophete Ysaye sayeth in the .xiiii. cha¦pytre. Subter te sternetur tinea et operi mentum tuum erunt vermes. ¶Th  as moche for to saye that thy fyre shall  strewed vnder the with mouthes and thy couerture shall be wormes. ¶After these wordes the sayd frere departed. And the sayd maister thought so moche of the said worde of the bedde of helle that all the ny∣ghte he ne myght slepe. And the sayd wor¦de had so grete effecte & so moche vaylled it vnto hym that within a ryght lytell ty∣me after he entred in to relygyon and cor∣rected hym. Wherfore it is a grete thynge to here the worde of god. D. ¶Another example of an yll knyghte the whiche in his lyfe was confest but one tyme / and at one sule predycacyon he cor∣rected hymselfe and conuerted. lv. MEn fynde by wrytynge in the sermons of the dyscyple and many other bookes of a kny∣ghte replenysshed with ma∣ny synnes. The whiche ye de∣uyll hadde so strongly blynded his herte yt in al his lyfe he hadde not be confessed but one tyme. And it befell that he came reue∣rently vnto the chirche on the daye of pen¦tecoste / and not for bycause of deuocyon / that he hadde vnto our lorde Ihesu cryste nor vnto his sayntes / but to the entent for to shewe himselfe. For vpon that daye he hadde be clothed with .ix. vestymentes the whiche were ryght precyous. And on the sayd daye he herde speke vnto prosne the preest of the sayd parysshe the whiche she∣wed of the solempnyte and vertue of the holy ghost. And whan the said knyght her¦de that vnto those what so euer they we∣re eyther men or women the whiche haue cōmytted synne that wolde repente them
that god sholde sende the holy ghost ye whi¦che sholde make clene theyr hartes and al synnes. And afterwarde sholde enhabyte in them. Incontynent that the preest had spoken this thynge the sayd knyght yode in to a place secrete to praye vnto god and sayd. O lorde god I am a synner / I haue goten many of synnes / of the whiche I so¦rowe and repente me gretely. I pray the by thy grete mercy that thou sende me on this daye the holy ghoost the whiche shall make me clene and enlumyne myn herte And incontynent god exalted hym & sent vnto hym the holy ghost the whiche made clene his herte by verey contrycyon and af¦ter by pure confessyon. And so ye holy gost came vnto hym and abode with hym: and after synned he no more mortally and dy∣de penaunce dygne and satisfaccyon and ended his lyf in good consōmacyon. This example denoteth that it is a grete thyng to here the worde of god / for all benedye∣cyon and saluacyon procedeth of it. Ano∣ther example it is wryten in the dede of ye appostles that as saynt peter preched the holy ghost dyscended vpon all those yt her∣de the worde of god. Vn̄ actuū .x. Adhuc loquēte petro cecidit spiritussāctus super oēs qi audiebant vbū dei. E. ¶Another example of a counte ye whi¦che cōuerted hȳ in herȳge ye worde of god IT is wryten in ye sermons of ye dys∣cyple & in other bookes yt there was an erle lecherous / proude / & malycyous ye whiche lyued longly in many synnes and so it befel one tyme yt he entred in to ye chir¦che & there herde a sermon. And whan he herde preche yt / yt is wryten eze .xviii. In quacū{que} hora īgemuerit pctōr oīm īiqitatū ei{us} nō recordabor. That is to say / in what houre the synner shall wayle & wepe hys synnes I shall not remembre of al his ini¦quytes. He toke this auctoryte in hymselfe he repented hȳ bytterly & requyred of god his grace & his mercy & that he wolde par¦don hym his synnes / & confessed & sayd yt he ne wolde do more other thynge tyll vn¦to the dethe than to serue god / he lefte the worlde / he entred in to relygion and there serued god deuoutely. And after his dethe men founde in wrytynge vpon his sepul∣ture in lettres of golde the wordes of the psalmyste. Misit dn̄s vbū suū & sanaut epos. That is to saye yt our lorde sente his wordes & heled hym / yt is yt he conuerted hym from ylle in good by the herynge of ye worde of god. & therfore it is a grete thyn∣ge as to preche & to teche. ¶Another exā¦ple of a carle ye whiche wolde not here the worde of god / & the crucyfyxe stopped hys eres in sygnefyenge yt he ne wolde here ye prayers that men made for hym. MAyster Iaques of Vitre sayth in his booke yt there was a carlysshe man yt wolde neuer in his lyfe here ye wor∣de of god / & whan the preest began for to preche he yode out of ye chirche & wente in to the chircheyarde to talke & to detracte with other carles ye whiche was repreued many tymes of his sayd preest for yt that he & the other letted to speke the worde of god / but he ne corrected hȳ & abode in his obstinacyon. The whiche was afterwar∣de seke greuously / & called his sayd preest & confessed hym for drede of dethe / & not for the charyte of god / ne for his helthe / & of the sayd sekenes shortely he deyed. And whan his body was borne vnto the chirch and that the sayd preest and clergye songe the dyryge & the offyce of the deed bodyes
the ymage of ye crucifixe stopped his eres with ye fyngers of his handes taken from the crrosse before all the people. Than as all they meruaylled to se yt / the preest sayd vnto ye people. Knowe ye what token this is here. They answered that naye. And ye sayd preest sayd. Ye shal vnderstonde that the soule of this carle whose body lyeth he¦re is nowe betwene the handes of the de∣uylles. For in lykewyse as he stopped hys eres that he herde not the worde of god / In lyke wyse god closeth his eres that he ne here ye prayers & oraysons that we ma¦ke for hym. And the sayd preest defended vnto al the presence yt they ne sholde pray more for hys soule. Than they ceased to praye for hym. And his body was taken from the holy place and was buryed in a felde. For as for the soule of one dampned a man sholde not praye. Quia in inferno nulla est redemptio. After that a persone is iuged and sente vnto the paynes of hell for to suffre payne / he shall neuer come a∣gayne vnto lyghte ne neuer shall he haue mercy. Wherfore it behoueth no more pra¦ye for it. Vnde gregori{us} vndecimo. Quis quis ad inferna mala tollerāda semel de∣cenderit: nequa{quam} vlterius miā parcentis liberat quos semel in locis penalibus iusti¦tia iudicantis damnat. A. ¶Another example of ye paroyssyens of a curate the whiche ne wolde here ye pre¦dycacyon and the cōmaundementes of ye chirche. IT is wrytē how a curate reproued many tymes his paroyssyens for yt that they yede in to ye chircheyarde whan he preched and made his antetyme. Also whan ony other made predycacyon / & for asmoche as he knewe not how to remedie it for ye helthe of theyr soules. For they dy∣uysed of theyr occupacyons seculers in the sayd chircheyarde whan he diuysed of fees¦tes / fastynges. And other cōmaundentes of the chirche. What dyde he / he made to brynge hym a lytell stole in the myddes of them in the chircheyarde and soo set hym downe / and behelde theym there. And he herde theyr langayges. And whan he en¦noyde them they demaūded what he dyde there. He answerde. Vbi sunt ciues ibi de¦bet esse episcopus. That is to say. That ye bysshop sholde be where his cytezyns ben Also a curate sholde be where his paroys∣syens is / & you are here / wherfore I shol∣de be with you. And for asmoche that at ye fyrst tyme they correcte them not / yet the∣der dyde he goo afterwarde the seconde ti¦me. And whan it came vnto the thyrde ty¦me they all had so grete shame that after∣warde they yede theder no more. And soo he correcte them / & vnto them it prouffy∣ted more than all the langayges yt he had spoken to them before. And therfore whan a man maye not correcte his paroyssyens in one manere hym behoueth to assaye in another. B. ¶Another example how a herdeman was saued & correcte hymselfe by the he∣rynge of one predycacyon. lvi. THe dysciple recyteth in his tromp∣tuary how that a pastour or herd man yede late vnto ye chirche vnto masse & sermons for the kepynge of his bestyall And one tyme he passed by a cite & entred into ye chirche & herde preche yt euery crea¦ture is taught to fle sȳne & to loue god / by this prechynge he was edefyed. And in be¦holdynge ye creatures he sayd to hymselfe
Suche a creature serueth vnto god & obe¦yeth vnto hym. The water in rennynge ye byrdes in syngynge the herbes in rysynge vppe and growynge and in lyke wyse of other creatures. And he sawe a toode one tyme and said / the creatoure myght haue create me as this tode yf he had wolde / & I offende him contynuelly by synnes and am vnkynde. For he hathe made me and create vnto his ymage for to haue beaty∣tude and me hathe redemed by his passyō &c. For to be shorte he conuerted hym and dyde penaunce / and was suffycyently in∣structe of a holy man and perseuered loua¦bly in the seruyce of god. &c. C. ¶Another example. That to here the worde of god it is prouffytable albeit that a man holde it not. IT is wryten in the lyfe of the fa∣ders yt a frere sayd vnto a goode fader abbot. I haue axed questy¦ons oftymes that they wolde tel me ammonycyon for the helthe of my soule. And of all that that they tell me I reteyne nothynge. The auncyente sayd vnto the frere I haue two vesselles voyde goo fetche me one and wasshe it wt water / and afterwarde caste it and put ye sayd potte in his place. And the sayd frere dyde so one tyme two tymes / and the aū∣cyente sayd vnto hym. Brynge me ye two vesselles heder / whan that he hadde brou∣ghte them the auncyente sayd vnto hym / Whiche of the two pottes is moost moyst and also clene. The frere sayd vnto hym. It is that wherin I haue put my water that I haue wasshed. Than the auncyent sayd vnto hym. Sone in lyke wyse is it of the soule the whiche hereth often the wor∣de of god / albeit that he reteyne nothynge of the thynges that he axeth / notwithston¦dynge he is more clene than he the whiche demaūdeth nothynge and also hereth not ony thynge. D. ¶Another example how some freres slepte in herynge the worde of god and in herynge the ydell wordes they were mo∣che wakynge. Ca. lvi IT is wryten in the lyfe of the fa∣ders that an aūcyent the whiche set him in hermytage for to pray vnto god that he wolde gyue hȳ grace yt he slepte not whan men sholde speke of spyrytuell thynges. And whan men sholde speke of detraccyon or of hate that he myght slepe incontynente that the eres ne token the venyme of that synne. He sayd that the deuyll studyed hȳ to admoneste these men in ydell wordes for to impugne doctryne and thynge spy∣rytuell. And he tolde this example. Whan I spake some tyme vnto some freres of the vtylyte of soules / they slepte so profoū¦dely that they ne myght meue the eye lyd of theyr eyes. And I wolde shewe that it was a thynge dyabolyke. And I yode to speke thynges ydell. And they were incon∣tynent wakynge and enioyed theym and I toke me to wayle and to saye. I spake tyll vnto nowe of thynges celestyall / and all your eyes were holden by grefe to slepe & whan an ydell worde hathe be brought forth / ye haue be all prompte and redy to here. For the whiche thynge I praye you ryght dere brethern that ye knowe that it is the werke of the cursed deuyll / take he∣de to your selfe and kepe you from slepyn¦ge whan ye do or here ony thynge spyrytu∣ell.
&c. By this example a man may vn¦derstonde that the deuyll bryngeth a slepe his seruauntes of drede that they ne here the worde of god / and that they ne sholde leue theyr synnes. And also he waketh thē¦for to here ylle / to thende that they fall in to synne and dampnacyon. &c. E. ¶Another example agayne those the whiche fleeth the sermons. lvi. IT is wryten that as saynt mar∣tyn yode frome towne to towne prechinge and doynge myracles one Cayment impotente fledde euermore before hym from tow¦ne to towne / and from cyte to cyte / and fe¦red that he sholde hele hym / of drede that he ne loste to gete and to demaunde his li¦uynge. In lyke wyse the rauysshers / ye the uys / the lechoures / and synners fleeth the sermons and they ne wyll here them / of drede leste that they leue theyr synnes / & they ne amende them. &c. F. ¶Another example how the case of a prechoure was borne at the dethe / & how Ihesu cryste ayded hym and chased awa¦ye the deuylles. lvi. SOme maysters hathe wryten this ye whiche foloweth howe ye dyscyple recyteth in his prō∣tuarye and sayth that it was cōmaunded vnto a relygious preest of the ordre of the prechers that he sholde go to preche agayn the sarazyns / ye crosse he theder yode and so deyed. And he appered vnto one of his compaygnons ye whiche axed hym of his estate. He answe∣red in this. It semed me that my payne was to longe. And whan that I deyed I ne sawe by me but the deuylles the which began to saye vnto me. Thou keptest ne∣uer wele thy professyon ne the obedyence that thou hast promysed vnto thyn abbot And also thou ne preched neuer vnto ony clerely thy lorde god. And as the sayd de∣uylles preposed agaynst me dyuers thyn∣ges in the sayd manere and that there ne was persone the whiche answerde for me Ihesu cryste came and sayd. Come after me / for thou haste preched me. And incon∣tynent all the company of deuylles depar¦ted as a smoke & I folowed Ihesu cryste in to glorye and I ne felte ony other pain excepte the sayd fere. &c. G. ¶Another example how he the whiche precheth the worde of god shal haue grete rewarde in heuen. MEn fynde by wrytynge in so∣me bokes / also the dyscyple it recyteth in his promptuarye that as a good preest precher approched vnto his dethe o∣ne of his good frendes made hym swere in our lorde that he sholde come to certefy hym of his estate .xxx. dayes after his de∣the. After that he was deed the said preest appered vnto hym as he had requyred hȳ in a meruayllous fayre chapel al replenys¦shed with ouches of golde that is to saye of Iewelles ryche / noble good and precy∣ous / amonges the whiche there was one vpon the brest dyffered / & was more fayr without comparyson than the other. And as he enquyred of his estate / he sayd vn∣to hym that it was wele. After he hym de¦maunded
wherfore he was so cladde. He answered I haue this vestyment for the grete zele and loue that I haue had vnto my neyghbours. And as many as I haue conuerted of synners there are in my ves∣ture of ouches. And I haue receyued the ouche that thou seest on my brest / for that that I haue conuerted a synner of whom no man had ony hope of helthe. And he as¦ked hym of the estate of those the whiche haue cure and charge of soule and of peo∣ple / as the curates the whiche haue parys¦shynges. He answered ryght fewe shall be saued. For they walke in the large waye ye whiche ledeth vnto helle. And shewe euyl examples vnto theyr subgectes they be so moche habandoned in couetyse that they care not of soules so that they haue the go¦des of theyr subgectes. And enioyneth yt is yet more peryllous / that / yt they sholde conuerte vnto the vsage of ye poores / they dyspende it with vyle persones. Whan he hadde spoken these wordes he departed. / These curates and those the whiche haue cure of soules sholde wele note this exam¦ple. For grete rewarde foloweth vnto tho¦se ye whiche wele shewe vnto theyr paroys¦syēs. And also dampnacyon vnto those ye whiche vse yll of the offyce and charges yt they haue. &c. H. ¶Another example how the deuyll ne myght strangle a knyght / for that / yt he sa¦lued the vyrgyn Marye euery daye / & for the good wyll that he had to here a predy∣cacyon he was saued. lvi. THe dyscyple recyteth in his promp¦tuarye this the whiche foloweth / the whiche is also wryten in other bookes and sayeth. That there was a knyght lor∣de of a castell whoo had vnder hym many tyrauntes. And this sayd knyght dyspoyl¦led all the goers by withoute mercye / but he had of custome that euery daye he sa∣lued the vyrgyn Marye. And one day the∣re passed therby an holy monke that ye said knyght cōmaunded he were dyspoyled / & the holy man prayed the pyllers that they wolde brynge hym vnto theyr mayster & that he had a secrete thynge to tell to hym whan he was ledde he prayed the lorde yt he wolde make al his seruauntes to come forthe to the ende yt they sholde here a pre∣dycacion. And he commaunded that they sholde come al. Whan it was done he said They ne ben all here there wanteth one. & some sayd ye chamberer defayleth / he was made to come. The holy man sayd. It is this here that I demaunded. And he said vnto hym. I the adiure and cōmaunde yt in the name of the fader / of the sone / and of the holy ghost that thou tell what thou arte / and wherfore thou arte heder come. He answered. Alas I am constrayned to declare my secrete. I am not a man but a deuyll / and I haue dwelled with this kny¦ghte .xiiii. yeres / for our prynce sent me he¦ther for to loke the daye that this vnhap∣py sayd not the salutacyon accustomed to the ende that I sholde strangle hym. For I haue the puyssaūce of god for ye synnes that he hathe cōmyted / to the ende that he were our compaygnon in helle / whan the knyghte herde these wordes he was abas∣shed. And he fell prostrate at the fete of ye sayd monke / requyred hym pardon. And amended his lyfe in to better. It is a gre∣te thynge to here a predycacyon and to ser¦ue the vyrgyn Marye. And in lyke wyse as the deuyll of helle fleeth / and renneth from the predycacyon / bycause yt he wolde not fynde hymself there / denote yt those yt flee the sermons foloweth ye deuyll of hell
And as now there are many of his party the whiche ne wyll here predycacyon. I. ¶Another example how men shal for∣gete the cōmaundementes of god in the laste or latter generacyon. IT is wryten in ye lyfe of the faders that one tyme the holy faders assē∣bled them togyder & prophetyzed of ye last generacyon. Amongest whome one pryn¦cypall named querimus sayd. We accom¦plysshe the cōmaūdementes of god. And these other faders shall aske it in demaun¦dynge. And those that shall come after vs what shall they do. He answered and said vnto them. They shal accomplysshe para¦uenture the halfe of the cōmaundements and shall requyre the good eternell. And the faders demaunded after these people where shal become these other. In answe¦rynge he sayd. The men of that generacy¦on shall not haue the operacyon of that / yt god wylleth that be do. And they shal for∣gete the cōmaundementes of god. Also in that tyme synne aboue shall habounde / & charyte shall were colde / and grete temp∣tacyon shall come vpon them / but those ye whiche shal be in bounte proued they shal be better / more blyssed & proued than we and or our faders. K. ¶Another example of a ryche man ye whiche serued the deuyll .xl. yere. And in a smon repented hym. LEgitur in dyalogo cesarii. It is wryten that a ryche man & puys∣saunt full of vyces & cursydnesses was in suche estate .xl. yeres. And afterwarde re∣pented hym in a sermon / confessed hym / chaūged his lyfe / entred in to relygyon / & prouffyted so gretely yt he was in the gra∣ce of god / & that he made reuelacyon of ye houre of his dethe. And whan he was seke he sayd vnto his frendes yt he sholde deye the thyrde daye & so he dyde. &c. By these examples beforsayd it appereth yt all go∣denes / all saluacyon / & benedyccyon proce¦deth to here & to kepe the worde of god / & therfore it is wryten in the gospell. luce. xi Beati q audiūt vbū dei & custodiūt illd. ¶Primum preceptum. Idolotria. ¶Example vpon ye fyrst cōmaūdemente of god. Nō adorabis deos alienos. & fyrst A. ¶Another example of a preest prynce of the ydoles of the people yt brente in the fyre of helle / and how these without byle∣ue shall be founde there. WE fynde in the lyfe of faders yt a good abbot named machaire foū¦de in his waye in ye deserte a hede drye of a man deed / whome he cōiured & demaunded hym what he was / & he an∣swered. I am the prynce of the prestes of Ydoles of the people ye enhabyted in thys place here. And the abbot asked hym of ye payne yt he endured / & in wayllyng on hye he said. Quātū distat celū a tra: tātū ignis alt{us} ē ī quo medio positi sum{us}. That is to saye / yt of asmoche as there is of dystaūce from heuen vnto erthe of asmoche is ye fy¦re of hell grete in the myddest wherof we ben put whan ye holy Machayre herd this worde he began to wepe & saye. Ve hoī il li q mādata dei trāsgress{us} ē. Malediccion is vnto yt man ye whiche hathe transgres∣sed
the cōmaundementes of god. And he asked him agayne yf there were more gre¦te payne / & he answerde yes. And yt the ie¦wes were more strongly brent & tormen∣ted / & lower than they / for that yt they had gretter knowlege of god & of ye faith than they haue had. And after sayd yt yll cristen men & women ye whiche lyue in sȳne mor¦tall ben yet more bas brent & tormented / For as moche that of certayn scyence they offende god & had more grete knowlege of hym & of the fayth than the Iewes & pay¦nemes ye whiche offended by ygnoraunce & enfermete & vnstedfastnes. And therfo∣re they ben in the botome of helle / ye whi∣che of asmoche as it mounteth hye / & it is the lesse hote. And therfore we ne ben soo moche tormented as ye sayd crystyens / & whan the sayd Machayre herde the sayde wordes he asked hȳ no more / & in wepȳg so departed. This example sheweth yt all sortes of people incredules & vnfaithful yt go agaynst the fayth / & deye impenyten∣tes shall be punysshed in ye fyre of helle af∣ter theyr deserte. Vnto ye purpose the psal. sayth. Pones eos vt clibanū ignis ī tēpo∣re vult{us} tui dn̄e: dn̄s ī ira sua {con}turbabit e∣os et deuorabit eos ignis. That is to saye O yu lorde yu haste put the ylle in lyke wyse as an ouen of fyre in ye tyme of thy face / yt is of thy iugement / the lorde shall trouble them in his ire / & the fyre shal deuour thē. And agayne ye psalmyst sayth. Cadēt su¦per eos carbones: scʐ ī die iuditii: ī ignem deucies eos ī miseris nō subsistēt. That is to vnderstonde. The coles shall fall vpon them at ye daye of iugement yt shal brenne where ye sȳnes hath ben made / yu shal cast them in ye fyre / they ne maye be but in my seryes. Et le. iob. xx. Deuorabit eū. s. īpiū ignis q nō succendit. That is to saye. The fyre yt is not lyght shall deuour the cursed dampned. B. ¶Another example of the ydolatrie of Nabugodonosor whan he made the thre chyldren to be put in ye furnayse. lvii. IT is wryten in the thyrde chapi¦tre of the boke of Danyell how the kynge Nabugodonosor dyd make an ydole of golde of .lx. cu∣bytes in heyght / & syxe of large∣nes / & made to bere it in to a grete felde & caused all the people to come theder. Mo∣re ouer he sente a cōmaundement yt al the people sholde worshyp the ymage whan they sholde here the instrumentes melodi¦ous soūde / & that al those yt wold not pros∣trate them or fall vnto ye erthe & worshyp the sayd ydole yt they were taken & cast in to the furnayse lyght & embraced. And as the people worshypped in suche wyse the sayd ydole there were thre chyldren called sydrac / Mysac / & Abdenago yt wolde not worshyp it ne prostrate theym. Than the kynge made them to come before hym to whome he demaūded. Whiche is the god that may delyuer you fro my hande. And the sayd chyldren sayd vnto the kynge na¦bugodonosor. Of that thynge it nedeth ye none answer. The god that we worshyp hathe puyssaunce to delyuer vs frome the furnayse brennynge & from thy handes. / Than ye said kynge was replete of furour & cōmaūded yt the sayd furnayse were .vii tymes more strongly embraced than had be accustomed / & the moost strongest men of his hoost bounde theyr fete & theyr han¦des & caste them within the said furnayse The whiche was done / & the fyre brente those yt caste them in / but it dyde none yll vnto ye sayd chyldren / the whiche walked within the myddest of ye sayd furneyse in laudynge & blissynge god. And the fyre ne dyde them neuer yll. Than the kyng was
moche meruaylled to se them in suche wy¦se to walke thorowe the fyre / & to gyue lo∣uynges vnto god the whiche made them for to to go out of the furneyse. And ye gre∣te & puyssaunce of the kynge behelde them gretely / but they founde that the said fyre had not had ony puyssaunce to touche thē nor neuer heere of theyr hedes nor vesty∣mentes were brente. Than the kynge na∣bugodonosor began to crie yt theyr god we¦re blyssed the whiche sente his aungell / & delyuered his seruauntes the whiche byle∣ued in hym. And they chaunged the wor∣de of the kynge the whiche made a decre∣te that all the people of what lygnee and tongue that he were ye whiche had made blaspheme agayne the god of sydrac / my∣saac / & abdenago / sholde perisshe / and his house be wasted. &c. ¶In this example a man may vnderstonde yt all blasphema∣tours ben reprehend & punisshed greuous¦ly be it in confessyon or otherwyse / syth yt the kynge the whiche was ydolatre & per¦uers knewe manyfestly the puyssaunce of god / & that he offended agayne hym in do¦ynge hym suche dyshonoure / rebuke and blaspheme to gyue the diuyne honoure vn¦to an ydole ye whiche apperteyneth to god And therfore of good right he made to pu¦nysshe the blasphematoures after that he hadde knowen his helthe. C. ¶Another example how Egeas ydola¦tre was slayne of the deuyll. lvii IT is wryten in the legende of sa¦ynt andrewe how the kynge ege¦as constrayned the crystyens to do sacryfyce to ye ydoles. Agayn whome came saynt Andrewe to reprehende him and they dysputed longly togyders of the passyon and redempcyon of our sauyoure. And for asmoche as the sayd saint Andrewe was ferme in ye faith And the sayd egeas ne myght put hȳ out he hym iuged & condampned to be crucy∣fyed & put in the torment of the crosse the fete vpwarde to thende yt he had ye more longe & gretter torment. And to be shorte in suche wyse was it done. And the said an¦drewe was two dayes in ye sayd torment where he preched & shewed vnto the peo∣ple the whiche were present by estymacy∣on. a .xx. M. the whiche people yode vnto the sayd egeas cryenge yt vniustely he had condampned hym to dethe. &c. The sayd egeas came vnto the sayd saynt for to sa∣tysfye vnto ye people & to take hym frome the crosse. And the lyght dyscended vnto the sayd saynt. And as the sayd egeas re∣torned hym the deuyll entred in to his bo¦dy the whiche slewe hym in the sayd way & so euylly fyned he his dayes. D. ¶Another example of the dethe of sy¦mon magus & of other myscreaūtes. lvii. IT is wryten in the dede of ye ap∣postles yt the enchauntour symō magus deceyued ye people by fal¦se arte magyk in many maners the whiche abide bicause of short¦nes / in thende of his dayes he vaunted hȳ to flee in the ayer. And in dede moūted in to a toure & toke hym to flee before ye peo∣ple / but they were the deuylles the whiche bare hym thorowe the ayre / the whiche le∣te hym fall by the cōmaundement of saint peter / & fell vpon the stones ye whiche bra¦ke his body. And ryght shortly after yelde vp his spyryte / & so deyed myscheuously. / Another example of two enchauntoures /
zaroes and arphasat ye whiche deceyued ye people in many maneres. And they were brente & bruyled of the fyre & of the lyghte¦nynge the whiche dyscended from heuen. Whan saynt symon & saynt Iude sholde be martred in lyke wyse as we rede in the legende of those appostles. ¶Another ex¦ample how he the whiche slewe saynt leo∣degayre yede oute of his wytte & cast him¦selfe in ye fyre / & so was brent as it is wry∣ten in ye legende of saynt leodegayre. Ano¦ther example how the preest of the ydoles the whiche coūsaylled that men sholde sle saynt Vitall / yede oute of wytte / & by se∣uen dayes was posseded of the deuyll / & drowned hymself as it is wryten in the le∣gende of the sayd Vytall. Another exam∣ple how the emperoure domycyen ye whi∣che put saynt Iohan the euangelyst to de¦the & made hym to be put in a tōne of oyle was slayne yt yere. And all his dedes we∣re reproued yll of ye senatours as it is wry¦ten in the legende of the sayd Iohan. E. ¶Another example how dyascorus ye whiche was ydolatre deyed euylly. lvii. IT is wryten how dyascorus was fa¦der vnto saynt Barbara / ye whiche was a grete lorde (but ydolatre) And for as moche as the sayd doughter saynt bar∣bara made her to be baptysed & ne wolde byleue ne worshyp the ydoles / ye sayd dyas¦corus betoke her vnto the iuge marcyen / for to torment her & to punysshe by mar∣tyrdome / and soo was it done. And after that she had endured many martyrdoms and yt the sayd marcyen was confused he sent her agayne vnto dyascorus / ye whiche ledde her on a hye mountayne / & to make shorte there byheded her wt his owne han¦des. And afterwarde as he came agayne in dyscendynge the sayd mountayne ven∣geaunce & punycyon dyuyne folowed / for fyre / lyghtenynge / & tempeste dyscended vpon him & was brente & consumed in su¦che wyse yt of his body there ne abode pou¦dre / ne asshes / ne other thyng of hym / and so mischeuously he ended his dayes as rea¦son was / & as done people of yl lyfe. F. ¶Another example how the prouoste Tarquyn the whiche was ydolatre deyed myscheuously. lvii IT is wryten in the legende of saint syluester / yt after yt the prouost tar∣quyne had made saynt thymothee to deye by martyrdome for that / yt he preched fer∣mely the fayth of Ihesu cryste / he cōmaū¦ded vnto saynt syluester to doo sacryfyce vnto the ydoles / or he wolde make him in the mornynge to be tormented by dyuers tormentes. And syluester sayd vnto hym Fole thou shalte deye this nyght and thou shalte receyue tormentes perdurables / & wylte thou or not yu shalte knowe the god the whiche we byleue to be true / & in eatin¦ge at dynere the bone of a fysshe abode in his throte the whiche he ne myght cast ne swalowe downe / so dyed he at mydnyght & was ledde vnto ye tombe with grete we¦pynges and lamentacyons / & saynt sylues¦ter was delyuered from pryson with gre∣te Ioye. So it appereth that people ydola¦tres & myscreauntes deye myscheuously. G. ¶Another example how the kynge of perse quosdros the whiche wolde be of all folkes praysed & worshypped as god / had the heed stryten of.
IT is wryten in ye exultacyon of the crosse / that the kynge of per¦se quosdros put vnder his empi¦re many realmes of the worlde After he dyd make a toure of sil¦uer and golde where the precyous stones dyde shyne / & made ye ymages of the sōne & of the mone & of the sterres in semblaū∣ce of an heuen. And a precyous sege wher¦in he sat / & made hym to be worshypped as god. More ouer he had a sone moche or guyllous / greate & puyssaunt the whiche made the warre / the whiche fought vpon a brydge agayne the humble prynce eracli¦us. For to be shorte god gaue grace vnto the sayd prynce eraclius in suche maner yt he dyscomfyte the orguyllous in fyghtyn∣ge. And after yode vnto the sayd toure & stroke of the heed of the sayd kynge quos∣drus for that yt he ne wolde byleue in god So it appereth that the proude men and mysbyleuers fyned theyr dayes mysche∣uously. H. ¶Another example of the dethe of the ydolatres dacyen and Valeryen. lvii. IT is wryten in the legende of saint Ypolyte that dacyen and valeryen emperours deyed myscheuously / for after that they had made to sle by martyrdome saynt laurens / saynt Ypolyte & many cris¦tiens / he moūted in to a chayre for to goo to tormente of other crystyens / & dacyen was rauysshed of ye deuyl / cryed. O Ypoly¦te hath rauysshed me / & holdeth me wt gre¦te chaynes. And valeryen cryeth. O Lau¦rens yu drawest me boūde with chaynes & deyed incontynent. And Dacyen retour∣ned vnto the house / & was thre dayes tor∣mented of the deuyll / & deyed euylly. I. ¶Another example of the dethe of kȳ¦ge Yrache ydolatre. lvii. IT is wryten in the legende of saint mathieu yt after yt the kynge Yrach had made to sle saynt Mathieu ye fyre to∣ke in his palays ye brent & wasted all / & no¦ne ne escaped but onely ye kynge / & one of his sones was rauysshed of the deuyl / and began to crye the synnes of his fader and so yode vnto ye sepulcre of saynt mathieu And his fader was a foule lepre ye whiche slewe hymselfe with his swerde whan he sawe he ne myght be hole. H. ¶Another example of the ydolatrye of Quincien. lvii. THe legende of saynt Agathe specy¦fyeth yt after that Quyncyen had made to cutte the brestes of the sayd saint Agathe and to deye by martyrdome / he en¦tred in to a bote & his two horses beganne to greune togyders / and the one of them bote hym / and the other stroke hym wt his fete and cast hym to a water in suche wy∣se that ye body of hym ne myght neuer be founde. L. ¶Another example of the dethe of ne∣ron. lvii. AFter yt Neron had made to crucy∣fye saynt peter & to beheed saint poule / & that he had cōmytte many other euylles for to make short he slewe himself with a sharpe staffe. M. ¶Another example of the dethe of Maximien. lvii.
AFter that maximien had ma∣de to sle and to martyr many crystyens towardes thende of his dayes he dysguysed hym & wolde cōmaunde to tyrannyse as a tyraunt. And he was pursued of con∣stancyen his sone in lawe the whiche ma∣de hym to be taken hastely / and soo fyned his dayes as it is writen in the legende of saynt Mauryce. By these examples befor¦sayd it appereth that the people of yll lyfe defyneth theyr dayes cursedly. Also those the whiche hathe dispysed and persecuted god and his seruaūtes / god them shal pu∣nysshe & persecute at the houre of theyr de¦the. And shall be iuged and punysshed af∣ter that that they haue deserued. Vn̄ psal. Tu reddes vnicui{que} iuxta opera sua. ¶Apostasia. A. ¶Examples of people apostates. And fyrste how Iulyen apostat the whiche lef¦te the crystyente & persecuted the chirche / deyed by punycyon dyuyne. lviii. IT is wryten how Iulyen the a∣postat was in his chyldhode in∣structe in arte magyk and after¦warde was monke. And stole & toke awaye from a woman thre pottes ful of golde as telleth mayster Io∣han beleth. More ouer he lefte the relygyō and yode vnto Rome. And in thende dide so moche that he was emperour of ye cyte of rome / as wele by moneye as otherwyse he dyde many ylles & persecuted the chir∣che. Also he fyned his dayes ylle. For as he yode in armes in batayll he sente vnto sa∣ynt Basylle bysshop yt he sholde prouyde hym of his necessytees vnto hym & vnto his hoost. He answerde that ye thynges of the chirche was not his: but gods. Than ye sayd Iulyen was angrye & swore yt at his retorne he sholde dystroye his chirche. and the sayd bysshop trusted in the kepynge of our lorde Ihesu crist & of the vyrgyn Ma¦rye put hym in fastynges / oraysons and almesdedes hymself his clerkes & his peo¦ple in requyrynge theyr ayde. And as the said bysshop was in orayson in his chirche requyringe ayde of our lady / he was rauis¦shed in spyryte before ye trone of god / whe¦re he herde ye vyrgyn Marye yt complay∣ned her vnto her sone of ye dystruccyon of her chirche. And god demaunded whiche was he yt wolde venge the iniurye of hys moder. And incontynent saynt Mercure martyr yt was buried in ye chirche offrid hȳ to do the sayd vengeaunce. Than he rose hym frome his tombe & armed hym & ca∣me in to the place wher euery man made hym waye / & with his axe of armes stro∣ke the sayd Iulyen apostat ye whiche toke of his blode hymselfe & cast it towardes ye skye & sayd. Thou hast vaynquysshed me nazareth / yu haste vaynquysshed me. And so deyed myscheuously / & his hoost fledde The sayd bysshop tolde by ordre ye sayd vy¦syon vnto his people & for token of trouth they ne founde saint mercure in his sepul¦cre the whiche was open / ne his armoure the whiche hange in ye chirche. And after thre dayes all was founde in theyr places And those the whiche came agayne from batayll tolde the trouthe of the dede. And they all yelded thankes vnto god the whi¦che delyuereth all those yt haue truste in hȳ as it is wryten. eccle .ii. {quod} null{us} sperauit ī dn̄o & {con}fusus ē. & dauid sayeth. In te spe∣rauerūt patres nostri sperauerūt & liberal¦ti eos. That is to say there is none yt hath hoped in god yt is confused. Also for truste yu haste delyuered our faders.
B. ¶Another example of Theophylle ye whiche was apostat / worshypped the de∣uyll renounced vnto god and vnto ye vyr∣gyn Marye / but he repented hym and af¦ter was saued. lviii. IT is wryten in the legende of oure lady that Theophylle desyred to be vycayre and rectoure of a bisshop / & for to come vnto his entencyon he yede to seche the counsayll and ayde of a cursed Iewe hebrewe sorcyer the whiche ledde hym vn¦to the sabbat of the deuyll. And soo moche yll he counsaylled hym that he drewe him to do ye wyll of the enemye / & that he was apostate / worshypped the deuyll / renoun∣ced god & the vyrgyn Marye / & betoke hȳ a lettre of his hande. After yt the bysshop founde hym so moche tempted & prycked that he constytuted ye sayd Theophylle to be his vycayre general. And whan he had regned an espace of tyme by the grace of god he reknowleged his faute / repented hym & dyde penaunce / & came before the ymage of our lady & wepte & waylled his synne by daye & by nyght / & contynued in fastyng & oraysons to requyre the ayde of the gloryous vyrgyn Marye / the whiche appered vnto hym / that sholde be a longe thynge to tell / but for to be shorte she gate his grace & was meane yt all was pardo∣ned hym. And yt the lettre wherin he was bounde vnto the deuyl vnto hym was res¦tored. Also yt he shewed before the sayd bis¦shop in grete congregacyon of people al ye case by ordre how it was done. And ano∣ne after he deyed in good consummacion & is of the nombre of ye saued. By this exā¦ple is to be vnderstonde yt ther nys in the worlde so grete synner but yt he may haue saluacion yf he wyl come agayn vnto god & do penaunce here. Vn̄ ysaie. lv. Derelī∣quat impi{us} viā suā: & vir n̄quus cogitacio¦nes suas & reuertat ad dūm & miserebit eius. C. ¶Another example of a monke ye whi¦che renyed god / his baptysme / & purpose of monke / after he repented hym / dyde pe¦naunce & was saued. lviii IT is wryten in ye lyf of faders how a relygyous was tempted of forny¦cacyon / ye whiche loued to moche ye dough¦ter of a preest of ye ydoles yt he demaūded herto wyfe / whiche preest gaynsayd hym tyll he had spoken wt his goddes. Then he spake to the deuyll yt tolde hym yf he wol∣de renye his god / his baptysme / & the pur¦pose of monke than gyue her vnto hym. / The said preest tolde it to ye monke yt was contente to renounce vnto ye thre thynges beforsayd. And incōtynent he sawe a why¦te douue goynge from his mouthe ye whi∣che flewe into heuen. And the preest retor¦ned to ye deuyll & tolde hym he had promy¦sed hym to renoūce / shall I gyue her vnto hym / & he sayd naye / for his god is not yet departed from hȳ but him aydeth. Whan the sayd relygyous herde yt he had greate repentaūce / & tolde his case vnto a good fader yt bad hym fast thre wekes contynu¦ally / & he sholde praye for hym. At thende of the fyrste weke the good fader hym de∣maunded. Hast thou ony thynge sene. and he answerde I haue sene in ye skye a dou∣ue fle ouer me / & at thende of the seconde weke. He sayd he had sene the douue fle af¦ter hym. And at the ende of the thyrde we¦ke he sawe her come ouer him and entred in to his mouthe / the whiche denoteth yt he had done all his penaunce for the reny∣enge of god / and yt god hȳ had pardoned.
By this example a man may vnderston∣de that grace and vertue departe theym from the persone the whiche renyeth god. or synneth mortally. Also a man may kno¦we that grace cometh agayne vnto syn∣ners / whan they repente them and do pe∣naunce. &c. D. ¶Another example of a bisshoppe the whiche renyed god for to escape ye tormen¦tes of the incredules / the whiche repented hym afterwarde dyde penaunce and was saued. lviii. IT is wryten in ye lyfe of faders how a good fader walked .xvii. dayes by a countre of desert for to se yf he sholde fynde ony the whiche serued god. And he foun¦de a lytel habytacle. And by it a tree of pal¦me. And a man beynge there the whiche had grete heere / and the berde whyte of a¦ge the whiche couered hym. And he was poorely clothed. Also he was of terryble lo¦ke. Whan he sawe me he yode in orayson / and whan his orayson was fyned he dyd knowe that I was a man toke me by the hande & axed me how I was comen the∣der / and whether the persecucyons were yet in the worlde. I answered hym that I was comen theder vnto hym ye whiche serued god for the grace of him. And how the persecusyons were ceased by the puys∣saunce of god. And I prayed hym that he wolde tell me how he was comen theder. And in wepynge sayd vnto me. I was a bysshop / & of the myscreauntes I had of persecusyons & tormentes. And for asmo¦che as I ne myght bere the sayd tormen∣tes I renyed god & dyde sacrefyce vnto ye fals goddes. After yt I reknowleged my synne & gaue me in to this hermytage to deye & do penaūce. And it is .xlix. yere syth that I haue ben here in confessyon & pra∣yer yt god me wolde pardon my synne. I haue lyued of the fruyte of this tree ye god hathe gyuen me. And I haue not had of consolacyon of my sayd synne tyll vnto. / xlviii. yeres. In this yere here I haue had consolacyon. Whan he had sayd these wor¦des here / he rose vp and yode oute / & there was in prayer a longe space of tyme. And whan his orayson was ended he came vn¦to me / and whan I behelde hym I had fe¦re / for he was as tyre. And he sayd vnto me drede not god hathe sente the heder to thende that thou bery my body. And whā he had spoken these wordes / he stretched out his handes and so deyed. And I dys∣poylled my robe I cutte the halfe / & with the one partye I couered wrapped / & be∣ryed the holy body and with the other half I couered my body. And incontynent the sayd tree waxed drye. And his habytable fell downe. Than I wepte strongly & pra¦yed god that he wolde lende me the sayde palme. And how in yt place I sholde perse¦uer ye remenaūt of my lyfe. And I knewe that it was not the wyll of god I retour∣ned in to the worlde and shewed this thȳ¦ge. Many thynges be to consyder in thys example. ¶Fyrste a man sholde vnderstō¦de that yf the sayd bysshop had not repen¦ted hym correcte and amende he hadde be dampned. ¶Secondly a man sholde con¦syder ye by penaunce he was saued. Thyrd¦ly it is to consyder the greate austeryte of lyfe / as to ete but one fruyte / and not to lye in bedde / ne to haue of clothynge ne cō¦solacyon of persone / & to be so longe tyme as is .xlviii. yeres without hauynge reue∣lacyon ne consolacyon of his synne. &c.
E. ¶How a crysten man loste the crowne of glorye by that that he renounced ye crys¦tendome. And a paynym wanne it. lviii. THe disciple saith in his sermons yt it is wryten how one tyme .xl. cris¦tyens were take of the myscreaūtes. The whiche crystyens were put in the tyme of wynter in a tonne of colde water there to suffre martyrdome. And as they were in the sayd torment a paynyme sawe by the suffraunce of god .xl. aungelles the whiche helde .xl. crownes ouer theyr hedes And in the ende one of the sayd crystyens sayd yt he renounced vnto the crystendome by su∣che condycyon that men sholde take hym oute from the vessell. And incontynente yt he was taken out one of the sayd aūgelles flewe in to heuen with one crowne. And ye sayd paynym the whiche sawe this thyng sayd. And I byleue in hym for whom the∣se here suffre payne. And he was put wtin the sayd tonne of water to suffre. And he the whiche was taken oute demaūded hȳ who it was the whiche conuerted hym so soone. Than he tolde hym by ordre that / yt he had sene. So he that whiche ne perseue∣red as the other loste the crowne of glorye all be it that he had wele begonne. And ye paynym the whiche perseuered with yt o∣ther had the crowne eternell For to be sa∣ued it suffyseth not to begyn wele / but it behoueth to perseuer. Vnde mathei deci∣mo. Qui perseuerauerit vs{que} ī finem: hic saluus erit. Saynt bernarde sayeth. I we ne that it is a good lyfe to suffre yll / and to do good operacyons. And soo to perseuer tyll vnto the dethe. F. ¶Another example of a man yt gaue yl counsayll for to make martyr ye crystiens & make them renye theyr faith / & that coū¦sayll redounded fyrste vpon hym. lviii. THe dyscyple recyteth in his prom∣tuarye how a mayster werker ga¦ue folysshe counsayll vnto a tyrant called Valeryen the whiche dyde do make a gre¦te bulle of brasse holowe within / & that the crystyens were put in that bulle and of fy¦re vnder for to torment them. And sayd ye theyr voyces sholde resounde not as men but they sholde belowe as bulles. The ty∣rant dyde do make it / but of the ordonaū∣ce dyuyne the sayd werker the whiche had gyuen the counsayl there was fyrst punys¦shed & put in by the sayd Valeryen for to here his voyce how he sholde belowe and braye. So the cursed counsayll that he ga¦ue came fyrste vnto hym before other as reason was after god and the scryptures Vnde eccle. xxvii. Qui fodit foueā vt no∣ceat proximo in illam decidet. Et qui sta∣tuit lapidem proximo offendet in co: et q laqueū alio ponit peribit in illo facienti ne quissimū consilium su{per} illud deuoluetur et non agnoscet. Vnde veniat illi. Et dauid in psal. Lacū aparuit et effodit eum: et ī cidit in foueam quam fecit. ¶Exempla contra hereticos. A ¶Examples to confoūde heretykes / & fyrste example how the deuylles kepte frō brennynge an heretyke / but whan ye hosty was there they myght not kepe hym. &c. MEn fynde by wrytynge in some bo¦kes. Also ye dyscyple recyteth it in his promptuarye and sayeth / that as an heretyke the whiche sholde be brenned / ye
Whan he was caste in the fyre he cryed. / Helpe me / ayde me. And incontynent the deuylles drewe hym oute of the fyre. And he therin was cast agayne / and the deuyl∣les drewe hym oute agayne. And in this hangynge the good catholyckes dysputed of the fayth. And a good predycatour said vnto the bysshoppe. Make ye body of Ihe¦su cryst to be brought. Whan it was brou∣ghte the sayd heretyke was caste in the fy¦re as before. He cryed helpe me. And the de¦uylles answerde appertly / we ne may: for a more grete mayster than we is comen / & so was he brente / they ne myght resyste agayne god almyghty. Quia non erit im¦possibile apud deum omne verbum. Vt di∣citur luce. i. ca. Also god is the strength of all his people that sayth dauid. Vnde psal Dominus fortitudo plebis sue. &c. B. ¶Another example how an heretyke was dombe by the vertue of ye fayth. lix. IT is wryten in the promptuary by the dyscyple this yt foloweth / There was a faythfull & deuout crysten man albeit that he was an ydiot. And an herytyke moc∣ked hym of the fayth yt he helde. And wen¦de to haue beten hym downe / but the said faythfull crysten man put hym in oraison And lyfte vp his eyes and sayd before all vnto the heretyke. I cōmaunde in the ver¦tue of the fayth crystyen that thou ne de∣clare ne blaspheme ony thynge agayne it that is agayne the fayth. And forthwith he was dombe before all. And ye crystyens reioysed them and the herytykes were all confounded. B. ¶Another example how a cautellous heretyke was brende of a fole demonyacle MEn fynde by wrytynge thys the whiche foloweth how ye dyscyple recyteth in his trōp¦tuarye and sayeth that there was an herytyke ryght cau∣tellous the whiche dredde to be soughte & brente for that that he yode agayne god & the fayth. And one demonyacle hym vaȳ¦quysshed / and was ledde in to a chirche & bounde. And in that chirche was there a clerke posseded of the deuyll and bounde / The whiche clerke by the wyll dyuyne vn∣bounde hymselfe in the nyght folowynge And whan he was vnboūde he assembled the mattes / the strawes and benches of ye sayd chirche. And put them in a hepe vpon the sayd heretyke. And the sayd herytyke wende that yt woodman had played / and endured / & dyssymuled to call ayde vnto yt that the sayd clerke demonyacle toke of fy¦re of a lampe / and lyghted the sayd heepe of strawe. Than whan the fyre was takē the sayd heretyke began to crye. And at yt voyce the gardyens of the chirche ran all abasshed / the whiche wolde quenche the sayd fyre. But the said clerke foūde a glay¦ue in the sayd chirche / & vyolentely chased the sayd gardyens oute and brente ye sayd heretyke without ony taryeng. And inde¦de by ye iugement dyuine that clerke was delyuered of the deuyl. And appered plaȳ¦ly all hole heled. D. ¶Another example how the bysshop of heretykes fayned to gyue lyght vnto o∣ne that was blynde. lix.
THe dyscyple reciteth in his promp¦tuarye and sayeth that a bysshop of Arryens named Cerula seynge that he was confounded by the reasons and dys∣putacyons of the good catholyques he ga¦ue vnto a man of his secte fyftye peces of golde by suche couenaunte that he sholde fayne to be blynde & heled of the sayd bys∣shop. And Cerula passed in grete compa¦nye and excercyte of people of armes and of bysshoppes good catholykes prysoners The sayd man toke hym to crye & to saye O ye my ryght verytable Cerula beholde my blyndenes / & gyue me the experyence of thy vertue. For thou gyuest the syght to the blynde / the herynge vnto ye defe / thou helest ye lepres / and reysest the deed. Than Cerula drewe him a parte / touched his e∣yen and sayd. After our fayth that we by∣leue ryghtfully thyn eyes ben open and yu see clere. Forthwith that he had spoke his sayd wordes the eyes of the sayd accursed toke them to swelle soo horrybly that they wolde oute by grete dolour / the whiche in cryenge dyscouered ye malyce. And he cry∣ed in castynge the peces of golde and sayd Here is thy golde and yelde me agayn my syght. Than the man vsed of good coun∣sayll / and prosterned hym before the bys∣shoppes catholykes in wepynge and deny¦enge the enuye of the arryens. Than saȳt Eugenye bysshop made ye crosse vpon his eyes gaue hym helthe & receyued his sight Whan the kynge sawe this thynge noted that his secte was confoūded / and that ye fayth catholyke was exalted / made to tor¦ment ye sayntes of god in dyuers maners and incontynent the sonne wexed derke / And the sayd kynge was posseded of the deuyll in suche maner that he tere hym wt his owne tethe. And so fined his dayes by dygne torment. Chaton sayeth. Tēpori∣bus peccata latēt & t{pre}e parent. The sȳnes some tymes hyde them but in tyme & pla¦ce they appere. Also the gospel sayeth that there nys thynge so bestowed & hidde but that it be wyste and knowen / & that it ne come manyfestly before all Nichil occul∣tū est qd nō sciat: nec abscōditū quod non agnoscat et in palā veniat. &c. E. ¶Another example how a symple bys∣shop vaynquysshed an heretyke right gre¦te phylosophre. IT is wryten in the hystorye ecclesy¦astyke that many phylosophres ga¦dred them togyder to thende yt they sholde warre agayne the fayth of Ihesu cryste. / And amonge those philosophres ther was one vnto whome none ne myght resyste / For he soylled lyghtly all the argumentes Than a simple bisshop was moued agaȳ hym & demaunded audience. And these o∣ther crystyens the whiche knewe his sym∣plenes dred yt he ne sholde fayll vnto pur∣pose / but for his holynes they ne durst de∣fende hyme. The whiche in arguyng with that phylosophre purposed yt Ihesu cryst had taught to eschewe the fallaces dyabo¦lykes & to byleue in one god / & in Ihesu cryste his sone / and in sayenge all the sym¦bole sayd vnto the phylosphre. Tell me yf thou bileue so. Than incontynent as he herde the fayth comynge out of his mou∣the he was enlumyned and bileued & said vnto those yt whiche were present. Whan I haue herde ye wordes of the one and of the other I haue yelded worde for worde But whan the dyuyne vertue was appro¦ched I ne myght ferthermore answer ne more agayne saye vnto the fayth cristien but I me consente I am enlumyned of ye fayth.
F. ¶Another example how by the penaū¦ce and good example of saynt domynyke he conuerted an heretyke. lxi. THe dyscyple recyteth in his promp¦tu arye this the whiche foloweth / the whiche is wryten in other bookes and sayeth that as saynt domynyk yode to dis¦pute agayne the heretykes with many re¦lygyous & preestes. And for as moche as they ne knewe the waye they demaunde it of a man & wende that he had be a good catholyke / but he was an heretyke. The whiche sayd with good wyll I shal shewe you the waye / & so I shall lede you tyl vn¦to the place. Than he them ledde thorowe a forest / & malycyously them made so mo¦che to swerue and to go oute of the waye / that he them ledde thorowe the thornes & breres / so yt theyr fete & thyes were fulfyl∣led with blode. And saynt domynyk bare it pacyently & sayd vnto them. And by a grete ioyousnes admonested them to pray¦se god & to bere all pacyently / & sayd vnto them. Ryght dere frendes truste ye in god that we shall haue vyctorye / oure synnes ben nowe purged by the effusyon of oure blode. And that heretike the whiche regar¦ded the ioyous & meruaylous pacyence of them. And the good wordes of the man of god repented hym & vnto them declared the venim of his fraulde / renoūced vnto ye sayd heresye and reuoked hymselfe after¦warde & demaunded lyfe louable. ¶Exempla contra fidem. A. ¶Examples of people yt haue not ben stedfast in ye fayth / & fyrst example of char¦mers yt in maste tyme charmed theyr hog¦ges. lx MEn fynde by wrytinge this yt w¦che foloweth / how ye disciple recy∣teth in his boke & sayeth yt a man deuoute founde the deuyll in a forest in mannes ly¦kenes / he asked hym what he dyde there He answerde I kepe the hogges here that hathe ben charmed yt the wulues & cruell beestes ne deuoure them. And to thende ye men put to fayth vnto ye sayd charmours and that they abyde in theyr erroures. I kepe them in all dylygence. B. ¶Another example how a deuyll lyed vnto a noble man / & put hym in erroure wenynge to deceyue hȳ in his dethe. lx. SOme maysters hathe wryten this ye whiche foloweth howe the disciple reciteth in his prō∣tuarye & sayth that a man no¦ble and puyssaūt with his peo¦ple passed thorowe a forest by nyght. And he herde the voyce of a woman syngynge in lyke wyse as she had be nere by hym / & he sayd vnto his seruauntes / is there ony of you that wyll se this woman the whi∣che syngeth. And they ne wolde go. & they sayd vnto hym that they ne wolde go. He theder yode all alone and founde her vn∣der a tree. The whiche was also as a blac¦ke nonne the whiche songe holdyng ye han¦des towarde heuen. And the sayd noble as¦ked her what she dyde there. She answe∣red. I prayse here my god / he byleued yt she was one of ye holy women. He prayed her in saynge. I praye the tell me what thinge is to come vnto me. She answerd thou haste done many ylles & yet shal doo And after that thou haste ouercome thyn enemyes / thou shalte passe the see & thou shalte go in to the vyage of Iherusalem /
And thou shalte receyue the crosse and so shalte thou deye in the seruyce of thy lorde Ihesu crist. Whan he had herde these wor¦des he departed with grete Ioye. And as it was tolde hym he vaynquysshed his en¦myes. And in awaytynge to goo ouer the see he fell in to a greuous sekenesse. Than his frendes and the physicyens prayed hȳ that he wolde confesse hym & repente him of his synnes & to receyue the sacramen¦tes for the peryll of dethe. He ne wolde in no manere. And sayd that he ne sholde die yet. And as the physyens meruaylled thē of this thynge they called his broder car∣nall the whiche was a grete clerke / & tolde hym ye peryl of dethe & that he sholde war¦ne hym of his helthe. Whan the sayd cler∣ke had argued ye seke. He answerde. Thou art also a fole as these other / for I knowe wele that I shall not deye nowe. And the clerke in wepynge hym demaunded how he knewe it. Than he declared vnto hym that that the sayd woman had sayd vnto hym in the wodde. And ye clerke was stry¦ken of dolour in herte / said vnto hym. my dere broder it was the deuyll ye whiche ly∣ed vnto the ye whiche watcheth the and ta¦ryeth to haue the & to dysceyue ye nowe at thy dethe. Repente the thynke of thy helth & receyue the sacramentes. And without taryenge he repented hym demaunded ye preest requyred pardon / confessed his syn¦nes / & the erroure wherin he was / & esta∣blysshed his testamente / toke the body of our lorde / was anoynted & in good estate he deyed. And so men byleue that he was delyuered from ye malyce of deuylles And the sayd clerke broder of the deed knewe the bounte of Ihesu cryst / entred in to re∣lygyon in to the ordre of prechers. And lef¦te in the worlde many of goodes. &c. C. ¶Another example how a woman in erroure byleued in a byrde the whiche is called a cuckowe. lx MEn fynde by wrytynge this ye whi¦che foloweth how the dyscyple re¦cyteth in his promptuarye & sayth yt a wo¦man was seke tyll vnto ye dethe / & her do¦ughter sayd vnto her. My moder sende to seche the preest & confesse thy synnes. Vn∣to whome the moder sayd. What nedeth it I shal be hole to morowe. And whan ye doughter sawe how she empayred she ma¦de ye neyghbours to come theder / warned her to confesse. Vnto whome she sayd. I shall not dye before .xii. yeres. for yt cokow tolde it me. In thende she was dombe in suche peryll. And her doughter made the preest to come with the body of god. And the preest demaūded her yf she wolde ony thinge confesse / she sayd alonely cokow co¦kowe. And soo the preest retourned / & she so deyed. &c. D. ¶Another example how a relygyous in erroure byleued that he sholde lyue. xxii yere / & he ne lyued but two yere. lx THe dyscyple reciteth in his promp¦tuarye how yt a relygyous cōuers herde synge a byrde the whiche is called a cokowe. He nombred the tymes yt she san∣ge without ceasynge / & he founde .xxii. the whiche he coūted for as many of yeres as he sholde lyue in this worlde. And said for certayne puttynge to fayth yt he sholde ly¦ue yet .xxii. yeres. More ouer he sayd wher¦fore shall I make me leue in relygyon so longe tyme. I shall retorne in to ye worlde xx. yeres. And I shall repente me ye other
two yeres the whiche ben yet to come. but our lorde Ihesus ye hateth all deuyninges dysposed it otherwyse / for he lyued but .ii. yere / & was deceyued. Saynt poule saith in his epystylles. It is vnpossyble to plea∣se god without stedfast fayth. Sine fide ī possibile ē placere deo. And therfore men¦ne sholde put to of fayth in suche thynges incredybles. E. ¶Another example how that there is mo of women than of men dampned. THe dyscyple recyteth in his promp¦tuary that one deuyne conuerted vnto the fayth coniured one tyme the de∣uyll that he sholde shewe hym of the whi∣che was more eyther of men or of women dampned. The deuyll answerde that mo of women. And ye deuyne sayd. How may yt be / for there ben many vsureres / rauys∣shers / players / rybauldes / blasphematou¦res. &c. The deuyll answerde. It is as I haue sayd. And the deuyn constrayned hȳ to tell the cause. He answerde that it was for the sorceryes / & deuynynges / & how ye lyghtly they falsed theyr fayth catholyque Eue our fyrste moder byleued more soner vnto the deuyll the whiche spake by ye ser∣pent than vnto god the whiche defended that they ne sholde eate of the tree of ien¦ce of good & of yll. And by yt these women the whiche byleue to lyghtly go agayne ye fayth & cōmaundementes of god. And by that they go vnto dampnacyon. F. ¶Another example how some prepay¦red the table vnto deuylles bycause yt they wolde enryche. lx. THe dyscyple recyteth in his promp¦tuarye & sayeth that as saynt ger¦mayn yode to lodge in an ynne / he sawe yt after souper men prepayred agayn the ta∣ble & he meruayled. And he demaūded vn¦to whome men prepayred suche thynges. His hostesse tolde him yt good thynges sa there by nyght / to thende that they sholde enryche them in temporall goodes. And ye holy man waked by nyght. Whan the de∣uylles were come in manes lykenes / and that they were set at ye table / ye holy man suffred not that they yode cut of the house & yode to wake them of the house and de∣maunded them yf they knewe those per∣sones there. They answered that ye. And that they ben suche & suche. Than the holy man sente them vnto the houses of theyr neyghbours for to seyf they were there & they founde them in theyr houses. Whan they had reported it vnto the holy man / he constrayned the deuylles to tel what they were. And they confessed that they were deuylles and that they deceyued in suche wyse the men. &c. G. ¶Another example of a kynge ye whi∣che sente to seche counsayll of belzebub / & his messengers were brente of the fyre ce∣lestyall. And he deyed myscheuously. lx. IT is wryten in the fyrste chapytre of the .iiii. boke of kynges how the kynge Ozochias was seke in bedde. The whiche sent for messengers for to take coū¦sayll of belzabub god of Acharon. That is to vnderstonde yf he sholde lyue or dye of the sekenes. And the aungell of god came vnto the prophete Helye / vnto whome he seyd. Aryse & goo thou before the messen∣gers of ye kyng of Samarye & thou shalt
say vnto hym. Is it not the god of Israel yt is to vnderstonde vnto whome ye shold go to take counsayll / & not vnto belzebub god of acharon. For this thynge our lorde hathe said from thens that thou art moū¦ted yu shalt not dyscende / but yu shalte deye The said prophete made his message: and the sayd messengers retourned to tel it vn¦to the kynge. And ye sayd kynge said. why are ye come agayne. And they tolde how a man herye cladde vnto the raynes with a skynne is comen agayne vs. &c. ye whiche sayd it is Helye. Than ye sayd kynge sent vnto the sayd prophete a Capytayne and fyfty men vnder hym / ye whiche capitayn came vnto hym & said. Gods man ye king hathe cōmaūded that yu dyscende. Homo dei. Rex {pre}cepit vt discēdas. And Helye an∣swerde. Yf I be gods man dyscende the fyre from heuen & the deuoure & thy fyfty men. And incontynent the fyre dyscended from heuen & hym deuoured wt his .l. men And agayne the sayd kyng sente another capytayne with fifty men ye whiche were brente as the other in the same maner / & yet agayne the sayd kynge sente another capytayne and fyftye men vnder hym / ye whiche came before ye sayd helye / yode on knees & prayed humbly / not as the two o∣ther ye spake proudely / & said. Man of god ne dyspreyse thou my soule / ye fyre is dys∣cended from heuen yt hathe deuoured tho∣se yt haue ben sent towarde ye before me / & I praye the haue mercy on my soule / and the aūgell of god spake vnto the sayd pro∣phete & sayd. Dyscende with him & drede thou not. Than he came vnto the sayd kȳ¦ge with hym / vnto whome he sayd. For yt that thou hast sent messengers to take thi coūsayll wt belzebub god of Acharon / as & yf there ne hadde be of god in Israhell of whom thou mayst axe a worde. And ther¦fore from the bedde wherin thou art moū¦ted thou shalt not dyscende but thou shal deye of dethe. Than he deyed alter ye wor¦de of ye prophete. This example denoteth manyfestly howe a man sholde euermore seche counsayll after god & good maneres And so men sholde take hede to byleue ylle counsayll in lyke wyse as sayeth the saige Vnde ecclesiastici .xxxvii. A cōsiio malo serua aīam tuā. And by that yt these two fyrste capytaynes the whiche spake prou∣dely in sayenge / the kynge hathe cōmaun¦ded yt thou dyscende / is here to be noted yt god punyssheth boweth downe & dystro∣yeth the proude men. And exalteth & pre∣serueth the humbles as he byde the thyrde capytayne the whiche humbled hym on knees and spake humbly. &c. H. ¶Another example of a man the whi∣che gaue hymselfe vnto the deuyl bycause that he sholde enryche hym. lx THe dyscyple reciteth in his promp¦tuarye & sayeth yt a ryche man ca¦me vnto pouerte & afterwarde submyt∣ted hym of his good wyll vnto the deuyll to thende that he sholde enriche hym. And the deuyll toke hym & baptyzed hym in sa¦yenge. I baptyse the in the name of Lucy¦fer & of all the deuylles that thou be ours in body and soule. Afterwarde the deuyll toke hym many rychesses & sayd vnto hȳ For as moche as thou art ours yu sholdest bere oure token the whiche is pryde in clo¦thyng and in all thy membres. After that he had be in suche estate by some yeres it befell that he entred in to the chirche and herde a predycacyon of the mercy of god / And afterwarde abode in the chirche con¦tryte and sorowfull of his synnes. He fell prostrate vnto the erthe and prayed god
lyenge that he vnto hym wolde yelde hys grace / and that he wolde correcte all that that he had done. Whan our lorde had se∣ne his humylyte / his teres / & his wyll that he wolde correcte & amende his lyfe / pro∣fered from ye aulter & sayd. Aryse thou vp thy synnes be pardoned the. Go and sinne thou no more. The whiche arose and with the grete contrycyon that he had he was chaunged that is as an auncyent man so yt ryght fewe of his housholde knewe him more. The whiche dide afterwarde so gre¦te penaunce & tormented his body by cor∣reccyon that it was knowen that he had the lyfe eternall. Oure lorde sheweth hys mercy vnto synners whyles that they ben¦lyuynge in this worlde & shall shewe tyll vnto the iugement / but whan ye sayd Iu∣gement shall be come. He shall shewe and do Iustyce vnto the good & vnto the yll. I. ¶Another example of a woman the whiche renyed the fayth / slewe her chylde and betoke herselfe vnto the deuyll / and after had mercy. lx. THe dyscyple recyteth in his prom¦uarye how a woman had a hus∣bande the whiche vnto her was moche cō¦trarye. For whan he came fro the masse / From the market / frome the tauerne / he bet her euermore. And she toke coūsayl of an olde woman what she sholde do to the ende yt her husbande sholde loue her. She promysed her to fynde the meane / & ledde her in to a garnyer Whan she was there ye olde woman called the deuyll the whiche was present incontynent. Vnto whom ye olde woman said. This woman wolde ser¦ue you soo yt ye make yt her husbande loue her. He sayd yt he sholde do it wt good wyll so yt fyrste she muste slee her chylde yt she had. Whan she had slayne it she retorned vnto hym. Ye shall do yet a thynge / ye whi¦che is that ye shall renye the fayth and ye ayde of god and of al the sayntes. And she sayd that she consented / & that she cōmyt∣ted her vnto hym bothe body & soule. And the deuyll sayd vnto her. Go ye now al as∣sured vnto your house / than she theder yo de Ioyous. And her husbande came to be¦te her yt came from the tauerne. And as he had be before ylle & cursed / he was nowe more cursed. Whan she se that she was cō¦fused / she toke her to flee. And as she fled the deuyll ranne after her in semblaunce of her husbande & in semblable habyte / & on horsbacke / vnto whome he sayd. And accursed whether goest thou. She answe∣red I fle before you. Vnto whom ye deuyl sayd / retourne anone vnto thy house. For I promyse the I wyll bete the no more / nor do the yll. And so she lepte behynde hȳ vpon the horse / & wende it had be her hus¦bonde. Whan they were before the house / the deuyll vanysshed awaye so yt she wyst not where he was become. And her husbā¦de came for to bete her. Vnto whome she sayd. How fledde I before you this daye / & that ye haue brought me agayne. Ye ha∣ue promysed to bete me noo more. Whan he herde that she had fledde before him he began agayne to bete her. And so bet her so moche / yt she was as at ye dethe. And as she laye halfe deed in woūdes sayd. bryng me a confessour / vnto whom her husban∣de sayd / she wyl nowe confounde me and saye yt I haue slayne her / & defended yt no¦ne sholde goo for ye preest. She ceased not to crye brynge me a confessoure. In then∣de one of her seruaūtes wente pryuely to fetche the preest / ye whiche came at nyght with ye body of our lorde. But her husban∣de locked ye dore agaynst hym. And as he
was before the house ye woman cryed vn∣to hym sayng. My lorde at ye leest here me thorowethe walle (& thus she cryed) My lorde I confesse yt I haue slayne my chyl∣de / & haue cōmytted me vnto the deuyl in body & soule / & renyed the fayth of Ihesu cryste. And in grete contrycyon of her syn¦nes yelded vp her spyrite. And incontynēt god ye whiche is debonayre pardoned her all her synnes / & receyued her to grace / & made to bere her soule in to heuen by hys aūgelles. Her husbande se that & the prest & the presence by the permyssyon dyuyne. And therfore these synners sholde haue ye eye to requyre god the whiche is fader of pyte / mercye and forgyuenes. &c. ¶Fides. A. ¶Examples of the faith / & fyrst exam¦ple how a mountayne was put from one place into another for to conferme ye faith catholyque. lxi SOme doctours hathe wryten this the whiche foloweth how the disci¦ple recyteth in his sermons & sayeth howe in the towne of a kynge infydele myscre∣aunte yl and peruers came .v. bysshoppes cristyens the whiche assembled them the∣refor to make a consystorye. For one par∣tye of ye people of ye towne were crystyens And by the counsayll of an infydele ye sayd kynge made to come before hym the said bysshoppes vnto whome he sayd. Nere to this cite there is a mountayne ye letteth ye the see cometh not nere / the whiche sholde be a grete good dede yf the sayd mountay¦ne were taken awaye. And I can not fyn¦de the meane to make it to be take away. And I haue vnderstonde yt it is writen in your lawe that yf ony hathe fayth in your god as the sede of mustarde & that he saye vnto a mountayne yt it remeue in to ano∣ther place yt it shal be done incontynent & for asmoche as ye be the maysters of the lawe I cōmaūde you yt ye do make to be take awaye yt mountayne frome thens it is / bytwene this & suche a daye / or I shall make you to deye. Than the sayd bysshop¦pes were sory in sayenge amonges them that better it was to deye than to make ye sayd requeste vnto god for to obeye vnto the cōmaūdement of the sayd infydele / & that he ne was dygne that men vnto him sholde obeyene do the sayd pleasure. And as they waylled in awaytynge the dethe and the daye & the houre that they sholde be trode vnderfote. A good crystyen sym∣ple man & shomaker demaunded ye cause of theyr heuynesses. Answere was gyuen as it is sayd yt / that the kynge vnto them had spoken. And the sayd shomaker sayd Alas and shal our pastours & bysshoppes dye the whiche vnto vs precheth / techeth kepeth & susteyneth our lawe. And he yo∣de to make request vnto god / & said in this wyse. My god / my lorde / & my maister yf it be so yt I haue fayth in the in lyke wyse as a sede of mustarde after yt / that ye scrip¦ture speketh. I requyre the that the sayd moūtayne be chaunged in to another pla∣ce / and that our bysshoppes ben kepte frō dethe. And incontynent ye sayd moūtayne was founde in another place than it was accustomed to be. And the sayd bysshops were kepte frome dethe. It is that ye whi∣che is wryten mathei. xxi. Amen dico vo¦bis sihabueritis fidē et non hesitaueritis / & simōti huic dixeritis tolle & iactate ma¦re cito fiet et oīa quecū{que} petieritis in ora¦tione credentes accipietis. &c.
B. ¶Another example of a preest a good catholyque the whiche entred within the fyre for to approue the fayth / and he was not brente. MEn fynde by wrytynge in the lyfe of faders this ye whiche foloweth how the dyscyple recyteth in his promptu¦arye & sayeth yt there was a deuoute prest the whiche founde a grete doctoure here∣tyke of the manychees the whiche decey∣ued the symple people. And for asmoche as that doctoure was stronge to tourne & to take in wordes the deuoute preest sayd in herynge of all. Lyght a greate fyre of wodde in the myddes of the place. And en¦tre we bothe within the flambe. And he ye whiche of vs bothe shal not be brent. men shall byleue that he hathe the better fayth This thyng pleased vnto the people. and forthwith a grete fyre was made. Than the preest toke the heretyke and drewe hȳ with hym for to entre into the fyre. And the sayd heretyke sayd. It shall not be soo but euery of vs syngulerly therm shall en¦tre. Thou shalte entre in to it fyrste sayd the heretyke / for thou hast fyrste imposed it. And he blyssed hym and entred in ye na¦me of Ihesu cryst in ye myddes of ye flam¦be / & was there halfe an houre / & there yo¦de on the one syde & on the other. And the fyre neuer hurte him. Whan the good cris¦ten people sawe yt / they toke them to crye in grete admyracyon & sayd. Mirabiis de{us} ī sāctis suis. That is to saye yt god is meruaylous / yt is in doinge meruayles in his sayntes. Afterwarde they began to cō¦strayne ye heretyke yt he sholde entre in to the fyre / & he began to resyst & to wtdrawe hymselfe. Than the people toke hym and caste hym wtin the fyre. And incontynent the flambe of the fyre beset hym aboute & brente hym. And yelded hym so half brent And the people cast oute of theyr cyte the sayd heretyke with confusyon / and said ye seductoure brenneth lyuynge. And they to¦ke the preest with them in blyssynge god / ledde hym vnto the chirche with honoure And so the crystyens were ioyful / & the he¦retykes confounded. &c. This example de¦noteth that by the bounte & grete fayth yt the sayd preest had he was preserued and kepte from brennynge. And so had honou¦re before god and the worlde for puttyng hym in daunger of dethe for to defende ye fayth / and so sholde we do. &c. ¶Humilitas contra superbiā. C. Examples of humylyte of a holy nōne the whiche fayned to be a fole / & was scol¦yon of the kechyn. SAynt Basyll telleth that in a monasterye of women / there was a vyrgyn the whiche for the loue of god fayned to be a fole. And where the other vyr∣gyns were olde & wele ioconde / she lyued sobrely. And she serued al the other / neuer a nōne of forty ne se her eate / ne neuer sat she at the table / nor neuer toke she pece ne partye of brede / but gadred the grōmes yt fell from the table & made clene ye pottes And of yt she contented her / she neuer did ne sayd iniurye to none / she spake veryly tell / euery body she fledde as a fole. And vnto a holy man the whiche dwelled nere vnto the sayd monasterye came the aūgel of god vnto whome he sayd. Thou wenest to be grete / wylt yu se a woman more holy than yu. Go vnto suche a monastery wher thou shalte fynde one of them the whiche
hathe a crowne vpon the heed the whiche is more holy & better than thou / the whi∣che fighteth agayne the people nere vnto her & nyghte and daye / & her herte depar∣teth not from god. Than he came vnto ye sayd monasterye and desyred to se all the relygyeuses the whiche came with greate Ioye vnto the holy man & set them at his fete. And for as moche as he ne sawe her for whome he was come / he sayd brynge theym all vnto me there lacketh one. And they said that they sholde make the fole of the kechyn to come. The whiche ne wolde come / for she knewe the sayd dede by reue¦lacyon. And they sayd vnto her. Sctūs pi¦rus vocat te. Than she yode theder. And whan ye sayd saynt sawe her he fell at her fete and requyred her benedyccyon. Than she gaue it vnto hym. And also she requy∣red the benedyccyon of hym. And the laid relygyeuses hadde shame the whiche sayd vnto hym. Abbot doo not that thynge she is a fole. And he answered them / ye ben all foles. Please it vnto god that I were foū¦de at the daye of Iugement also dygne & worthy as she is. And whan they herd the¦se wordes / they yode on knees to crye her mercye. Whan the sayd saint was parted she myght no more bere the glorye yt they dyde vnto her. And she parted & lefte the house / wheder she yode / & how she ended her dayes it came not vnto knowlege for to speke of certayne. But men presuppose that she is saued. &c. ¶This example de∣noteth that for to be of the nombre of tho¦se the whiche ben perfytely good. It beho¦ueth to dyspyse the prayse & honour of the worlde & to haue humylyte & pouerte as hadde the sayd woman. Vnto purpose of this example the holy scrypture putteth. Si quis int vos voluerit sapiēs esse stul∣t{us} fiat vt sit sapiēs. sequit. Sapiētia hui{us} mūdi stultia ē apud deū. That is to say yf ony amonge you hath wyl to be wyse ma¦ke hymselfe a scole vnto the wysdome of this worlde the whiche taketh hede vnto pryde / auaryce & vanytees. And he be say¦ge as vnto god And fulfylled of grace and of vertues for the gospell sayeth that he ye whiche humbleth hym & boweth downe shall be lyfte vp and honoured in glorye. Vnde mathei. xxiii. Oīs qui se humiliat exaltabitur & qui se exaltat humiltabitur. Et legit iob. xxii. Qui enī humiliatus fue¦rit erit in gloria. ¶Secundū preceptū. Blasphemia. A. ¶Examples of those the whiche hathe blasphemed & sworne god & his saȳtes vn¦prouffitably. And fyrst of the sone of a wo¦man of Israhell ye whiche was stoned by the cōmaundement of god for his blasphe¦me. &c. IT is wryten in the byble in the .xxiiii. cha. of ye boke of nombres that one of the sones of the wo∣men of Israhell toke stryfe and noyse with a man of Israhell / ye whiche sone blasphemed the name of god & cursed hym. And afterwarde was ledde vnto Moyses. His moder was called salu¦myth ye whiche was proceded of the ligne of dan. Moises made yt blasphematour to be put in prysō / tyll men knewe what god sholde cōmaūde / for in ye tyme he spake to moyses & sayd. Lede the blasphematoure withoute the castelles & put they all theyr handes vpon his heed ye whiche hath har¦de ye blaspheme / & all the vnyuersall peo∣ple caste stones at hym & slee hȳ / & so was it done. And more ouer god sayd to moise
Say vnto the chyldren of Israhel that ye man the whiche hathe sayd yll of his god shall bere his synne. And he the whiche ha¦the blasphemed the name of ye lorde shall deye of dethe / the multytude of people re¦buke hym & slee with stones. Vnde leuiti. xxiiii. Homo qi maledixerit deo suo: porta¦bit pcim̄ suū. Et quiblasphemauerit no∣men dn̄i morte moriat: lapidib{us} oprimet eū oīs multitudo populi. Syth yt it is so yt god made to stone & to sle the blasphema¦toures yt regned in this worlde in the ty∣me of Moyses. It foloweth wele that he shall punysshe theym terrybly after theyr dethe yf they deye impenytentes. Yf men drede the punycion of this worlde / a man sholde yet more drede the punycyon eter∣nell. The persone ye whiche blasphemeth iniuryeth & sayeth yll of his god / his kyng his Iuge & mayster is not wyse / ne he ne may do wele. For he deserueth to haue pu¦nycyon and to be pryued as was he ye whi¦che was stoned the whiche is an example the whiche sholde drawe backe all perso∣nes from blasphemynge god. Yf all ye blas¦phematoures the whiche regneth in this worlde were stoned / many sholde be deed the whiche ben alyue / but they sholde dre∣de to be stoned and punysshed in helle. B. ¶Another example of a chylde of the aege of fyue yeres blasphematour ye whi∣che ye deuylles slewe in ye lap of his fader. IT is wryten in the fourth booke of the dyalogue of saynt Grego∣rye. That in a cyte there was a man knowen of all / & puyssaunt the whiche had a sone that he lo∣ued to moche carnally / and nourysshed hȳ to moche softely without correccyon. And that sone had of custome a thynge ye whi∣che is greuous to tell and to here / the whi¦che is that he blasphemed the maieste of god whan there came vnto hym ony thin¦ge in courage / he was of the aege of fyue yeres. And one daye as his fader helde hȳ in his lappe / in lykewyse as many vnto saynt Gregorye it wytnessed ye whiche we¦re presente. The sayd chylde sawe come to hym the yll spyrytes that ben the deuylles his eyes wepte / he cryed vnto his fader / Helpe me defende me. And in cryenge he declyned his face and hydde hym in the bo¦some of his fader ye whiche was abasshed to se hym in suche wyse tremble and crye demaundynge what he sawe. The chylde sayd the blacke men of moryenne ben co∣me the whiche wyll bere me awaye. And as he blasphemed the name of the maies∣te he yelded vp his spyryte. Saint Grego¦ry sayeth vpon this example that al lytell chyldren the whiche speke yll a man shold not byleue that they entre all in ye realme of heuen. For vnto some lytel chyldren the sayd realme is closed by theyr parentes / yf they ben yll nourysshed. Vnde gregori{us} Omnes paruulos qui iam loqui possunt regna celestia ingredi credendum non est quia nonnullis paruulis regni celestis adi¦tus a parentibus clauditur si male nutri∣antur. After the scrypture euery persone is bounde to holde and to kepe the cōmaū¦dementes of god in that aege that he may them comprehende. Statim enim cum quis sit capax precepti dei tenetur ad eius noticiam et obseruantiā distinctione. xvii Some ben more aduysed and sage in the aege of fyue yeres than the other ne ben at .x. And by that that incontynente that the persone maye dyscerne that he dothe good or ylle. And that he hathe dyscrecion for to vnderstonde the cōmaundementes of oure blessyd lorde Ihesu cryste clerely /
He sholde accomplysshe them for that / yt they ben of necessyte of helthe. &c. C. ¶Of a player the whiche blasphemed the wombe of the vyrgyn Marye and yll came vnto hym. IT is wryten in ye boke of myracles of cleruaulx of two players after yt that the one had loste he wrathyd hym & had enuye vpon hym the whiche had won And for to satysfye vnto his wrathe / he be¦gan to refrayne and saye / holde thy peas. Thou ne sholdest say yll. And incontinent he blasphemed god. And after swore by ye vyrgyn Marye & to swere by her wombe And forthwith a voyce from heuen was herde the whiche sayd. I haue susteyned & forborne myne iniurye / but the iniurye of my moder I ne may forbere in no wyse / And orthwith this blasphematoure was stryken vpon the table inuysybly of a woū¦de vysyble and apperynge & in gaspynge yelde vp his spyryte. Cesar sayth yt this is true. This example sholde drawe backe al persones from blasphemynge god and the vyrgyn Marye. For syth that the said man was in suche wyse punisshed in this worlde cruelly. It is to presuppose that he is dampned & punysshed horrybly. &c. It is wryten ecclesiastici. xxiii. Vir multum iurans replebit iniquitate: et nō discedet a domo eius plaga. That is to say a man swerynge moche is fulfylled with iniqui∣te. And the plage shall not departe frome his house. &c. D. ¶Another example of an erle blasphe¦matoure. MEn fynde by wrytinge this ye whiche foloweth how the dis¦cyple recyteth in his promp∣tuarye / & sayeth that an erle brought for the suche blasphe¦me ayenste god that he sayd ye wolde god or not he sholde haue agayne his londe / & incontynent he fell from his hors vpon ye whiche he was / & was tormented horry∣bly. And after that the knyghtes had lyft hym vp agayne he felle / in shewynge the payn of his blaspheme. and whan he was broughte agayne in to his house he was strongly tormented in ye fete & in ye thyes / He dyspraysed confessyon & in suche wyse deyed myscheuously foure monthes after Also in ye sayd boke of the dyscyple is wry∣ten of rybauldes ye whiche dyuyded a hēne And afterwarde by wantōnes sayd / ney∣ther saynt Peter ne Ihesu cryste ne can make it hole agayne. And forthwith they were lepres. These examples here sholde drawe backe all persones to brynge forth wordes blasphemynge god / for punycyon and dampnacyon foloweth. E. Another example of a burgeis of paris yt had his lippes perced for blasphemȳge. IT is wryten in the legende of saint Lowys yt one of the cytezyns of pa¦rys blasphemed our lorde Ihesu crist / but the sayd saynt lowys kynge of fraūce ma¦de his lyppes to be perced with a hote yrō by punycyon & for to gyue example vnto other. And bycause some prȳces reproued hym for this thynge. He answerde theym I wolde wt good wyll susteyne in my lyp∣pes that payne & vnbesemynge whyles yt I shall lyue so yt this vyce were out of my realme. & yt no man sholde offende more.
Vnto the example of saynt Lowys men sholde reprehende and punysshe the blas∣phematours / for it is a synne the whiche displeaseth moche vnto god and vnto his sayntes. And those the whiche wyll go in¦to paradyse with them sholde correcte thē of that vyce. F. ¶Another example of a dyse player yt was a blasphemer the whiche brake ye ar∣mes of the ymage of the vyrgyn Marye / and he was posseded of the deuyll. lxii. IT is wryten in the myracles of the vyrgyn Marye yt some men played at the dyse before the ya∣tes of the chirche of the vyrgyne Marye of ye monastery of doul. And the one of them was wrothe for that that he had loste / and began to blaspheme the vyrgyn Marye / and to speke foully a∣gayne her. And in thende he tourned him towarde the ymage of the vyrgyn Marye the whiche was in stone vpon the yate of the sayd chirche / and in his wrathe keste agayne that a stone and brake the armes of the ymage. And incontynent the blode sprange oute of it fresshely. And the blas∣phematoure was posseded of the deuyll & was tormented & expyred his dayes. G. ¶Another example of a dyse player blasphematoure yt the deuyll slewe. lxii. SOme maysters hathe wryten this the whiche foloweth how the dysci¦ple recyteth in his promptuarye / & sayeth that it happened in the realme of Frise in patria lāditie of a dyse player blasphema¦tour / & thefe the whiche vsed his lyfe in su¦che thynges. And one tyme among other to abrege the matere after that he hadde cōmytte thefte yode vnto the tauerne to playe at ye cardes with his compaygnons and for asmoche as he lost he blasphemed horrybly god and the vyrgin Marye. And incontynent the deuyll came vnto hym to whome he gaue suche a stroke vpon ye he∣de that al the ioynctes from the membres of his body were dysceuered and departed and he dyed horrybly. Than his compayg¦nons fledde the whiche denounced the de∣de vnto his fader / and that he sholde goo to fetche his sone in a sack. And as ye said fader theder yode to fetche hym / he yode thorowe the chircheyarde. And one of his neyghbours deed seuen yere afore rose hȳ vp and came to mete with hym the whi∣che he knewe and demaunded hym. Acte not thou suche one deed of late / he answe∣red yes. I am sente frome god to tell the that thou burye not thy sone in this chir∣cheyarde with vs for his soule is damned and borne into helle for his synnes. And god hathe suffred that the deuyl hathe kyl¦led hym. Goo in to suche a place where he is / thou shalte fynde hym by suche tokens that all his membres ben departed frome his body / the whiche ben all stynkynge / & burye hym in a place prophane / & so was it done. This example denoteth thre thyn¦ges. The fyrst is that the sayd blasphema¦tour deyed myscheuously / & was punys∣shed corporally for his synnes. The secon∣de that his soule is buryed in helle with ye dampned of perdycyon in paynes and tor¦mentes. The thyrde denoteth yt the body of one dampned the whiche is deed many festly in mortall synne sholde not be bury¦ed in holy grounde with the good crysten men that be in paradyse.
H. ¶Another example of a knyght wt one eye the whiche was enlumyned for that that he smote a Iewe that blasphemed the vyrgyn Mary. lxii. MEn fynde by wrytȳge this yt foloweth / how ye dysciple recy¦teth in his boke of a knyght wt one eye the whiche with good wyll herde the masse of ye vyr¦gyn Mary. And on a tyme as he herde sal¦ue sctā parēs he kneled on his knees. Whā  Iewe sawe hym he began to mocke hym & blasphemed the vyrgin Mary. The sayd knyght ne myght bere the iniury yt he dyde vnto our lady / but gaue hym a buffet & en¦tred into the chyrche & herde masse deuout¦ly. And ye meane tyme the Iewe yede to cō¦playne vnto ye Iuge / & he ne myght tell o∣ther token of hym but yt he had but one eye Whan the people came forthe from masse he sayd knyght abode & dredde. The vyr∣gyn Mary enlumyned hym & commaun∣ed hym yt he sholde go forth hardely. Whā he Iewe sawe hym he sayd / yf this mā had ot two eyen I sholde say yt he were culpa¦le. And the knyght sayd. It i I yt smote the loue of her that hath restored myn eye / for whome I haue prepared to spende my body & my goodes. Whan ye myracle was seen & knowen grete praysȳges was there gyuen vnto ye vyrgyn Mary / & the knyght alowed. &c. H. ¶Another example of two players at ye dyse vnto whome there came yll for swe¦rynge and blasphemynge. lxii. IT is wryten in ye boke of hony fly¦es that in a towne of the partyes of Champayne a Iewe played wt a crysten man. And after that the sayd Iewe had lost many penyes he was moeued by impacyence. In thende he recouered his losse & wrothe hym ayenst our lorde Ihesus & blasphemed and cursed. And as he gadred the dyse for to cast them his hande closed vpon the dyse wtout beyn∣ge in power to helpe hymselfe. And thāne by cursed furour he was enbrased & enfor∣ced hym to smyte the table wheron he had played wt the sayd seke hāde. Agayn he blas¦phemed vntruely Ihesu cryst & his moder & forthwith he torned the eyen ouerthwart & fell to the erthe all deed. And the crysten man yt played with hym for feere loste his wytte / lāguysshed afterwarde & ended his dayes by cruell dethe. &c. ¶By this exam¦ple a man may se clere that yl cometh vnto players blasphemers. Also the dethe is euyl as vnto the body / it is to presuppose that it is ryght cruell & terryble as vnto the soule For in the fyre of hell they ben so moche tor¦mented that they haue dethe wtout deyeng & without endynge & defaute without de∣faylynge. And euermore in dyēge they shal lyue / And neuer dye they may not. K. ¶Another example how yll came vnto kȳge Semacheryb the whiche sent wor¦des blasphemynges agaynst god vnto Ezechyas. lxii. IT is wryten in ye .xxxvi. chapytre of the boke of Ysaie how kynge se¦macherib was meruaylously prou¦de for his grete puyssaunce of peo¦ple of armes & of rychesses / ye whi¦che toke many townes & castelles / & after came to besyege Iherusalem / & kynge Eze¦chias was within. Vnto the whiche Ezechi¦as he sent that he sholde delyuer the towne and to say vnto hym by grete pryde & elaci¦on. What is he of al the goddes of these lan¦des here the whiche hath power to delyuer
his lande and his people fro my hande / as yf he wolde say that none had power to re∣syst agaynst hym & who is so grete ye shall delyuer Iherusalem fro myn hande. And whan ezechyas herde his wordes here / he cut his clothes and clothed hym in a sacke / yede vnto ye hous of god / & sent Elyachym and the auncyent prestes clothed with sac¦kes vnto the prophete Ysaie to tell ye prou∣de wordes ful of blaspheme agaynst god yt the kȳge Sennacheryb sēt / & that he was besyeged. &c. And the prophete Ysaie sayd vnto the messageres. Illud Ysaie .xxxvii. Hec dicitis dn̄o vestro / ne timeatis a facie verborum que audistis quibus blasphema uerunt pueri regis assiriorū. Ecce ego dabo ei spiritum et audiet nuncium & reuertetur ad terram suam et corruere eum faciā gla∣dio in terra sua. &c. Say to your mayster that he drede not the wordes of the sayd kȳ¦ge. For to abredge this mater it is wryten in the sayd boke of Ysaie that the aungel of god strake and slewe .lxxxv. thousande mē of armes of the sayd kynge Sennacheryb And those of Iherusalem came in the mor∣nynge and founde the sayd deed bodyes / & the sayd kynge Sennacheryb fledde in to the cyte of Nynyue. And it was done that as he prayed his god in the temple his two sones drewe theyr swerdes & slewe hym in the sayd temple / & so he was punysshed of his pryde. And the sayd Ezechyas ye which clad hym wt a sacke / & the whiche humbled hym was delyuered. It is that / yt the gos∣pell of mathew speketh .xxiii. Oīs qui se ex¦altat humiliabitur / et qui se humiliat exal∣tabitur. ¶Periurium. A. ¶Example how a tauerner lost the vse or spekynge / for swerynge and blasphe∣mynge. lxiii THe dyscyple reciteth in his boke yt it is wryten how in the toune of Cluny there was a tauerne yll & of foule lyfe. For whan the people that yede to drȳke in his tauerne payed not his wyll he blamed get & the vyrgin Mary & spake many vylayne wordes. So it happened yt a man tolde hȳ yt he had well payed him that yt he ought h Than the sayd tauerner sware by ye tongue of our lady yt he lyed & that he had nothīg payed hym. And incontynent by the pun¦cyon dyuyne his tongue lept fro his mouth and he lost the vse of spekynge / & dyed ho∣rybly for the vyle wordes that he had sayd of god / & of saynt Mary. B. ¶Another example of some chyldren ye whiche sware / and in swerynge they we¦re drowned. lx IT is wryten in a boke that is cal¦led mariall how a good woman instructe her chylde to salue ye vyr¦gyn Mary. The whiche as he ye de wt other chyldren to playe they sware and stryued by a water side. The wa¦ter flowed vp the whiche drowned them al in blasphemynge / & reserued hym before sayd that our lady toke from the water & set hym on her lappe / conforted hym and sa¦ued. &c. ¶By these examples a man shold vnderstande yt swerynges ben to fle / & that it is grete synne & case too swere vaynely. And to name in suche wyse god & his sayn¦tes vnlefully. Legit ecclesiastice .xxiii. In rationi non assuescat os tuum / multus e¦casus in illa sequitur nominatio dei non sit assidua in ore tuo ne{que} in omnibus factorū admiscearis quoniam non eris immunis ab illis / quia omne iuramentum requitet a te.
C. ¶Another example how the heed of a swerer torned that yt was behynde befo∣re / and the cattes cryed vpon his graue after his dethe. lxiii. MEn fynde by wrytȳge this the whiche foloweth how the dys∣cyple recyteth in ye boke of his promptuary and sayth that a yonge man wrothed hym mo∣she / for that yt he had lost at the playenge at the tenes. Therfore he began to swere and to dyspyte god and the vyrgin Mary. And incontinent his heed was tourned that / yt was behynde before / and his tongue lepte out of his mouthe more than halfe a fote / and thre dayes after he deyed / and was bu¦ryed in an abbaye. But euery nyght there came so grete multytude of cattes the whi¦che made there so grete tempest that ye mō¦kes ne myght take no rest / and this dured longe tyme / soo longe that fynally it beho∣ueth to put hym out of the chyrcheyarde / & kest hym in a dyche. ¶Vota. D. ¶Examples how a man sholde accom¦plysshe his vowes. And fyrste example how the chyldren of ysraell accomplys∣shed theyr vowes after that they had vy¦ctory. lxiii. IT is wryten in the byble in the boke of Iudyth yt whan the chyldren of Is¦raell were besyeged of holofernes / & yt they felt grete necessyte they made vowes vnto god for to go in to Iherusalem for to make gyftes & oblacyon yf it pleased hym to dely¦uer them. And it is wryten in .xvi. chapytre yt after yt they had vyctory & that Holofer∣nes was slayne all they yode in to Iherusa¦lem to worshyp god & fulfyll theyr vowes. E. ¶Another example of a vyrgyn yt vo∣wed chastyte & after wolde be wedded. lxiii SOme maysters hathe wryten this the whiche foloweth how the dyscyple recyteth in ye boke of his promptuary / and sayth how a vyrgyn serued faythful¦ly in chastyte the vyrgyn Mary / & bounde herselfe by vowe to serue her & her sone Ie¦su cryst in chastyte vnto her dethe. And the deuyll of hell had enuy of her good operaci¦ons the whiche moeued the courage of a ry¦che man in her loue for her beaute / & dyde so moche that he demaunded her in marya¦ge / & offred worldly glory / honour / ryches∣ses / & euery day he ceased not by flateryes and promesses to drawe her soo to consent what more. The sayd vyrgyn was so we∣ry of the temptacyons of the ennemy yt she fell and consented to mary with the sayd ry¦che mortall man / & left the espouse of the kynge eternall the whiche is Ihesu cryst & the goodes perpetualles for to haue yt go∣des transytoryes. The day of the weddyn∣was constytute and set. And the nyght pre¦cedent ye day yt the weddynge sholde be as she rested in the hous of her parentes / she sawe in her dreme as she slept yt she was ra¦uysshed vpon the mouthe of a well / from ye whiche proceded so moche stynke that it se¦med vnto her yt the worlde was infect and vndone. And also kest so grete clowdes of smoke yt she thought yt all ye clerenes of the worlde was dryuen away / & all boyled of serpentes & wormes & of soules tourmen∣ted. And as she meruayled her of the horry¦ble clamours of those the whiche were wtin ye tourmentes she sawe sodaynly go forth of ye sayd well of these moryens of fyre they ben deuylles the whiche toke wtout dyfferē¦ce ye soules deputed to ye tourments & them plunged & kest wtin it. And as they drewe ye
sayd vyrgyn amonge ye other for to be plon¦ged there she loked on the one syde & on the other as despayred yf there were ony ayde & sawe a ferre of her auncyent lady the glo¦ryous vyrgyn Mary that torned to her ye backe. And the whiche was for yt she might not drawe her backe. In thende she cōuer∣ted vnto her with al her herte / & called her name and sayd. O lady thynke on thy han¦demayden constytute in so grete & bytter necessyte. And she approched more nere & sayd vnto her. What art thou. And she an¦swered I am thyn handmayden / I haue be euermore deuout in thy seruyce & in thy memory. And she sayd / it is not so / thou art not myn / for thou hast dyspised me and my sone / thou arte his that thou hast chosen / thynke on hym and he wyll delyuer yt. And she ne myght bere the wordes & sayd. O la¦dy ferre of is he fro me / fro my herte / & fro my mynde / delyuer thou thyn handmaydē and deferre it not. O dn̄a iam absorbet me {pro}fundū / iam vrget su{per} me pute{us} os suum. And she excused her for to ayde her & that the ennemyes drewe her without gyuynge vnto her dylacion. The moder of pyte Ma¦ry the moder of god approched vnto her / touched with her honde & toke her / & incon¦tynent the enmyes fledde ferre of / & durst nomore loke whan they sawe the helpe of ye moder of god. Than she spake & conforted her benygnely & sayd. Here ben the fruytes of ye flesshe / & the rewarde of volupt. Thou knowest not that thou gyuest the to be cast in this deluge of tourment / fle it now syth that thou hast seen thexperyence / & drawe the with all thyn herte and wt al thy might to recouer grace & to serue me in tyme to co¦me chastely / & I shall helpe the by my pra¦yers. Than the vyrgyn Mary departed & yelded the soule / & so she awoke. The fren∣des of the ryche man were there the whiche demaunded what the man sholde do. And she answered / mynystres of dethe departe ye ferre of / & in grete indygnacyon she put them backe. The parentes & all were trou∣bled / vnto whome & to al togyder she tolde all the thynge before sayd. And they left her fre whan they had herde that yt she had she¦wed / & she retorned vnto her fyrst purpose And with all her force she excercysed her in penaunce & wepynge for to recouer grace of the gloryous vyrgin Mary & of her dere sone Ihesus. And after ended her dayes in good purpose. &c. F. ¶Another example of a man yt had ma¦de a vowe the whiche was dampned. Al¦so example of rauayne & of the paynes of hell. lxiii. THe dyscyple recyteth in his prō¦tuary this the whiche foloweth the whiche is wryten in other bokes & sayth that as man pre¦ched of the crosse a carle vsurer bought agayne a vowe yt he made to Iheru¦salem / & yode to ye despensatour fraudelent¦ly & gaue vnto hym for his sayd vowe .v. li. & he myght well haue gyuen .xlviii. wtout to dysheryte his chyldren. And as this sayd carle sate in ye tauernes he sayd vnto other the whiche hadde made vowes. Ye foles ye shall passe the see in peryll of your lyues / & ye shall spende your substaunce. I haue a∣gayn bought my vowe for .v.li. And I shal abyde sure of my lyfe in my hous / & also I shall haue as grete mede as you. And on a nyght as he was in his bedde with his wy¦fe he herde in his myll moeuynge tempest as the wheles gryndynge / & he sayd vnto his sone. God se what is in the myll. The chylde yode & retorned anone by grete dre¦de and horrour / of whome the mayster de∣maunded / what hast thou seen. I haue had so grete fere at the myll dore yt I durst not
tary. And he sayd / yf the deuyll be there yet shall I go & se who it is. Than he kest his clothes vpon his sholdres and yode vnto ye myll / he was all naked sauf onely of ye sayd vestement. He opened the dore & loked wtin and sawe to blacke horses / & a blacke man by them the whiche sayd vnto the carle. Ha¦ste the / lepe vpon this hors the whiche is to the brought. The earle feered / & the blacke man sayd. Why taryest thou / caste downe thy vestement & come. There was a crosse on his garmēt. He was dyspeyred at ye voy¦ce and callynge of the deuyll & keste of his clothes and lept on the other hors. and they were incōtynent brought in dyuers places of paynes / in the whiche ye cursed sawe his fader & his moder in many other yt he had knowen. And he sawe a knyght named He lye of the castell horste yt sate strydlynge on a cowe / & the backe towarde ye hornes. The whiche cowe ranne on the one syde and on the other / & tourmented terrybly the sayd knyght in smytynge hym with her hornes in the backe. And the carle demaunded hȳ wherfore he suffred suche payne. He answe¦red. I haue taken away this cowe from a woman wydowe wtout mercy / & therfore she me tourmēteth sore. Afterwarde there was shewed vnto the carle a syege of fyre / & it was tolde vnto hym. Thou shalt retor¦ne now vnto thy hous / & after thre dayes yu shalte come agayne in to this place here / & thou shalte take thy rewarde in this syege After these wordes the deuyl brought hym agayne in to his mylle / & he founde his wy¦fe & his meyny as halfe deed / vnto whome he tolde that yt he had sene & how it was co¦men vnto hym. The preste was called for to confesse hym & to styre him to confessyon and to haue contrycyon. And he answered. What prouffyteth me these wordes here I may not repent me / for I se that in vayne I sholde confesse me / & I knowe that it is of necessyte to accomplysshe in me the thyn¦ge the whiche is dysposed. And the cursed man deyed in suche wyse without receyuȳ¦ge the sacraments of ye chyrche. &c. ¶They the whiche chaungeth theyr vowes sholde take hede therin to make fraude as dyde ye sayd man & to mocke other / for punycyon and dampnacyon there foloweth. Also the rauysshers sholde well note where punycy¦on & dampnacyon foloweth to take & to ra¦uysshe the kyen or other godes from theyr neyghboures as was punysshed the sayd knyght named Helye. Also people obstyna∣te ben to be blamed For yf ye sayd carle had repented hym & confessed he had be saued / but for his obstynacyon he was dampned eternally. &c. G. ¶Another exāple how a doctour yt had vowed & dyfferred to accomplysshe his vowe lost his syght. lxiiii. MEn fynde by wrytinge this ye whiche foloweth how the dys¦cyple recyteth in the boke of his promptuary and sayeth yt a doctour gretly lettred & cler¦ke after that he had vowed to entre in to ye ordre of freres in the cyte of melanke / and that he vnto them had assygned the day he was withdrawen of his scolers and wente into another cyte to thende yt he sholde te∣che his scyence / & that he ne se the sayd fre∣res. And on that day yt he brake his promes he lost his syght & abode thre dayes blynde At the last he reknowleged his synne & re∣couered his syght & entred in to the ordre / & therin was deuout and ended his lyfe in good consummacyon. H. ¶Another example yt it is peryll to dyf∣ferre to do his vowe. lxiii.
MEn fynde by wrytinge this ye whiche foloweth how the dys¦cyple recyteth in the boke of his promptuary and sayeth yt a yonge man named Iohan vowed that he wolde entre in to the ordre of Cysterciences / but he was replenysshed with slouthe & repented hym. And in stede of that vowe he made his pylgrymage vn∣to saynt in galyce Iames. And whā he had accomplysshed it he was receyued honora¦bly of his parents. And in his slepe he sawe hym ascyted before god / with whome was saynt Peter / saynt Poule / saynt Iames / saynt Iohan / & the other. And it semed hȳ that saynt Peter helde in his hande a fayre boke the whiche our lorde commaunded to open. And he sawe that the name of ye sayd Iohan was wryten in lettres of golde / & how our lorde commaunded that it were scraped out. Than saynt Iames fel prostra¦te before our lorde & requyred hym that the name of his pylgryme were not put out / & out lorde excused hym not. Than our lorde reproched hardly vnto the sayd Iohn̄ with grete Indygnacyon that he had contemp∣ned to accomplysshe his vowe / & he cōmaū¦ded vnto saynt peter yt he sholde scrape out his name. And saynt Iames fell prostrate yet agayne before god / & prayed hym that the name of his pylgrym were not effaced ne put out / in promyttynge for him that he wolde accomplysshe his vowe wtin .xv. da∣yes. Than the sayd Iohan awoke fro slepe & yelded thankes vnto sayd Iames / & pro¦mysed yt he sholde beginne before the terme And before the .xv. dayes he entred in to ye ordre of cystercyences / and was so good af¦terwarde that he was abbot and bysshop of Valence where he dyde many myracles & fynysshed his lyfe. &c. ¶This example denoteth yt those the whiche repente theym to haue vowed or that ne wyll accomplisshe theyr vowes ne shall be of the nombre of ye saued / yf they in suche wyse deye without amendement. It is here vnderstande by yt that god made to efface his name out of the boke of lyfe. And that / yt saynt Iames pra∣yed for hym denoteth that pylgrymage is agreable / whan ony dooth in the honour of ony saynt & remuneracyon there foloweth For the sayd man was saued by the prayer and meane of saynt Iames. &c. I. ¶Another exāple how a preste the whi∣che wolde not accomplisshe his vowe en¦ded his dayes yll. Also of his Iugement & of his punycyon. lxiii. IT is wryten in the boke of Peter of Cluny yt a preste cōmytted ma¦ny synnes the whiche as he was warned many times of ye pryour ot bonneuall that he sholde amen¦de his lyfe / yt he sholde renounce ye worlde / and that he sholde entre in to thordre of re∣lygyon. The whiche preest vowed yt he ther¦in sholde entre / but he accomplysshed not his vowe / & sodaynly he began to b seke / & sent for the pryour. Whan he was come he warned hym to accomplysshe his vowe wt∣out more dyfferrynge / & he began to crye so¦daynly. O fader praye for me. For two be∣res cometh to deuoure me. Than the sayd pryour with them present prayed for hym and forthwith he was delyuered / & yet he accomplysshed not his promesse. And agay¦ne he began to crye that men sholde praye for hym / for the fyre dyde renne vnto hym for to deuoure hym / and he was delyuered agayne at the prayers and requestes of the good man. And yet he contempned to ac∣complysshe his promesse and vowe / and as despayred he was rauysshed in the Iuge∣ment of god / and herde that sentence was gyuen agaynst hym for his synnes / and for
the brekynge of his vowe. And he was incō¦tynent brought agayne vnto the place fro whens he had ben rauysshed / and tolde the¦se thynges the whiche he hadde sene & her∣de and that he had nomore hope of helthe. And he put to and sayd. Here ben to deuyl∣les the whiche bereth a fryenge panne for to haue me fryed wtin it by perdurabylyte. And as he sayd the sayd worde a droppe of the fryture fell vpon his hande the whiche deuoured hym vnto the bones before all yt before hym were the presente / and than he sayd. Beleue ye now that here ben the de∣uylles the whiche casteth me in to the fry∣enge panne. And in spekinge these wordes he departed and ended his lyfe without cor¦reccyon. &c. ¶By this example a man shol¦de denote that he ought too accomplysshe his vowes and hȳ correcke & amende why¦le that he lyueth for to escape punycyon / & to haue saluacyō. The sayd preest was war¦ned of the holy pryour / and for that that he wolde not correcke hym he was dampned with the deuylles. K. ¶Another example of a carle the whi∣che vowed a cowe & her calfe vnto saynt Myghell and he accomplysshed not his vowe. lxiii. IT is wryten in some bokes. Also the dyscyple recyteth in his prōp¦tuary and sayeth how a carle led his cowe and her calfe vnto the mountayne of saynt Myghell fe∣red of the peryll of the see for the wawes of the water came vnto hym / & in cryenge he sayd. O saynt Myghell helpe me and dely∣uer me / and I shall gyue the my cowe and the calfe. And whan he was delyuered he sayd. Saynt Myghell was a veray fole to wene that I sholde gyue hym my cowe & my ealfe. And agayne the wawes of ye wa∣ter came vnto him / and yet he cryed & sayd O good saynt Myghell helpe me and dely¦uer me / and I shall gyue the my cowe and my calfe. Whan he was delyuered he sayd. O saynt Myghell thou shalt neyther haue cowe nor calfe. And as he was so as assured the wawes of the see came agayne the whi¦che englouted hym / and drowned hym and his cowe and calfe. L. ¶Another example how some Iewes made a folysshe vowe for to slee saynt Poule. lxiii. IT is wryten in the .xxiiii. chapytre of the dede of the appostles that mo thā .xl. Iewes vowed and ma¦de an othe that they sholde ney∣ther eete nor drynke tyll that they hadde put saynt Poule to dethe. And they departed and went to tell vnto the prynce of the preestes that they hadde vowed by deuocyon not for to ete nor drynke tyll that they hadde put to dethe ye sayd saynt Pou¦le. And that he sholde make the sayd Pou∣le to come afore hym for some cause. And ye sone of the syster of saynt Poule the which herde theyr malycyous counceyle wente & tolde it vnto saynt Poule the whiche foun∣de the meanes for to escape and eschewe ye cursed intencyon that they hadde conspy∣red agaynst hym. And than he was ledde and conduyted by nyght out of theyr boun¦des and fraudes. &c. Almyghty god dely∣uered his seruaunt from the handes & tou∣chementes of euyll people / the whiche had made cursed vowe and othe ye whiche they might not accomplysshe as reason was. &c ¶By the examples afore declared and she¦wed it euydently appereth that all maner of persones ought for too kepe theym well
from swerynge / from blaspheminge / & fro brekynge the vowes iustly made for the lo¦ue of god for to escape dampnacyon / & also to haue saluacyon. ¶Tercium preceptum. ¶Operatio. A. ¶Examples of thē the whiche hath bro¦ken the festes commaunded. And fyrst. Example of a man yt moyses made to be stoned for that yt he gadred wood on the holy day. lxiiii. IT is wryten in the byble in ye .xv. chapytre of the boke of nombres yt a man of the chyldren of Israel was founde gadrynge wood on the day of the feest commaunded He was taken & gyuen vnto Moyses and Aaron the whiche made hym to be put in prison for that yt they knewe not what they sholde do. And god sayd vnto Moyses the wordes the whiche folowe. Morte moriat homo ista obruāt eū lapidibus oīs turba ex¦tra castra. That is to saye / this man shall deye of dethe / al the company of the people cast stones at hym / & lete hym be broken & slayne without the castels. And thus was done ye cōmaundement of god. ¶By this example a man sholde knowe ye it dysplea¦seth to god to werke on the feest commaun¦ded. It was a lytell thynge as to gadre wo¦de / but it is a grete thynge as to breke the commaundements of god yt sayth. Kepe & sanctyfy the feest wtout werkynge theron. By this that god commaunded that he we¦re stoned / slayne / & punysshed is to vnder∣stande that so shall be those the whiche bre¦ke the feestes / in lykewise as god sayth in ye holy scryptures. Vn̄ psal. Si iusticias me∣as prophanauerīt et mandata mea non cu¦stodierīt: visitabo in virga iniquitates illo{rum}. et in verberibus pctā eorū. That is to say. Yf the synners haue taken in scorne my Iu¦styces / & yf they haue not kept my cōmaun¦dementes I shall vysyte theyr iniquytees in rodde & betynge theyr synnes. And the sage sayth. O ye cursed men maledyccyon vnto you the whiche haue left the lawe of yt right hye god. Vnde ecclesiastic. xli. Ve vo¦bis viri impii qui dereliquistis legem dei al¦tissimi. B. ¶Another example of a woman that was dyuynely punysshed for that yt she sercled and closed her felde on the fest of saynt Iohan baptyst. lxiiii. IT is wryten in the myracles of saynt Martin yt as a woman clo¦sed her felde ye day of saynt iohn baptist whā other were at masse Whan she began to be besye her handes were taken incontinent wt the fyre dyuyne / and her vysage was enbrased as it had cast flambe of fyre / & all her body & her membres were replete wt bladders brennȳ¦ge and pryckinge / so that the cursed vnhap¦py was bounde not alonely of dolour of bo¦dy / but with yt of dolour of shame whan it was so yt she must nedes declare her syn̄es ¶This example sholde withdrawe all per¦sones fro worke on the holy daye / & ought for to warne too sanctyfye it. For whan a man dooth theron operacyon he breketh ye commaundemente of god / he synneth mor¦tally / and he byndeth hymselfe vnto puny∣cyon and dampnacyon / and also it putteth hym from the Ioyes of paradyse / & from the vysyon of god. C. ¶Another exāple of a man yt wrought on the sonday. lxiiii.
IT is wrytē in ye myracles of saȳt Martyn how a man made his he¦dge on ye sonday / his handes har¦ded them in the wood & he drewe backe strongly his ryght hande / but the fyngers fastned them vnto the pal¦me / & was in grete dolour by .xl. days. And afterwarde by the merytes of saynt Mar∣tyn he was heled. D. ¶Another example of a man the whi∣che caryed hey on the sonday. lxiiii. IT is wryten in some bokes / also ye dyscyple recyteth it in his promp∣tuary and sayth ye a man was led to se the paynes of hell / and he sa∣we as it had ben a carre ful of hey and it was sayd vnto hym. There must ne¦des as moche hey be brence on thy backe for that / that thou hast ladde hey on ye sonday And thou knowest well it was defended of the preest. Afterwarde he was brought a∣gayne and dyde penaunce / and was con∣fessed of his synnes and was of right good lyfe after. E. ¶Another example of a man the whi∣che bare his whete on the day of the feest commaūded. lxiiii. MEn fynde by wrytynge this ye whiche foloweth how the dys¦cyple recyteth in his promptu¦ary & sayeth that a carie ledde his whete from the feldes in to his graunge on the day of the feest com∣maunded. And by the suffraunce of god ye fyre brent al the sayd wheet and the graun¦ge. This sayd man yede agaynst the scryp¦ture the whiche defendeth that a man shol∣de not bere charges on the day of the solem¦pnyte / that is of ye feest commaunded. And that a man sholde put no charges without his houses. Also that a man ne do operacy∣on the whiche sholde lette the sanctyfycaci¦on of the feest. Vnde hieremie decimosepti∣mo. Nolite pondera portare in die sabba∣ti et oē opus non facies in eo. &c. F. ¶Another example of goynge vnto the plough on the day of the feest commaun¦ded. lxiiii. ALso the dyscyple recyteth in his promptuarye how Gregory of tours telleth that as a carle wol¦de plowe / that is to ere / he toke with his ryght hande the hafte or the handle of an axe for to make clene ye plough / but his hande was nayled and har¦ded in the wood / and two yeres after was heled in the chyrche of saynt Iulyen by the prayers of the sayd saynt. G. ¶Another example of two women the whiche baked theyr breed in the solemp∣nyte of the sonday. lxiiii. IT is wryten in the myracles of saynt Martin of a woman of the partyes of Angyers the whiche wolde bake on the saterday after the sonne goynge downe. And as she made the breed she was smyten of euyl in suche maner that her body and her mem¦bres became all drye. And in especyall her ryght hande and her fyngers were more drye than the other mēbres. And afterwar¦de she yode vnto the sepulcre of the holy ar¦chebysshop saynt Martyn of Tours and fell prostrate in deuocyon and prayer. And at the last she had helthe by the merytes of the sayd saynt Martyn. By this example a man ought to absteyne him from worke on the holy dayes.
¶Another example wryten in ye sayd my¦racles of a woman the whiche baked on ye saterdayes at nyght within the fast of the sonday / and as she put the breed within the ouen her handes were greuously seke / the whiche claue and toke in the hafte of the pe¦le in settynge in the breed. And whan the sayd woman felte that payne and punycy¦on toke her she wolde haue casten away ye sayd pele hastely / but she myght not escape the payne. And her sayd handes were cro∣ked / and the nayles of her fyngers fastned them in the palmes of her handes in suche maner that the leches sayd that she myght not be remedyed. Afterwarde she went vn¦to the tombe of saynt Martyn by grete de¦uocyon and there was heled / and vowed vnto god and vnto saynt Martyn that she sholde goo to serue one weke in euery mo∣neth in the holy place where the body of the sayd saynt Martyn rested. And she accom¦plysshed the sayd vowe one yere without faylynge it. And after that yere she left one weke of a moneth without goynge thyder & doloure toke her in her eyen in suche ma¦ner that in lesse than halfe an hour she was blynde of bothe the eyen. And afterwarde she confessed her of her neclygence to haue lefte the sayd vowe / dyde penaunce / retor∣ned vnto ye tombe of saynt Martyn in oray¦son & for to accomplysshe her vowe / & her eyen keste blode and she was enlumyned at the ende of .viii. dayes. ¶These exam∣ples here denoteth that a man sholde ab∣stayne hym from werke on the festes com∣maunded / & that a man sholde do and ac∣complysshe his vowes / or elles he shall be punysshed be it eyther in this worlde or in the other. I. ¶Another example of bakȳge of breed on the daye of the holy feest commaun∣ded. lxiiii. MEn fynde by wrytynge this ye whiche foloweth that the dys∣cyple recyteth in ye boke of his promptuary and sayth that a chorle baked his breed on the daye of the feest / and al the sayd brede was blody in token of offence made / & also that the feest sholde be halowed & kept. K. ¶Another example that god sendeth punycion vpon those the whiche breketh his cōmaundementes. lxiiii. THe dyscyple recyteth in his ser∣mons that men fynde by wry∣tynge that it happened in ye coū¦tree of Englonde in a yere that the cornes came & grewe in gre¦te haboundaunce and were moche fayre. And whan ye tyme to gadre approched the∣re sprange vp a swarme of flyes in grete haboundaunce the whiche consumed those cornes in suche maner that in fyue thousan¦de pace of londe with grete payne myght a man fynde one quarter of corne. The men of the countre toke some of those flyes and behelde them dylygently / so that they foun¦de lettres wryten on theyr winges. And on the one wynge there was wryten / ira / that is to say / yre. And on the other winge was wryten / dei / that is to saye / god. The whi∣che sygnyfyeth that god was wrothe ayēst theym for theyr synnes and mysse lyuynge and that by vengeaunce and punycyon all myghty god sent vnto them the sayd ver∣myn or flyes. L. ¶Another example of two cordoyners of the whiche the one kepte the festes cō¦maunded / and the other wolde worke alway. lxiiii.
IT is wryten in some bokes this ye foloweth the whiche the dyscyple recyteth in the boke of his sermōs wherin he speketh of two cordwy¦ners of the whiche the one had gre¦te multytude of chyldren the whiche kepte wel the festes & yode vnto masse euery day and habounded in grete goodes. And the other ne kepte feest ne werke day / & ceased not to werke day and nyght & had no chyl¦dren & was moche poore. And this poore de¦maunded of the other from whens came vnto him his goodes. And he answered / co¦me with me in the mornynge in to the chyr¦che & I shall shewe the where I take them He came and they yede by thre mornynges vnto the chyrche & vnto masse. And after ye ryche sayd vnto the poore. Go do thy wer∣ke. And the poore sayd vnto hym. I wened that yu sholdest haue ledde me vnto a grete treasour. I haue none other place where I gete the treasour of the body and the rewar¦de of the lyfe eternall than the chyrche. For god hath sayd. Illud mathei. vi. Primum querita regnum dei et her oīa aduciētur vo¦bis. Go as I do vnto the chyrche and kepe the festes and obey vnto god / & he shall gy∣ue the of his goodes. He yode confused / cor¦rected hym / yode vnto the chyrche / & after¦warde had goodes. M. ¶Another example of a mowyer the whiche ceased of mowynge on a sater∣day at euensonge time / and his felawes dyde not. lxiiii. MEn fynde by wrytinge this ye whiche foloweth how the dys¦cyple recyteth in the boke of his promptuarye and sayeth how that a knyght made for to fell his medowe. Whan it came vnto the euensonge tyme that the belles range in ye chyrches for the feest one of the fellers sayd vnto his felawes / leue we werke for they ringe to euensonge it is tyme to cease. And they wolde not for hym / but confoūded by wordes him the whiche them warned / and he left werke and yode vnto euensong. On the thyrde day he yode to make an ende of fellynge with his felawes the sayd medow And for as moche as the other yode before and that he must nedes fell the laste all the other mocked hym / and he bare pacyently theyr mockynges and laughynges. And at the begynninge that he put the honde vnto the sythe for to fell after the other he sawe before hym a grete pyece of golde the whi∣che hanged at the stumpe of a felled tree / ye whiche tree was of grete beaute and large¦nes / than he bowed his knees and thāked god. Whan he cryed the mayster of the me¦dowe and his felawes ran̄e and they sawe the dyuyne myracle. The knyght the whi∣che was a clerke behelde the scrypture and founde that there was in wrytynge about the sayd pyece of golde. The hande of god hath made me and brought me in gyft vn∣to the poore the whiche hath not broken the day of the feest. And the knyght bought yt pyece of golde of ye sayd poore and shewed it vnto many in recountynge the sayd my∣racle. &c. D. ¶Another example how the sellers & the byers on the holy daye of the feestes commaunded ben gretely for too be re∣prehended. lxiiii. IT it writen in the byble. Neemie vltimo capitulo. how the prophe¦te Neemie repreued vyllanously those the whiche bare in to Ihe¦salem of lyuynges or vytayles
and the whiche there solde and bought on the sabbot daye / that is on the feeste / vnto whome he sayd. Dyde not our faders this that ye do / and our lorde ledde vpon vs & vpon this cyte all yll / and ye brynge agayn his yre vpon Israell in vylynge this feest. For to cease suche marchaundyses and ope¦racyons the sayd Neemye made to shytte the gates of Iherusalem the day of the sab¦bot / & constytued his seruauntes vpon the gates that none sholde bere burden on the sayd day in the cyte. And the negociatours and marchauntes abode two tymes before Iherusalem wt theyr marchaundyses we∣nynge there to entre. But ye sayd Neemye thretened to lay hande on them yf they ca∣me ones agayne: & so they came nomore on the feest day. This here is a grete example for to kepe and to sanctyfy the feestes. ¶Another example. It is wryten in ye .xvi chapytre of Exodi. how the chyldren of Is∣raell gadred in deserte the .vi. daye double manna by the commaundement of god to thende that they sholde rest them on ye day of the sabbot in gyuynge example that in ye feest men sholde cease and doo none opera∣cyon. ¶Seruicium. A. ¶Another example of a ryche man the whiche rode & went to worldly occupa∣cyons whan they range to masse. Also he dyspysed for too here the predycacy∣ons or sermons. lxv SOme maysters hath wrytē this the whiche foloweth how the dis¦cyple recyteth in his promptua∣ry and sayth yt there was a riche man of suche condycyon yt whā he shold go to masse he lept on horsbacke & went to se his manoyrs / his mylles / & his cornes in his feldes. And he was warned by his wyfe yt was deuout that he ne sholde do suche thynges / & that he sholde go vnto the masse on the holy sondayes & solempny¦tees vnto the chyrche to thende yt he myght here some good in predycacyon. He answe¦red. I knowe what I sholde do better thā thy prechers. At the last on a tyme as men range to masse he lepte on horsbacke / & as he rode in a felde the deuyll ranne vnto hȳ and sayd. Alyght from thy hors & here my masse / and the deuyll ledde hym in to a gre¦te dyche the whiche was there & keste hȳ in and descended with the deuyll in to hell for to here the seruyce of hell. &c. B. ¶Another example of a woman ye whi¦che wolde haue hanged herselfe / & as she herde knyll vnto a sakerynge she kneled on her knees and was delyuered from daunger. lxv. THere is foūde by wrytynge this the whiche foloweth how ye dys∣cyple recyteth in his boke of ser∣mons & sayth that a womā was one tyme so heuy & tempested of the deuyll that she prepared a corde & a pla¦ce to hange her selfe / & as she made an ende of that she had begon she harde ryngynge to a sacrynge / than she bowed her knees & put her in orayson for she had lerned to doo it in her youthe / & sayd. My lorde Ihesus sone of the lyuynge god haue mercy on me. And incontynent the beme & the corde bra¦ke / and the deuylles fledde and sayd. The vertue of the presence of Ihesu cryst hath delyuered the from the dethe presente and eternall. C. ¶Another example how the deuyll ba∣re a boke wherin was wryten the syn̄es of men and women / and in especyall a
complyn that saynt Austyn had forgo∣ten. lxv. IT is wryten in ye legende of saynt Austyn that as the sayd saynt Au¦styn studyed he sawe the deuyl go before hym berynge a boke on his sholdre. And than he coniured hȳ that he wolde shewe that the whiche was wryten in it. And he āswered that they we¦re the synnes of men that he gadered in all places & put theym there. Than saynt Au∣styn commaunded hym yt yf he had ony of his synnes in wrytinge that he sholde gyue them incontynent vnto hym to rede. And he shewed him ye place where he was / & foū¦de nothynge in wrytinge but that he hadde ones forgoten to say complyn. Than he cō∣maunded ye deuyl that he sholde tary there & he entred in to the chyrche and sayd com∣plyn deuoutly & made an ende of his oray∣sons accustomed. And aftercame vnto the deuyll whome he commaunded yt he vnto hym sholde shewe agayn the chapytre whe¦re ye sayd complyn was wryten. And he tor¦ned and retorned the sayd place / & in con∣clusyon he founde ye sayd place voyde whe¦re it before was wryten. Than the sayd de¦uyll was wrothe & sayd that he had fouly mocked hȳ / and yt he repented yt he had she¦wed him hs sayd boke. &c ¶By this exam¦ple men sholde vnderstande that they the whiche forgeteth or leueth to say theyr ser∣uyce that ye deuyll dooth not forgete theyr neclygence. D. ¶Another example how deuyls were sene vpon a womans trayne pompyou∣sly clothed. lxv. CEsarius dicit. It is recyted in the bo¦ke of the discyple how cesar sheweth in his wrytynges that as a deuoute preste keste holy water on the sonday vpon ye peo¦ple at the chyrche dore / there aryued a ma∣tron be sene & aorned of dyuers aornemen¦tes as a pecocke. And the sayd preste sawe grete multytude of deuyls the whiche we∣re vpon her trayne the whiche was longe & the sayd deuylles were lytell as dormyse blacke as ethyopyens / scornynge wt theyr mouthes / strykynge with theyr handes / & lepynge as fysshes do enclosed in the nette. Whan the preest sawe them he called ye peo¦ple & adiured the deuylles that they sholde not fle. The woman was afrayed and sto∣de styll. And the good Iust man obtayned in orayson that the people myght se the vy¦syon. Than the womā vnderstode that she was so beset about with deuylles for ye pry¦de of her clothȳge & retorned in to her hous & chaunged her clothynge. ¶This vysyon was occasyon of humylyte as wel to other women as to her. E. ¶Another example how saynt Bryce sa¦we the deuyl wryte in the chyrche ye euyl wordes that were sayd. lxv. MEn fynde by wrytynge this ye whiche foloweth how the dys¦cyple recyteth in his promptu¦ary and sayeth how as saynt Bryce helped saynt Martyn to synge he sawe the deuyll yt wrote the yll wordes that two persones spake in ye chyr∣che. And whan al his parchemyn was wry¦ten he drewe it with his tethe to length it / the whiche escaped hym & strake his hede a¦gaynst the wall / and the sayd saynt Bryce began to laugh. And whan the masse was ended saynt Martyn demaunded hym the cause wherfore he laughed. Than he tolde vnto hym the dede. And in thende & conclu¦syon the sayd saynt Martyn knewe that ye sayd thynge was verytable. Wherfore it fo¦loweth
that euyll wordes ben to fle / in espe¦cyall in the chyrche. F. ¶Another example how the deuyll en∣charged a woman for to do four thyn∣ges. lxv. MEn fynde wryten in the legen¦de of the deed folke that a do∣ctoure telleth that as a womā wydow despayred her lest she sholde be in pouerte the deuyl appered vnto her and sayd vnto her that he wolde make her ryche yf that she wolde do after his wyl / and she accorded therto. And he gaue her in charge soure thynges. The fyrst was that she sholde make to do forny¦cacyon with people of the chyrche that she sholde receyue in to her hous. The seconde that she sholde receyue on the day the poo∣re people for to lodge / and that in ye nyght she sholde put theym out without doynge them ony good. The thyrde is that she shol¦de lette other of theyr prayers by her Ian∣glynge and talkynge. The fourthe was yt she sholde not confesse her in none of ye thin¦ges before sayd. And in the ende whan her dethe approched her sone warned her that she sholde cōfesse her. Vnto whome she dis¦couered her dede / and sayd that she myght not confesse her and that her confessyon ne sholde nothynge preuayle. And her sone be¦gan to wepe and warned her to repente & too confesse her in promysynge her that he wolde doo penaunce for her. Than she had bytter contrycyon and purpose to confesse her and to amende / & sent for to seche ye pre¦ste by her sayd sone / but or euer that the pre¦ste came ye deuyls came vnto her / & for the grete horrour of them she deyed. Than the sone confessed the synne of his moder vnto the preste / & dyde .vii. yere penaunce. And whan it was accomplysshed his sayd mo∣der appered vnto hym & thanked hȳ of her delyueraunce & saluacyon / & that by hym she was saued. ¶This example denoteth pryncypally thre thynges. The fyrst is that the deuyll counceyleth vs to do yll / & to le∣ue the good to brynge vs to dampnacyon. The seconde that a man sholde correcke & amende hym by contrycycyon & confession how grete so euer ye sȳnes be yt a man hath commytted / & he shall haue grace and mer¦cy. The thyrde is that the penaunce & good operacyons that a man dooth for one that is dede auayleth to delyuer hȳ fro the pay∣nes of purgatory. &c. G. ¶Another example of a monke that ye deuyll drewe out of the chyrche whan y• other prayed. lxv SAynt Gregory telleth in the se∣conde boke of his dyalogue yt an abbot named Pompeian{us} myght not correcke one of his monkes yt in the tyme that the other waked in orayson he went out of the chryche & yede vnto vanytees. The whiche abbot wrote the case vnto saynt Benet to thēde yt he sholde correcke hȳ. Than ye sayd saynt Benet yode vnto the monastery and sawe vysybly the deuyll in lykenes of a bla∣cke man yt drewe out the sayd monke by ye plytes of his vestement. And for as moche as the other relygyous sawe not the sayd deuyll the sayd saynt Benet sayd vnto thē that they sholde goo to prayer / & that they ne sholde cease to pray god tyl it pleased hȳ yt some of theym myght se hym that drewe out the sayd monke. Than they all put thē in prayer. And whan they had ben so by .ii. dayes saynt Mor relygious of the sayd mo¦nastery sawe vysybly the deuyll the whiche drewe out the sayd monke with saynt Be∣net. And the sayd abbot Pompeianus and
the other relygyous myght not se the sayd deuyll. Than saynt Benet bette the sayd re¦lygyous / & so he was correcte / and the de∣uyl came nomore. ¶By this example a mā may vnderstande that they the whiche hol¦de theym not in orayson whan they sholde be bounde of necessyte of helthe / and haue not excusacion but for to go vnto vanytees that it is the deuyll the whiche theym dra∣weth out to thende that they lese the fruyte of prayer. ¶Sompnolentia. A. ¶Examples of slepynge in herynge the seruyce. And fyrst example of a monke without deuocyon the whiche slepte in orayson. lxvi. IT is wryten in the dyalogue Ce¦saru that there was a monke pre¦ste of ye ordre of cystercyences cal¦led whyte monkes the whiche le∣ned hym vpon a syege or stalle & slepte whan the other relygyous were at ye psalmodye and in orayson. The whiche thȳ¦ge soo moche dyspleased vnto god that he wolde shewe vnto him that in suche a place and suche an hour he sholde not slepe. And it befel that many tymes whan the sayd re¦lygyous came to pray before the crucyfyxe the ymage torned the backe vnto hym / and in denotynge for that yt thou arte slouthful and neclygente in suche orayson thou arte not worthy to beholde my face. Hymselfe wytnessed that he had sene the experyence of the sayd thynge. Wherfore men ought to be feruent in prayer. B. ¶Another example of a monke yt was smyten wt the knot of a strawe in slepyn¦ge for yt he was without deuocion & wey¦ke in spyryte. lxvi. LEgitur ī dyalogo cesaru. There was an auncyent relygyous the whiche was accustomed to slepe in the seruyce tyme. It befell yt at matynes on a nyght as he dy¦de slepe at the psalmody he sawe in a dreme before hym a grete man longe / blacke / and defourmed the whiche helde in his hande a dyrty strawe. The whiche as he behelde ye sayd relygyous / and after that he had sayd wherfore slepest thou so all ye nyght he smo¦te hym in ye vysage wt the sayd strawe. And the sayd relygyous the whiche had so grete drede as no meruayle was a woke. And to thende that he myght auoyde the stroke of hym yt smote hym he smote his heed ayenst the harde wall. &c. C. ¶Another example of a slouthful mon∣ke vnto whome ye deuyll gaue hote bren¦nynge pytche for to drynke lxvi. MEn fynde in wrytynge this ye whiche foloweth how the dys¦cyple recyteth in his promptu¦ary and sayeth that a monke had a custom for to slepe. And it befell that as he slepte in the quere at the laudes he sawe in dremynge a deuyll ryght terryble the whiche had a ladle enbrased wt fyre & pitche molten within it / and came to vesyte euery monke for to knowe yf he slep¦te. And vnto some yt slōbred he offred in a spone of yron of the sayd pytche. And whan the sayd deuyll came vnto the sayd relygy∣ous the whiche slepte / and that he vnto hȳ had offred the sponefull of pytche in fyndȳ¦ge it hote he withdrewe sodaynly his heed and smote hymselfe sore agaynst ye lenyng of the syeges that he founde hymselfe sore hurte. &c. ¶These example here denoteth that god wolde shewe that it hym dysplea¦seth whan a man slepeth in the seruyce of
god. And those the whiche slepeth ben wor∣thy of punycyon. Tempus est orandi / tē∣pus est dormiendi. &c. Oīa tempus habēt et in suis spacus trāseunt vniuersa. There is tyme to pray / & tyme to slepe. All thyn∣ges haue theyr tymes / and al thynges also passeth in theyr spaces of tymes. &c. D. ¶Another example of a relygyous the whiche swette in ye mornynge at the ma¦tyns. lxvi. MEn fynde in wrytynge this ye whiche foloweth how the dys¦cyple recyteth in his promptu¦ary and sayeth that ye deuyll made to come vnto a monke a sweet fantastycall in the mornynge / and counceyled hym yt he sholde not aryse. And many tymes he lost matyns wenyng that he swette in the morninge by sekenes. And for as moche that one tyme he wolde haue rysen the voyce of the deuyll was herde all on hye the whiche sayd vnto him. Ryse thou not / breke not thy slepe. So he vnderstode yt the deuyl made hym in suche wyse slouth full / & to lese to do ye good dede / and correc∣ked hymselfe. &c. ¶Oratio. E. ¶Examples of prayer. And fyrst how a man sholde take hede to the prayer that he maketh. lxvi. IT is wryten in the lyfe of the fa∣ders that a relygyous complay∣ned him one time vnto a good ab¦bot that they were tourmented in theyr quarter for the dryenesse for it rayned not there. And the good abbot sayd. Why goo ye not vnto prayer. And he sayd / we cease not to pray / & it rayneth not I beleue yt ye pray not ententyuely. That is to say that ye praye not deuoutly enten∣dynge vnto your prayers. Wylt yu se that it is so / goo we vnto prayer. He stretched his handes vnto heuen in orayson / and incōty¦nent the rayne descended from heuen his boundaūtly. Than the other had grete mer¦uayle / & knewe yt the prayers were not ma¦de of herte & deuocyon. F. ¶Another example of a deuout relygy∣ous the whiche ceased not to be in ye oray¦son of the psalmodye / & good odoure ys∣sued out of his sepulcre .xiii. yere after yt he was deed. lxvi. IT is wryten in the boke of the dia¦logue of saynt Gregory that there was a relygyous named Merie moche deuout / the whiche was a gyuer of almes / wept often / and toke hede so moche vnto the psalmodye in orayson that he ceased not at ony tyme but alonely whan he dranke and ete / or whan he slepte. And this sayd relygious had a vy¦syon in the nyght the whiche appered vnto hym as a crowne of whyte floures descen∣ded from heuen on his heed. And hastely se¦kenes corporell toke hym / and with grete surete and Ioyousnes of courage he deyed and was buryed. And .xiii. yere after as the abbot of the monastery made to prepayre in that place his sepulture so moche of good odoures and swetenes yssued out that it se¦med that the odoure of all good floures we¦re there assembled / in lykewyse as that ab¦bot wytnessed to haue smelled. &c. ¶This example denoteth that orayson well made moche pleaseth vnto god whan the deed bo¦dy the whiche naturally sholde stynke kest good odoure. Dauyd sayeth in the psalter. Dirigat dn̄e ad te oratio mea sicut incen∣sum inconspectu tuo. That is to saye. O yu
my lorde dyrect myn orayson and prayer in thy syght in lykewyse as ensence. Whan ensence is put vpon the coles of fyre it ca∣steth a good odoure and smoke the whiche mounteth vnto heuen towarde god. Also orayson & prayer well made and embrased vpon the coles of deuocion is a good odour the whiche mounteth on hyghe before god the whiche maketh to haue grete rewarde in paradyse. &c. ¶Gula. A. ¶Examples of drynkynge whan men sholde serue god. And fyrst example how a nonne the whiche ete letuse before that she serued god / and without makinge ye sygne of the crosse was posseded of the deuyll. lxvii. IT is wryten in the dyalogue of saynt Gregory that a mayden en¦tred in to a gardyn the whiche be helde and coueyted a letuse / she forgate to make the benedyccyon and sygne of the crosse & ete glotonously ye the sayd letuse / and incontynent was pos∣seded of the deuyll and fell vnto the erthe in the sayd gardyn. And as she was stron∣gely tourmented it was shewed vnto a ho¦ly man named Equycius the whiche came to pray for her & to socour her the whiche ye de thyder and entred in to the gardyn. And the deuyll the whiche was in the sayd may¦den began to crye by her mouthe and sayd What haue I done. I sette me on a letuse & she is come and hath eten me. And ye mā of god commaunded hym that he sholde de¦parte & that he had no more place in the ser¦uaunt of god / and forthwith he departed without power to do her ony more euyll & grefe. &c. B. ¶Another example that euyll came vn¦to a conuers the whiche dranke wyne in the cyte without lycence / & without ma¦kynge the sygne of the crosse. lxvii. THe dyscyple recyteth in his bo∣ke yt it is wryten in a boke how a frere conuers was ryght gre∣uously tourmented of the deuyl in a conuet. The freres of y• con¦uent arose them vp for they were layde / & called theyr mayster saynt Domynycke ye whiche was at that tyme in the hous / the whiche sent that he were brought vnto the chyrche. And wt grete payne .x. freres brou¦ght hym. And in entrynge in to the chyrche with a grete blast he put out all the lampes in the chyrche that there were brennynge. And as the deuyll tourmented hym in ma∣ny maners saynt Domynycke sayd vnto ye deuyll. I the coniure from Ihesu cryst that thou yu tell wherfore thou tourmentest this frere here. And whan and how thou art en¦tred in to hȳ. The whiche answered I tor¦mente hym for he hath deserued it. He dran¦ke wyne yesterday in the cyte without ha∣uynge lycence / and without makynge the token of the crosse. And in drynkynge I en¦tred in hym / that is he dranke me with the wyne. After these thynges matynes were ronge. And the deuyll sayd. I may nomore tary here syth that these hoded folke aryse to prayse god. And the deuyll departed fro the frere and left him as deed lyenge vpon the erthe. And the freres bare him in to the fermoury. Whan the mornynge came he a¦rose all hole and wyst not what was comē vnto hym. He the whiche wrote this myra¦cle herde it tolde of one of those the whiche at that sayd time was presente there in the abbaye.
C. ¶Another example of a smyth the whi∣che waked to drynke and to ete whan ye other waked to serue god. lxvii. THe venerable Bede telleth in ge¦stis angelorū in libro quīto how a smyth had of custome to dryn¦ke and to ete and to be dronken whan the other waked in ye chyr¦che at seruyce. And on a tyme there came vnto hym a sodeyne sekenes in the whiche he was warned to repent hym / to confesse and to do penaunce. The whiche as dyspey¦red began to crye that he myght not repent hym. For in lykewyse as saynt Stephen sawe heuen open soo he sayd that he sawe hell apertly / and a place of tourmente the whiche was made redy nygh vnto the pla∣ce where as were Pylate / cayphas / Iudas and ye other the whiche made our lorde Ihe¦sus to deye / and afterwarde tolde what ye Iugement of hym was made / & yt he shold neuer haue hope of helthe for the grete con¦tynuacyon of dronkenes that he had ledde And whan he had tolde this he deyed and was put from sepulture ecclesyastycall & from all prayers. &c. ¶This example here is good for those the whiche leseth the mas¦ses and the seruyces of the chyrche for to be waytynge in tauernes and potacyons by that yt the sayd smyth wolde not wake at ye sanctyfycacyons of the feestes & in the ser∣uyce of the chyrche / but dyspysed them. In lykewyse god wolde that he were put at his dethe / and fcom the prayers of the chyrche and from sepulture ecclesyastycall / & from all good and honour. And by that yt he sayd that the Iugement of hym was made and that he sawe ye tourments the whiche was made redy vnto hym sholde vnderstande these dronken & slouthfull people to go to sanctyfye and to honour god in solempny∣tees commaunded yt the Iugement party∣culer shall be made of those at theyr dethe and that they shall haue there punycyon af¦ter theyr deseruynge. Vnde psal. Tu red¦des vnicui{que} iuxta opera sua. And god suf∣fred that he spake the sayd wordes to then¦de that his semblables therby take exam∣ple and hede. D. ¶Another example of a man yt yede t playe and to drynke at the tauerne with his felawes whan he sholde wake in the seruyce of the chyrche. lxvii. THe dyscyple recyteth in his ser∣mons this the whiche foloweth the whiche is also wryten in o∣ther bokes and sayeth that in ye tyme of a deuoute bysshop na¦med Cyryllus there was a yonge parent of the sayd bysshop Cyryllus named Ruffus dwelled wt hym as a seruaunt. And whan the bysshoppe sange masse the sayd Ruffus yode vnto tauernes to playe with his fela∣wes. So it befell that he was seke & deyed After that he was deed the sayd cysshop re¦quyred ye people the whiche vnto hym were subgecte that they wolde make prayer for hym / for he loued hym moche & was well loued of the people. And one day after that the bysshop hadde songe for his soule as he was in deuocion and orayson the sayd deed body appered vnto hym all in fyre & in gre¦te tourment. And he demaunded hȳ what he was. He answered. I am ye soule of thy cosyn for whom thou prayest god in vayne for I am dampned eternally. Than ye sayd bysshop was ferefull and sayd. Alas how hast thou deserued it the whiche hast lyued truely ynough / & I wened that yu haddest be yet in Innocency vyrginal. And he sayd It is soo / for I am yet vyrgyn. But I am dampned for that yt I had of custome in ye mornynge whyle that ye dyde synge masse
to go and vysyte the tauernes with my fe∣lawes and to play with them at the dyse & cardes / & that yt I wanne I kept to my sel¦fe without beynge in wyll to make restytu∣cyon. And I was the occasyon somtyme yt they sware / wrothed and blasphemed god. And of this I am not confessed. I ne haue done of conscyence ne of penaunce / howbe¦it that I was warned in sermons and by good people. Alas I cared not / & therfore I am lost eternally. This bisshop Cyrillus wrote this vysyon vnto holy saynt Austyn ¶This example denoteth that dampnaci¦on cometh vpon those the whiche go to drȳ¦ke and to ete or to playe whan they sholde wake in the seruyce of the chyrche / vnto ye solempnytees & teestes commaunded yf ye they correcke them not and amende by pe¦naunce. Also it is to note that it is offence not beynge in wyl to restore / or to be the oc¦casyon to swere and to blaspheme god and his sayntes. &c. E. ¶Another example of a mā named Vo¦do the whiche yode vnto the tauernes whan he sholde go vnto ye chirche / what drinke / what bayne / & what bed he hath now in hell. lxvii MEn fynde in wrytynge this ye whiche foloweth how the dys¦cyple recyteth in his promptu¦ary and sayth that a man na¦med Vodo had of custome to be dronken well nere euery day / and lyued after ye voluptuosytees of the body / to drin¦ke wynes and to ete metes goten ryght ap¦plykes. And for as moche as he dyde good operacyons god sent fyrst his aungell / and secondly warned hym yt he sholde amende him / & elles that he ne myght in suche wyse be saued / thyrdly the aungell warned hym and with that sayd. Yf thou amende ye not shortely thou shalte sustayne cursed dethe. and so the angel departed. The whiche mā amended him not and perceuered in his sȳ¦nes as before. And on a daye he layde hym downe dronke / & he had a good seruaunt & deuout the whiche sawe ye soule of his may¦ster that the deuylles drewe from the body in the sayd nyght / and ledde it vnto ye pay¦nes of hell. And the prynce of the deuylles rose hym vp and came before hym / and ma¦de hym sytte vpon a seete of fyre / and com¦maunded that deuylles sholde bringe to hȳ to drynke of molten brymstone medled wt fyre. And they gaue it hym to drynke in sa∣ynge. For as moche as in the worlde thou hast made thy selfe dronken this shall be he¦re thy drynke / and parforced hym to dryn∣ke. After the prince of deuylles made to ap¦parayle hym a bayne of fyre in pytche and sulphre medled / & was put there in ye bayne And the prynce of deuylles sayd vnto hym this here shall be thy bayne for thou hast of¦fended thy creatour in baynynge the with delytes and draughtes of lechery. &c. Thyr dely that deuyl made to prepayre a bedde / and than he was casten in to a dyche ryght depe the whiche was ful of fyre / smoke / sul¦phre and stynke. And the prȳce of the deuyl¦les sayd vnto him. Hast thou not herde and redde what is sayd by the prophet Amos. Ve qui dormitis in lectis eburneis et lesci¦uitis in stratis vestris. And for as moche as thou shalte be suche this shal be here thy bedde and thou shalt rest in this dyche of fy¦re for to lay the on. &c. ¶By this example that this wretched gloton wolde not leue his synne and beleue the admonycyons of the aungell the whiche gaue hym warnyn¦ge to correct hym all glotons sholde vnder¦stande and other synners the whiche wyll not correct them and leue theyr synnes by the admonycyons that the holy prechours maketh vnto them the whiche in the ende
of theyr dayes shall be punysshed. And by that yt he was perforced to drynke of sulfre And that he was bayned and layde in bed is vnderstande that the dampned shall ha¦ue punycion for euery synne that they haue commytted in this worlde. Vnd psal. Tu reddes vnicui{que} iuxta opera sua. And ther∣fore euery man sholde do the fewest sinnes that he myght so that he may escape payne and punycyon. &c. F. ¶Another example of a boucher ye moc¦ked the holy asshes / and dranke at the ta¦uerne whan the other good folkes were at masse. lxvii. IT is wryten in dyaloguo Cesarii that there was in ye towne of Flo¦rēce a boucher the whiche waked well nere al the nyght on the shro¦ue tuesday to fyll his bely as ma∣ny done the whiche is grete dolour. Whan asshewednesday came he & mo of his fela∣wes entred in to the tauerne for to vngrese theyr tethe. And for to wasshe & put away shrouetyde. And whan the masse was ron¦ge and the good crystiens yode vnto the ho¦ly asshes they abode all alone too drynke & to ete / and the one of theym sayd vnto the boucher. We tary here to longe / go we to ye chyrche to take holy asshes. Vnto whome ye boucher sayd in mockynge of ye holy asshes. Syt thou styll and I shall gyue the asshes and thou shalte gyue me. And the other to¦ke asshes in the harthe of the fyre & kest vp on the heed of the sayd mockynge boucher. And incontynent payne & punycyon folo∣wed of his mockery / for he felte soo moche dust about his heed and his vysage the whi¦che on hym was blowen that he was all a¦ferde. And as he began to crye soo many as¦shes entred in to his mouthe that he was well nere choked and his brethe gone. Thā clamour was there / and many came to se the plage of his mockery. He was ledde in to a place nere therunto where as there we¦re none asshes / but it prouffyted hym no∣thynge by the Iust Iugement of god / ne in waters / ne in gardyns / ne amonge apple trees / ne in no place where so euer it were / he myght neuer defende him from ye asshes in hepes the whiche came about hym. And in conclusyon wt an hepe of asshes he was choked / and so he ended his dayes mysera∣bly for his mockery. &c. ¶By this example mockers and glotons ben rebuked. And a¦so ben those the whiche gooth-vnto the ta¦uerne whan men go vnto the seruyce of ye chyrche. Yf the sayd mocker were in suche wyse tourmented in this worlde by punyci¦on dyuyne / by more grete reason it is to pre¦suppose that god punyssheth there sembla¦bles in hel yf they deye impenytentes wtout correccyon. &c. G. ¶Another example of a knyght ye yode to vysyte tauernes whan he sholde vesy¦te the dedycacyons / and pardons of the chyrche. lxvii. MEn fynde by wrytinge this ye whiche foloweth how the dys¦cyple recyteth in the boke of his promptuary and sayeth yt a knyght wolde be dronke of¦ten tymes. And one tyme he yode with the vessell wherof he dranke vnto the dedycati¦ons and pardons of the chyrches / but he ve¦syted the tauernes & cared not of indulgen¦ce & chyrches. And afterward as he was se¦ke his doughter the whiche was moche de¦uout prayed hȳ instauntly yt after his dethe he wolde appere vnto her and for to shewe her of his estate and beynge. The whiche
appered after his dethe within .xxx. dayes and helde in his hande the vessell infernall the whiche was all in fyre. And whan his sayd doughter sawe hȳ so enbrased she had grete feere / and demaunded hym what he was / and what he wolde wt that cup. The whiche answered. I am thi fader. And this cuppe is the tourmente wherin I drynke. Wherof speketh the psalmyst. Ignis sul∣phur et spiritus procella{rum} pars calicis eo{rum} And she demaunded hym secondly yf she myght helpe hym by prayer or good dedes And he sayd nay / ne all the sayntes of heuē for the sentence of the gospell was gyuen a¦gaynst hym. Ligatis manibus & pedibus proucite eū in tenebras exteriores ibi erit fle¦tus et stridor dentium. Mathei. xxii. Than he cryed with an hye voyce thre tymes (ve) in sayenge. Ve in amaritudine / ve in mul¦titudine / ve ī eternitate pena{rum}. And saynt Gregory sayth in his moralles. Qui nunc se male in voluptatibus dilatat / illum po∣stea in suppliciis pena angustat. &c. ¶Venatio. A. ¶Examples of hunters. And fyrst exā¦ple how a lorde the whiche hunted on ye feestes had a chylde the whiche had eres lyke a dogge. lxviii. THe dyscyple recyteth in his ser∣mōs this the whiche foloweth ye whiche is wryten in libro apū and sayth that a noble mā was all gyuen vnto huntynge in su¦che wyse that he neyther herde masse on ye saterdayes ne on the sondayes. And his wy yt was deuout reproued hym often / but he toke no hede. And it befell that after yt the sayd wyfe had many chyldren she chylded an euyll shapen thynge the whiche had the heed as a dogge / and the eeres hangynge. And whan she sawe it she was confused & shamed before many damoysels good ma∣trones the whiche were there in presence / the whiche counceyled all that incontynent it were couered with erthe without beyng more sene / and it was done. And forthwith the husbande came from huntynge ye whi∣che demaūded where the childe: was & yt he wolde seit. And for as moche as she dyffer∣red it for shame he drewe his swerde & sayd that he wolde se it. Than the sayd woman made to take out of the erthe the heuy and horryble monster: the whiche sayd vnto her husbande. Beholde how the puyssaunt god by shewynge manyfest hath venged thyn vnwytte for that thou hast doone no good dede ne honour vnto the holy dayes and fe¦stes / and hast not gyuen ony reuerence vn¦to the holy sacramentes of the sacred body of Ihesu cryst / but vnto vayne huntynge thou hast taken hede on the sayd holy feest dayes. &c. Than the sayd noble man correc¦ked hym worthely and dyde penaunce mo¦che bytter. B. ¶Another example ye men knewe not where an hunter became in huntinge of a beest. lxviii. ALso it is wryten in libro apum this that foloweth how the dys¦cyple recyteth in his sermons. And sayth yt ryche lorde parfor¦ced his mē & subgectes to go wt hym euery daye to hunte / the whiche men left to labour & to do theyr seculer occupaci¦ons tyll yt they became poore / thēself / theyr wyues / and chyldren. And it befell one day that the sayd lorde went to ye huntynge in a wood he and his housholde the houndes reysed ye wylde beest. He was on horsbacke & folowed hym / and sawe hym euermore / but his rennynge prouffyted hym nothȳge
for he myght not take hym and perceuered to folowe hym by night and from that day afterwarde neuer man sawe him more / ne no man wyst what there was done of hȳ / and he was not founde. Some saye that in lykewyse as ye erthe opened the whiche swa¦lowed Chore. Dathan / & Abyron the whi∣che descended all quycke in to hell that soo it myght be happened vnto the foresayd hunter. ¶Chorea. C. ¶Example of dauncynge on the feestes And fyrst example how the deuyll wolde haue borne away a mayden the whiche daunced on the sonday. lxviii. IT is wryten in the myracles of ye blyssed vyrgyn Mary of a fayre doughter the whiche in her dedes was desolute dauncer and a syn∣ger the whiche wolde not correct her for her moder. And her fader loued her for her beaute the whiche clothed her pom¦peously wt fayre garmentes. And one daye of the sondaye after that she was werye of dauncynge she sate her downe vnder an apple tree for her recreacyon. And inconty¦nent the deuyll came vnto her the whiche sayd vnto her. Aryse thou and come with me. And she sayd. What arte thou. He an∣swered I am the deuyll vnto whome thou enforcest the to do my wyll / thou arte our armes and our doughter to take the soules And therfore now thou shalt receyue pay∣nes / not alonely for thy synnes / but for all the synnes of them the whiche ben drawen vnto cursed concupyscence for thy clothyn-and aournementes of thy body. And as ye deuyll enforced hȳ to rauysshe her vyolent¦ly she cryed twyes Lady mary helpe me. Her moder had taught her in her youthe so to call the vyrgyn Mary & for to salue her And she lerned her to say. Auemaria gra¦tia plena. &c. And the deuyl sayd. Cursed be they that taught the yt orayson. Yf yu hadde not sayd it I had borne the now in to hell and he departed. ¶By the example of the mayden yt was fayre / well clothed / of aby∣te to daunce & to synge must be vnderstan¦de yt she pleased vnto the deuyll & dysplea¦sed god. For suche vanytees draweth vnto synne / corrupteth vertues & good maners & ledeth vnto dampnacyon. Also by that ye she called helpe of the vyrgyn Mary yt is ye floure of vyrgynyte is vnderstande yt in ly∣kewyse sholde these vyrgyns do in necessy∣te / and them conferme vnto ye vyrgyn Ma¦ry to thende that they may goo in to para¦dyse. &c. D. ¶Another example of men and womē the whiche daūced a yere wtout that ony persone myght socour them. lxvii. MEn fynde by wrytinge this yt whiche foloweth how the dys¦cyple recyteth in the boke of his promptuary and sayeth yt in the yere of the incarnacyon of our lorde. M. & .xi. There happened in a cyte of ye countre of saxonye wherin there was a curate of ye parisshe chyrche of saynt Mayng: the whiche curate was called Tul¦les how in the vygyll of crystmas many of his parysshens men and women put them to daunce in the sayd chyrcheyarde and to synge in suche maner that they letted the sayd curate in his offyce of ye chyrche. Wher¦fore he sent to them yt they sholde cease / but they ceased not ne wolde not obey for hym. Than he cursed them in requyrynge god yt they myght not cease all that yere. Soo by myracle it became and was doone that in all the hole yere there fell not one droppe of
ater vpon them / nor they suffred honger e thyrste / nor theyr clothynge ne hosen we e broken / but by anoye & contynuacion of rnynge they were moche wery within ye ercle. And moche grete nombre of folke of ll estates & of dyuers regyons came for to  the punycyon of god. Whan it came to hende of the yere the archebysshop of Co∣yne named Hebart came thyder for to as¦oyle them / & made them to come vnto hȳ efore the hye awter of the sayd chyrche in he whiche place a woman & two men amō¦ge them yelded vp theyr spyrytes in yt hou¦e. Some of the other slepte thre dayes wt∣ut wakynge. Of the other the hedes & the membres trembled. And so they were dy∣ersly punysshed for too be in example for uermore that in the chyrche or chyrchyar∣de men neyther sholde ynge ne daūce worl¦dely. And also of the grete yll of those that dysobey theyr curates. E. ¶Another example of the punysshynge of a woman dauncer. lxviii. MEn fynde by wrytynge this ye whiche foloweth how the dys¦cyple recyteth in his promptu¦ary and sayeth how a man na¦med Arnold{us} telleth of a may¦den the whiche euery holy daye occupyed herselfe in playes and daunces without go¦ynge vnto the sermon the whiche was ma∣de vnto the people. And in the euen tyde she became wery & slepte at the dore. And incō¦tinent that her eyen were close she was bor¦ne by vysyon of two deuylles in to helle / & was so brente that there ne abode heere in all her body / the whiche was full of grete bladders & kest a stynke intollerable. And a deuyll put in her mouthe a brennȳge brō¦de and sayd vnto her / take this bronde for the songes yt thou hast songe vnshamefully Her clothynge had no token of brennynge. the whiche awoke in grete clamour & wepȳ¦ge and tolde vnto her moder & vnto many other this thinge. She was borne in to the hous / the curate was called the whiche foū¦de in her no mortall synne / but that wyllȳ¦gly she went vnto playes and daunces. &c. F. ¶Another example how a maydē was rauysshed in the daūce and vyoled / & af¦ter hanged her selfe. lxviii. SOme maysters hath wrytē this the whiche foloweth yt the dyscy¦ple recyteth in his boke & sayth / yt as a yōge mayden wēt to a ga¦derynge for to daunce she met ye deuyll in lykenes of a man the whiche sayd to her. Whyder goest thou. And she answe¦red & sayd. I god for to daunce in suche an assemble. And the deceyuable deuyll ye whi¦che counceyleth somtyme well the more gre¦tely for too deceyue sayd vnto her. Yf thou wyll beleue me thou shalt not go thyder ne come amonge them. She toke no hede and yode thyder. And at the daunce she was ra¦uysshed of harlots & corrupt at theyr plea∣sures. And after as she came agayn wepȳ¦ge & dyscōforted she met the deuyll / but he dyscomforted her so yt she dyspayred & han∣ged her selfe. ¶Ecclesia. A. ¶Example how Nychanor was slayne after yt he had thretened ye chyrche. lxix. IT is wryten in ye .vii. cha. of Ma¦chabe{us} how Nychanor had a gre¦te hoost & fought wt yt chyldren of Israel / & had lost .v. M. men on a day he yode to the mount of syon & the olde prestes came before hȳ to tel him yt they made sacryfyce for the kynge. And
the sayd Nychanor mocked them & spake vnto them proudly & swore yf Iudas & his hoost were betaken vnto him & that he had the vyctory that whan he came agayne frō batayle yt he sholde dystroy & brenne theyr houses & the chyrche / & with grete yre he de¦parted. Than the sayd prestes yode vnto ye chyrche to wepe & to requyre ye ayde of god And to be shorte whan the sayd Nychanor was at batayle he fel the fyrst & was slayne as it is wryten the sayd chapytre / & also in the seconde boke of Machabeus in the .xv. chapytre. And whan the sayd Nychanor was deed his hoost fledde / & were pursued and slayne yt there was not one left. After they cutte of the heed of the sayd Nichanor and his ryght hande yt he had shewed prou¦dely in thretenynge the sayd prestes. And god was loued and gloryfyed the whiche punisshed the proude herted and ayded the meke. ¶By this sayd Nychanor yt spake proudely vnto the preestes and sayd vnto them that he wolde dystroye them he was fyrst dystroyed & punysshed. For by pryde all the strength and the goodnes of man is dystroyed and lost. Quia de{us} superbis re∣sistit et humilibus dat gratiam. vt dicit{ur} ia∣cobi .iiii. ca. Also he moeued not the prestes to pray with good mynde for hym / he beyn¦ge in wyll to dystroye them. Also they pra∣yed for his dystruccion & confusyon / & they were herde. Also god aydeth not vnto the proude / furyous / and vengeable / but vnto the contrary he them punyssheth & putteth from paradyse. ¶Sepultura. B. ¶Examples of sepultures. And fyrste. Example of a synner the whiche the de∣uylles vnburyed and drewe oute of the chyrche. lxix. IT is wryten in the .iiii. boke of the dyalogue of saynt Gregory that a worshypfull bysshop & ryght he¦rytable tolde vnto hym yt he kne∣we of trouthe & of his people had sene the dede in a cyte named valence / h a man bryttle in his lyfe & in all lyght thy∣ges occupyed. Whan he was deed his bod was buryed in the chyrche. And whan it  me vnto mydnyght grete voyces were he¦de / as yf men had drawen out of ye chyrche some man by vyolence. At these voyces ¦se vp the gardyens of the sayd chyrche / and ranne and sawe two terryble spyrytes the whiche had vnburyed the sayd man & had bounde his fete with a strynge & drewe hȳ out of the chyrche incryenge horrybly. Whā the sayd gardyens sawe that they had gre¦te drede and retorned in to theyr chambre. And whan the morowe came they opened the sepulcre of the sayd deed man and they founde not his body. And they yede to seke hym out of the chyrche / & founde hym in a dyche & his fete bounden where the deuyls had casten hym. ¶By this example a man sholde vnderstande that holy grounde sa∣ueth not the synners the whiche ben the buryed. &c. Also after the ryght wryten men put out of the chyrche people excōm¦nyed or acursed / the whiche ne ben buryed tyll they ben assoyled / & reabled. Also peo∣ple the whiche ben homycides of them selfe ben not buryed in holy grounde / for that yt it appereth that they ben dampned. C. ¶Another example of an vsurer buried in the cloyster kept the monkes from sle¦pynge. lx. MEn fynde in wrytynge this yt whiche foloweth how the dys¦cyple recyteth in his promptu¦ary and sayth that an vsurer
was buryed of monkes in theyr cloyster / And in the nyght he yode out of the pytte in playnynge and cryenge dyscouered the house & he stroke with his staffe meruayl∣lously and woke the monkes. In ye mor∣nynge the body of the sayd man was foū∣de caste ferre of in to a felde beyonde the cyte. And he was agayne put in to the pyt And after that many tymes it was in su∣che wyse done / he was coniured of an ho∣ly man that he tolde wherfore he and his monkes had no rest. And he sayd of me it is to dyspayre. For in lyke wyse as by my vsuryes I haue tormented by nyght and by daye the poore people. In lyke wyse nowe shall I not reste. And ye maye rest yf that ye cast my body out of the cloyster The whiche thynge was done. And after∣warde they ne were more of hȳ troubled. Who so wele sholde consyder these exam∣ples beforesayd of this thyrde commaun∣dement he shall fynde that a man sholde kepe honoure and sanctyfye the feestes ye whiche ben of cōmaundement of the chir∣che without beynge slouthfull to go to he∣re the seruyce / and not neclygently to put hym in deuocyon and to do good operacy¦ons. Item without doynge worldly ope∣racyons the whiche let the sanctyfycacion of the sayd feestes. And withoute cōmyt∣tynge synnes mortalles ye whiche ben ope¦racyons not of sanctifycacyons / but of dā¦nacyon and perdycyon. ¶Quartū preceptū. Filii. ¶Example of those the whiche hath not borne honoure and reuerence vnto faders and moders / & the whiche ne hathe socou¦red them in theyr necessytees after the cō∣maundement of god. A. ¶And fyrste examples of Absolon the sone of Dauyd the whiche deyed mysche∣uously for that that he made warre with his fader. Ca. lxx IT is wryten in the xiiii. chapitre of the seconde booke of kynges yt in all the people of Israhel there ne was soo fayre a man as was Absolon the sone of kynge dauyd For from the sole of the fote tyll vnto the heyght of his heed was there not in al his body and his membres ony foule spotte. / And also his heere were of grete weyghty¦nes & beaute. And he the whiche was no∣ble / yonge / fayre / and strong was so prou¦de and dysobeyssaunt vnto his fader Da∣uyd and made agayne hȳ soo grete warre that he fledde one tyme before hym. Also he was lecherous and so fulfylled of coue∣tyse that he wolde be kynge and expell his owne fader from his realme / but he abo∣de not vnpunysshed as reason was. For he deyed myscheuously. In lyke wyse as it is wryten in the .xviii. chapytre of the se¦conde boke of kynges. It befell that Abso¦lon ranne after the seruauntes of Dauyd in makynge warre agayne them / & was vpon his mule the whiche yode vnder an oke gretely braunched / and his heere toke and medled with the braunches of ye sayd oke. And as he was there hanged betwe∣ne the skye and the erthe / the mule where vpon he was rested not but yode forth stil And some men the whiche sawe this thin¦ge yode vnto ioab the whiche was Capy∣tayne and ledde the warre for Dauid / vn¦to whome they sayd that Absolon was a∣byden hanged on the braunche of an oke Than the said ioab toke in his hande thre speres and festened them in ye herte of ab∣solon. And for as moche as he yet remo∣ued
and panted ten stryppelynges of the armye of the sayd Ioab wente to kyll out of hande the sayd Absolon / and caste hym in to a grete dytche / and layde vpon hym a grete hepe of stones in sygne of punycy¦on and maladyccyon. This is here the ex∣ample of all the euyll chyldren yt wyll not bere honour and reuerence vnto faders & moders after the cōmaundement of god. By this that he was hanged by the heere myraculously / is to vnderstonde that the pryde that he toke in his heere dyspleased vnto god / & by this that his hert was per¦ced with thre speres / is to vnderstonde yt it was reason that the proude herte & ino∣bedyent vnto god the whiche ne dyde ho∣noure vnto his fader / but made warre wt hym was trebly punysshed. For he was re¦plenysshed with thre vyces / the whiche is pryde / auaryce / and lecherye. And by that that he was buryed in grounde prophane without prayers / without honoure / ne wt¦out solempnyte ecclesyastycall was in to∣ken of maledyccyon. For it is wryten deu¦tero. xxii. ca. Maledictus homo qui nō ho¦norat patrem suū et matrem suam: et di∣cet omnis populus amen. That is to say that man be cursed the whiche honoureth not his fader and his moder / and al ye peo¦ple shall saye Amen / so be it. &c. B. ¶Another example of a sone the whi∣che defaylled vnto fader and moder / and he bare a tode thre yere in his vysage. lxx THe dyscyple reciteth in his sermōs yt it is wryten in dyalogo cesarii / how a ryche man & his wyfe lefte of their goodes and herytages vnto a sone yt they had to thende that he were maryed vnto a damoysell. And then to prouyde for thē haboundaūtly whyles they lyued. And af∣ter that he was maryed vnto the yong da¦moysell she had the fader and the moder of the sayd sone in dyspleasure. And dyde so moche that they were departed and put in to a caban in the whiche they had mo∣che of defaute. And one tyme ye auncyent woman sayd vnto her husbande. I sawe borne from ye market of good mete in our sones house / it is a greate tyme syth thou etest ony flesshe / goo thou theder this son∣daye and in dede thou shalte fynde there of good roste and a grete dyner. Than at the houre of dyner the sayd auncyente ca∣me to knocke at the dore / and incontinent the yll sone made to hyde the mete rosted And whan the fader was entred the euyl sone demaūded hym what he wolde / and he sayd that he was come to dyne with hȳ hopynge that there was some good thyn∣ge. And the sayd sone sayd vnto hym. Lo∣ke what we haue / holde here is two pens bye some thynge for ye & for my moder / & go thy waye. And whan he was gone the sayd roste was set agayne vpon the table & a chekyn rosted by the wyll of god was chaunged in to a grete tode ye whiche lept in to the vysage of the yll sone / & toke him soo strongly with ye two fete before on his chekes / yt the flesshe of the man & of the to¦de was one flesshe togyder / without that they myght separe them. And the behyn∣de of the sayd tode hanged before his mou¦the. The preest was called that ledde him to the Archebysshop / vnto whome he con∣fessed his synne & the case by ordre euenso as it was happened. Then the archebys∣shop gaue hym in penaunce that he shold go thorowe all the grete townes and cy∣tees of Fraunce / and that he sholde cal the yonge chyldren and recounte vnto theym the case beforsayd / to the ende that none sholde dyspyse theyr faders and parentes
And the sayd tode remoued not from his vysage. And whan ye man ete he ete. And whan men wolde take awaye the sayd to¦de with instrumentes he streyned soo sore with his fete yt the face became so blowen that the eyes remeued from theyr place & he lyued so thre yeres without that that a man coude take hym awaye. In that ty∣me frere Iohan du pont of ye ordre of pre∣chers sawe him at parys with many men women and chyldren. The said chylde the whiche ne dyde honoure vnto his fader & moder / hymselfe was dyshonoured. quia legit eccle. xxix. Peccator transgredyens mādata dn̄i: īcidet ī {pro}missionē ne {quam}. This example sheweth yt punycyon shall come be it in this worlde or in the other vpon ye chyldren the whiche defaylleth vnto fader & moder in theyr necessytees. God ye whi∣che is all puyssaunt wolde that this thyng were sene and knowen ouer all the coun∣tree / to thende that all the chyldren mer∣uaylled them. And knewe ye grete offence the whiche is to defayl vnto theyr paren∣tes. &c. C. ¶Another example of Cham the whi¦che mocked his fader noe. lxx. IT is wryten in genese yt Noe had thre sones / yt is to vnderstond / sem Cham & Iaphet. And it happened one ty¦me that after that Noe hadde strongly la¦boured at the gaderynge of wyne that he was wery & slepte / the whiche was vnco∣uered byneth / & one of his sones named Cham came there / the whiche mocked of the thynges naturell of his fader / whiche wente to seke his two other bretheren for to se it for to mocke withall. And the two other whan they sawe that couered them & dyde chyde with Cham / to wome they sayd that it was not well done to mocke wt his fader. After this ye said Noe knewe it by reuelacyon and cursed him / not that he was cursed / but al his lynee / not that ye soules were cursed / but they yt proceded of hym sholde be subgectes to grete trybula∣cyons / as of pouerte of godes / or fortunes temporelles. And more than two thousan¦de yere after as our sauyour and redemp¦toure preched a wyfe yssued of the sayd ly¦nee of Cham came to requyre our lorde to hele her doughter that was tormented of the deuyl. Dn̄e misere mei filia mea ma¦le a demonio vexat{ur}. &c. And our lorde an∣swered to her that it was not good to gy∣ue the brede of sones vnto dogges. Non est bonū sumere panē filiorū: et sumere ca¦nibus. He called the sayd people dogges / bycause that they were euyl / and yssued of the said cursed fader Cham that mocked with his fader as sayd is. D. ¶Other example of two sones yt slew theyr fader. lxx. IT is wryten in the .xxxvii. chapi¦tre of the boke of Ysaye that the armye of kynge Sennacheryb was punysshed diuinely for the∣yr pride and synne / yt sholde be a longe thynge to recounte. And the aungel of god slewe in one nyght. C. foure score & fyue thousande. And the kyng Sennache¦ryb fledde in to the cyte of Nynyues / and it was soo that as he adoured in ye temple his god / his two propre sones drewe their glayues and slewe him in the sayd temple The whiche sones wend to haue succeded and regned in the realme after hym / but the one nor the other was not kynge.
E. ¶Other example of a sone the whiche stroke his moder. lxx. THe dyscyple recyteth in his promp¦tuary how a sone cast downe and stroke his moder with the fete. And of ye permyssyon dyuyne that fote where with he hadde stryken her was cut from hym. Another example of a sone the whiche dys¦honoured his moder / And in shorte tyme all his chyldren deyed / without doubte al chyldren the whiche done yll vnto the fa∣der and vnto the moder / or ye whiche dys∣honoureth them / or the whiche fayl them in theyr necessytees shall be punysshed in this worlde or in the other. For they dyso∣beye vnto god and ben vnnaturelles. &c. F. ¶Another example how ye two sones of Helye wolde not be corrected for theyr fader and they were slayne. lxx. IT is wryten in the thyrde chapytre of the fyrste boke of kynges how he¦ly was iuge of ye people of Israhell by .xl. yeres. And he had two sones named ophī and phynees the whiche lyued delicyously and prepayred them delycatyuely ye mea∣tes the whiche came vnto ye temple in sa∣cryfyces / and made of synnes and cursyd¦nesses. Theyr fader hely the whiche herde the tydynges repreued them / but he punis¦shed them not. And therfore god suffred yt they deyed myscheuously / for the chyldren were slayne in batayll. And the sayd hely fell frome his chayre and slewe hymselfe whan men brought hym the tydynges yt his chyldren were slayne / and that the ar∣ke wherin were ye cōmaundementes was taken of the phylystyens. The clerkes pre¦suppose theyr dampnacyon / more soner than otherwise / for the synnes the whiche regne in chyldren / and for ye faute of their correccyon. G. ¶Another example of the chylde that the deuyll bare awaye. lxx. IT is wryten in the dyalogue Ce¦sarii how a deuyll bare awaye a chylde in body and soule for the malediccion of his parentes. In suche manere that his parentes sawe hym no more afterwarde. And god suffred it to thende that these other paren¦tes haue drede how they curse theyr chyl∣dren / but that more sooner they correcte them with a rodde. &c. A. ¶Another example how a good and true chyld loued his fader and myght not endure yt a man dyde vnto hym ony yll. MEn fynde by wrytynge how ye dys¦cyple recyteth in his promptuary and sayeth how a man had thre sones wt his wyfe after the opynyon. And it befel yt they wrathed theym one tyme togyder / & that the sayd wyfe sayd vnto hym. Thou wenest to haue thre chyldren of me / but ye ne haste but one. And he demaunded her whiche it was. And she ne wolde tell hym After that that ye sayd woman was deed as the fader lay in his dethe bedde / by his testament he lefte all that he had vnto hȳ ye whiche was his owne sone. And whan he was deed they stroue who sholde haue his goodes and herytage. And the kynge commaūded that the sayd fader deed we∣r
boūde vnto a tree / and that the thre so∣nes sholde shote at hym. And that he the whiche sholde shote moost strhtest shol¦de haue the herytage. And af yt he was bounde two of the sones shotte han the thyrde sawe that they had shot  suche wyse vnto his fader he was wroche agaȳ them / and said that he ne wolde in no ma¦nere shote vnto his fader. Than men kne¦we truely that he was the very chylde the whiche ne wolde none yll do vnto his fa∣der. And vnto hym it was iuged that he sholde haue the goodes and herytages. Al¦so al good chyldren sholde loue theyr fader deed and quycke. A beest loueth naturelly her fruyte & semblables. Eccle. xiii. Om̄e animal diligit simile sibi. And those ye whi¦che loue not theyr faders & parentes ben gretely vnnaturell / worse than a dombe beest / & therfore they ben worthy of puny∣cyon / ye whiche they shall haue yf they cor∣recte them not whyles that they ben lyuin¦ge in this worlde. B. ¶Another example how the nature of byrdes techeth vs to thynke and remem∣bre our parentes. lxxi. WRyten it is in the boke of Ysydore of the nature of byrdes yt the na∣ture of cranes is suche that they withdrawe them from mete & endure hō∣gre / to the ende yt they puruaye vnto theyr lytel byrdes. And after that theyr lytel cra¦nes maye fle & take proye yf theyr paren∣tes haue necessyte / afflyccyon and lennes they haue cōpassyon & gadre them in to a neste / & nouryssheth them whyles yt they haue conualescence / & do good ye one vnto the other. In lyke wyse done ye good chyl∣dren vnto theyr parentes. These lytel gry¦pes ne done not so vnto theyr parentes of whome ye naturyens saye that after that theyr parentes haue longely laboured to nourysshe them / & to go to gete them me∣te in many places / & that they haue kepte themselfe frome mete for to gyue it vnto them. After that those lytel grypes be gre¦te to fle and haue puyssaunce. Than they bete with theyr wynges theyr parentes. / Also they ne gyue them to ete of theyr pro¦ye / but with theyr bylle and with theyr wȳ¦ges they bete them out of theyr nest. The yll chyldren done in lyke wyse vnto theyr parentes. &c. C. ¶Another example of a doughter the whiche nourysshed her moder the whiche was enclosed in a toure / with the mylke of her brestes. lxxi. VAlerian recyteth that for the syn∣nes that a noble woman had cō∣mytted she was iuged vnto the dethe / but the Iuge ne wolde punysshe her openly / for the honoure of her parentes. And she was enclosed in a pryson to thende yt she sholde deye for hongre. And her doughter the whiche was maryed vysyted her mo∣der euery daye by the leue of the Iuge in suche wyse that she was serched before yt she entred for to se yf she bare ony thynge to be eten. And the said doughter gaue vn¦to her / her pappes to souke & nourysshed her. And at the laste the Iuge knewe of it wherfore he was moued with pyte & ga∣ue the moder vnto the doughter. &c. D. ¶Another example of the chylde yt bo¦te of his faders nose. lxxi.
IT is wryten in many bokes this ye whiche foloweth how the dyscyple recyteth in his boke and sayeth that there was a fader the whiche ledde his sone wt hym in to tauernes & playes. And he ler∣ned that in suche maner yt whan he was grete he ne myght kepe hym from playn∣ge and vsynge the tauernes / & after was a thefe. Fyrste vnto his fader / & after vn∣to his neyghbours / & was so cursed yt hys fader delyuered hȳ two tymes from han∣gynge in gyuȳge grete money. And third¦ly for a thefte was ledde vnto ye galowes And there requyred that he myghte kysse his fader / from whome he bote the nose wt his tethe. And as the sone was rebuked of that he answered. I haue done wele and iustely / for he is cause that I am hanged in asmoche as he correct me not in youthe of my fautes / for yf he had correcte me I had not be here. This example denoteth yt the sage sayth {pro}uer. xxix. Puer qi dimit∣titur volūtati ue: cōfudit matrē suā: īmo patrē & oēs cognatos. &c. The chylde the whiche is suffred to do his owne wyll con¦foundeth his moder / also his fader and al his kynnesmen. And therfore a man shol∣de punysshe him & correct in youthe. Men plye & bende the rodde whyles yt it is yon∣ge / so dothe men a chylde. And who so ta∣ryeth tyl they be growen men / he ne may ayde hȳ. Yf the sayd fader had correct hys chylde he hadde not byte of his nose nor be hanged / he yt wele loueth wele chastiseth. E. ¶Another example of hym whose ber¦de grewe after he was hanged. lxxi. THe dyscyple recyteth in his boke & sayeth yt there was a cursed chyld inobedyent vnto fader and moder ye whi∣che slewe his felowe / & for his demerytes was hanged in his yonge aege. And with in thre dayes after yt he was hanged a gre¦te gray berde grewe vpon hym so moche that it came tyll vnto his gyrdyll wherof the people meruayled. And afterwarde it was reueled vnto a holy man al the dede of it the whiche sayd that he shold haue ly¦ued in as grete aege as ye sayd berde shew¦ed yf he had be obedyent vnto fader & mo¦der. And all suche chyldren abrydge theyr lyues / & ben in the waye of dampnacyon yf they haue not grete & bytter repentaū∣ce. &c. Et legit{ur} in psalmi. Subito defece∣runt propter iniquitatem uam. F. ¶Another example of a man the whi∣che was fell & harde vnto his fader & hys yonge sone repreued hym. lxxi. THe dyscyple recyteth in his promp¦tuary that there was a man yll & vnnaturell vnto his fader auncyent / For he made hym to lye in the stable with hys shepe. And gaue vnto hym a vyle vesture the remenaunte wherof men couered the horses. The sayd auncyent had gyuen vn¦to hym his herytage for to lyfte him vp in grete estate. Now it happened yt the sone of the sayd felon was heuy & displeased to se his grandfader soo entreated: And for this thynge he came vnto his fader / and demaunded hym suche another couerture of hors as his sayd grandfader had. And his fader asked hym what he wolde do wt it. And the chylde answerde. I shall kepe it tyll yt thou be auncyente / & than I shall clothe yt with it in lyke wyse as yu doest thy fader my grandfader the whiche begate ye nourysshed the / & lefte vnto the his hery∣tage. &c. Legitur mathei. xv. et marci. vii.
Honora patrē tuū & matrē tuā: & qui ma¦ledixerit patri vel matri morte moriatur The holy scrypture procedeth of ye mouth of god cōmaundeth yt men honoure theyr fader and theyr moder. And he sayth vn∣to the chyldren yt do the contrary. That is they the whiche curse theyr faders or mo∣ders / or the whiche theym dyshonoure or defayle in necessyte that they deye of deth And it is to vnderstonde not of dethe cor∣porell alonely / but of dampnacion and de¦the eternell the whiche is dethe withoute dyenge yf they deye without correccyon & amendement. G. ¶Another example how a fader & his sone cursed eche other in hell. Also of a go∣de sone yt blyssed his fader in heuen. lxxi. THe dyscyple recyteth in his promp¦tuarye & sayeth howe a holy man desyred to se the paynes of helle / and the glorye of the blyssed the whiche was ledde in to helle by his aungell. And amonges many other paynes he sawe a fader stry∣ue with his sone. And the fader sayd vnto his sone. Cursed be the tyme that euer I begate the. All that that I haue done for yt is cursed. For for yt I was a cursed vsu∣rer / to thende that thou haddest grete ha∣boundaunce of goodes in the worlde. and he said many other thinges vnto his sone in cursynge hym. The sone sayd vnto the contrary. Cursed be the hour that thou be∣gatest me for thou ne haste taught me the cōmaundementes of god / ne to do penaū¦ce ne other good dedes / but thou taughte me pryde & to make false vendycyons / & he reproched him many other thynges by∣cause he corrected him not of his yl dedes Than sayd the holy man vnto his aungel the whiche ledde hym. It is a cursed thyn¦ge to here & to se these thinges here. After¦warde the aungell shewed hym the glorye of the blyssed. And in that he sawe a fader & his sone the whiche were in grete Ioye And the sone sayd vnto his fader. Fader be thou blessyd of god. For thou me haste made to lerne scyence. And thou haste led me vnto the chirche / & vnto predycacions thou haste taught me many good thinges and haste correcte me of the ylles that I dyde. More ouer thou haste lerned me the cōmaundementes of god & to loue and to drede god aboue all thynges. And many other thynges yt the sone sayd vnto the fa∣der in blyssynge hym. For by the sayd thin¦ges he had saued his soule. And the fader blyssed the sone in spekynge vnto hym sē∣blable thinges good and prouffytables by the whiche they were saued. &c. This exā∣ple denoteth that god hathe suffred yt this thynge were sene and knowen to the ende that the faders and moders & chyldren in lykewyse take hede & doo. And yt they cor∣recte & lerne vnto theyr chyldren the good for to come vnto the glorye of heuen. And yf they do the contrary that they know yt they shall haue punycyon in helle. Where they shall curse other eternally. &c. H. ¶Another example of a woman dam¦ned whiche dispreysed those that repreued her of her synnes. Ca. lxxi. THe dyscyple recyteth in his promp¦tuary & sayeth that a woman mo¦che deuoute and loued of god was ryght curyous of her moder departed. The whi∣che wolde knowe of her moders estate for to helpe her yf she were in purgatorye / & it requyred of oure lorde Ihesu cryste. / ✿
And one time as she was at the chirche wt teres requyred god of this thȳge / she was put in horrour & sawe by her a derke spiri¦te. Than she made the token of the crosse & demaunded who it was. And the spyry∣te sayd I am thy moder. And she her de∣maunded how it was with her / & she an∣swered it is with me ryght yl / thy prayers ne maye serue me of nothynge / for I am dampned eternally. Than the doughter with grete wayllynge sayd. Alas my mo∣der what is the cause of thy dampnacyon And she answered. For that that I lyued & haue be nourysshed of thynges yl goten by vsuryes & otherwyse / & I culpable to∣ke no hede to restore vnto other. And that the whiche was yll done agayn god of my subgectes in my house I forced not of it / but I am entred in the wayes of ye world yll and vnryghtfull. And also I haue dys¦preysed those ye whiche me haue repreued of my synnes & ylles. And I ne me amen¦ded ne repented in no manere. And in su∣che wyse I deyed. And whan the sayd mo¦der had sayd these wordes she departed / & the sayd doughter prayed no more for her Vnto this purpose saynt Austyn sayeth. Si scirē patrē meum in inferno: non plus orarē {pro} eo {quam} pro dyabolo. That is to saye yf I knewe my fader were dampned in helle I sholde pray no more for hym than for ye deuyll. This example denoteth that those the whiche lyueth of thynges yll go∣ten ben in the waye of dampnacyon / yf yt they dye without restitucyon. Also a man sholde not dyspreyse one yt repreueth hym of his vyces & synnes. I. ¶Another example of a tauerner that the deuyll bare awaye in body & soule for that he repreued not those the whiche dyd ylle. Ca. lxxi. THe dyscyple recyteth in hys ser∣mons & sayeth that a tauerner re¦ceyued to ete to drynke & to lodge all sor∣tes of people / yt is to vnderstonde good & yll / & suffred to playe / to swere / to be dron¦ke / to blaspheme / to cōmytte baudrye and other synnes in his tauerne for temporell gayne. And one tyme on a sondaye as he bare of wyne from his seller before his ya¦te for that yt his hous was ful of other hos¦tes / there arose vp a tempeste of wynde & deuylles amonge it ye whiche toke vp vyo¦lently the sayd tauerner on hye in the ayre before all the people. And whan he sawe hymselfe so lyfte vp and of ye deuylles bor¦ne awaye cryed by grete contricion of her¦te. O de{us} quid fatiet aīa mea. O my god what thȳge shal be done of my soule. thā the deuylles suffred hym to fall in to a fel∣de / & they sayd vnto hym. For asmoche as thou haste forgoten all thynges transyto∣ryes & the lyfe of thyn owne body / thy wy¦fe thy chyldren / & thy frendes / & that thou haste prayed alonely god for thy soule by contrycyon of herte we ne maye bere the no ferther / for god ne wyll suffre vs to ex∣cercise in the our wyll. For that that thou haste called hym by contrycyon. And yf ye haddest not done it we had borne the in to hell in body and in soule. Than the said de¦uylles yode awaye / and he was founde in the sayd felde / and borne in to his house. / And he laye in his bedde certayne dayes / and after that he was in conualescence he corrected hym and amended / & put away his tauerne. And more ouer he neuer suf∣fred in his house to playe / to blaspheme / ne to do other ylles. All tauerners and hos¦tyllers sholde wele note this thynge yt god ne punysshe them as he dyde the sayd ylle tauerner.
K. ¶Another example of a man the whi¦che was so ylle instructe and correcte that he solde his soule / and the deuyll bare it a∣waye with the body. lxxi. THe disciple recyteth in his sermōs and sayeth that a man sayd vnto his compaygnons as they dranke at ye ta∣uerne yf they byleued yt there was of sou∣les / and that he byleued nothynge / and yt he ne had none sene. And that the prestes and prechers had founde that there was of soules in helle for the gayne temporell And that he byleued nothynge. And hys compaygnons affermed yt after the fayth catholyke that there was of soules in hell and in heuen / and that the soule of euery persone goeth vnto paradyse or in to hell or in to purgatorie after that it departeth from the body. After he demaūded yf ony wolde bye his soule. And that he sholde sel it. And one of his compaygnons sayd vn∣to him. I wyl bye it. And it was solde for a quarte of wyne the whiche was inconty¦nent dronke. And there came the deuyl in the fourme of a man the whiche boughte the sayd soule of hym the whiche solde it / and payed a quarte of wyne. And whan ye sayd wyne was dronke the deuyl said. Gy¦ue me the soule yt I haue bought / for it is myne. And those the whiche were present sayd. It is a thynge iuste that he the whi¦che byeth possede the thynge bought. And the accursed the whiche had solde his sou∣le sayd that he had not solde the body. And the presence sayd. Whan yt ony selleth his hors he gyueth the coler or halter withall. And incontynent ye seller was estrangled of the deuyl. And before the presence rauis¦shed the sayd man & bare hym in to hel in body and soule. A. ¶Another example how ye fader shol∣de loue more god than his chyldren / and other parentes and frendes. lxxii IT is wryten how the dyscyple recy¦teth in his promptuarye and saith that a man was one tyme so moche holdē in the loue of his parentes and neyghbou¦res that he was letted to loue god and to folowe hym. And one tyme he wolde ther¦in fynde remedye and called them vnto a dyner. And in dynynge he prayed one of them the whiche vnto hym after his aduy¦se was moost faythfull. Yf thou loue me put thy lytell fynger in this fyre for the lo∣ue of me. And he dredde the payne & wold nothynge do. So the fayth and the loue yt he fayned to haue in hȳ appered to be vay¦ne. After he requyred al the other by ordre and sayd vnto them as vnto the fyrste / & they wolde nothynge doo. Than he decla∣red his purpose vnto theym all / and sayd vnto them that onely for the loue of them he was taryed for to loue parfytely Ihe∣su cryste / but for that that he founde noo more fayth in them he wolde no more ta∣ry. And for that they ne wolde put in ye fy∣re transytorye ye moost lytel membre that they hadde one seule houre for the loue of hym / he sayd that in lyke wyse for the lo∣ue of them he ne sholde put all his body & his soule in the fyre perpepual of helle. Af∣terwarde he sayd vnto them / take hede to do for your selfe / and so wyll I for myself Then within a whyle after he restored & payed all his debtes. And after gaue and dystrybuted all his goodes vnto the poore for the loue of god. And put hym to serue our lorde Ihesu faythfully and deuoutly / and to loue hym parfytely. &c. True it is that we sholde loue our parentes / frendes and kinnesmen naturally and wyllyngly
And for as moche as god cōmaundeth it / Diliges proximū tuū sicut te ipsū. math xxii. But we sholde loue our fader celesty¦all more than them & aboue them. Vn̄ au. Diligēdus ē genitor {sed} {pre}ponēdus ē crea∣tor. And yf ony man loue his fader or his chyldren & parentes more than god & abo¦ue hym he shall be sente vnto dampnacyō And he ne maye be saued without true pe¦naūce. For it is wryten mat. x. & luce. xiiii. Qui amat patrē aut matrē plus{quam} me nō est me dign{us}. Et qi amat filiū aut filiā su∣per me: nō est me dign{us}. We be holden vn¦to fader & moder: but yet ben we more hol¦den vnto god the whiche hathe fourmed our soules vnto his semblaūce / & the whi∣che hathe redemed vs by his precyous blo¦de / & suffred dethe for vs. And more ouer he vs puruayeth & nouryssheth by ye goo∣des yt he maketh to growe. And also vnto vs prometteth paradyse. And therfore no loue what so euer it be ne sholde drawe vs backe from the parfyte loue of god. &c. B. ¶Another example of a fader yt whi∣che sayd vnto his sone that he sholde hol∣de his fyngere in the fyre tyll he had sayd Aue maria. lxxii. IT is wryten in some bookes that ye whiche foloweth how the dyscyple recyteth in his sermons and sayeth that a ryche man posseded many goodes vnius∣tely goten. And after that he had herde ye worde of god in predycacyon wolde expe∣rymente ye fidelyte of his sone. Vnto who me he said that for the loue of hym he wol¦de holde his fynger in ye fyre so longe alo∣nely as he sholde saye aue maria. And the sayd sone began to assaye / & incontynent that he felte the brennynge of the fyre / he drewe backe his fynger and said vnto his fader. What shall it prouffyte the that all my body shall fele hete and shall be brent And the fader sayd vnto the sone. What shall it prouffyte yt for the I dampne my selfe & put in the fyre of helle eternel / And so the sayd ryche man restored all tho thin¦ges that he had ylle goten and chaunged his lyfe from yll vnto good. C. ¶Another example how a man sholde doo of good dedes whyle that he lyueth wt out trustynge vpon his heyres. lxxii. THe dyscyple reciteth in his promp¦tuarye & sayeth that a ryche man was in the artycle of dethe / he called hys thre sones and sayd vnto the moost aūcy∣ente. My dere sone knowe ye that I leue vnto you many possessyons and goodes that I haue kepte for you / the whiche I sholde haue gyuen vnto the poores / & ther¦fore parauenture I shall go in to purga∣torye. Tell me what shalte thou gyue for my soule. And he sayd vnto hym yt he shol¦de make to synge many masses / and also sholde gyue of almesse. &c. In lyke wyse ye seconde hym prometted. The fader pray∣sed these two sones here. And demaunded of the yongest what he wolde do for hym I promyse the nothynge not to gyue one peny. Whyles that thou lyuest dystrybute thy goodes for the helthe of thy soule with out cōmyttynge it vnto vs / how shall we ayde the by dede whan we haue thy godes the whiche ne wylte helpe thy selfe for the loue of vs / & euery of vs shall loue better his owne vtylyte than thyne. And therfo∣re thynke fyrste on thyselfe yf thou wylte / Whan the said ryche man herde this yon¦ge chylde consydered that he sayd vnto hȳ
veryte & dystrybuted his rychesses vnto ye poores for his owne helthe. D. ¶Another example how a man shold do of good dedes in his lyfe tyme without taryenge vnto his frendes. lxxii THe dyscyple reciteth in his promp¦tuarye yt there was a ryche man the whiche hadde a sone / the whiche ryche man whan he was in his dethe bedde ma¦de his testament solemply / & lefte moche goodes vnto the relygyous & vnto ye peo∣ple / and afterwarde he deyed After his de¦the the sayd people and the relygyous ca∣me vnto his sayd sone & demaunded him that yt his fader had lefte vnto theym by his testament. Than the sone answered & sayd. I ne shal gyue vnto no persone that lyueth / & tolde ye reason. Ye saye in appro∣uynge the scrypture yt yf ony be in helle yt the suffrages & good dedes ne prouffite to hym. And yf he be in heuen yt hym nedeth nothynge. I knowe not nowe yf he be in paradyse or in helle. And yf he be in pur∣gatorye he is there purged vnto the laste synne / for I ne shal gyue nothyng for his soule. The goodes temporelles that I pos¦sede I ne shal shedde them. Also I doubt me for his soule / but be he tormented tyll that he be purged. This example techeth vs to do of good dedes whyles yt we lyue without taryenge or trustynge vnto oure parentes for to do it after our dethe. Vn̄. grego. Tutior ē vita vt bonū qd quis{que} post mortē sperat agi {per} alios: agat dū vi∣uit ipse {per} se. Beatius quippe ē liberū exire {quam} post vīcula liberantē q̄re. Chylde vnna∣turall syth yt it is so yt god cōmaūdeth the to helpe thy neyghbours / the poore / ye hon¦gry / ye thrusty / ye seke / & yf yu do it not thou shalt yelde accompte before god at ye day of Iugement. By a more stronge reason yf thou socour not thy parentes of whom thou haste thy goodes the whiche ben in ye pryson of purgatorye hauynge hongre & thurst / & grete necessyte thou arte worthy of grete punycyon. &c. E. ¶Another example of semblable ma∣tere to do of good dedes without taryeng or trustynge vnto his chyldren. lxxii. MEn fynde by wrytynge yt the∣re was a ryche man the whi∣che had purchased lōdes and possessyons. And all the coun¦tree aboute hym was his. It happened that he fell in a grete sekenes & sente for his preest & deuysed that he had / & requyred hym to praye for hym / & ma∣de to praye in euery monastery. And pro∣mysed that yf he myght escape yt he shold de go vnto saynt Iames / vnto saynt gy∣les / vnto Rochemador. And yt he sholde do many of good dedes for the loue of god / It happened that he escaped from ye sayd sekenes / & became wors than euer he had be and more vnfaythfull / & dyde nothyn∣ge of all that he hadde promysed vnto the preest. Longe tyme after he fell agayne in to a moche greate sekenes / and sente for his preest as before. And promysed to doo many of good dedes / and that he wolde praye for hym. Ha said the preest the other tyme thou saydest as moche vnto me / & nothynge hast yu done of yt that yu promy∣sed. I haue sayd he to moche good / who shall do it for me. Then he called his sone & his heyre & tolde hym yt he had goten hȳ grete londes & that he muste goo for hym vnto saynt Iames and vnto saynt gyles
And vnto suche pylgrymages yf I deye / Fayre fader sayd the sone men saye that deed men go as swyftely as they wyll. Go you by saynt Iames and vnto saynt gy∣les yf ye wyll / so god helpe me I shall not put my body in payne. Yf ye haue wele do ne ye shall fynde it. The sayd heyre yode not / & therfore a good thynge it is not to tary ne abyde vnto his heyres. For ye lan∣terne ye whiche is borne before gyueth bet¦ter lyght than that the whiche is borne be¦hynde. F. ¶Another example how a man sholde do of good dedes whyles that he lyueth & that a fole taught wele one sage. lxxii. MEn tell of a grete lorde the whiche had of custome as done these gre∣te lordes whan he wyll go thorowe ye coū∣tree to sende his coke to prepayre his dy∣ner and his place. And the sayd lorde had a fole yt had of custome to go after the co∣ke for the prouffyte that he there had. &c. It befell one tyme that ye sayd lorde was seke in his bedde of the dethe. And ye peo∣ple the whiche came to se hym sayd vnto eche other whan they mette / ye lorde gothe his waye. The sayd fole herde these sayd wordes & sayd yt shall he not do / for his co¦ke is yet here. And for yt that ye people per∣seuered to say yt he gothe his waye / ye said fole entred in to the chambre of ye lorde / & sayd to hym. My lorde all the people say yt ye go your waye / and bycause ye haue not sente your coke before by saynt Peter ye shall deye of hongre. Than the lorde sayd that the fole sayd true / & that a fole hathe assensed wele a saige. Than the lorde ma∣de all the prestes of the countree to synge & to do in his lyfe the seruyces yt men shol¦de do after his dethe & to do almesdedes & so he sente the coke before / & made his far∣dell to bere with hym as dothe a bryde the whiche departeth from the house of her fa¦der. &c. A. ¶Another example of a fader and of his sone the whiche were dampned for ye goodes yll begoten and witholden. lxxiii. THe dyscyple recyteth in the booke of his sermons & sayeth yt an vsu∣rer had two sones of the whiche ye one re∣pented hym in herynge a sermon / & after sayd vnto his fader. My fader yf we deye in suche wyse we shal be loste in body & in soule. Than he sayd vnto hym. Paye vn∣to euery man that yt thou owest & retorne vnto god. Vnto whome the fader sayd / & the other broder. Sholdest yu be our confes¦soure / goo deye where thou wylte. For we shall abyde with our goodes. The whiche helde his peas / lefte theym & yelded hym∣self hermyte / & lyued a poore lyfe in seruȳ¦ge god. And after that this good hermyte herde speke that his fader and his broder were deed was moued in pyte & desyred to knowe of theyr estate. And requyred of god yf it were his pleasure that he might se them. And one daye as he was in oray∣son the aungell of our lorde came vnto hȳ & sayd. Thy petycyon is made / come thy waye I shall shewe them the. And he to∣ke hym & rauysshed hym / and bare him in to helle. And set hym vpon a hye moūtay¦ne. And the sayd aungell sayd vnto hym / wylte thou se and here thy fader and thy brother and the sayd hermyte answered yt ye. And he sawe a valeye replenysshed of dyuers kyndes of tormentes / and herde a myserable voyce. And he sawe fyrst his fa¦der
the whiche boylled in fyre as pesen do the within a grete pot ye whiche said. Ma∣ledyccyon / maledyccyon / maledyccyō / cur¦sed be the houre that euer I was concey∣ued. Cursed be the wombe that bare me / Whan the sayd hermyte herde these wor∣des he trembled and sayd. O fader arte yu here. The answer. My sone thou art blyst for thou hast dredde god and haste fledde this payne ryght horryble and cruell / but take hede that thou serue wele god. And e∣uen in lyke wise as he spake these wordes the sone came and appered as the sayd fa¦der had done with grete boylyons of fyre: & in swymmynge on hye & within as a pe¦ce in a potte. And the sayd sone toke hym to curse his sayd fader in paynes and said in this manere. Cursed be thou my fader in pardurabylyte. For by these thynges yt thou haste yll goten thou haste dampned me & loste. And vnto the contrary the fa∣der said vnto the sone. Cursed be thou so∣ne / for for the I haue goten suche goodes and them hathe witholden. And so am I put from al good. And therfore I am dis¦cended in to this payne. Vnto whome the sone lyuynge sayd. Is there neyther pra∣yers ne suffrages maye prouffyte you nor ayde. The whiche sayd that no. For in hell there is no redempcyon. And the sayd aū∣gell ledde agayne the sayd hermyte / The whiche lyued afterwarde more faythfully and serued god deuoutely & he was saued This example denoteth that those ye whi∣che taketh & witholdeth ye goodes of ano∣ther vniustely yf they dye in suche wyse wt out restitucion & amendement yt they shal dyscende in to helle in payne and in grete torment. B. ¶Another example of a fader the whi¦che put a malet in a cheste / and toke ye ke∣yes vnto his chyldren. Ca. lxxiii MEn fynde by wrytynge this ye whiche foloweth how the dys¦cyple recyteth in his promp∣tuarye & sayeth yt a riche man maryed hys chyldren & enry∣ched them of his goodes. And in the ende became poore. And his chyldren gaue no force. And afterwarde he called his chyl∣dren vnto whome he gaue the keyes of a coffre wherin he had a locket / and within it was a heuy malet / in lyke wyse as & yf it had be moneye / but he reteyned one key to thende that they ne myght go vnto the cheste. And he sayd vnto his chyldren. You ben myne herytours & frendes / whan I shall be deed open ye the cheste / & ye shall fynde within it a lettre the whiche deuy∣seth howe moche I haue lefte vnto euery of you. For this hope the chyldren the one after the other inuyterent the sayd auncy¦ent / they honoured hym and ayde. After his dethe they founde within the sayd lo∣ket a malet and a lettre ye whiche contey∣ned. That man is worthy to be beten on ye heed with his malet the whiche hathe soo moche gyuen vnto his chyldren and trus∣teth the whiche nothinge reteyneth for hȳ selfe. C. ¶Another example of two doughters the whiche put oute theyr fader in his ol∣de aege. Ca. lxxiii. IT is wryten in some bokes thys the whiche foloweth how the dis¦cyple recyteth in his promptua∣rye and sayth that a man hadde two doughters vnto whome he
gaue all his goodes and maryed them. & after that he was poore his doughters & sones in lawe wolde no more reteyne him with them. And the one of the doughters sayd vnto her fader. Go vnto my syster / & the other sayd in lyke wyse. That yu shalte repast with me one daye / and after go a∣nother daye vnto my syster. And the aun¦cyent man was instructe of one of his ne∣re neyghbours the whiche was sage / whi¦che sayd vnto hym yt he sholde take a fayr coffre aourned and besene withouteforth and that he sholde put of stones within / & he sholde make to bere it vnto the chirche on a sonday whan the people ranne vnto the masse / yt whiche thynge he dyde. Whan his doughters & sones in lawe sawe thys thynge they stroue togyders who sholde haue to kepe the sayd auncyent / the which made bargayne with one that he shold ha¦ue the said coffre after his dethe / & that wt in it for to nourysshe hym. And toke a let¦tre & kepte towardes hymselfe thre keyes Whan he was deed his sone in lawe ope∣ned the coffre / and whan he foūde nothyn¦ge but stones he was confounded. &c. D. ¶Another example how a good mo∣der loued naturelly her chylde and myght not endure that he had ony yile. lxxiii. IT is wryten in the thyrde chapy∣tre of the thyrde booke of kynges that two harlottes came before kynge Salamon / & the one sayd vnto hym. Syr this woman he∣re and I dwelled togyder in one house / & I haue chylded by her. And the thyrde da¦ye after she childed also. We were togider And there was but we two / She hathe o∣uerlayne her chylde in ye night in slepynge and it is deed. And she arose vp softely by night in scylence / and toke secretely my so¦ne by my syde and put it betwene her ar∣mes. And hers ye whiche is deed she put it by my syde. Whan I rose vp in the mor∣nynge for to gyue the brest vnto my sone it appyered to be deed. And whan that I hadde ryghte well beholden it on the daye I knewe incontynent that it was not my sone the whiche I hadde engendred. The other woman answered that it was not soo and that she hadde lyed falsly and vn∣truely / and sayd my chylde lyueth & thyne is deed. And the two women stryued soo before the kynge Salamon. And thenne the kynge Salamon sayd vnto the assys∣tence. This woman sayth my sone lyueth and thyne is deed. And the other answe∣reth naye / but thy sone is deed and myne lyueth. Brynge vnto me a swerde sayd ye kynge and deuyde ye the chylde quycke in two partyes & gyue vnto euery of theym one of the sayd halues of the sayd chylde / And ye woman vnto whom apperteyned the quycke chylde sayd vnto the kyng Sa¦lamon. My herte and myn entraylles is all moued vpon my chylde. I praye you gyue vnto her the chylde quycke and slee it not. And the other cryed vnto the con∣trarye. That it ne be vnto me ne vnto her but that it be deuyded. The kynge answe¦red and sayd. Gyue the quycke chylde vn∣to this woman here the whiche wyll not yt it be slayn That she is his propre moder So the people knewe that the kynge Sa¦lamon had gyuen ryghtwyse Iugemente & that a good moder loueth naturelly her propre chylde and ne maye endure that it haue ylle. E. ¶Another example how ten chyldren
trembled & were punysshed dyuynely af∣ter that yt theyr moder them hadde cursed for that yt they had offended her. Ca. lxxiii IT is wryten in the legende of sa∣ynt steuen yt a noble matrone a wedowe woman was wrothe & tormented of the multytude of ye ten chyldren that she had wherof there was seuen males. And thre females And one tyme they offended theyr sayde moder ye whiche requyred of god that ma∣ledyccyon sholde come vnto them. And in contynent they were stryken of diuine vē¦geaunce. For they all by semblable payne horrybly tremble in theyr bodyes & by all theyr membres / by the whiche thyng they were moche sorowfull. And for as moche as the people of the countree ne myght en¦dure them of the horrour that they had to se them in suche horrybly to tremble / they departed them thorowe out the world va∣cabondes. And ouer all where they yode e∣uery man behelde them. And two of them were heled a sone and a doughter by the merytes of saynt steuen in the presence of saint Austin. This example sheweth that all chyldren sholde drede to offende theyr faders & moders yt maledyccyon & damp∣nacyon come not vnto them. Also faders & moders ne sholde curse theyr chyldren / but sholde desyre that they haue benedyc∣cyon and saluacion / & yf they ben as forsa¦ken they sholde punysshe them & correcte sagely and dyscretely. F. ¶Another example that it displeaseth vnto god yt a woman aourned her dough¦ter and clothed pompously. lxxvi. THe dyscyple recyteth in his booke yt a fader & a moder had a dough∣ter the whiche serued god deuoutely vnto the example of her moder & purposed to abyde in virginite. And the fader cōmaū∣ded vnto the moder that she shold aourne her doughter after the course of the worl∣de the whiche dredde her husband and clo∣thed her doughter pompously & seculerly and aourned her face & her heere. Than ye aungell by the cōmaundement of god ap¦pered vnto her moder and sayd vnto her. Wherfore haste thou more dredde thy hus∣bande than god to aourne thy doughter / & to take her frome Ihesu cryste for to put her in to the worlde. For this thynge thou shalt dye within four wekes / & thou shalt be dampned yf thou repente the not with in the sayd tyme. And more ouer within the sayd tyme all thy chyldren shall deye / And this daye thy handes shall begyn to drye in payn for that yt thou hast aourned the heere of thy doughter. Than the sayd woman dyde true penaunce and all hap∣pened in lyke wyse as the other had sayd vnto her. For she deyed and her chyldren within the sayd terme / & also her handes dryed. &c. Those and they the whiche ben culpable sholde loke vpon this & take ex∣ample for to correcte them & amende to ye ende that oure lorde Ihesu cryste be not wrothe agaynst them / and that they haue not punycyon. &c. ¶Correctio. A. ¶Examples of correccyon. And fyrste example how swete correccyon more pro∣fyteth vnto the yll than sharpe. lxxiiii.
IT is wryten in the lyfe of the fa∣ders & in many other bokes that as saynt Machayre walked one tyme by the countree he sayd vn¦to his dyscyple that he sholde go acore. And as he yode he met with ye prest of the ydoles the whiche bare a grete staff & the dyscyple sayd vnto hȳ wheder goest thou deuyll yt thou arte. And ye sayd preest wrathed hym agaynst hym for his harde wordes / & bette hym soo moche yt he lefte hym as for halfe deed. After ye sayd preest yode his waye. And as he yode his way he met the sayd Machayre whiche sayd vn∣to hym. Thou arte a saue walker / thou be saued. And the preest meruaylled & sayd vnto hym. What haste thou sene of good∣nesse in me the wiche salutest me in suche wyse. And he sayd I haue beholde that yu labourest strongly in walkynge. And the preest sayd vnto hym yt in his salutacyon he hathe had composycyon / & he knewe ye he was the seruaunt of god & that he had mette a cursed monke yt had iniuried him and that for his iniuryes he had strongly beten hym. For to be short by ye swete wor¦des of the sayd Machayre the sayd preest yode with hym / conuerted hymselfe / and was relygyous / & many paynyms cōuer∣ted them by the example of ye sayd preest. And here ye sayd Machayre sayd yt a prou¦de worde & an yll conuerteth somtyme ye good vnto the yll. And a humble worde & good somtyme draweth the yll to do good Vnto this purpose it is wryten. {pro}uer. xv. {quod} respōio mol is frāgit irā / sermo durus excitat furorē. Et eccle. vi. Dulce vbū ini∣micos mitigat et amorē multiplicat. B. ¶Another example of ye good correc∣cyon yt was done vnto a chylde. lxxiiii. THe dysciple recyteth in his promp¦tuarye yt a fayre sone noble / was gyuen of his parentes in to a monasterye of the blacke ordre / for to be discyplyned re¦gulerly in good maners / the whiche was instructe of the pryour & correcte by wor∣des / & somtyme by rodde / in so good ma∣ner yt he refrayned hym from all thynges infancybles & vnnefull / & that he was in∣formed in all goodnes. And the sayd chyl∣de toke the sayd correccyon humbly. And in lyke wyse grewe he in good perfeccyon tyll vnto the aege of .xx. yeres & so deyed / And after his dethe appered the soule of hym vnto the pryour so clere & fayre yt the chambre was all replenysshed with lyght & he sayd. Pryour I yelde vnto the than∣kes of the correccyon that thou hast put in me. I am not fallen by lytell & by lytell in to synne by ye whiche I had be dampned / and by the I am saued. &c. C. ¶Another example of the correccyon of two relygyous of the whiche the abbot corrected the one & spared ye other. lxxiiii IT is writen in ye boke of ye sermons of the dyscyple how there was two freres in a monasterye / of the whiche the one was gracious & agreable vnto his ab¦bot and vnto the other relygyous / & ther∣fore he was spared & was not punysshed of his necligences. And the other was not agreable. And he was punysshed inconty∣nent that he dyde a faute. So they deyed bothe twayne. And he ye whiche was gra∣cyous appered vnto his abbot after his de dethe and sayd vnto hym that he was in grete paynes. And his sayd abbot demaū¦ded hym. Where is the cursed the whiche commytted more of neclygences than yu
And he sayd. O fader he is not cursed / for he is in the clere vysyon of god. For ye nec¦lygences that he cōmytted were inconty∣nent punisshed. And by that yt the satisfac¦cyon of his synnes is made / but for that yt thou sparedest me in my neclygences for my gracyousnes I am nowe tormented in purgatorye. And therfore my fader I requyre the praye vnto god for me. And yt ye recōmaunde me vnto myn other bre∣therne in theyr messes to the ende that ye delyuer me from the greate paynes wher¦in I am. By this example a man sholde vnderstonde that these synners the which ben ofte tymes punysshed & corrected or those the whiche gone often vnto confessy¦on & do penaunce ben more sooner saued than those ye whiche be not repreued / and the whiche go not vnto confession but one tyme in the yere. &c. D. ¶Another example how a man shol∣de correcte hym whan a man is warned. THe discyple reciteth in his sermōs and sayeth that a good relygyous conceplatyf was rauysshed in iugemente ye whiche sawe an erle accused before god & also a grete prelate agayne whome god was wrothe. Albeit at the prayer of some sayntes ye whiche there were present god dyfferred his sentence & sayd vnto yt rely∣gyous ye he sholde make theym to be war∣ned to correcte them by his abbot. the whi¦che thynge was done. The erle corrected hym by the sayd admonycyon for the dre∣de of the sayd vysyon. And the sayd prela¦te contempned the sayd visyon & correcte hym not & he deyed sodaynly in his bedde E. ¶Another example how a man sholde correcte & drawe backe the synners swete¦ly as saynt Iohan the whiche drewe we∣le by swetnes ye prynce of ye theues. lxxiiii SAynt Clement telleth in ye fourth boke of the hystorye ecclesyastyce that saynt Iohan the euangelyst conuer∣ted a fayre yongman the whiche was cru¦ell the whiche he betoke vnto a bysshoppe for to enstructe. And a lytell whyle after∣warde the said man lefte the bysshop & be¦came prynce of theues. And one tyme yt saynt Iohan came agayne demaūded of the said bisshop where he was yt he had re¦cōmaunded so curyously vnto hym. He an¦swered. Fader he is deed in spyrite & dwel¦leth in suche a mountayne with theues & is theyr prynce. Than saynt Iohan was wrothe & sayd vnto hym. Thou arte a go¦de keper / thou hast suffred to lese the sou∣le of thy brother. And anone he toke a hor¦se & yode surely in to ye mountayne. And ye yonge man sawe hym & had grete shame & lepte on horsbacke & fledde hastely. And than the appostle forgate his aege & stro∣ke the sayd hors with the sporres & began strongly to crye after him the whiche fled Ryght swete sone wherfore fleyst yu thy fa¦der sone doubte the not / for I shal yelde ye vnto Ihesu cryste by reason. And certes I shall deye wt good wyll for the / in lyke wyse as dyde Ihesu cryste for vs / for god hathe sent me vnto the. And whan he her¦de yt he repented hym & wepte ryght byt∣terly. And the appostle fell at his fete & be¦gan to kisse his honde / as & yf he hadde be lately purged by penaūce. Than the sayd appostle fasted for him & prayed and gate hym pardon. And after the sayd penitent was ordeyned a bysshop by ye sayd appos¦tle & was a good man and a deuoute. &c.
By that / ye saynt Iohan kyssed the hande of this synner and drewe hym agayn swe¦tely & called vnto penaunce. In like wyse sholde those do the whiche wyldrawe bac¦ke these persones from synne and brynge them vnto saluacyon. ¶Caritas. A. ¶Examples of charyte & fyrste exam∣ple of a clustre of grapes the whiche was sente vnto many by charyte. lxxv IT is wryten in the lyfe of faders ye a frere relygyōus gaue a grape vn¦to saȳt Machayre / & of his charyte he sent it vnto the moost seke & weyke of his bre∣thern. And he toke it & gaue it agayne vn¦to another vnto whome it semed as hym thought that it sholde be better employed than vnto hym. And he sente it agayn vn¦to another. And this sayd grape yode soo from one to another tyll yt it came agayn at the laste vnto ye sayd Machayre ye why¦che hadde it fyrst gyuen. And also they ne knewe the one of the other. Than the said Machayre thanked god of the grete cha∣rite & abstinence yt he sawe in his bredern relygyous. &c. Vnto the example of these good religyous here a man sholde gyue so me noueltees to his neyghboures yf they ben seke & weyke for to chere them & com∣forte them. &c. B. ¶Another example of the charyte of two men the whiche wolde deye the one / for the other. lxxv PEter Alphons telleth in his booke that two marchauntes of dyuers countrees mette & accompanyed togyder & loued so moche the one the othe that the one toke in maryage the doughter of the other. And after yt the maryage was past & done the sayd marchauntes yode backe euery of them in to his countre. And it be fell that in short tyme he yt toke ye others doughter in mariage loste all his godes & came vnto soo grete pouerte yt he begged / He came in to the towne where his sayde compaygnon dwelled. And it happened yt whan he arryued yt men sought an homy¦cyde the whiche had slayne a man / and on hym was this cryme put. And how be it yt he was innocent he confessed it. For vnto hym it forced not to dye bycause of his po¦uerte. And was Iuged and ledde vnto ye gybet. And whan he was there for to be hanged his compaygnon beforsayd knew hym & sayd. It is not this here the whiche hathe done the homycyde. It is I ye whi¦che hathe done the deed / & wolde well dye for his compaygnon so moche he loued hȳ Than that laste was taken & the fyrst de∣lyuered. And the homycyde ye whiche had done the dede ye whiche was presente had remors in his conscyence cryed & sayd. He there ne this here hathe not done the homi¦cyde / it was I. Than the two fyrste were delyuered & the laste was taken & holden The Iuges were meruayled / ledde vnto the kynge the two fyrste delyuered and ye laste reteyned. And after yt the kynge had knowen the trouthe he pardoned al ye paȳ And this fyrste the whiche was come vn∣to pouerte was releuid of his compaygnō the whiche gaue vnto hym ye halfe of his goodes by loue and charyte. This exam∣ple denoteth that it is parfyte loue & cha¦ryte as to put his body ye one for another / wherof speketh the euangelyst Iohan. xv
ca. Maiorē caritatē nemo habet: vt aīam suam ponat quis pro amicis suis. C. ¶Another example how an holy man named sanctul{us} lyuered himself to be slaȳ for the loue of his compaygnon. lxxv IT is wryten in the dialogue of saȳt gregorye yt the Lombardes toke a deken for to slee hym. And a holy man na¦med sanctulus requyred theym gretely of his delyueraunce / the whiche ne wolde he¦re hym / but was betaken vnto hym to ke∣pe by suche lawe that yf he escaped that ye sayd sanctulus sholde be slayne for hym & were so agreed. Whan the nyghte came ye they slepte the sayd sanctulus sayd vnto ye sayd deken / ryse thou and go thy waye / & he sayd vnto hym. O fader yf I goo my wayes they shall slee the / & he sayd go thy wayes. We ben all in the handes of god / they ne maye nothynge do vnto vs but yt god shal suffre. Than he fledde. And after the Lombardes sayd vnto the sayd sanc∣tulus. Chose the of what dethe thou wylte deye / for thou shalte deye for the deken / & he sayd. Sle me of what dethe yt god shal suffre. Than they chose a stronge man to stryke of his heed at the fyrste stroke. The sayd sanctulus fell prostrate in orayson & requyred god. And whā his orayson was made the hangman made him to stretche the necke / & he lyfte vp the swerde in the ayre for to slee hym in the presence of mo¦che people. And whan the sayd sanctulus had stratche the necke & sene the sworde / he sayd. O sācte iohānes suscype illū. And incontynent saynt Iohan vyolently held in the ayre the arme of the said hangman & they all thanked god. Some requyred ye by his prayer the arme were heled. He an∣swered yt he ne wolde praye for hym / but yf he wolde swere that he sholde neuer kyl crysten man. And after yt he had sworne sayd. Put downe thy hande. And it was taken away & heled. Than the lombardes wolde gyue vnto hym all the oxen & kyen that they had pylled / but he them refused and requyred all the prysoners / & they all were gyuen vnto hym. So by his charyte he delyuered them all. This example shol¦de moue vs to loue another / & to put vs in daunger corporelly for to saue and to dely¦uer our neyghbours from yll & from incō¦uenyence as dydde the sayd sanctulus the whiche delyuered the deken from dethe & the prysoners from captyuyte. D. ¶Another example howe god sente a poore man .xx. s. for one peny ye he gaue. IT is wryten in the booke of the dis¦cyple that peter damyen recoūted ye a poore man fasted wt his wyf ye whiche had not but one peny for to by theyr diner & he gaue his peny vnto a pore man as he yode vnto the market. And after that as he was at his table & that the brede was put vpon it there came in a man vnkno∣wen hastely the whiche layde .xx. s. in mo∣ney vpon the sayd table in a clothe boūde & said. This here my lorde hathe sent you & incontynent he departed. And men pre∣suppose that it was an aungell. This ex∣ample sholde moue vs to gyue almesse to the poore people. For grete retrybucyon fo¦loweth therof. For one peny that the sayd man gaue god sente hym twelue score. Al soo yf ony wyll haue vyctorye and to sur∣mounte his enemyes / be he a gyuer of al∣messe. And yf he wyll regne and to flee in to heuen also gyue he vnto the poore folk.
In lyke wyse as sayth the scrypture. Vn̄ poeta. Vincit cūcta dare: da sivis supera¦re. Per dare regnare poteris: celos{que} vola¦re. &c. E. ¶Another example how the herte of a vyrgyn was cutte for the grete loue that she had vnto god. lxxv. THe discyple recyteth in his promp tuarie this example the whiche is wryten in many other bookes & sayeth yt a noble vyrgyn was .xiiii. yere moche de∣uoute vnto ye vyrgyn Marye. And by .vii. yeres euery daye she requyred her yt it wol¦de please her to shewe vnto her her chylde And it befell as on a crystenmas daye she entred alone in to the chapelle bycause of orayson the vyrgin Marye appered vnto her holdynge a fayre sone betwene her ar∣mes & sayd vnto her. Take my sone and playe with hym. And she toke hym with grete Ioye / reuerence & deuocyon. And ye said chylde demaūded her / louest thou me And she answered / ye. Whether sayd he lo¦uest thou me more than my clothes / and she sayd. I loue you more than my herte / And ye sayd chylde sayd. How louest thou me more than thy herte. The answer / I ne can tell it / but the same speke. And incō¦tynent the herte of the said vyrgyn for the grete loue that she had to the sayd sone it brake in sondre. And so deyed the sayd vyr¦gyn. Than the chylde toke her soule & soo grete songe & melodye of aungelles was there to bere the sayd soule in to heuen / yt the people ranne vnto the chapel the whi∣ce were replenysshed of meruayllous o∣doure. And they founde the sayd vyrgyn deed. And her herte cut wherin was wry∣tn in lettres of god. I loue ye more than myself. For thou haste create me redemed & endowed. &c. After the scypture & thys example we shold loue god more than our self. vn̄. math. Diliges dn̄m deū tuū ex to∣to corde tuo et ex tota aīa tua. F. ¶Another example of the charyte of hym the whiche dyd wȳne his broder the whiche was fallen in to fornycacion for to make hym selfe a synner / & in doynge pe∣naunce. lxxv. IT is wryten in the lyfe of ye faders how two bredren yode to sell in the cyte yt / that they had wrought. And whan they were departed in yt cyte / one of them fell in fornycacyon. After that his broder came vnto hym and sayd. Broder retour∣ne we in to our habytable / he answered I may not retourne / he demaunded the cau¦se. And he sayd vnto hym. After that thou departest fro me I was tempted & I am fallen in to fornycacyon. And his broder sayd yt soo was he / but retourne we togy∣der do we penaunce with grete laboure. & god shal pardon vs our sȳne. Whan they were retourned they tolde it to ye auncyen¦tes. The whiche gaue them in charge the maner how they sholde do penaunce. and the one of them dyde penaunce / but for ye other broder also as he was culpable to ha¦ue sȳned. In fewe dayes god shewed vn∣to one of the aūcyentes yt the synne of hȳ the whiche hadde done fornycacyon vnto hym was pardoned by the greate chary∣te of the other the whiche had not synned / ¶This example is greately to be noted / For for to socoure his broder the whiche was fallen in to the sinne of lecherye / and in to the bondes of the deuyll. And in the waye of perdycyon & dāpnacyon eternell.
He made hymselfe a synner & toke labour and penaūce for hym / yt was charyte and grete socour dyd vnto his neyghbour. In this thynge it appereth yt he loued his bro¦ther as hymselfe / & that he socoured hym in his necessyte as he wylled yt a man shol¦de do vnto hym / and for the grete charyte the synne was pardoned. &c. G. ¶Another example how one frere wt∣drewe another from yll wyll / not by force but by charyte and pacyence. lxxv IT is wryten in the lyfe of faders yt a frere came one tyme vnto a gre∣te auncyent and sayd vnto hym I haue a broder the whiche goeth on the one syde & on the other without holdynge hym with me / & therfore am I tormented. And the aūcyent sayd vnto hym. Bere it pacyent∣ly. Whan god shal se the labour of thy sup¦portynge he shall call hym agayne vnto ye ne wene thou not by austeryte yt ony shall withdrawe hym from his entencyon / for one deuyll ne expelleth another deuyl / but by benygnyte thou shalt make hym come agayne vnto the. Our lorde draweth vn∣to hym many in cherynge theym. And he recoūted to hym of two freres of the whi∣che the one was fallen in fornycacyon / the whiche woulde retourne vnto the worlde & the other wepte & said. Broder I shal not suffre the to retourne & be loste. And for yt yt he wolde nothynge do / he wente to take coūsayl of a grete aūcient whiche sayd vn¦to hym. Go yu with hȳ in to ye worlde / god ne shall suffre hym to be lost for thy labour than he yode with him. And whan they ca¦me in to a strete god ye same the charite of ye frere whiche yode to saue his broder to∣ke awaye ye cōcupyscence of ye frere sȳner. Than he sayd vnto his broder yt they shol∣de retorne vnto theyr hermytage. I wen∣de nowe to haue synned with the woman but I haue no more of wyll syth yt I ha∣ue conquest in suche dede. And they retour in to theyr hermytage in deuocyon wtoute cōmyttynge synne. By these examples be forsayd it appereth that a man sholde ha∣ue loue & charyte with his faders & neygh¦bours. And as a man sholde honour them & socour them in theyr necessytees. ¶Qintū preceptū. Homicidiū īiustū. A. ¶Examples of those the whiche haue done homicide iniustely. And fyrst exam∣ple of Cayn the whiche slewe abel his bro¦der. Ca. lxxvi IT is wryten in the .iiii. chapitre of gene that after that Cayn had slaȳ his broder abell by enuye & cursednes god demaūded / where is thy broder Abell / he answered I can not tell / am I the keper of my broder. And god said vnto hȳ what haste thou done / the voyce of the blode of thy broder cryeth vnto me from the erthe It is yt that demaundeth vengeaunce / & incontynent god cast forth maledyrcyon. Vn̄. gene. iiii. Nūc maledict{us} eris su{per}irā cū operat{us} fueris eā nō dabit tibi fructus suos: spinas & tribulos germinabit tibiva gus et {pro}fug{us} eris su{per} terram. That is to saye thou shalte be cursed aboue the erthe Whan thou it shalt laboure it ne shall gy∣ue vnto his fruytes. It shall brynge forth thornes & thystylles / yu shall be wandryng and fugytyue vpon the erthe. Cayn sawe that his broder Abell was better than he / and more loued of god bycause that he pa¦yed better his dysmes thenne he dydde. /
And therfore god multeplyed his goodes and fruytes / & sente vnto hym haboūdaū∣ce. And vnto cayn and vnto his gyftes he regarded nothynge. Soo Cayn wrathed hym hugely and had enuye vpon his bro∣der & slewe hȳ. Vn̄ ge. iiii. Propt{er} hoc de{us} respexit ad abel et ad munera eius: ad ca∣yn et ad munera eius nō respexit: iratus{que} est cayn vehemēter inuidit su{per} fratrē suū et occidit. Enuye procedeth to se & to con∣syder that his neyghboure is better than hymselfe in ony thynge be it temporell go¦de or spyrytuell. Vn̄ grego. ī mora. Inui∣dere enī non possum{us} nisi eis quos nobis in aliquo meliores esse putam{us}. That is to saye we ne maye haue enuye but vnto those yt whiche we wene to be better than we in some thynge. By this example and by ye scryptures a man sholde vnderstond that those the whiche foloweth the lyfe of Cayn haue maledyccyon. Vn̄ in epi. iude. ii. ca. Ve his qui via cayn abierūt erroris baaā mercede effusi sūt: et contradictione chore perierūt. For to vnderstonde what maledyccyon is. A man sholde vnderston¦de ye maledyccyon is puttynge from bene¦dyccyon & from all goodes spyrytuel / and assocyacyon wt al yll. And whan a persone is cursed of god & of the chirche knowyng that he is pryued from benedyccyon / and from all goodes spyrytuelles done in holy chirche / & is assocyate with all yll. And yf he deye in suche estate impenytent he shal be put from paradyse / as sayth saynt pou∣le. i. co. vi. Ne{que} maledicti regnū dei possi debūt. Also whan a man obeyeth soner to the deuyll than to god / he is moche cursed or whan he leueth god for to folowe the de¦uyll / or whan he loueth sȳnes & leueth ver¦tues. Vn̄ psal. Dilexit maledictionē & ve¦niet ei▪ noluit benedictionem et elongabit{ur} ab eo. &c. That is to saye. He hathe loued malediccion and it shall come vnto hym / And he hathe not wylled to haue benedyc¦cyon / and it shall be lenthed from hym. B. ¶Another example how the kynge a∣chab & iezabell his wyfe made to sle Na∣both for to haue his vyneyarde. lxvi. IT is wryten in the .xxi. chapytre of the thyrde boke of kynges that the kynge Achab coueyted to haue & to posse∣de ye vyneyard of a good man named Na¦both. And for as moche as he ne might ha¦ue it ne by sale ne by eschaunge was sory. And layde hym downe & wolde not eate. The sayd Naboth wolde not sell the hery¦tage of his predecessours. And Iesabell wyfe of the sayd Achab comforted her hus¦bande. And to be shorte in the matere she sente lettres vnto the grettest of the cyte. And caused to make false wytnes agayne the sayd Naboth. And so made hym to be stoned & slayn. And whan he was deed by the counsayll of Iesabell Achab wente to take possessyon of the sayd vyneyarde / & the worde of god was made in the prophe¦te Helye in saynge. Aryse & dyscenbe thou agayne the kinge Achab & thou shalt saye vnto him. Thou hast slayne Naboth and possedeth his vyneyard / god hathe sayd yt in the place where the dogges haue lycked the blode of Naboth / they shall lycke thy blode. More ouer god hathe sayd that he shall sende yll vpon the & vpon thy house: as vnto Hieroboam the whiche was cur∣sed & brought vnto nought. &c. Grete thre¦tenynges ben here wryten. And the sayd prophete Helye sayd vnto Iezabell yt god had sayd yt the dogges sholde ete Iezabel in suche a felde. Whan ye kynge Achab her¦de these wordes here / he cutte his clothes & cladde his flesshe wt a sacke / fasted and
slepte in a sacke the heed bowyng downe And whan god had sene his humilite said vnto the prophete Helye. Haste thou not se¦ne Achab humble hym for bycause of me I ne shall sende hym the said yll in his da¦yes / but in ye dayes of his sone I shal brin¦ge in yll vnto his house. And so was it do¦ne. And it is wryten in the .ix. chapytre of the .iiii. booke of kynges that Iezabell de∣yed myscheuously. For ye kynge Cheu ma¦de her be caste forthe at a wyndowe in to the strete / & the horses of his armye yode ouer her notwithstondynge that she was a kynges doughter. And after the dogges brake her body & she ne was buryed. thys example denoteth many thȳges The first is the auaryce and couetyse to haue & pos∣sede the vyne of Naboth yt whiche is frac¦cyon of ye .x. cōmaundement of god. Non ōcupisces rē proximi tui. The seconde is fals wytnessyng. Nō falsū testimontū di¦ces. And also homycyde. Nō sis occisor / ye thyrde is grete punycyons temporelles & corporelles folowe after without the puni¦cyon eternell for the fraccyon of ye thre cō∣maūdementes of god. And it is here to be noted that by the penaunce and humyly∣te of the kynge Achab god spared hym in his lyfe / but his sone bare the punicyon of his sayd fader the whiche is grete matere to vnderstonde & to moralyze the whiche shall abyde bycause of shortnes. And the fals harlot Iezabell the whiche humbled her not was slayne & eten of dogges the whiche is a longe thynge to declare / in ly∣ke wyse as it is wryten in the forsayd cha∣pytre. &c. C. ¶Another example how Ioab slewe ye prynce Abner malycyously & Amasam & yll came vnto hym. lxxvii. IT is wryten in the chapytre of the seconde boke of kynges how Ioab the whiche was capytayne and chyef of ye werre of kynge Dauyd slewe malycyous∣ly a prynce named Abner for to venge hȳ of his broder that the sayd Abner had slay¦ne in batayl. And dauyd was gretely wro¦the of that murdre wepte vpon his graue & ne wolde neuer in ye daye ne ete ne drin∣ke tyll that the sone was gone to reste / & sayd vnto his seruauntes the whiche wol∣de make hym to ete. Ye knowe not yt a prȳ¦ce and that ryght grete is fallen this daye in Israhell. Our lorde graunt vnto them the whiche haue done ye yll after theyr ma¦lyce. And it is wryten in the seconde cha∣pytre of the thyrde boke of kynges that in contynent that dauyd was deed the sayd Ioab fledde in to the tabernacle of our lor¦de / & helde hym nere the aulter for to war¦raunt hym. For the kinge Salamon com¦maunded that he were slayne / for that yt he had slayne two men better than hym∣selfe without the consentynge of dauyd / yt is to vnderstonde Abner prynce of the chy¦ualrye of Israhell / & Amasam prynce of the armye of Iudas. And the sayd Ioab wolde not come forthe of the tabernacle / And there was slayne by the cōmaunde∣ment of Salamon. Men saye incōune lā¦gage / he that sleethe with the swerde with the swerde shall deye. &c. D. ¶Another example how herode Asca¦lonyta made to sle the innocentes. lxxvii. THe euangelyst saynt mathieu ma¦keth mencyon / yt whan god was borne in bethelem ye thre kȳges came out of orient for to worshyp hym / & demaun∣ded kynge herode where yt he was borne.:
Whan herodes herd these wordes he was greately troubled / & those of Iherusalem wt hym. And inquysycyon was made whe¦re it was that Ihesus sholde be borne / the grete clerkes sayd that it sholde be in beth¦leem as it was wryten by ye prophete my∣chee. vi. Et tu bethelem t{er}ra iuda nequa{quam} minima as ī principibus iuda: ex te enī exi et dux qi regat populū meū israel. Than ye kynge herodes called the other kynges & asked them dylygently in what tyme the sterre appered vnto them. And sent them in to bethelem to enquere dylygently whe¦re he was borne. And whan they had foū∣de hȳ yt they sholde come agayne vnto hȳ in faynynge to go to worshyp hym / but it was for to slee hym. Whan ye kynges had founde hym and worshypped hym it was sayd vnto them in a dreme that they shol∣de not retorne vnto herodes / but goo in to theyr countrees by another waye. And so was it done. Afterwarde whan herodes sawe that ye kynges retourned not by hȳ and that he was mocked he sente in to be∣thelem & made to sle all the chyldren the whiche were in the coūtree of the aege of two yeres and vnder / wenynge for to slee our redemptoure Ihesus. And the soules of ye holy innocentes cryed vnto god ven∣geaunce of theyr bloode that herodes had made them to shedde. And they had dyuy¦ne answer that they sholde tary yet a lytel tyme tyll that the nombre of theyr brethe∣ren were accomplysshed. The sayd hero∣des ne abode vnpunisshed in lyke wyse as it is wryten in the hystorye scolastice. For he began his hell frome this worlde befo∣re that he deyed / he became blowen so stȳ¦kynge foule and vyllayne yt there ne was persone yt myght approche vnto him. and also he hadde his guttes eten wt wormes. Legit{ur} etiā actuū. xii. By this historie it ap¦pereth that the sayd herodes was moche cursed wher as he wolde not gyue honour vnto god as the other kynges / but wolde slee hym. And in wenynge to do hym ylle made to sle grete nombre of fayre chyldrē And therfore he had wele deserued puny∣cyon the whiche came vpon hym ye which sholde be to longe a thyng to tell. &c. E. ¶Another example how Herodes An∣typas made to slee saynt Iohan baptyste (ca. lxxvi.) IT is wryten in the .xiiii. chapitre of the gospelles of saynt Mathieu yt saynt Iohan baptyst reproued herode of his lecherye & sayd vnto hym that it was not lefull to haue ye wyfe of his broder phi¦lyppes. By this thynge herode was wro∣the & by the coūsayll of his harlot herodien he made saynt Iohan baptist to be put in pryson for to sle hym / but he fered the peo¦ple for they helde hym as a prophete. And Herodes made a grete dyner the daye of his natyuyte vnto the prynces & greate of his courte. And his doughter daunced at dyner & lepte & pleased so wele Herode the whiche sayd vnto her wt an othe that she shold axe what she wold & he wolde graūt it her & yf it were halfe his realme. Thys thynge was done malycyously for to haue the occasyon to make saynt Iohan to die Than herodyane counsaylled her dough∣ter. And made her to saye vnto the kynge Gyue me in a grete dysshe right hastely ye heed of saynt Iohan baptyste. And ye kyn¦ge fayned to be wrothe for the othe and ye prasence the whiche ther dyned. And sent to behede in pryson saynt Iohan baptyste And ye heed was brought in a dysshe and presented vnto the lepynge wenche. The scrypture maketh mencyon that there we¦re thre kynges herodes. The fyrste had to
name Ascolonita the whiche slewe the in∣nocentes. The seconde antipa / the whiche made saynt Iohan baptyst to be slayne / The thyrde Herode had to name Agrippe the whiche made to slee saynt Iames the more. And put saint peter in pryson. It is wryten in speculo historiali yt a doctour na¦med vincent reciteth in the sayd boke yt a holy man by vysyon & permyssyon diuine sawe in helle ye beforsayd kynges herodes the whiche were hanged in the fyre of hell beynge in grete tormentes. And the sayd harlot was hanged vnder them more cru¦elly tormented than the sayd herodes. For she had two serpentes ye whiche helde her by the brestes / and bote her. And by puny¦cyon & permyssyon dyuyne his said harlot herodes antipa bote hym in the throte oft tymes as yf he wold haue strangled hym Also ye sayd harlot had in her heed so ma∣ny of litell bestes as litell serpents that by hys estimacion as she myghte haue of he∣rys. yt whiche bestes bote hir incessably &c. F. ¶Another example howe iudas / py∣late / & thys other iewys were homicides of the deth of owre blyssyd sauyour and re¦demptour Iesus. lxxvi. IT is wryten in the gospellys And in many other bokes yt iudas solde our sauyour & redemptour iesu crist vnto the iewes for .xxx. penyes. vnto whome he sayd. he that I kysse take and bynde hym for he it is: and after that he had lyuered hym vnto them & betaken by ye sayd tokē repented hym And yelded vnto them the sayd pence. More ouer he despeired hāge hym selfe and estrangled. Than the prin∣ces of ye prestes: and the coūseil of ye iewys sought the wayes & the meanes to make hym to daye by enuie and coursednes For they se the miracles & predicacions that he made. And the worlde wente after hȳ. They sawe that he was iuste and good: & yt he reproued them of theire synnes. And therfore they sought false wytnes for to accuse hym / but they founde none. & they accused hym of .iiii. thynges. The fyrste was that they sayd that they had a lawe. after the whiche he sholde deye The secō∣de that he deceyued / & moued the people vnto yll. The thyrde that he deffended to paye ye tribute vnto cesar The .iiii. that he dide agayne ye maieste in as moche as he sayd hym selfe to be god. Of the thre laste thynges pylate knewe wel that they lyed & they sayd it by enuie Vnde mat. xxvii. Sciebat enī {quod} per inuidiā tradidissent eū And therfore pylate restyde at the fyrste: and sayd vnto them. Syth that I haue a lawe after ye whiche he sholde dye thē iuge ye hȳ after your law. Than they answerd hym that it was not lefull vnto them yt they sholde put ony man vnto dethe. For to be shorte in the mater Pylate ne foūde cause of dethe in Ihesus. And for to satys¦fye vnto the Iewes sayd yt he shold be pu¦nysshed for his fautes. And made hym to be bounde vnto a pyller & to be beten. and so moche was he broken yt al his body was in blode & woundes. And soo betoke hym vnto the Iewes / but yet were they not cō∣tent they crowned hym with thornes and put it downe wt staues / & cryed vnto Py∣late that they might crucefye him. And by cause yt he sayd yt he ne founde in hym cau¦se to make hym deye / they cryed. Sāguis ei{us} su{per} nos: et su{per} filios nostros. That is to saye. His blode be vpon vs & vpon oure chyldren. And soo it was done. For after∣warde Vaspasien beseged the cite of Ihe¦rusalem. And they were so affamysshed yt a woman ete her owne chylde. And they
ete theyr treasoures wenynge for to bere them awaye. And whan the cyte was ta∣ken / some deyed of hongre / some other wt the swerde / & other take prysoners & sold And men gaue .xxx. for a penye. And one of those accused them ye they hadde eaten theyr treasours. So euery man yode to sle his prysoners for to haue theyr moneye. so theyr chyldren had for to doo. Whan men ledde Ihesus to crucefye ye women of Ihe¦rusalem wepte. Vnto whom Ihesus said wepe ye not vpon me / but vpon your chyl¦dren. For the dayes shall come yt the wom¦bes shal be blyssed ye whiche hathe not bor¦ne / & the pappes the whiche hathe not gy¦uen souke. The Iewes were homycydes & the cause of the dethe of our lorde ye whi¦che was Iuged vniustely & condampned of Pylate to be crucefyed / & so suffred de∣the & passyon / & had in his body fyue thou¦sande .CCCClxxvi. woundes for oure re∣dempcyon. Pylate the whiche Iuged hȳ abode not vnpunysshed / & deyed mysche∣uously. For afterwarde the Emperour ce∣sar wolde make hym to deye. & as he was in pryson he dyspayred hym & slewe hym∣self with a knyfe. And for as moche as he slewe hymselfe Cesar made a stone to be hanged aboute his necke & to caste him in to tybre the whiche ranne by the cyte of ro¦me. And incontynente the deuylles & cur∣sed spyrytes there made suche a lyghtenȳ¦ge & tempest for the reason of suche a cur∣sed body that man ne woman ne myght dure / ne bote / ne shyppes durste not ther∣on go. And whan the romaynes sawe su∣che tempest they made hym to be drawen out & cast in to the ryuer of Rosne. A. ¶Another example how Lucrece ma¦de to slee saynt Beatryce. lxxvii. IT is wryten in the legende of saynt Beatrice yt a cursed man named lu¦crece coueyted to haue the heritage of bea¦tryce. And to thende that he myght come to his entencyon accused her that she was crystyenne. And made her to be slayne by martyrdome but he abode not vnpunys∣shed. For whan he had taken the possessiō of the sayd herytage he reioysed hym and made a dynere. And a lytell chylde at the pappe cryed. Lucrece thou hast slayne bea¦tryce and possedeth her herytage. And yu arte gyuen in to the possessyon of ye deuyll And incontynent Lucrece gaped / the de∣uyll entred in hym the whiche tormented him thre houres and after slewe him. So it appereth that homycydes & theues co∣uetous ben punysshed in this worlde or in the other / or in bothe. B. ¶Another example of a man yt slewe his fader and his moder / whan he was dronken. lxxvii. MEn fynde by wrytynge this ye whi¦che foloweth how the dyscyple re¦cyteth in his promptuarye & sayeth that as a dronken man came from the tauer∣ne he mette his fader the whiche blamed hym and repreued of his exces of drynke / And then incontynent he drewe oute his swerde and slewe his sayd fader. And as his moder herde the bruyte & the clamour she ranne theder a grete pace / and he dyd slee her as he hadde done his beforsayd fa¦der. Incontynente the neyghbours came oute and toke hym / and ledde hym into a pryson. And in the mornynge there was grete meruayle of that that he had done.
C. ¶Another example of a seruaunt that seruyd wele his maister in youth / & whan he was dronke slewe hym. lxxvii. THe dyscyple reciteth in his promp¦tuarye of a man yt serued a kynge ryght faythfully. And whan he was yong he gouerned hȳ wele & moche pleased his seruyce vnto his mayster. And he was sēt vnto a dyner at the whiche he became drō¦ken & slewe the kynge & his sones. ¶Also whan we faste the vyces flee from vs and make our seruyce agreable vnto god our kynge. And whan we be dronken we slee all our vertues / & the kyng that is our sou¦le & reason. And the sones they ben his fy∣ue wyttes wt the whiche we sholde gouer∣ne our bodyes / & do meritoryous dedes. D. ¶Another example of a doughter the whiche slewe her fader & her moder / and after hadde mercy by contrycion and con¦fessyon. lxxvii. THe disciple reciteth in his prōptua¦rye yt Peter sayeth in his seconde boke de amore that a knyghte had a fayre doughter the whiche synned with her. and her moder knewe that they synned togy∣der by euydent sygnes / of the whiche men aduerted her / but they ne wolde sclaūdre for the confusyon. Whan ye mayde vnder¦stode yt her moder knewe her sȳne / by coū¦sayll of an olde woman she poysoned her. And the fader had horrour of his synne & lefte her. Wherfore the doughter poyson∣ned hym also. And whan she had so slayn her fader & moder she dyspayred thynkȳg not to haue mercye tyll vnto that she her∣de preche yt in contrycyon & confessyon all synnes were pardonned. Albeit tht they were th moot grce and fou that man may speke / so mche is greate the bounte & grace of god. Than ye sayd doughter ca∣me to the precher for to confesse her / & for her grete dysperacyon ne myghte declare all her synnes in confessyon. And after yt he had chered her she confessed truely her synnes with so many of teres & of lamen∣tacyons yt it was meruayll / and sayd that she was worthy to haue all payne & confu¦syon. After that she had confessed her and that she had receyued penaunce salutarie she entred in to the chirche with her cham¦berere and fell prostrate in orayson & wep¦te and lamented her synnes in so grete do¦lour & haboundaunce of teres yt she deyed in the place. And afterward as her confes∣sour preched & desyred the people to praye for her he herde a voyce the whiche sayd yt he and the people had more grete nede of grete haboundaūce of teres she had be pu¦ryfyed & wasshed in lyke wyse as of newe baptyzed and so flewe in to heuen wtoute the paynes of purgatorye. E. ¶Another example how dauyd made to slee Vrye vniustely and commytted ad¦uoutrye. lxxvii IT is wryten in the .xi. chapitre of ye seconde boke of kynges that dauyd behelde out at a wyndowe ye wyfe of vrye as she wasshed her / & for her beaute was tempted and deceyued. For he her couey∣ted / loued and slepte with her. And whan her husbande Vrye seruaunte of the sayd dauyd came from the warre to brynge ty¦dynges to his mayster / dauyd sayd vnto hym that he sholde go to lye with his wyf
And sent after hym vyande ryall / but the sayd Vrye wolde not lye with his wyf but excused hym honestly. Afterwarde dauyd wrote agayne vnto his capitayne a pistyl by Vrye that in the place where the daun¦ger of dethe sholde be he sholde put Vrye in batayl to thende that he were slayne / & so was it done. And it foloweth inconty∣nent in ye .xii. chapitre ye god sente nathan vnto dauyd vnto whom he sayd. Answer me of a Iugement. Two men were in o∣ne cyte one ryche & one poore. The ryche had oxen and shepe & goodes haboūdaūt∣ly / & the poore ne had but one sheepe that he had bought and nourished. And so mo¦che he loued her yt she ete of his brede and dranke of his cuppe & slept in his bosome And it befell that a pylgrym came vnto ye ryche the whiche spared his shepe & yode to take the shepe of the sayd poore / & pre∣payred of metes vnto hym / for ye that he was come to hym. Whan dauid herde the¦se wordes here he was moche wrothe and sayd vnto Nathan. God seeth. For he the whiche hathe done this thynge is culpa∣ble of dethe / he shall yelde the shepe in fou¦re double bycause he hathe done this thyn¦ge. And Nathan sayd vnto hȳ. Thou art he the whiche hathe done this thinge. god hathe made the kynge & gyuen the of goo¦des yt whiche hathe dyspysed his wordes. Thou haste slayne Vrye by glayue / & also hathe taken his wyfe for thyself. For this thynge the glayue shall not departe from thy house. God hathe sayd yt he shall sende yll vpon the & vpon thy house / & shal take thy wyues before thyn eyes & gyue theym vnto thy neyghbour the whiche shal slepe with those women. Thou haste done thy synne secretely / & I shall do all these thyn¦ges before all the people of Israhell. And dauyd sayd vnto Nathan. Peccaui dn̄o. I haue synned vnto my lorde. And incon¦tynent as dauid had reknowleged his fau¦te & that he hadde sayd peccaui / Nathan sayd vnto hym. God hathe translated thy synne thou shalte not deye / but thy sone yt is proceded of the shall deye / and soo was it done as it is wryten in the sayd chapy∣tre. &c. F. ¶Another example how a knight was strongly tormented in purgatory for that that he vyoled the chircheyarde / & hurte a man within it. lxxvii IT is wryten in ye legende of ye deed that as a knyght was layde in hys bedde with his wyfe / & the mone was cle∣re the whiche entred by the holes / he mer∣uaylled hym moche wherfore the man the whiche is reasonable obeyde not vnto his creatour / whan the creatures not reason∣nables obeyed vnto hȳ. And began to mis¦saye of a knyghte deed the whiche had be his pryue frende. And the sayd knyght de¦de entred in spekynge these wordes in the chambre all sodaynly / vnto whom he said Frende haue thou none yll suspeccyon of me in ony thynges / but pardon me yf I haue ony thyng synned in the. And whan he demaunded hym of his estate he sayd vnto him I am tormented of dyuers pay¦nes for yt that I haue vyoled the chirche∣yarde & hurte a man within it / & hym dis¦poylled of his mauntelles hode / the whi∣che is vpon me more heuyer than a moū∣tayne. And the said deed man prayed him that he wolde do make oraysons for hym Than he demaūded yf suche a preest shol¦de synge for hym. The sayd deed answe∣red nothynge / yt is he spake no worde / but lyfte vp & shoke his heed in lyke wyse as
he them refused. And afterwarde hym de¦maūded yf he wolde that suche an hermy¦te prayed for hym. And he said I wyl wel that he praye for me. And whan the sayd knyght had promysed it hym ye deed said vnto hym. And I saye the that this daye two yeres thou shalte deye. And so was it done. This example denoteth many thyn¦ges. The fyrste is that one man shold not saye yll of another in as moche as ye deed body repreued hym that spake yll of hym. The seconde is that a man sholde kepe hȳ to do & to speke ylle in holy grounde in as moche as the deed body was in purgatori for that / yt he had vyoled the sayd chirche yarde. And also that a man ne sholde bete¦ne do none yll vnto his neyghbour / for pu¦nycyon foloweth in this worlde and in the other. The thyrde thynge that the exam∣ple denoteth is yt the prayers & oraysons of a good persone ben more soner exalted than those of synners in synne. It is here vnderstonde by that yt the deed loued the prayer of the hermyte more soner than of the other beforsayd. How be it yll preestes empayre not the sacrament of the masse / but those the whiche accedeth vnworthe∣ly is vnto theyr dampnacyon. G. ¶Another example how the aungell shewed vnto tongdalus a valeye replenis¦shed with coles of fyre in the whiche were put the homycydes. lxxvii. MEn fynde by wrytynge yt a man amed Tongdalus deyed. And yt the aungell ledde hym to se the tormentes of helle. And afterwarde broughte hym a¦gayne & put hym in to his body. The whi¦che recompted many torments amonges the whiche the aungell shewed / hym vn∣to a valeye moche horryble & full of derke¦nesses the whiche was ryghte depe full of coles brēnynge. And aboue yt valeye was there a couerynge of yron in fyre brēnyng in thyknes as of a syxe fadom the whiche was more hoter than the coles the whiche brenned vnder it. From thens yode forthe so grete stenche the whiche greued more ye soules than all yt that they had suffred be∣fore. Vnder the sayd couerture descended many soules ye whiche were fryed as men frye the bacon in the pan. And afterward they were streyned as men strayne waxe thorowe the clothe. And so fell they & dys∣cended in to the botom of the sayd valey / vpon the coles brennynge / vpon the whi∣che they were tormented of a newe tormē¦te. Than sayd the aungell / this payne suf∣freth those the whiche haue kylled faders or moders / systers or broders or other peo¦ple. Also ben in this torment those yt whi∣che haue had wyll to sle another by delybe¦racyon yf they myght / albeit that they ha¦ue not done it / & after that tormente shall be ledde in to more grete. ¶Homicidium dubium. A. ¶Examples of homycyde doubtous / and fyrste example how saynt Peter ma∣de to deye Ananye & his wyfe saphyre for that that they fraulded of the price of a fel¦de. lxxviii. IT is wryten in the fifte chapytre of the dede of the appostles that a mā named ananie his wyfe saphyre presente solde his felde & fraulded of the pryce hys sayd wyfe culpable. And bare awaye one partye & put it vnder the fete of the appos¦tles. He sholde all bere for that he sholde
yelde it in the cōmunyte withoute beynge propryetayre. And saynt Peter sayd vnto ananye. Ananye wherfore haste yu temp∣ted sathan thyn herte / thou hast lyed in ye holyghoost & fraulded of the pryce of the felde / whan thou possedest it yu haste puys∣saunce eyther to holde it / or to sel it / wher¦fore haste thou put this thynge in thy her∣te. Thou hast not lyed vnto men but vnto god. Whan ananye herde this thynge he fell & expyred / that is he was deed / & was buried / within thre houres saphyre entred the whiche knewe nothynge of the dede. / And saynt Peter sayd vnto her. Tell me woman yf thou haste solde the felde at su∣che a pryce. She answered yt ye. And saint peter sayd vnto her. What nedeth you to tempte the spyryte of our lorde / here be ye fete of those the whiche hathe buryed thy husbande / the whiche shal burye the. And she fell deed before his fete. And the yonge men toke her / & buryed her with her hus∣bande. And grete drede was made in the chirche. And so kepte these other for to be propryetayre. Here is example that all re∣lygyous & other shall be punysshed yf they take or witholde of the goodes of ye cōmu∣nyte. B. ¶Another example how dauyd made to slee the yonge man the whiche lyed to say that he had slayne saul. lxxviii IT is wryten in the fyrste chapytre of the seconde boke of kynges that a yonge man came to brynge the tydȳges vnto dauyd that he had slayne his aduer∣sarye the kyng saule & his sone Ionathas in wenynge to be welcome. And albeit he lyed / for he had not slayne the sayd Saul Sothe it was yt he had slayne hymself / & dauyd demaunded of the yongman how knowest thou that saul is deed / he answe∣red & sayd. I am come of auenture in the mountayne of gelboe / and saul lened him vpon his axe / he called me & sayd what an¦guysshes helde hym of al partes & desired that I wolde sle hym / & I haue slayne hȳ For I knewe wele that he ne myght lyue after the ruyne / for his aduersaryes ap∣proched vnto hym. And I haue taken the dyademe the whiche was on his heed and the aournement of his arme / & haue brou¦ghte theym vnto the. Whan dauyd herde these tydȳges toke his clothes & cut them And all they yt were with hym wepte and fasted tyll vnto ye euentyde. He was not io¦yous of the dethe of his aduersarye ye whi¦che made warre on hym. Dauyd came a∣gayne vnto the yongman the whiche had brought hym ye tydynges & sayd vnto hȳ. Wherfore hast thou not dredde to put thy hande & to slee a kynge. And dauyd called one of his seruauntes & made to sle ye said yongman / and said thy blode be vpon thy heed / thy mouthe to speke agayne them saynge I haue slayne saul. &c. By this ex∣ample a man sholde vnderstonde yt yll ca∣me vnto the yongman the whiche wende to be welcome for to tell yt thynge that he had not done. Also no good spyrytuell ne procedeth of lyenge / & to vaunte hym to haue done ylle. Also this example deno∣teth yt a man sholde not enioye of the deth perdycyon & ruyne of his aduersaryes. C. ¶Another example how dauyd slewe Golyas phylystyen incyrcumsysed. lxxviii IT is wryten in the .x. chapytre of ye fyrste boke of kynges that the phy∣lystyens the whiche made warre with the
people of Israhell came one tyme agayn them amonges the whiche there was one named Golyas the whiche was incyrcūsy¦sed / proude / renōmed / stronge / & puissaūt wele armed the whiche dysdeyned the so∣nnes of Israhell. ¶And for asmoche as he was stronge he ne doubted persone / defy∣ed the chyldren of Israhel / and sayd vnto them that ye moost strongest of them shol¦de come to fyght agayne him & he the whi¦che sholde haue the vyctorye sholde be ma¦yster of all the other. And for as moche as he was so strongly armed / redoubted and dredde euery man fered to assayl hym. &c For ende and conclusyon dauyd the whi∣che kepte beestes was moued vnto ye zele of the lawe puttynge his truste in god of∣fred hymselfe vnto ye kynge saul for to go fyght. And Saul armed him and put an helme on his heed. Whan dauyd had assa∣yed it sayd yt he coude not in suche wyse fy¦ghte / & that he had not accustomed to be∣re armoure / soo made to vnarme hym / & toke fyue stones / his slynge / & his staffe yt he had of custome to haue after his bestes and yode vnto Golias. Whan he sawe da¦uyd with his staffe he dyspreysed him and sayd vnto hym. What wenyst thou I am a dogge the whiche comest vnto me with a staffe. And Golyas cursed dauyd in his goodes / & sayd vnto hym. Come vnto me and I shall gyue thy flesshe vnto the byr∣des of the skye & vnto ye beestes of the er∣the. And dauyd sayd vnto hym. Thou co∣mest vnto me with glayue / axe / & armou¦re. And I go vnto the in the name of god of Israhell & thou shalt be slayne / to then¦de that all erthe knowe that there is one god in Israhell & that he ne saueth in axe and armoures. han Golyas herde these wordes he lyfte hym vp and toke hym to come agayne dauyd. And Dauyd hasted hym to fyght and toke a stone oute of his pouche and kest it in the foreheed of goly∣as / and made hym to falle vnto the erthe vpon his forheed he yode vpon hym and for that that he had no swerde to drawe / he drewe the swerde and glayue from go∣lyas and cut of his heed / and so hadde the vyctorye of the phylystyen / orguyllous in∣cyrcumsysed that byleued in goddes straū¦ce and mortall. &c. ¶Ire. D ¶Example of a woman dampned for Ire without beynge in wyll to pardon & to forgyue. lxxviii. THe dyscyple recyteth in his sermō that there was a woman ryghte full of Ire and wrathe that with payne ony might accorde with her. But notwith¦stondynge she reputed herselfe to be holy and deuoute / for she fasted moche and ex¦cercysed in fastynges and oraysons and in many goode operacyons. But she hadde pryncypally this vyce yt after that a perso¦ne hadde onely offended her one tyme she neuer loued him after. And no persone ne myghte put her oute of that Ire and ven¦geaunce. Whan she came vnto the dethe she confessed her of all her synnes excepte of this Ire. And as the preest wolde ha∣ue gyuen her the body of god / she shyt the mouthe & torned her towardes the walle and sayd vnto the preest and vnto all the men and women the whiche were present ¶In lyke and semblable wyse as I tor∣ned me from al those the whiche hathe of¦fended and trespassed agaynste me / And that I ne wolde pardon them with herte I ne myght loue theym parfytely. And yt I haue holde me in Ire in lettyng other.
In lyke wyse god taketh and torneth fro¦me & shal neuer loke on me mercyfully / ne I hym Ioyouslye in the realme of heuen for myn Ire / but I shall entre in to helle with the deuylles & with all Irefull whe∣re I shal brenne eternelly. And so the said Irous departed and deyed. &c. By this yt this sayd woman ne wolde corecte her in her lyfe of the sayd Ire & vengeaunce / & that she confessed her not in her dethe it is to presuppose that she is dampned to con∣syder the sayd wordes yt she spake at her departynge. And a man sholde here clere¦ly vnderstonde yt one mortal sinne damp∣neth the persone the whiche cōmytteth it / what good dede soo euer he hathe done in his lyfe. So deyed she without penaunce correccyon & amendement vnde ezechie∣lis xxxiii. Iustitia iusti nō liberabit eū in quacū{que} die peccauerit. &c. ¶Odium. A. ¶Examples of hate / & fyrste example how the lone of a ryche man was damp∣ned for to kepe Ire in his herte & for that he wolde be venged. lxxix. THe dyscyple recyteth in the boke of his sermons & sayeth that a nobe man had a sone the whiche yode vnto the chirche & serued god in fastnges / oraysons & in doynge good operacyons. And whan the sayd sone was in the dethe bedde his fader prayed hym that he wolde pere vn∣to him whan he was deed yf it pleased vn¦to god for to shewe him of his estate / and of the meryte of his lyfe / the whiche so ap¦pered and sayd vnto hym. Fader praye ye no more for me / for I am dampned / and in soo grete paynes that yf there were as many of tongues as ther are of sterres in the skye ne myghte expresse the paynes yt I haue. ¶And his fader sayd vnto hym. And hast not thou ben chaste / abstynent / and deuoute. &c. He answered ye / but I haue loste all the good dedes that I haue done as vnto saluacyon for Ire & venge∣aunce that I haue reteyned in my herte agayne those yt whiche hathe offended me After that a persone had done me yll one only tyme I ne myght neuer loue hym / & venged me all tymes whan I myghte / & for that onely vyce I am loste and damp∣ned eternally. Whan he had spoken these wordes he departed. This example deno∣teth and techeth that Ire / hate / and ven∣geaunce ledeth vnto dampnacyon. For it is agayne charyte and the cōmaūdement of god the whiche sayeth. Diliges proxi∣mum tuum sicut te ipsum. Men fynde by wrytynge that the sayd boye was one ty∣me in a tree / and bette downe & toke the apples of his neyghboure / & a good man the whiche paste by made hym to dyscen∣de / shewed vnto hym his case / and by cor∣reccyon gaue vnto hym a buffet. And the sayd boye thretened hym & sayd vnto him that he sholde yelde it hym how be it that he taryed / & after that as often as he se hȳ he shewed hym with his fynger in sayeng There is he the whiche bet me / but whan I am grete I shal yelde it hym. The ylle wyl that he kepte in his courage made hȳ to be dampmned and loste. And therfore for to haue saluacyon it behoueth to putte oute all hates and rancoures / and to par∣don vnto another in lyke wyse as we re∣quyre of god that he pardon vs our sȳnes Also by this example is to be noted that good operacions ben put in forgetefulnes as vnto saluacyon how be it that a man ne sholde withdrawe hym to do good de∣des as many as he maye in this worlde. /
For it serueth vnto the dymynycyon of ye payne. B. ¶Another example how hatours the whiche slewe a man in ye chirche were pu∣nysshed dyuynely. lxxix. IT is wryten in the promptuarye of the myracles of the vyrgyn marye that thre knyghtes hated a man the whi∣che sought the opportunyte for to sle hym And one tyme as they wolde haue slayne hym he fledde in to the chirche consecrate in the honoure of the vyrgin marye for to escape the peryll of dethe / they yode after entred into the chirche irreuently & cruel∣ly slewe hym before the aulter of the vyr∣gyn Marye. For this thynge the vyrgyn emoued her against them / & incontinent vengeaunce of god came vpon theym for theyr presumpcyon / they were embraced with fyren suche maner that ye membres of euery of them brenned. Whan they ap∣perceyued ye dyuyne vengeaunce to be on them they were constrayned to beseche ye vyrgyn Marye of grace / & retourned vn∣to her by greate contrycyon of herte. And she the whiche is fulfylled with pyte dely∣uered them frome the fyre by the grace of god: but not ful helthe. After yt they might go they presented them vnto the bysshop / requyrynge hym of penaunce. And he en∣ioyned them to bere vpon them ye armou¦res that they hadde whan they slewe him And that they sholde repente theym euer∣more tyll vnto that that they had satysfy∣ed vnto god and vnto the blessyd vyrgyn Marye. C. ¶Another example how the deuyl did sle a man for the kepyng of hate and wol∣de not pardon it. lxxix. MEn fynde by wrytynge ye two men neyghbours pleded togi¦ders & hated other soo moche that theyr curates knewe not what to do at euery ester. and one tyme the sayd curate gaue them mo∣nycyon to pardon the one the other & to lo¦ue togyders / or that they ne sholde recey∣ue theyr creatour in the estate of grace / & he that had the leest of wronge pardoned hym all & put hym in his deuoyre. And ye other wold not pardon. And for as moche as his curate menaced hȳ not to gyue hȳ his creatoure / for as moche as he sholde tary / & of drede / of offyce sayd wt the mou¦the and not with the herte that he pardo∣ned. And they receyued togider theyr crea¦toure. After the masse as they yode togy∣der to theyr houses / for it was theyr waye He the whiche had lest of wronge folowed the other to haue hym to dyner with him and ryght gretely prayed hym & his wyfe The whiche answered yt he loued better to dyne with Sathan and to eate with all ye deuylles in helle than with hym. Ha sayd he wenest thou to playe ye knaue with me in suche wyse / whan ye feest is past I shal handle the wele ynoughe. And the other sayd / my neyghbour haue ye in suche wy∣se receyued your creatoure / ye haue recey∣ued hym in yll estate. After they departed For he the whiche hadde wronge dwelled ferther of than ye other. And whan he was nere to a wodde ye deuyll came vnto hym in lykenes of a blacke man / the whiche to¦ke hym horrybly & sayd vnto hym. Thou yll crystyen wors than a sarazyn / or than I am yt haste not done honoure vnto thy creatour yt yu hast receyued in mortal sȳne
For as moche as thou haste not wylled to pardon vnto thy neyghbour vnto whom thou haste sayd that thou louest better to dyne with the deuylles than with hym / at this houre thou shalt come to dyner with them. I am the deuyll the whiche euermo¦re hathe stered the to do yll. And I ne had neuer puyssaunce to sle the vnto this day But thy god hathe gyuen me leue and ly∣cence / and it is suffred that at this houre thou haue punycyon & dampnacyon. And therfor thou woman go tel vnto thy cura¦te that I cōmaunde hym to come hastely here for to take the bodye of Ihesu cryste that this cursed crystyen hathe receyued / For to be shorte the deuyll slewe the sayd hater. The curate came with greate com∣pany of people the whiche toke the body of our lorde in lyke wyse as god it suffred & wylled. And the deuyll dyde hym honoure and yode on knees. And after toke the bo¦dy of the sayd man and bare it awaye. Al¦soo men fynde many other Examples of haters the whiche ne wolde pardon vnto theyr neyghbours. And therfore they dyf∣fyned ylle theyr dayes horrybly & mysche∣uously. wherfore men presuppose more so¦ner that they ben dampned than otherwi¦se. For it is wryten de pe. di. i. Omnis qui non diligit manet in morte. D. ¶Another example how the deuyl we ned to lette saynt Thybault to pacyfye ye barons of the champayne that had dyuy∣syon togyder. IT is wryten in the legende of saint thybault that grete dyuysyon was one tyme amonges the barons of ye cham¦payne in suche manere that they were re¦dy to slee eche other. And the tydynges ca¦me vnto saint Thybault the whiche was ferre from the countre. And for as moche as he ne myght ryde he made to prepayre hym a charyot / & made him to be borne wt in it for to go to pacyfye them. And as he was in a waye the horses yode in to a wa¦ter for to drynke. And the deuyll enuyous & wrothe of the welfare of the countre ca¦me in to the sayd water & toke away one of the wheles of the charyot and cast it in to a dyke ryghte depe. And in spyryte the sayd saynt Thybault sawe this thynge yt the deuyll dyde. Vnto whiche deuyll saint Thybaulte sayd. I cōmaunde the in ye na¦me of our lorde Ihesu cryste that thou ser¦ue to this charyot in stede of ye sayd whele And the sayd deuyll was obedyent and ye sayd charyot yode vpon one whele. And ye deuyll bare the other part ye ye whiche was a thynge ryght meruayllous vnto all tho∣se that se it. And whan the sayd saynt ca∣me vnto the place where they were all ap¦poynted to sle other. Whan the prynces & people sawe manyfestly that the charyot yode vpon one whele as it is sayd they we¦re ameruayled / and came before the sayd saynt & theym pacyfyed and put in good concorde. And then retourned from whēs he was comen. And whan he was in the sayd water saynt Thybault said vnto the deuyll. Acursed go fetche ye whele and put it on agayne & go thy wayes. Thou wen∣dest to haue had grete prouffyte for to do me this thynge / & it hathe be vnto thy con¦fusyon. And the sayd deuyll it appoynted vpon the sayd charyot / & afterwarde re∣tourned him. &c. By these examples befor sayd in this fyfte cōmaundement it appe¦reth that a man ne sholde commyt homy∣cyde iniustely. And that a man ne sholde do none yll vnto his neyghboure by Ire / hate / vengeaunce ne cursydnes. &c.
¶Sextum preceptum. Furtum. A▪ ¶Examples of people the whiche ha∣ue cōmytted thefte. And fyrst of a thefe na¦med Achar the whiche was stoned & hys substau e brent by the cōmaundemente of god. nc lxxx. IT is wryten in the .vii. chapitre of the boke of Iosue that a man named Achar stole agayne ye cō∣maundement of god. And of his capytayne Iosue a ryghte good mauntell / two hondred peces of moneye / & a rodde of golde the whiche was worth fyftye peces of golde in lyke wyse as hym self confessed. Vnde Iosue .vii. Vidi enī int{er} spolia paleū cocceneū valde bonū: & du¦cētos cieclos argēti. regulā{que} aureā quīq̄∣ginta siclorū: & {con}cupiscēs abstuli & abscōdi in tra. And by ye synne of the sayd thefte ye people of Israhell loste a Iourneye agaȳ theyr aduersaryes / & fledde before theym. Than theyr capytayne Iosue yode vnto the temple / cut his vestimentes / & prostra¦te couched hym vpon the erthe before the arche where were the cōmaundementes tyll vnto the euentyde. And all the auncy∣entes of Israhell with hym / the whiche put of the poudre vpon theyr hedes & hum¦bled them before god / & hym demaunded what was to be done. Quid facies ma∣gno nomini tuo. &c. And god sayd vnto io¦sue. Aryse yu vp wherfore lyest yu on ye erthe Some of the people of Israhell hath bro∣ke my cōmaundemente. I shall not helpe you tyll he that is culpable be taken from you. Vnde iosue .vii. Anthema in medio tur ē israel nō poteris stare corā hostib{us} tu is: donec deleat{ur} ex te qi cōtaminat{us} ē scele∣re. Than god cōmaunded yt men sholde se¦che after hym yt had done the synne. An yt he were slayne / & all his substaūce brent & it was done. For the sayd Achar confes∣sed ye sayd synne as it is sayd. And it was Iuged of Iosue by the wyll of god in the maner the whiche foloweth. That is the sayd Iosue made to hange the sayd achar thefe & all his bestyall / his house / his bed∣des with all ye other housholde stuffe / and made all to be borne in to a valeye wtoute the cyte. And all the people of Israhel ca∣me theder. And than the sayd Iosue spa∣ke and sayd. For as moche as thou haste troubled vs all / our lorde troubleth ye this daye. All the people of Israhell shal stone the. And all yt the whiche is thyne shall be brente / & so was it done. And after that al ye sayd people of Israhell assembled a gre¦te mountayne of stones vpon ye said thefe the whiche yet is there. And ye Ire of god was appeased for ye punycyon of the said thefe. Here is an example as vnto ye texte of the byble the whiche is gretely to be no¦ted vnto all theues. For by that yt god ma¦de to punysshe the sayd thefe & to take him from amonge the good / it is to be vnder∣stonde / yt in lyke wyse shall god make to be departed all theues at the Iugemente And shal make them to be broyled & brent Vnde mathei. xiii. Exibunt angeli et se∣perabūt malos de medio iustorum & mit¦tent eos in caminū ignis. Also here is an example of people the whiche haue cōmu∣ned goodes that they ne sholde nothynge take vnto theyr partyculyer as people of warre the whiche haue made othe to put all in butyn / or boty felowes as were the chyldren of Israhel. And as ben many sor¦tes of people with goodes comunes. And suche people the whiche draweth and pre¦tendeth vnto theyr partyculer ben theues And by that that the chyldren of Israhel were gretely troubled & in like wise vexed
And loste a Iourneye by the sayd thefe / it is to vnderstonde yt by an yll persone all a parysshe / or good company is troubled / & hathe to suffre. &c. B. ¶Another example of a thefe the whi¦che was fastened / & abode with his thefte vpon the graue of a deed body. lxxx. IT is wryten in ye dyalogue of saint gregorye yt in the prouynce of Vale¦rye was there a worshypfull preest of ho∣ly conuersacyon with his clerkes to gyue preysynge vnto / full of good operacyons and vertues. After his dethe was buryed before the chirche. And as the clerkes we∣re in orayson in a nyght there came a the∣fe ye whiche stole from them a shepe. And the sayd thefe came to passe with his proy aboue the graue of the sayd preest buryed And abode there all styll withoute power to go / ne power to leue ye sayd shepe. And in the mornynge was founde wt his proye as the deed body helde hym. And as he ne myght leue his thefte the sayd clerkes yo∣de to prayer. And yt payne obteyned they that the sayd thefe myght go without be∣rynge ony thynge awaye. &c. For to mora¦lyze vpon this example a man sholde vn∣derstonde by the thefe the whiche was a∣rested with his thefte withoute power to remeue ne to go / that these theues ye whi∣che ben dampned bere vpon them ye thef∣tes that they haue stolen & shall bere eter∣nally without power to take them away. & shal be holden in ye fyre of hell. It is wry¦ten ezechielis .xliiii. {quod} pctōres portabūt cō¦fusionē suā & scelera sua q̄ fecerūt / yt is to saye yt the synners shall bere theyr synnes in confusyon. And the dampned shall se al theyr fautes vpon them. As men knowe a companye of people yt suche is clothed wt gray and suche with whyte / & suche & su∣che haue white hodes / or blacke. Vnde eze xviii. Impietas impii erit su{per} eū. Et le¦gitt{ur} eccle. xi. In fine hoīs denudatio ope¦rum illius. &c. C. ¶Another example how the deuylles slewe a thefe & bare awaye his soule for ye that he had witholden the hors of a deed body the whiche sholde haue be gyuen vn¦to poore people. lxxx IT is wryten in ye legende of ye deed bodyes yt Turpyn Archebysshop of Rayns sayd that a knight named charles yode in batayll for fo fyght in armes. the whiche prayed one his cosin yt yf he deyed in the sayd batayll yt he sholde sell his hors and that he sholde gyue the money therof vnto poore people. And whan ye sayd kny¦ghte was deed / the other withelde for hȳ∣selfe the sayd hors. And within lytel tyme after the sayd knyght deed appered vnto the other knyght shynynge as the sonne / & sayd vnto hym. Good cosyn thou haste made me to suffre paynes by eyght dayes in purgatorye for my hors / the price wher¦of was not gyuen vnto the poore in lyke wyse as I had dysposed / but thou ne arte quyte / for at this day the deuylles shal be¦re awaye thy soule in to helle. And I goo purged in to heuen. And than a crye was herde sodaynly in the ayre of deuylles the whiche bare hpm awaye from thens. &c. This example denoteth that those ye whi¦che witholde the goodes of deed bodyes / ben theues and dampne themselfe as did he ye whiche withelde the sayd hors. &c.
D. ¶Another example how a chylde the whiche had stolen an halfpeny frome his cosyn was punysshed in the pyt of helle & afterwarde broughte agayne in to his bo¦dy. lxxx THe dysciple reciteth in his sermōs this example howe a chylde was preent in Iugemente before god after yt he was deed. And the deuyll accused hym & sayd. Dn̄e iudica secūdū iustitiā. &c. ✿ Thou lorde iuge after iustyce / this chylde hathe stolen from his cosyn germayn an halfpeny the whiche he hathe not yelded / & is deed without doynge penaunce. Wol¦dest thou wele yt I condampne this chyld for so lytell a thynge / my iustyce is not wt out mercy. Than some sayntes ye whiche were than present yt the sayd chylde hadde serued prayed the Iuge for hym. And the Iuge sayd yt he sholde haue payne for hys offence. And after shall be brought agayn in to his body. Than by the commaunde∣ment of the sayd Iuge he was cast in to a pytte of fyre wherin he susteyned soo mo∣che of payne & dolour yt afterwarde he ne myght expresse it by worde. And at ye pra∣yer of ye sayd sayntes he was drawen out of the sayd pyt of fyre / & the soule was res¦tored within the body & lyued afterward And the said Iuge gaue him in charge to yelde agayne the sayd half peny / & the peo¦ple meruaylled them of ye yt he had recoun¦ted. And they put to fayth vnto yt that he had sayd. For asmoche as he lyued after∣warde moche holyly in the drede of god wt out takynge apple ne pere ne ony thynge of other mennes. By this example a man sholde vnderstonde yt this chylde was ac∣cused before god of ye deuyl of so lytel a thȳ¦ge as is an halfpeny / by a more grete rea∣son shall be accused those the whiche stele a grete thynge. And yf he had so grete pu¦nycyon for so lytell offence / so shal they ha¦ue that do the grete offences. And by that that god hym cōmaunded restytucyon so sholde those do ye whiche hathe taken fro other / or elles they may not be saued. For it is wryten in droit. Nō dimitt{ur} pctm̄ ni∣si restituat{ur} ablatū. xiiii. q. vi. c. Sires. and saynt Thomas sayth secūda secūde. q. lxii articulo .viii. Who so euer letteth iniustely another neyghbour in the vsage of ye thyn¦ge the whiche vnto hym apperteyneth he trespasseth the cōmaundement of charite A. ¶Another example how churle was punysshed of the deuyll for that yt he had stolen a lytell of a hedge in the felde from his neyghboure. lxxxi. IT is wryten in the dyalogue cesarū that a carle was in the dethe bedde & the deuyll came vnto hym ye whiche hel¦de a lytell of a hedge al in fyre / the whiche enforced hȳ to put it in his mouthe. Than the sayd carle forgote not his synne. And vnderstode yt the deuyll dyde vnto hym so¦che payne for a lytell of a hedge yt he had taken & stolen in the felde from his neygh¦boure / & had put it in his felde vnto hym∣selfe. And for that yt the deuyll was euer∣more before his face in what place so euer he tourned hym was constrayned to resto¦re the sayd lytell hedge / called his frendes sente theym to promytte to restore ye sayd lytell & to requyre pardon / vnto whome ye mayster of the sayd lytell sayd. I shal not pardon hym yet / let hym be wele tormen∣ted. And agayne the sayd deuyll helde the sayd lytel hedge embrased / & him tormen¦ted as before. And agayne sente messen∣gers but they ne might haue pardō. thyrd¦ly
in wepynge sente them. I vnhappy I ne maye dye ne lyue / retorne ye to demaū¦de pardon. Than the other him pardoned & the deuyl departed incōtynent. By this example a man sholde vnderstonde that all maner of theues yt steleth or wasteth ye goodes of theyr neyghbours iniustely shal be punysshed in this world or in the other Syth that the deuyll tormented soo thys man for so lytell a thynge as is a lytell of hedge. By a more stronger reason he shall torment those the whiche do ye grete thef∣tes. This lytell of a hedge was not worth no greate thynge. But it was a grete thȳ¦ge as to take it wyttyngly from his neigh¦boure theuysshely agaynst the cōmaunde¦ment of god wherfore he was digne of pu¦nycyon. &c. B. ¶Another example of a seruaunt the whiche toke & stole frome his maister fyg¦gues. lxxxi. THe dyscyple recyteth in his promp¦tuarye & sermons & sayeth that ye body of saynt Thomas is reuerently kep¦te / where god vnto hym hathe gyuen su∣che grace that he is yet entere & hole. And whan the tyme cometh to admynystre vn¦to the people one sytteth in a chayer reue∣rently. Whan the hostyes are consecrate ye preest putteth them in saynt Thomas hā¦de / ye whiche admynystreth ye people. And yf ony of those yt receyueth theyr creatour be in ony synne ye sayd saynt thomas with draweth his hande / & shall not be admy∣nystred tyl he be in the state of grace. The scrypture speketh of a seruaūt yt stole fyg∣ges from his mayster & eate them wtout ye knowlege of his mayster / & confessed him not of it. So he came to be admynystred as the other dyde. And the sayd saynt tho¦mas withdrewe his hande and wolde not suffre hym to receyue it. Then the seruaūt be thought hym of the sayd theft & was cō∣fessed / & after that was admynystred of ye sayd saȳt Thomas & was no more repul¦sed. And by this all theft is to fle be it gre∣te or lytell. For for that man is put out of the company of god. C. ¶Another example of a baylye iuge & thefe the whiche toke gyftes iniustely and corructe Iustyce. lxxxi. THe dyscyple recyteth in his promp¦tuarye & sayeth yt a baylye made a weddynge vnto his sone / & a man yt whi∣che had a grete cause before hym gaue vn¦to hym an oxe / & prayed hym that he wol¦de do for hym in his cause. And whan his aduersarye herde it spoken / he sent a fayr cowe vnto the wyfe of ye sayd baylye and prayed her to speke for hym. The whiche dyde so moche ayenst the said baylye that he promysed that he wolde doo for hym yt had sente the cowe. And whan they were in iugement & that the said baylye ne spa¦ke for hym the whiche had gyuen the oxe / he sayd / oxe speke. Than ye baylye answe∣red. The oxe may not speke / for the cowe wyl not suffre it. &c. The cause of suche iu¦ges the whiche corrupteth iustyce by gyf∣tes promesses & fauours shal be dyscussed & iuged before god the whiche is souerain Iuge / ye whiche is not acceptour of perso¦nes / in lyke wyse as sayeth the holy scryp∣ture. Nō enī ē acceptio {per}sonarū apud de∣um. And in the sayd iugement of god eue¦ry man shal be punysshed after that / that he hathe deserued as the fals Iuges and those the whiche wȳne theyr causes falsly
And those ye whiche possede herytages yll begoten / & witholde them without restitu¦cyon. Tu reddes cui{que} iuxta opera sua / vt dicit psal. Also god ne shal spare in Iu¦gement the grete lordes / ne prayer ne gol∣de ne syluer / ne contrycyon ne wrathe ne shall doo nothynge in lyke wyse as sayeth the scrypture. Vn̄. {pro}uer. vi zel{us} & furor vi¦ri nō parcet dn̄s ī die vīdicte: nec acquies∣cet cuius{quam} {pre}cib{us}: nec suscipieth {pro}redēptio ne dona plurima. &c. D. ¶Another example how the kyng of perse made to fle an yll Iuge corrupte by gyftes. &c. lxxxi THe dyscyple recyteth in his promp¦tuarye yt the kynge of perse repre∣ued a iuge for gyuyng fals iugement and for his iniustyce made hym to be flayne & to put his skynne vpon a stole. And made to sytte vpon the said stole his sone & the iuges the whiche came after hym to then∣de that they sholde remembre them of the sayd yll Iuge. And that they sholde drede to Iuge vniustely. &c. E. ¶Another example how the deuyl ba∣re away in body and in soule a thefe coue∣tous aduocate. THe dyscyple recyteth in his sermō that there was an aduocate chief of dyuers townes / auarycyous withoute mercy yt made of greuous exacions in his subgectes / & came one daye as he yode in a towne for an exaccyon ye deuyll assocya∣ted with hym in the waye in lykenes of a man. And of horroure & of the wordes yt they spake togider he vnderstode yt it was the deuyl & dredde to go with hym / but in no manere he ne myght departe / neyther in praynge / ne in makynge the sygn of ye crosse. And as they yode togider they met a poore man the whiche ledde a hogge in a bande. And as the hogge tourned from one syde to another / yt pore man was wro¦the / & cryed the deuyll take the. Whan the aduocate herde this worde he had hope to departe from hym by suche occasyon. and sayd vnto the deuyll. Frende here yt hogge is gyuen vnto the / go & take hym. The de¦uyll answerde / he is not gyuen me wt hert & therfore I ne maye take hym. And af∣ter they passed by another towne / & as a chylde wepte his moder was at the doore wrothe / & sayd the deuyll take the / wher∣fore tormentest yu me thus wt thy wepyn∣ges. Than the aduocate sayd here haste yu wonne a soule / take ye chylde / for it is thin Vnto whome the deuyll answerde as be∣fore. She hath not giuen it me with good herte. And whan they began to approche vnto the place whether they yode. Then the men of ye towne se them ferre of they knewe not the cause / wherfore they yede all togyder with one voyce cryenge the de¦uyll take the. And sayd vnto the deuyll yu arte welcome. Whan the deuyl had herde this / he shoke the heed / & in mockyng said vnto the aduocate. Those here hathe gy∣uen the vnto me with al theyr hertes. and therfore art thou myne. And the deuyl ra∣uysshed hym in that hour / & what became of hym no man can tell. The langages yt whiche were spoken / & the thynges ye whi¦che were done in the waye the seruaunt of the aduocate declareth yt was with hym. / By this example it appereth that cursed Iuges and aduocates deye cursedly / and that the gyftes & salayres that they haue taken vniustely / hathe deceyued & blȳded
theyr soules. Also the scrypture speketh it in many places. Fyrste gyftes blynde the eyes of the wyse people yt whiche haue ius¦tice to gouerne For they ne se drope in the good & iuste cause of those the whiche ne gyue nothyng. And loke ryght clere in the cause of those ye whiche hathe made them ony gyfte. Also the gyftes peruerteth the wordes of the iustyces as sayeth moyses / deuterono .xvi. Ne acciptas munera: nec personā quia munera execant oculos sa∣pientū: et mutāt verba iustorū. And he sa¦yeth in ye boke of exode. Exodi. xxiii. Ad∣uers{us} impiū ne accipias munera q̄ execāt etiā prudētes: et subuertēt verba iustorum Also the gyftes put outethe eyes of ye Iu¦ges / & theym make dombe / & take awaye correccyon as sayeth the wyse. Eccle. xx. Dona execātoculos iudicū: & quasi iūct{us} in ore aduertit correctionē eorū. Et grego¦rius dicit. Non potest constāter argui a quo accipit{ur}. Also the giftes make maledic¦cyon to come vnto those ye whiche for gyf∣tes iustefye the yl / & make theyr yll causes good / & take awaye iustyce from the iuste and theyr good causes make yll. Vn̄. ysay v. Ve qi iustificatis impiū {pro} muneribus et iusticiā iusti aufertis ab eo. Iterū in eo¦dem capitulo. Ve qui dicitis bonū malum et masū bonum: ponentes amarū in dulce & dulce ī amarū. Et deutero .xxvii. Male∣dictus qui {per}uertit iuditiū aduene: & pupil li et vidue: et dicet omnis populus amen. He is acursed the whiche peruerteth ye iu∣gement of the man straunge / & of the or∣phelyn / and of the wedowe. And all ye peo¦ple shall saye amen / that is so be it. Iterū deuterono .xvii. Maledictus qui accipit munera vt {per}eutiat aīam sanguinis inno∣centis: & dicitomnis populus amen. He is acursed the whiche taketh gyftes to then∣de that he stryke the soule of the blode īno∣cent. Et prouerbiorum .xvii. Qui iustifi∣cat impium: et qui condemnat iustum ab∣hominabilis vt vter{que} apud dominum. He the whiche iustefyeth the wycked synner / and condampneth the Iuste / the one and the other is abhominable anenst god. and those the whiche composeth and maketh yll lawes to thende that they eschasen the poores in Iugement. And that they ma∣ke force vnto the cause of the humbles be cursed. Vn̄. ysaie .x. Ve qui cōdunt leges iniquas vt opprimēt in iuditio pauperes et vim facerent cause humiliū populi mei vt essent vidue preda eorum▪ et populos dirumperent. Also the persone the whiche taketh gyftes byndeth hymselfe anenst ye gyuer / or elles vnkyndes foloweth. Mu∣nera alligāt. Also some cursed offycers ta∣ke of two sides / as those ye whiche fissheth with two nettes and flatereth with bothe partyes / and saye vnto euery of theym he hathe good ryght / they do treason / decep∣cyon / thefte / susurracyon / and in scryptu∣re ben called bylyngues. For theyr tongue speketh two langages. And ben cursed. ie¦gitur ecclesiastici decimo octauo. Sufur∣ro et bilinguis maledictus: multos enim turbauit pacem habentes. Sequitur lin∣gua tercia multos commouit: et dispersit illos a gente in gentem. F. ¶Another example of a tayler named martyn the whiche stole the clothe in cut∣tynge the robbes. lxxxi. THere was a tayller named Mar∣tyn the whiche hadde of custome that whan he cutte of clothe for to make of robes / or gownes / or cotes. &c. that he stole euermore some what of the forsayd clothe as coloured clothes or fyne whytes.
And hym thoughte that he dremed in one nyght for that ye he stole of clothe that the deuyl bare hȳ awaye in to hell / he shewed vnto his wyfe his dreme. And his wyfe ye whiche wolde withdrawe hym from euyl counsaylled that he sholde neuer take no∣ne. Afterwarde it happened that this tay¦lour cut a fayre blewe in his shoppe whi∣che was nere vnto his wyues chambre / & by a hole thorowe the wall the wyfe behel¦de hym euermore cuttynge. And in seyng her husbande the whiche had of custome yt whan he wolde stele he whysteled in lokȳ¦ge where it myght be yt he myght ony thȳ¦ge stele. Than ye wyfe cryed martyn mar∣tyn remembre the of the deuyll. And mar¦tyn seynge this stole nothynge. Afterwar¦de came a fayre scarlet to be cutte. And yt wyfe as is beforsayd cryed / martyn mar¦tyn remembre the of the deuyll. And he se¦ynge so fayre clothe rubbed his sholdres & euermore that woman sayd martyn mar¦tyn. &c. And he said / yf the deuyl sholde be¦re me a waye yet sholde I haue it. &c. G. ¶Another example how four men of one lygnage were dampned and hanged in helle / for yt that they posseded falsly an herytage. lxxxi THe dyscyple recyteth in his boke & sayeth that a ryche man sawe by vysyon foure men dampned & tormented in helle the whiche were vnder a drye tree & sawe that one of them hange the fyrste / the other the seconde / & the fourth the thir¦de / the other abode vnder ye said tree. The aungell the whiche shewed this visyon sa¦yd vnto the ryche man that the thre han∣ged were of his lynage / that is thy graūd faders fader / & his fader. And he the whi¦che abydeth vnder the tree / that is thy fa∣der ye whiche taryeth tyll thou be deed for to hange the for suche herytage the which was yll goten / the whiche they haue posse¦ded falsly the one after the other without beynge in wyll to leue it. And thou shalte be hanged as they ben yf thou leue it not / For they ne haue therin nothynge / no mo¦re haste thou thyselfe. Than the said riche man lefte the sayd heretage and dyde pe∣naunce. This example denoteth yt a man ne sholde possede godes & herytages whā a man hathe true knowlege that they ben comen of yll getynge & purchase. For the fals geters purchasers & herytours ye whi¦che possede the sayd thynges without be∣ynge in wyll to leue them. In the whiche they ne haue nothynge dampne theyr sou¦les to reteyne & take vniustely the thynge the whiche is not theyrs. And therfore for to saue theyr soules they sholde make resti¦tucyon. &c. ¶Sacrilegium. A. ¶Examples of sacrylege / & fyrste exā∣ple how an erle and many of his lygnage were damned for that yt they posseded vn¦iustely an herytage the whiche had be ta∣ke awaye from the chirche. lxxxii. THe dysciple reciteth in his sermōs that an erle after the opynyon of men was of good life. After his dethe a re¦lygyous sawe hym in the flambes of fyre of hell vpon a laddre on the laste staffe the whiche was lyfte vpwarde / & procedyng from the lower parte of helle. And moche people were vpon the laddre that grynde the tethe of rage of tormentes. And ye said relygyous demaunded wherfore the sayd
erle was in suche tormentes on ye sayd lad¦dre consyderyng that he had lyued so we∣le. And it was tolde hym that it was for an herytage yt his greate grandfader had taken from ye chirche / & that he was now the tenthe ye whiche had posseded it. And therfore all those the whiche shall possede the sayd herytage shall be put on the sayd laddre with the erle This example sholde drawe backe all persones to gete & to pos¦sede vniustely the heritages the whiche be not well goten. And pryncypally to take from the chirche that the whiche is gyuen vnto it. For god is theyr iuge & sufferer wt whome they haue to doo. And it behoueth to passe vnder his hande / & his rodde. Vn̄ scryptura. Nō est qui de manu mea pos∣sit eruere. And therfore it is grete folye to take from his iuge yt the whiche appertey¦neth vnto hym. By this that this said erle dredde not this thynge / and ne made of it conscyence ne restytucyon he put hymself in dampnacyon & perdycyon what good dede so euer he had done of the other part And therfore take hede vnto hym who so loueth hymselfe. &c. B. ¶Another example how Helyodorus was punysshed dyuynely in takynge the treasours from ye chirche of Iherusalem. IT is wryten in the booke of macha¦bee how heliodorus was sent from the kinge solencus to take & to bere away the treasours of ye chirche of Iherusalem In the whiche treasours there were four hondred talentes of syluer / & two hondred talentes of golde as it appereth in ye said chapytre. And as ye sayd Heliodorus was in the chirche with his complyces / god she¦wed vnto hym yt he dyspleased hym. For all those yt there was entred hardely were caste by the puyssaunce of god in dyssolu∣cyon & drede. Vnto whome it appered a terryble hors vpon the whiche was by sy∣mylitude a man on horsbacke aourned wt ryght good enournements. And with gre¦te impetuosite came the hors to stryke the sayd helyodorus wt his fete. He the whiche was on horsbacke semed that he was ar∣med wt armours of golde. And there arry¦ued by symylytude two yongmen / & byle∣ue that they were aungelles replenysshed with greate vertue & with grete beaute / & clothed ryght specyally the whiche sette a¦boute the sayd helyodorus / & hymbet and whypped without cessynge / tyll yt he was replenysshed with woundes. Than ye said Helyodorus fell vnto the erthe as deed in grete confusyon. The whiche yonge men toke him in to his lodgynge where he had lyen. He ye whiche was come on horsbacke with puyssaunce of satyllytes was borne agayne without horses / ne without ayde humayne by the vertue of god the whiche appered manyfestly. And so laye the sayd helyodorus by the dyuyne puyssaunce and pryuate from all hope of helthe. And the people of Iherusalem blessyd / & thanked god the whiche had kepte his temple to be pylled & was replenysshed with Ioye the whiche lytell before was replenysshed wt drede. Than the frendes of the sayd Helio¦dorus came vnto the souerayne preest of Iherusalem named onias. And hym re∣quyred that he wolde praye vnto god for the sayd Helyodorus. Vnto whome he obe¦yed & prayed god for him. And as the said preest onias prayed god the forsayd yong men clothed as they were before came be∣fore helyodorus vnto whom they said / yel¦de thankes vnto the preest onias / For for the loue of him god hathe gyuen the thy ly¦fe. And thou the whiche hast ben beten by
god denounce and shewe vnto all ye puys∣saunce & the grete thynges of hym. Than the said Helyodor{us} was heled yelded than¦kes vnto god & vnto the sayd onias / retor¦ned vnto the sayd kynge to tell these thyn¦ges beforsaid. And them manifested ouer all where he myght. ¶By this example a man sholde note that no persone ne shol∣de take ne pylle the goodes of the chirche. For god wyl yt they be employed vnto that where vnto they ben ordeyned. And yf the sayd Helyodorus were punysshed in this worlde of the punycyon dyuyne / by more grete reason shall those be punysshed in ye other worlde / the whiche take and pyl the chirches. The grete thynge that they wyll take ne make not the questyon. For those the whiche take lytell thynges ben theues & sacryleges & synne mortally / as those ye whiche take grete thȳges / but euery man in his egall porcyon shall be punysshed af∣ter his deserte. Vn̄ psal. Tu reddes vni∣cui{que} iuxta opera sua. &c. C. ¶Another example of he punycyon of a man the whiche denyed the syluer of the chirche the whiche hadde be lent vnto hym. lxxxii. THe dyscyple recyteth in his boke & sayth yt the deane of the chirche of Couioygne lente vnto his broder carnall fyue marke of golde of his chirche. And af¦ter the dethe of the sayd deane ye chanons demaunded ye sayd moneye. And for that yt they had no wytnes the sayd broder de∣nyed it & forswore hym. And afterwarde as he retourned in to his house he abode vnmouable & was dombe. Wherfore he a¦uowed in his herte that he sholde retorne where he was pariured / & that he sholde shewe his malyce / and yelde the sayd mo∣neye vnto the chirche. And by contrycion & penaunce was delyuered. All theues sa∣cryleges / & pariured persones sholde cr∣recte them & make restytucōn yf they con¦syder wele this example. For yf the sayd man were punysshed & his case manyfes¦ted / so shall it be to theues yf they repent them not / & that they ne done also good & true penaūce. D. ¶Another example of theues sacrile∣ges the whiche were punysshed for that yt they had stole the crosse. And the goodes of the chirche. lxxxii. THe dyscyple reciteth in his promp¦tuary and sayth ye theues broke a chirche foūded of saynt martyn. The whi¦che toke & stole of treasours & the crosse of the chirche the whiche was aourned with golde / with precyous stones / & with a por¦cyon of the very crosse of our lorde Ihesu And for that yt the sayd theues were ma∣ny some had the treasours. And two had the said crosse & fledde. Whan the bysshop herde the tydinges sent people after them & on al partes for to seche them. And tho∣se the whiche had the crosse ne myght goo but by the grete hye waye. And god alye∣ned theyr wyttes / & made them byde styll in a grete waye full of myre / & they wal∣ked & trode in the sayd myre wtout power to procede ony ferther. And those the whi¦che folowed them ouer passed them fyrst wtout thynkynge yt it were they. But whā they foūde theym in the mornynge there they had suspeccyon / & sayd in this wyse / Good men ye go not well wherfore go ye not by the hye waye. They answered we go wele / what haue ye to do wt our goȳge
Than the one of them sayd. I wene that they ben culpable / take we them. and they were asked of the thefte / they confessed it by condycyon that they sholde not deye / & they poynted vnto the sayd crosse the whi¦che was in the myre hydde / were ledde vn¦to the bysshop / & were lette go for the said promesse. But god the whiche punyssheth the synners anone after those theues bro∣ke another chirche / & were taken & hāged Hec cesarius dicit. E. ¶Another example of a relygyous of saynt gregorye the whiche was buryed in a donghyll for that yt he withelde thre pe∣ces of golde of the cōmunyte. lxxxii IT is wryten in the fourth boke of ye dyalogue. s. gre. how a monke of ye relygyous of saynt gregorye medecyn hid thre peces of golde / & kepte them as vnto his partyculeir without betakynge them vnto the communyte. And whan it came vnto his dethe he shewed where the sayd golde was hydde / he wepte this thynge & so deyed. And whan he was deed the said saynt gregorye for to shewe that he hadde gretely offended / & for ye example of other made to burye hym & the golde in a dong∣hyll / sayenge. Thy moneye be with the in perdycyon. Albeit after .xxx. dayes saynt gregorye cōmaunded one to synge masse for hym .xxx. dayes. And he dide it. And at the laste daye the sayd deed body appered vnto one of his brederne / the whiche hym demaūded of his case. He answered. I ha¦ue ben yll entreated tyll vnto this day but nowe am I wele. For I haue at this day receyued communyon. &c. This here is a grete example for all relygyous yt they ne sholde be propryetayres ne go agayne the vowe of pouerte / or yll shal come to them And yf the sayd relygyous had not hadde repentaunce / & yf he had not manyfested his synne he had be dampned / he was pu¦nysshed in purgatory by penaunce and by the masses yt were songe for hym he was delyuered. &c. F. ¶Another example how a marchaunt was poore whyles that his broder ye whi∣che was abbot toke vnto hym the goodes of the chirche. lxxxii SOme maysters hathe wryten this yt the dyscyple reciteth in his prom¦tuarye & sayeth that a monke was abbot of an abbay founded of saynt panthaleon The whiche abbot hadde a brother mar∣chaunt vnto whom he gaue many tymes of the moneye of his monastery for to en∣crease hym in marchaundyse. But ye sayd marchaunt lost all & yode vnto noughte / how be it that before that he had receyued the sayd money he was a good marchaūt And also he was ryght dylygent in his ca¦se. And after that many yeres he had mar¦chaunded in suche wyse of the sayd godes & that he loste all the sayd abbot sayd vn∣to his broder. Wherfore wastest yu soo thy substaūce vnto thy confusyon & myn. Vn¦to the whiche abbot he said. I lyue moche straytely / & kepe my marchaundyse dyly∣gently / but I can not tell what it ayleth / for my felawes prouffyte and I defayle. Than the sayd marchaunte aduysed hym & yode to confesse hym vnto a good & wy∣se preest / yt whiche tolde hym yt the money yt he had taken was theft by whiche al yo∣de to nought. And charged hym not to ta¦ke more ye good of the chirche / but that he marchaunded with so lytell as he hadde /
And that the halfe of the gayne he sholde gyue vnto the monasterye for to fulyl tyl he had restored. And that he shold lyue of the other halfe. And the marchaunt was obedyent & accomplysshed the sayd coun∣sayll. And in short tyme he became soo ry∣che that he restored all vnto ye sayd abbot And more ouer he became moche ryche / & for as moche as the sayd abbot had mer∣uaylle of the sayd restytucyon & of ye sayd rychesse of his brother him demaūded frō whens came the sayd rychesses. He answe¦red whan I toke ye substaunce of thy bre∣dern of relygyon yt thou gauest me I ne myghte nothynge gete / but was poore / & thou synned greuously in lyke wyse as I haue founde by these clerkes. And after yt I haue had horrour of the sayd thefte. I haue had haboundaunce of goodes. &c. by this example all relygyous sholde vnder∣stonde yt they offende to gyue vnto theyr frendes of the goodes of the chirche. The gyuers ben fraulded of theyr entencyon / for they ne haue gyuen ye sayd goodes for to be employed in suche wyse / yt is the sub¦staūce of the seruaūtes of god. And yf the∣re be resydue it sholde be gyuen agayn to the poores of Ihesu criste in lyke wyse as sayeth the scrypture. Bona ecclesiarū sūt bona pauperū. &c. G. ¶Another example how these relygy¦ous ne sholde gyue the goodes of the chir∣che vnto theyr frendes. lxxxii. IT is wryten in the lyfe of faders / yt a monke had a poore broder seculer vnto whome he ceased not to gyue hym / so yt he laboured not. And the more he ga∣ue hym the poorer he was. Than the sayd monke toke counsayll of a good fader the whiche coūsaylled hym yt he ne sholde gy∣ue hym no more / & that he sholde saye vn¦to him. My broder whan I had I gaue ye go yu now to labour / & of yt that thou shalt haue gyue vnto me / & al that yt he shal b¦ge vnto ye take it & gyue it vnto pylgrȳs / & good auncyentes & theym requyre that they praye for hym. The sayd monke dide this counsayll / & the sayd seculer yode he∣uely to laboure. And the fyrste daye that ye sayd seculer came vnto the monke he bro∣ught him halpens / the whiche gaue them as it is sayd. Afterwarde he broughte vn∣to hym of herbes & thre loues / the whiche dystrybute them. Thyrdly he brought vn∣to hym of vytaylles / & of wyne & fysshe. / Whan the sayd monke sawe it he meruay¦led / called the pores & fedde them. And de¦maunded of his broder yf he had ony mo∣re nede & that he wolde ayde hym. He an∣swered yt naye / & sayd vnto hym. All that thou gaue me consumed awaye / & nowe I take nothynge of the Ihabounde in al goodes that god sendeth me. Also these se¦culers shal not be ryche for to drawe vnto them the goodes of the chirche. H. ¶Another example of an holy man ye whiche gaue the whyppe vnto those that had taken awaye his hors. lxxxii SAynt gregorye sheweth in his dya¦logue yt as an holy man named ly¦bertyn was vpon his hors he met an host of men of warre yt keste hym to the erthe / & toke his hors to lede him awaye / and he sayd vnto them / take this whyppe for to make hym go the better / they departed & lepte vpon ye hors / gaue hym the sporres impetuously for to make hym to goo / but for to be shorte / they ne myght ferther go /
Soo they byleued that this thynge came vnto them for the rauyne that they hadde done vnto gods man / and yelded him his hors agayne. And afterwarde yode theyr waye lyghtly. &c. This example denoteth that the good lybertyn was ryght lyberall & pacyent to take vnto them the whyppe after that they had caste hym downe vn∣to the erthe & taken awaye his hors. And god shewed manyfestly vnto the pyllers that they had sȳned & offended. And that they ne sholde trouble ne pyl the people of the chirche where god them shal punysshe eternally yf they deye without correccyon and amendement. &c. I. ¶Another example how that theues sacryleges reuoked themself vnto penaū¦ce / and made restytucyon by the pacyen∣ce of an auncyent. lxxxii. IT is wryten in the promptuary of the dyscyple yt there came theues to the monastery of an aūcyent vnto whom they sayd. We are come to bere awaye all yt is in thy house. And he said / chyldren be¦re awaye what ye wyl. Than they toke al that they founde / & yode theyr waye. And the sayd auncyent founde a sacke the whi∣che apperteyned vnto theym / the whiche they had stolen / he ran after them & sayd vnto them. Chyldren bere away this yt ye haue forgoten in my house. Than the said theues were ameruayled of his pacyence reuoked them vnto penaunce / & restored to hym all his goodes. ¶Decime. A. ¶Examples to paye his dysmes. and fyrst example of a lorde the whiche retey∣ned the tenthe of his goodes that he gaue vnto his seruaunt. lxxxiii. MEn fynde by wrytynge that a gre¦te lorde was requyred of his ser∣uaunt to gyue hym of his godes. The whi¦che lorde gaue vnto hym by condycyon to reteyn / yt is to knowe / he gaue hym .x. kye x. shepe .x. geete. &c. & all by tenthes / Vnto whom he sayd. I gyue ye these goodes he∣re by suche condycyon yt I reteyne the .x. pyece euery yere. And also I wyll yt thou theym nourysshe in my pasture. Than he thanked the said lorde & toke them ioyous¦ly / & promysed in suche wyse to do it. And dyde it by two or thre yeres / but whan he was riche he gaue it wt yl wyl & of ye worst Than the sayd lorde made hym come be∣fore hym & demaūded why he had not gy¦uen vnto hym the tenthe of his goodes ye whiche he had gyuen him / & it was by the admonycyon of his wyfe. He answered yt it was by his proprecouetyse & not by his sayd wyfe. Than he requyred pardon and promysed satysfaccyon / & he it pardoned him. &c. By this lorde is vnderstonde god the whiche reteyneth the .x. partye of the goodes yt he maketh to come / & to growe vnto the as yu haste herde by ye scryptures. And by that yt he hathe payed with yl wyl denoteth vnkyndnes or couetyse. And by this yt he repented hym & promysed satys∣faccyon is to note yt those the whiche haue yll payed theyr dysmes shold repent them & reknowlege theyr faute: & they shold ma¦ke satysfaccyon / & they shall haue pardon of god. Vnde ezechielis .xviii. Si aūt im∣pius egerit penitenciā ab oībus peccatis q̄ operat{us} ē. &c. vita viuet et nō morietur.
B. ¶Another example of a knight ye whi¦che dysmed wele and his vyne bare fruy∣te two tymes in the yere. lxxxiii MEn fynde by wrytynge this ye whi¦che foloweth how ye dyscyple recy¦teth in his promptuarye & sayeth yt there was a knyght replenysshed wt soo moche of vertues & of Iustyce yt in payenge hys dysmes he had all good condycyons plea∣saūtes vnto god / for he them payed with∣out taryenge / wtout malyce / & of the best / He had a vyne that bare agayne from ye∣re to yere aboute ten pypes of wyne. And it befel one yere more of the dyspensacion of god than of the attempraunce of ye ayre after that the wyne was gadred there ne was but one onely pype of wyne. And as the sayd knyght had herde yt he sayd vnto his seruaunt. That the whiche was myn & that I sholde lyue wtall of the vyne god hathe taken fro me. And I wyll not take awaye his porcyon. Goo & gyue vnto the preest this pype of wyne for his dysme. & it was done. And in that tyme as the co∣syn germayne of the sayd knyghte and a preest past by the said vyne ye whiche was all full of grapes / yode vnto the knyght / & repreued hym of his neclygence. Wherfo∣re haue not you gadered wyne. He answe¦red & sayd / it is lately gadered. And ye said preest sayd that it was replenysshed with fruytes. Than yode men to se it / and they foūde more grapes and better than euer they had done before. And therfore it is a good thȳge to paye wele his dismes. The sayd knyght was lawful and iuste to pay wele that that he sholde in obeynge vnto god. Also he ne was vnkynd / for he rekno¦leged the good ye god to hym hadde done. And he was moche lyberall to gyue vnto god ye sayd pype of wyne. And god ye whi∣che is the rewarder of ye goode dedes that men do vnto hym he hym restoreth / and sheweth that he hathe done thynge digne of prayse and of retrybucyon. C. ¶Another example of a symple man the whiche dysmed wele / & dyd myracle. IT is wryten in the collocucyons of the faders in lyke wyse as recyteth the dyscyple & sayeth that after that a ho∣ly abbot named iohan hadde done many myracles there was brought vnto hym a man the whiche had the deuyl in the body And the sayd Iohan was strongly requy¦red of many that he sholde chase ye deuyll from the sayd man. And for to be shorte yt sayd Iohan cōmaunded vnto the deuyll from god that he sholde go oute. The whi¦che deuyll answered that he wolde not / & that he ne sholde go out for hym. And vpō his wordes there arryued a goode symple man yll clothed the whiche bare his tythe vnto the preest the whiche herde how the deuyll answered that he ne sholde go oute for the sayd abbot / yt whiche symple man sayd to the deuyll. And wherfore ne goest thou oute (so thou shalt) I cōmaunde the from god that thou go oute. Than the de∣uyll yode oute the whiche sayd that he ne was gone forthe for the sayd Iohan / but yt he was constrayned by god to go forthe for the bounte of the sayd symple man. & than the good abbot was a meruaylled ye whiche demaūded of the symple man of what lyfe he was. And how be it yt he dre∣we backe to tell it / he answerd yt he payed well his tythes incontynent that they we¦re deu. And them put vnto prouffyte and payed them Ioyously of the beste / and ba¦re them vnto the person or vnto ye vycayr
I go vnto the chirche sayd he euery daye And yf I maye there I here euery daye masse. I kepe wele the feestes & the com∣maundementes of god / at the begȳnyng of my yonge aege I had wyll to be rely∣gyous & for that that my fader hadde no more chyldren but me / they ne wolde that I were relygyous to thende that to posse¦de theyr herytage I obeyed vnto them & they maried me vnto a good woman / we kepe wele our maryage togyder. And yf she deyed I haue yet the wyll to be relygy¦ous / it is not yet chaunged. There is the li¦fe that I am of. Than the sayd Iohan fel on knees before hym and requyred hym yt he wolde praye for him. &c. In this exam¦ple is to be noted yt a good symple man la¦bourer is somtyme more nerer vnto god & more holy persone digne to do myracles than ne ben ye grete bysshoppes doctours & prelates. Whan the daye of Iugement shall come god ne shall demaunde hast yu be doctour or mayster in suche scyence or in suche / but he shall demaunde hast thou done ye werkes of mercy / hast thou payed thy dysmes / hast thou obeyed vnto ye chir∣che. &c. D. ¶Another example of those the whi∣che take of dysmes. lxxxiii MEn fynde by wrytynge how saint renobert the whiche was ye secon∣de bysshop of bayeux sawe one tyme that a man toke a iauel of corne out of a shefe of dysme for to gyue it vnto his hors / and saynt renobert badde hym leue it / but he wolde not / wherfore his hors enraged. &c ¶Tenatitas. A. ¶Other examples of people to moche holdynge & vnmercyfull. And fyrst exam∣ple of the cursed ryche man. lxxxiiii. IT is wryten in the .xi. chapytre of the gospelles of saȳt luc yt ther was a ryche man clothed wt purple & with pre∣cyous vestymentes / yt whiche ete & dran∣ke euery daye delycyously. And ther was a lazar full of woundes ye whiche let hym before the yate of ye sayd ryche / whiche de¦maunded the crōmes yt fell from his table but he gaue hȳ none but set dogges on hȳ & they lycked his fete. So he deyed and ye ryche man also / the poore man wente to heuen & the ryche man to helle. The yll ry¦che lyft vp his eyen as he was in torment & sawe Abraham a ferre of & the lepre in his bosome. He made two requestes of ye whiche he was denyed. The fyrst was of one droppe of water. The seconde to goo tell vnto his brederne yt they myghte cor∣recte them. &c. This ryche man is an exā¦ple vnto all cursed ryche men the whiche vse yll of theyr rychesses / & this poore is ex¦ample of all good poores yt haue pacyence in aduersite. The riche was dampned for many thynges pryncypally for foure. The fyrste is bycause he was wtout mercy / for he lete ye poore deye for hongre at his gate Cupiēs saturari de micis q̄ cadebant de mēsa diuitis. And therfore god sent hym in to ye fyre of hell wtout pite / & shall say to hym at ye daye of Iugement. I haue had hongre & thurst & thou hast not gyuen me mete nor drynke. Et ideo. Ite maledicu ī ignē eternū. math .xv. The seconde for by∣cause he appetyted the honours of ye worl¦de. And he was proude in herte. And ther∣fore the gospel sayeth sygnantly yt he was clothed in purple & with precyous vesty∣mentes the whiche denoteth vaynglorye.
Induebatur pupura et bysso. The thyrde that he was moche lykorous and yt he nou∣rysshed his bely with metes made dylyca∣tyuely the whiche draweth vnto lechery / & maketh the man vnmercyfull. And therfo¦re sayth the gospell. Expulebatur cotidie splendide. He lyued after the wyll of the bo¦dy the whiche ledeth vnto dampnacyō. Vn̄ ad roma. viii. Si scdm carnem vixeritis mo¦nemini. He ne lyued in this worlde bu .xl. yeres to lyue delyciously / and he is in ye fyre of hell fro the tyme of Moyses two. M. ye¦res past in so grete pouerte yt he ne myght haue one droppe of water / so was it vnto hym a ryght cursed market from ye kechyn The fourth is that he declyned not frome euyll wordes the whiche comynly he spake in dynynge. And therfore sygnauntly he playned that he was tourmented in the tō¦gue whan he demaunded a droppe of wa¦ter. What prouffyted vnto that man ye ry∣chesses / honoures / and meetes whan he is dampned. The rychesses delyuereth hym not from dethe. The metes kepeth not his body from wormes / and the honours from stynke. Vnde bernard{us}. O diuites quid {pro}∣sant vobis diuitie / quid epule / quid honores diuitie non liberabunt vos a morte / epule a verme / honores a fetore. ¶Et poeta dicit. Quid tūc the sauri / qid aceru{us} {pro}derit auri Quando pctōres / mittuntur in inferiores Malet preterite / {quod} in omni tempore vite. Pauper vixisset / {quam} diuitias habuisset. Et math .xvi. Quid prodest homini si mundū vniuersum lucretur / anime vero sue detri∣mentum patiatur. This saued begger is ye example of all good poore folke. He is blys∣sed in as moche as he had pacyēce in pouer¦te. Vn̄ luce. vi Beati pauperes quia vestrū est regnum dei. Also he is blyssed in as mo¦che as he had pacience in honger and thurst whan he coueyted to haue of the crommes Vnde luce. vi. Beati qui esuritis qr satura bimini. Et apoca .vii. Non esuriēt ne{que} s∣tient amplius. Also he had not the honours of the ryche / but was soo abiect and dysho∣noured that men sette at hym the dogges the whiche dyde vnto hym noo harme but lycked his sores. Legit{ur} math .v. Btīeritis cum maledixerint vobis homines. &c. Also he had no helthe as the ryche had but was seke / full of sores / and in sekenes he had pa∣cyence / and by that was he blyssed. Vn̄ ma. v. Beati pacifici qm̄ filii dei vocabuntur. Also he endured pacyently hete & colde and was euyll lodged and lay before the gate of the ryche. And he shall neuer haue hete ne colde. Vn̄ apoc. vii. Non cadet super illos sol / ne{que} vllus estus. &c. And the ryche lyft vp his eyen as he was in tourmentes / and sawe and knewe the bosome of Abraham & the lazer. The mayster of the sentences ex∣poundeth this in expressynge that the dam¦pned seeth some maner the saued in glory / and shall se tyll the day of Iugement / to ye ende that they be the more tourmented to haue loste the Ioyes of paradyse. And after the Iugement they shall se nothynge. And in this that Abraham and the lepre sawe & knewe the ryche in tourments is to vnder¦stande yt the saued seeth the dampned in hel and shall se them them pardurably / that is also after the Iugement of god to thende yt they haue the more greter Ioy that they ha¦ue auoyded the sayd tourmentes. And the riche the whiche demaunded one droppe of water was denyed it. And Abraham sayd vnto hym. Inter nos & vos chaos magnū firmatū est. To bere vnto the a droppe of water it may not be done / for betwene you and vs there is grete confusyon and dyscor¦de. Ye the whiche ben euer in tourmentes may not come vnto vs. Vnde psal. Spūs vadens et non radiens. And we may not go vnto you / for we ben confermed in ye Iu¦styce that god hath made that we may ne∣uer
haue pyte ne compassyon of one damp¦ned. Vn̄ dauid ī psal. Letabit{ur} iustus cum viderit vindictā. Yf the saued were sory of th dampnacyon of theyr frendes they shol¦de not haue parfyte Ioye / and sholde go a∣gaynst the wyll of god. And after the ryche requyred that the lepre myght goo in to the hous of his fader to tell to his fyue bredren that he was in tourments / & that they shol¦de do penaunce of drede yt they yode not wt hym in paynes. Abraham denyed it & sayd vnto hym that they had Moyses & other {pro}¦phetes / and that they myght here them yf they wolde. And the ryche sayd. A fader A∣braham yf one of the deed arose they sholde beleue more sooner. And Abraham sayd. Yf they wyll not here the quycke they shal not here the deed. B. ¶Another example of dur Durant the whiche lyued wtout hauynge pyte nor mercy of the poore people. lxxxiiiii IT is wryten in speculo hystoriali of a mā the whiche was called du¦rant yt was not surnamed. For he was harde to do well / in especyall to gyue vnto the poore / & also too excercyse the werkes of mercy. And his wy¦fe was vnto the contrary / for she was mo¦che pytefull / a gyuer of almes / and mercy∣full. Whan the poore folke demaunded al∣messe of the sayd Durant / ryght vylanous¦ly he chased them away. And it befell on a tyme that our lorde came vnto hym to de∣maunde almesse in the symylytude of a po∣re man. And the sayd Durant toke a mace wenynge for to haue smyten hym. Thā he wyst not where he became / quia euanuit / but he abode not vnpunysshed. For incon∣tynent grete multytude of deuylles in the fourme of blacke moryens came vnto hym & bare hym away in body and in soule ho∣sed and cladde / and made hym to passe the rowe a lytell partycyon of the wal wt grete tourment. And his wyfe seynge yt was full of drede / & in tremblynge as a lefe ranne to tell it vnto her neyghbours. And ye seruaū¦tes and children seynge theyr moder & may stresse renne in suche wyse they ranne after her. And incontynent as they were depar∣ted / fyre / lyghtnynge / tempest / and punyci¦on descended in the house the whiche was grete as a palays / and cōfounded in to dep¦nes his goodes and the sayd hous excepte yt the portayle before the gate the whiche abo¦de in wytnes of that thynge. And ye deuyl∣les came and wrote vpon the portayle the wordes the whiche folowe. Here was the mancyon of dur Durant / whyles that he was lyuynge. Of al wretches moost harde and skante / vnto the poore in gyuinge. Of theyr nede he gaue no charge. Wherfore in hell is now his dwellynge / in {per}petuall tour¦mēt and rage. Vnto that purpose saynt Ia¦mes sayth that the Iugement without mer¦cy shall be done vnto hym the whiche dothe no mercy. Vn̄ iacobi .ii. Iuditia sine miseri¦cordia fiet illi qui non fecerit misericordiaz. Whan god hathe gyuen haboundaunce of worldly godes vnto ony persone / and that he is so vnkynde yt he wyll gyue nothynge vnto the poore the whiche demaundeth in ye name of god / a mā sholde knowe that god hathe suche a man in hate. And reputeth yt man denyeth it vnto hymselfe / as sayth ye gospell of mathew .xxv. Quod vni ex mini¦mis meis non fecistis / nec michi fecistis. Whan a mayster sendeth to demaūde ony thynge by his seruaunt and yt he is denyed the sayd mayster reputeth that hym self is denyed. In lykewyse whan ye sayd Durāt denyed the poore yt axed in the name of god he denyed god. And the euyll yt he dyde vn∣to them god reputed as done vnto hȳselfe. And for as moche as he was vnkynde and
without mercy he had well deserued to ha¦ue punycyon corporel / and that yt is moche wors damnacyon eternall. So it appereth that he loste his body / his goodes / and his soule. &c. C. ¶Another example of a ryche man vn∣mercyfull yt fledde in ye tyme of famyne of drede to gyue al messe vnto the poore peop.le lxxxiiii. THe dyscyple recyteth in his ser∣mens this the whiche foloweth thwehiche is also wryten in o∣ther bokes and sayth that there was a ryche man wtout pyte & mercy the whiche in the tyme of famyne & of dethe fledde in to an heritage that he had by a water syde. And it was for to auoyde the clamour of the poores the whiche hym requyred. And the sayd poores folowed hȳ And for that yt they demaunded almes he sayd. I shall not endure wt these dogges / & made his table behynde a chambre on ye sy∣de from whens he ne myght here theyr cla¦mour. And thyder came incontynent an ar¦med man the whiche smote at the gate sa∣ynge. I am the messager of god / & I wol∣de speke with your mayster. And a seruaūt sayd by the commaundemēt of his mayster yt he was not there. He answered thou lyest He is gone vnto suche a chambre to thende that he here not the clamoures of ye poores And now fro the party of our lorde I cyte hym that he appere before god / and that he come to yelde reason of all the goodes tem∣porelles yt vnto hym hath be taken. The ry¦che man was hastely seke vnto the dethe / than his frendes & parentes came to vysy∣te hym & to moue hym vnto penaunce & cō¦fessyon / the whiche he wolde not here / and sayd vnto them. I am cyted vnto the Iuge¦ment of god / vnto whome I haue appered and am there Iuged vnto ye dethe eternall without ony hope of helthe For in lykewy¦se as I ne haue excercysed mercy ne had cō¦passyon on the poores of Ihesu cryst / also wtout ony mercy am I sentenced / and so ye accursed deyed / & lost his lyfe / his bdy / his goodes and his soule. D. ¶Another example how a monke saw ryche men hāged in ye fyre of hell. lxxxiiii IT is wryten in the dyalogue of saynt Gregory that a monke desi¦red to go in to an hermytage / & before that he demaunded lycēce to go thyder he was seke & deyed and was ledde in to hell / but anone he was brought agayne & put in to his body. And he remembred hym to haue seen the tour∣mentes of helle and innombrable places full of fyre. And within those flambes of fy¦re he sawe some ryche men hanged / ye whi∣che he had seen & knowen in his countree / & were strōgely tourmented. And as he was ledde to be put within the sayd fyre there a ryued an aungell fro whome proceded gre¦te clerenes the whiche defended yt he ne we∣re put in the fyre. The whiche sayd vnto hȳ retorne in to thy body and take good hede wysely from hensforthe whyles thou lyuest that yu come not hyder. After this voyce he retourned in to his body / & lytell and lytell came in to conualescence. And afterwarde put hym in so moche fastynges / wakinges oraysons / & good operacyons ye meruayle it was / for the tourmentes yt he had seen yt the synners sustayne. &c. ¶This example sholde moue cursed ryche men to restore ye thynges euyll goten. &c. E. ¶Example how two men were lepres for yt they dyspysed lepres. lxxxiiii.
THe dyscyple recyteth in ye boke of sermons that there was a preste the whiche had in so gre∣te horrour the lepres yt he herde theyr cōfessyon through a wall & himselfe was lepre. ¶Also it is wryten of a seruaunt the whiche had in soo grete hor∣roure the lepres that he wolde not bere thē ne to gyue the almesse / and he hymselfe be∣came lepre. ¶Simonia. A. ¶Examples of people the whiche haue ben symonyakes. And fyrst example of Symon magus. lxxxv IT is wryten in the dede of the ap¦postles yt the fals and dysloyal sy¦mon magus offred grete somme of money vnto the apostles we∣nynge by yt to gete the grace of ye holy goost yt he sawe in them. And vndersto¦de yt yf he myght haue ye grace that he shol∣de sell it vnto other & sholde receyue grete fynaunces. But in fygure of all those the whiche selleth or byeth thȳges spyrytualles he & his money were accursed of god by the mouthe of saynt Peter. Vn̄ actuū .vii. Pe¦cunia tua tecum sit in perditiōe. That is to say. Thy money be wt the in perdicion. And for yt he was the fyrst in ye newe testament yt wolde bye spyrytuall thynges this espece of theft is named in al holy chirche symony for bycause of ye cursed symon fygure of all the dampned symonyakes. B. ¶Another example of the punycyon of Gyezy yt was symonyake. lxxxv. IT is wryten .iiii. regū .v. ca. how the prophete Helyseus gaue helthe of the sekenes of lepry to a ryche mā named Naa¦man the whiche offred grete gyftes vnto ye sayd prophete after yt he was hole. But for none erthly thynge he wolde nothynge ta∣ke. Also he knewe yt it was symony to sell ye grace of the holy goost. And the dyscyple of the sayd prophete named Giezy was couey¦tous & ranne after Naaman of whome he demaunded money & clothinge. And for to be shorte he toke two talentes of syluer / & two vestementes for ye grace yt his mayster had done to hym. The whiche thynge dys∣pleased vnto god & his mayster. And whan the euentyde came ye sayd prophete demaū¦ded of Giezy fro whens he came. He answe¦red. Thy seruaunt hath ben nowhere. And the {pro}phete sayd. My hert was that yu were gone after Naaman & that thou hast takē syluer & clothes for to bye oxen & shepe / and for to haue seruauntes & maydens. &c. For as moche as yu hast done this thinge ye lepry of Naanam shal drawe to the & to thy sede in perdurabylyte. Lepra naamā tibi adhe¦reat et semini tuo in sēpiternū. And so was it done. For he was incontynent mesel / & so he was punysshed for his symony. ¶This example shold wtdrawe eche persone to bye or sell spyrytuall thynges / for it is a grete synne yt taryeth not vnpunysshed. C. ¶Another example of the symonyake Hieroboam the whiche solde bysshopry∣ches. lxxxv IT is wryten .iii. regū .xiii. ca. how kinge Hieroboam toke money for to constytute ye persones to be so∣uerayne bysshoppes. Also it was ydolatry and for that / yt he was a symonyary & a grete synner for these cau∣ses he deyed myscheuyously and he and all his was put doune / degraded / and effaced Vn̄ .iii. regū .xiii. Quicū{que} eī volebat imple¦bat manū hieroboā / & fiebat sacerdos excel¦lorum
et {pro}pter hāc causā peccauit domus hieroboā: et euersa est et deleta de superficie terre. &c. Yf ye vendycyon of the prestehode of ydolles was in suche wise venged of god that the sayd Hieroboam was so punisshed & put doune as it is sayd / it foloweth wel yt they the whiche selleth the true prestehode shall be cruelly punysshed / for suche people ben theues. Vn̄. iohan. x. Qui nō intrat per hostiū ī ouile ouiū / sed ascēdit aliūde ille fur et et latro. Also they ben sacryleges. For ye thefte yt they done is by vendicyon of holy thinges. Sacrilegiū dicit{ur} quasi sacrūledēs vel sacrū violās. It shold be a defe thīge to say yt he is sacrylege that steleth a chalyce & yt he is none that steleth the hole chirche. Al¦so he that selleth a chyrche is a thefe / symo∣nyake & sacrylege / wherby he commytteth grete synne. Vnto whome it behoueth sa∣tysfaccyon vnto hym yt is culpable / & that desyreth to be saued. D. ¶Another example how kȳge Anthio¦chus was symonyake and proude ouer puyssaunce humayne. lxxxv. IT is wryten in ye .iiii. chapytre of the seconde boke of Machabees / how the kynge Anthiochus solde vnto Ialon the dygnyte to be so∣uerayne bysshop / & also yll came vnto hym. He was also proude and lyft vp ouer puyssaunce humayne / as it is wryten in the .xvi. cha. of ye sayd Machabees. And he was punysshed as he yode he and his army in grete pryde & furour to sle them of Iherusalem / god vnto hym sent a cruell & ryght stynkynge sekenes in the guttes so yt he was borne in a lytter / and from that fell in to puddle of myre lyenge on ye erthe. Also he was so stynkynge yt his seruauntes and his hoost were sore greued / & hymselfe ne myght endure his owne stȳke. Also he was so seke yt maugre in his heed he meked hȳ and than deyed in dyspayre. E. ¶Another example of a man dampd yt had many benyfyces. lxxxv. SOme maysters wryteth this the whiche foloweth how ye dis¦cyple reciteth in the boke of his promptuarye and sayeth that one of ye grete maysters of Pa¦rys named in scyence was vysyted of ye bys¦shop of paris and admonested at the houre of his dethe yt he sholde leue & resygne ma∣ny benyfyces that he had vnlefully / & that he sholde holde alonely one. And he abode in his opynyon full of errour & sayd. I shal assay yf ony may be saued with many bene∣fyces. After his dethe he appered vnto that bysshop at the houre of tyerce as he was in orayson to praye vnto god. And whan the sayd bysshop knewe yt it was the sayd deed body he asked hym how it was wt hym. He answered. I am dampned eternally wtout ony remyssyon. And he demaunded ye cause wherfore. He answered for elacyon. And ye bysshop axed hym of the sayd opynyon. He answered that the pluralyte of his benefy∣ces helped hym not / but noyed hym. And ye sayd dampned him asked yf there were mo persones lyuynge in ye worlde. The bisshop answered / Why demaundest yu that / ye whi¦che arte so grete a clerke that thou wenest yt the worlde is so sone fynysshed. He answe¦red. Certaynly syth yt I deyed there is dys¦cended in to hell so grete multytude of sou∣les dampned that I wolde skantly beleue yt there had ben so many lyuynge in ye worl¦de. &c. Vnto this purpose ye prophete Ysaie sayth / that at the day of Iugement fewe of the people shall be saued in regarde of al sor¦tes of the yll yt shall be dampned. And gy∣ueth this symylytude of raysyns in ye tyme
of theyr rypenesse and of olyues in ye tyme yt they ben gadred. Whan the grapes and ye olyues haue ben assembled & gadered there y abydeth same lytel thynge in the vynes and olyues forgoten & lefte. And this lytell the whiche there abydeth is to compare by symylytude vnto the saued / and the grete multytude of the raysyns gadered vnto ye dampned. Vnderstande well this the whi∣che is here wryten. Ysaie .xxiiii. Erunt in medio terre in medio pplorum quo modo si pauce oliue q̄ remāserūt excutiant{ur} ex olera et racēm cū fuerit finita vīdemia / huscm pau¦ci boni saluati lenabūt vocē suā at{que} lauda∣būt cū glorificatus fuerit dn̄s. &c. ¶This man dampned yt had soo many benefyces denoteth yt the couetyse of godes & honour of the worlde deceyueth & dampneth yt peo¦ple of ye chyrche. Or cupiditas et radix oīm malorū .i. ad thy .vi. ca. F. ¶Another example that none ought to be constytute in benefyce by prayers car¦nalles. lxxxv. MEn fynde by wrynge of anab¦bot whan he was in his dethe bedde he made all his monkes to come before hȳ. Vnto who∣me he requyred yt whā he shol∣de be deed yt they shold chuse his neuew for to be abbot after hym. The whiche was do¦ne. And as ye newe abbot walked in his gar¦dyn by a well syde he herde a voyce yt com∣playned ruthefully. And the sayd yonge ab¦bot coniured the sayd voyce in the name of god yt he sholde tell hym what he was. He answered. I am the soule of thyn vncle yt am here brent & broyled mestemably in this fountayne / for that yt I haue procured car¦nally yt thou were abbot after me. To who¦me the neuew sayd How may this be that yu brennest in a well so colde. Than the voyce sayd. Go in to the chyrche & fetche ye candel∣styckes of copre & cast theym in to this well and yu shalte se how I am brente. Than he dyde it / and incontynent ye sayd candelstyc¦kes were molten as waxe within the fyre. And whan the sayd yonge abbot sawe that he called all the monkes & renounced vnto the dygnyte & croyse. / & afterwarde ye sayd voyce was no more herde. ¶By this exam¦ple a man sholde vnderstande that those yt whiche entreth so in benefyces entreth not not by the dore / that is Ihesu cryst as before is declared. Vnde iohan .x. Qui non intrat per hostium in ouile ouium sed ascender ali unde ille fur est et latro. G. ¶Another example how a man seculer sholde not do the offyce of the preste in ye chyrche. lxxxv. IT is wryten in the .xxv. chapytre of the seconde boke of paralipo∣menon how ye kynge Ozyas lyft vp in pryde whan he was in puys¦saunce regal / and dyspraysed his god. Morouer he presumed to be worthy & to do the offyce of prestes. And he entred in to the temple of god and toke the ensencer for to do the offyce of a preste after as ye cu¦stome was to do honour vnto god. And the mayster of the prestes named Azarias en∣tred in to the temple after wt grete multy∣tude of prestes strōge. The whiche resysted agaynst the sayd kynge / vnto whome they sayd that it was not his offyce to do suche thynge. Vn̄ .ii. pa. xxvi. Nō est tui officu vt adoleas incensū dn̄o / sed est sacerdotū qui consecrati sūt ad huiusmodi misteriū / egre∣dere de sctūario ne contēpseris / qr nō repu∣tabit{ur} tibi ingliam hoc a dn̄o deo. And for as moche as the prestes reprehended the kȳge therof / he thretened them in grete yre. And
incontynent before the prestes in ye temple he was smyten wt a lepry / & was soo all his lyfe / & dwelled in an hous separated from all other / where he deyed a roten lepre. And for the sayd cause he was put out of the tem¦ple. &c. ¶By this example & after scryptu∣re the seculer people sholde not presume to do ye offyce of a preste / nor medle to gouer∣ne the goosly thynges ne the chyrche. For suche thynges dyspleaseth god. H. ¶Another example in Alchin{us} / how lor¦des sholde not cōstytute people of yl lyfe to be benefyced. lxxxv. IT is wryten in the .vii. cha. of the fyrst boke of Machabees how kȳ¦ge Demetrius consiytuted in so∣uerayne preste / yt is bysshop a yll man warryour named Alchinus the whiche dyde many euylles / & also he dy¦ed mischeuously / and he reygned not longe in his bysshopryche / after yt he had of eccysy¦ons he began to dystroy the operacyons of prophetes. And incontynent he was strykē of dyuyne punycyon & cursed sekenes / lost his speche & deyed fouly / as it is wryten in the foresayd boke. Vn̄ .i. macha. ix. Prece∣pit Alchinus destrui dom{us} sancte iterioris et destrua o{per}a propheta{rum} & capit destruere Intempore illo {per}cussus est alchinus & impe¦dita sūt opera illi{us} et obclusū est os ei{us} et dis¦solutus ē paralisi: nec vltra potuit loqui ver¦bū et motuus est cū tormento magna. &c. Alchinus is interpreted / luctus / wepynge / For they the whiche sēblably entren in to be¦nefyces sholde wepe theyr synne by repen∣taunce. For they entre not by ye dore yt is Ie¦su cryst. Nō intrēt per hostiū in ouile ouiū sed ascendut aliunde / et ideo non saluabun¦tur. &c. I. ¶Another example of a man the which was bysshop vniustly / and he deyed of a sodayne dethe. lxxxv SOme maysters wryteth this the whiche foloweth how ye dis¦cyple reciteth in the boke of his promptuarye & sayeth yt there was an archedeaken yt couey∣ted the bysshopryche / & layde in wayte vp¦on his bysshop a good man how he myght slee him. And the bysshop had of custome to go oft tymes to matynes / & went before ye other for to grete our lady / & he entred by a gate. The cursed archedeaken put a grete stone vpon yt sayd gate. And whan the bys¦shop came as he had of custome and yt he o∣pened ye gate ye stone fell on his heed & bray¦ned hym. And the archedeaken wt grete la∣bour obteyned ye bysshopryche. Whan yt he was confermed & that he made his dynera prȳce serued before hȳ at ye table knelynge. And sodeynly the sayd prynce was rauys∣shed before the chayre of ye souerayne Iuge And he sawe our blyssed lady wt grete mul∣tytude of sayntes & of aungelles bryngȳge ye sayd deed bysshop / & brought his brayne in theyr hondes. And ye blyssed virgyn sayd My right dere sone I shewe to the / ye blode broken & the brayne of this bysshop my frē¦de yt the prodytour hath shed wyllyngly to obtayne ye bysshopryche. Our lorde answe∣red. Who shall I sende to cyte ye sayd prody¦tour / & who shall go. Than the blyssed vyr¦gyn sayd. Here is his seruaūt. Vnto whom our lorde commaūded on payne of dethe yt he sholde cyte his lorde personally to come to answere of so horyble crime. He retorned streyght wepynge / & tremblynge / & keste ye keruynge knyfe doune yt he helde / & wepte sore. He was prayed of the bysshop & other for to tell ye cause / & so he dyde. And cyted ye bysshop as he was charged. And after that
he had brought forthe the wordes / the bys∣shop was smyten incontynent of sodayne dethe & deyed mischeuously before them al. By this example a man may vnderstande that he yt sleeth his neyghbour iniustly is ho¦mycide of his owne soule. For he it dāpneth & byndeth vnto punycyon eternall. Yf the sayd archedeaken had not slayne the sayd bysshop he had not deyed in suche wyse / & he had not be borne in suche wyse in to per∣dycyon. He wened to clymbe hye / but he fel anone. He that clȳbeth hygher than he shol¦de / he shall descende more sooner than he wolde. &c. K. ¶Another example how a chanon was accused of the patron of ye chyrche. lxxxv. MEn fynde in wrytynge this ye whiche foloweth how the dys¦cyple recyteth in his promptu¦ary and sayth that in a nyght it semed to a chanon that god had set hȳ in Iugement & that all ye worlde was called before hym for to receyue euery man after his merytes. He sawe also that euery of them ledde wt hym some saynt vn¦to whome they had moost serued to be ad∣uocate towarde the hye Iuge. And this cha¦non thought yt he wolde pray that saynt of whome he had be chanon / & that he had ser¦ued in syngynge & redynge / & that he shol∣de go in Iugement with hym before Ihesu cryst to thende yt he prayed for hym in she∣wynge hym of his seruyce. That saynt an∣swered / I shall goo with the wt good wyll. And he toke another wt hȳ as for wytnesse They came vnto Iugement togiders. And whan they were before god the saynt sayd. Lorde I requyre Iugement of this vyle le¦chour yt by .xxx. yeres & more hath eten and dronken his prebēde of my chyrche / & hath dysposed his tyme lecherously & fouly / and one onely day hath not ended his houres as he ought to do. He here is wytnesse of this thynge. Ihesu cryst answered. Take and bynde hym hande & fote and caste hym in to hell. The chanon awoke as yf he had be in a grete slepe / and wende for to haue ben than in hell. And he sayd vnto that saynt. My lorde take your prebende / for of it I wyll ete no more. For this vysion he conuer¦ted hym / entred in to relygyon / and saued his soule. &c. ¶By this example people be∣nefyced may vnderstande yt yf they vse yll the goodes of the chyrche they shal answer before god. And better it is to be abiecte in this worlde and to lyue poorely than after the dethe to lese paradyse & to be dampned. L. ¶Another example how a conuers yt wolde haue ben bysshop by ye induccyon of the deuyll / and he stale an hors & was hanged. lxxxv. CAsarius dicit. It is writen how a monke conuers had lerned so strongly the lettres yt he coude rede the texte. And by the occa∣syon of this thinge was wode & made to wryte secretely lytell bokes decep∣tyues / & began to delyte hȳ in ye vyce of pro¦pryete. And as that study was defended to the sayd conuers for the loue of lernyng he ranne in apostasy / and prouffyted lytel for the aege. Afterwarde he was moeued vnto penaunce & came agayne in to the monaste¦ry. And the deuyl toke hym mater for to de¦ceyue hym. For now he went vnto ye scole to thende yt he were a scoler / now he retor∣ned to the monastery / & appered to hȳ in ly¦kenes of an aungell / & sayd to hym. Lerne fast / for it is dyffyned of god yt yu be bysshop of such a place. And ye vnhappy fole euaded not his fraude / hoped in hȳ to renue ye aun¦cyent myracles. What more. On a daye he
appered vnto the conuers in clere voyce & Ioyous face & sayd vnto hym / suche a bys∣shop is deed this day / haste the go in to the cyte in the whiche thou art predestynate of god to be pastour / his coūceyle he ne might chaunge. Incontynent the vnhappy yode our secretely of ye monastery & was lodged in the hous of an honest preste. And to then¦de that he were put in his syege gloryously he rose vp before the day and stale a ryght good horse from his hoost / lepte vpon hym & yode his way. In ye mornynge ye houshol¦de knewe the domage & folowed the appo∣state. They toke hym & put hym in Iuge∣ment & was drawen with his theft / and by sentence condampned. Not to be in ye chay¦re as a bysshop / but he mounted vnto the galowes / and there was hanged as a thefe Take hede vnto what ende the promesse of the deuyll tendeth. &c. ¶By this example a man may vnderstande that one ought to kepe hym to be deceyued of temptacyons / decepcyons / & lesynges of the deuyll. For yt that ye sayd conuers kept hym not & wende to be bysshop he was hanged / & yt wors is in way of dampnacyon. ¶Vsura. A. ¶Examples of people vsurers. And fyr¦ste example of the punycyon & dampna¦cyō of an auarycious vsurer / out of who¦se bely proceded a tree. lxxxvi. MEn fynde by wrytinge this yt whiche foloweth how the dys¦cyple recyteth in the boke of his promptuary and sayeth yt a riche auarycyous vsurer ga¦te moche good vniustly / & for yt he was dā∣pned / as it was shewed vnto a man yt was rauysshed. Quasi ī extasi. yt sawe many tor¦mentes in hell / & there was yt sayd vsurer prosterned & stretched alowe / & from his be¦ly proceded an hye tree full of braunches / wheron hynge an horyble sorte of men and women. And it was tolde to the sayd rays¦shed man yt the sayd vsurer fro whom pro¦ceded the tree was an auarycyous / & they the whiche hanged were of his housholde / and of his kynne the whiche folowed hym in syn̄e / example / counceyle▪ & admonycōn And the whiche posseded after hym yt thyn¦ges yll goten wtout beynge in wyll to yelde them ne to leue them. &c. ¶This example denoteth that it is grete peryll to gyue go∣des or herytages vniustly. For the geters & posseders go vnto dāpnacyon yf they deye Impenytentes wtout beynge in wyll to re∣store them. B. ¶Another example how an vsurer that wolde not restore cryed at his dethe yt he brent & broyled. lxxxvi. IT it is wryten in the somme of pe¦naunce how an vsurer was war∣ned at his dethe to make restytuci¦on. And he answered yt he wolde not / and yt his wyfe and his chyl∣dren had nede / & therfore he wolde not re∣store. The preste wolde not gyue hym yt bo¦dy of our lorde and bare it agayne. Than by the admonycyon of his frendes for to ta¦ke away the shame dyde so moche yt he pro¦mysed wt mouthe for to deceyue the preste / not of wyll to come to the operacyon. And whan he had receyued our lorde / he cryed yt he brent / & the fyre of hell was wtin his bo∣dy. And in grete clamour sayd I brenne I broyle in body & membres / and so he deyed myscheuously. ¶By this examples a man may vnderstande yt yf ye sayd vsurer decey¦ued the preste by worde / he deceyued hym∣selfe moche wors by dede. And yf he bren∣in body in this worlde. It is to presuppose
that he brenneth cruelly in helle as vnto ye soule. &c. C. ¶Another example of the myscheuous dethe of an vsurer the whiche in his seke¦nes sayd that he chawed pence. lxxxvi. IT is wryten in the promptuary of the dysciple that in the dyocese of Coleyne a knight deyed yt was renoumed to be an vsurer & aua∣rycious. Whan he was seke and yt the mater moūted in to the brayne he was frantyke. And as he moued euery daye his mouthe and the tethe his seruauntes sayd vnto hȳ. My lorde what ete you he answe¦red. Iete pence. It semed vnto hym yt the deuylles put pence in his mouthe. And he sayd. I may not bere ne suffre these deuyls brynge me vnto the chyrche / for peraduen¦ture I shall be delyuered by the prayers of good men. Whan he was there he cryed / be¦re me agayne / for I se mo deuyls here thā in myn hous. The vnhappy man was had home / & as the deuyls tourmented hym he deyed myscheuously. &c. D. ¶Another example of ye horryble dethe of an vsurer. lxxxvi. ALso the dyscyple recyteth that there was an vsurer in the par¦tyes of brabant ryght cursed / for he dysheryted many noble & puyssant men / & dyspoyled ye poore of theyr goodes. This sayd vsurer ye¦de often vnto the relygyous & prayed them as in maner of wepinge yt they wolde pray for hym. But he correcked not hymselfe in no maner. And it befell that he was seke so¦daynly / & whan he aproched vnto his deth two terryble dogges of derkenesse came to his bedde. And he drewe out of his mouthe his owne tōgue / the whiche was stretched out as a fote / and ryght horrybly he deyed. ¶This example denoteth that people the whiche lyueth in syn̄es of cursed lyfe dyeth horrybly of cursed dethe. Also the scrypture speketh it. Vn̄ psal. Mors peccatorum pes¦sima. &c. E. ¶Another example of a woman vsurer the whiche made too burye with her / her purse and her golde and syluer. lxxxvi. MEn fynde by wrytinge this yt whiche foloweth how the dys¦cyple recyteth in the boke of his promptuary and sayeth yt two systers departed theyr go¦des and herytages after that theyr moder was deed. And one of them toke her porcy∣on and departed it vnto vsury / and there assembled moche golde & syluer / & had noo compassion of her syster the whiche was ne¦dy and poore. It befell that the syster vsu∣rer was seke tyll vnto the dethe. The whi∣che called her other sister for to admynister vnto her her necessytees. She serued her in hope to haue some thynge. Whan the syster vsurer sawe that she myght not escape the dethe sent her syster asyde & toke two pur∣ses full of golde and of syluer / and gyrded theym to her bare bely vnder her clothes. And whan her sayd syster was comen ayen she sayd vnto her. I praye the my syster yt whan I am deed that yu suffre not that I be dyspoyled of noo persone / but that yu bu∣ry me wt the clothes wherwith I am clad: What more. She deyed and was buryed as she requyred. And it was tolde vnto the lorde to whome the towne apperteyned yt suche an vsurer was deed / & that her golde & syluer apperteyned to hȳ. He sent incon∣tynent a messager to seke the sayd treasour
goten by vsury. Whan the messager had ta¦ken the keyes opened the cofres / & that he had nothynge founde he began to tourmēt the syster of the sayd vsurer and to enquyre for the sayd golde & syluer. The which had suspeccion yt it sholde be buryed wt her syster And for the wordes that she had spoken / & for that her body was so heuy. Whā yt sayd messager vnderstode this thynge he requy¦red ye preste yt the body were vnburyed for to se the sayd thynge. The preste suffred it and the sepulchre was opened. Meruayle it was / for whan the body was all naked the preste and the messager sawe a ryght grete & ryght meruaylous and ferefull serpent ye whiche lyft vp often her heed / & kest in the mouthe of the woman fyre & sulphre. Whā they sawe that they had so grete fere & hor∣rour that they fledde & cryed to make men to caste agayne the erthe hastely / and that it was the deuyll the whiche punysshed the body and mocked it. The messager retour∣ned hastely the whiche recounted what he had sene. &c. ¶What prouffyted it vnto the sayd vsuryesse to gete the sayd golde and syl¦uer whā her soule is tourmented and dam¦ned. It is wryten mathei. xvi. ca. Quid pro¦dest homini si vniuersum mundū ucretur: anime vero sue detrimentū patiatur. She gote / posseded / and bare awaye the thynge wherby she is pryued from paradyse / and is in hell tourmented. In lykewyse as it is to presuppose for to consyder her lyfe & her dethe / and that was founde after that she was buryed. &c. F. ¶Another example of an vsurer the whiche demaunded helpe of his golde / of his syluer / and treasoure whan as he laye at the poynte of dethe / wt the which he was tourmented. lxxxvi. IT is wryten in the boke of exam¦ples of an vsurer that as he labou¦red in the later days of his dethe was prayed of his trēdes that e wolde confesse hym and to resto∣re the vsuryes & brought vnto hym ye pre∣ste by two or thre tymes. But at euery time he sayd / abyde tyll to morowe / and after yt I shall do it. And at the last after yt he had be strongly warned to be confessed / & that he had sayd tary tyll to morowe / whan the preste was gone he made to brynge before hym all his golde and syluer / and sayd to it My golde and my syluer I neuer ceased to laboure to take payne for the tyl vnto now And therfore socoure me now at this nede. And one tyme there was herde a voyce the whiche sayd. Go in to the place where thou sholdest go and we shall goo after the. And incontynent he deyed / and grete thonder & tempest came thyder / & the sayd golde and syluer vanysshed that it was not knowen where it became. And afterwarde by ye suf¦fraunce of god the soule of the sayd vsurer appered vnto a holy man as he was in oray¦son the whiche sayd vnto hym that he was dampned / and that euery day he was per∣forced to drynke of the sayd golde and syl∣uer the whiche was in the sayd fyre molten brennynge & decouraūt / wherby men may say vnto this purpose yt the whiche is wry∣ten. Sapienc. xi. Per q̄ peccat hō / per hec et torquet{ur}. In lykewyse as the sayd vsurer had offended in getynge & kepynge ye sayd good also of it he was tourmented. ¶By this example a man may knowe yt these a∣uarycyous ben wel abused to wene yt theyr golde and syluer shall socoure them sooner than god at dethe or in sekenesse / or that it shal put them in paradyse & delyuer fro hel by yt they haue loued / serued / and trusted in the golde and the syluer more than in god they shall be Iuged and condampned & by
theyr golde in hell punysshed and tourmē∣ted. &c. G. ¶Another example of an vsurer ye whi¦che commaunded his soule vnto the de∣uyll for yt it wolde not abyde no more wt his goodes. lxxxvi. THe dyscyple recyteth in his ser∣mons how Hubert sayth in the treatyse of the triple drede that as an vsurer laboured in his la¦ste days he made to be brought before him his vessell of golde and of syluer as cuppes. &c. And spake vnto his soule & them vnto it promysed & many other goo∣des as feldes / houses / herytages. &c. & that it sholde abyde yet in the worlde wt his bo∣dy. And as he sayd these wordes ye doloure of the sekenes gryped hym / & than he sayd. For as moche as thou wylt abyde no more with me I commaunde the vnto the deuyll And in saynge these wordes he deyed / & en¦ded his dayes euyll as ryght was. For he requyred not the helpe of god / but it was of his godes the whiche fayled hym at his gre¦test nede. A. ¶Another example of an vsurer ye whi¦che wolde not restore / and he was borne vpon an asse vnto the galowes & there was buryed. lxxxvii. MEn fynde in wrytynge this ye whiche foloweth how the dys¦cyple recyteth in his promptu¦ary and sayth that a man an vsurer wolde not restore: how¦beit that he was warned often. And whan he was in his dethe bedde he demaunded ye sacramentes of ye chyrche of his preest / the whiche wolde not gyue him them yf he wol¦de not restore / but he wolde not. And whan he was at the poynte of dethe the sayd pre∣ste was called for to recommaunde the sou¦le vnto the aungelles of god / & yet agayne he ne wolde restore. Than the preste sayd. I recommaūde hym vnto all the deuylles of hell / & went fro him. Whan he was deed his frendes requyred the sayd preste to bu∣ry hym in some corner of ye chyrchyarde for to saue theyr honour. The whiche thynge he ne wolde consent / for yt in his lyfe he wol¦de not consent to restore. And the sayd pre∣ste had an asse yt serued for nothinge but to bere to & fro the chyrche the bokes & other thynges for the layd preste / & therfore he ne knewe none other way. Than the frendes of ye sayd vsurer prayed the preste yt the bo∣dy myght be layde vpon the asse and to lete hym go where he wolde / & where the sayd asse rested the body to be there buryed. And they wened that the sayde asse wolde haue borne hym to the chyrche or vnto the house of the preste / for yt he was acustomed to go to none other place. This thynge was acor¦ded of the preste & of all / & the sayd carayne was layde vpon the asse / the whiche bare hym all ryght without declynynge on ony syde vnder the galowes. And there he sha∣ked hym so sore yt he made hym to fall befo¦re all the people / & there he was buryed cū patrib{us} suis. It was no reason that he we∣re in holy erthe with good crystyens / for he had not lyued an holy lyfe in obeyeng vnto god. And by yt the scripture approued sayth yt vsurers manyfestes ought to be pryued from sepulture ecclesyastycall yf they deye correccyon & amendement and without re¦stytucyon made to other. Vt habetur extra de vsuris. capitulo. Quia in omnibus. etce¦tera. B. ¶Another example how the ennemy ye deuyll sette hym vpon the coffre where
the money was of an vsurer. lxxxvii. THe dyscyple recyteth in his prō¦ptuary how an vsurer gaue in kepȳge his money in an abbay and a relygyous sawe ye deuyl the whiche sette hym on the co¦fre vnto whome he demaunded what he dyde there vpon the sayd cofre. And he an¦swered. I kepe my money. Than whan ye abbot herde hym speke it he sent agayne ye sayd money and the deuyll yode his waye fro that place. &c. C. ¶Another example how a man sholde not pray for an vsurer deed. lxxxvii. MEn fynde by wrytinge this yt whiche foloweth how the dys¦cyple recyteth in the boke of his promptuary and sayeth yt a preste prayed for his fader the whiche had ben an vsurer / and in syngȳ¦ge his hādes trembled. And saynt Bernar¦de prayed god that he wolde shewe what ye sygnyfyed. And an aungell appered to him and sayd. It is grete foly to pray for an vsu¦rer the whiche is dampned. And the blyssed saynt Bernarde defended vnto the preste that he sholde synge nomore for his fader / And after that he hadde ceased to pray for his sayd fader his handes ceased and trem∣bled no more. D. ¶Another example what became of a chyrche the whiche was made of vsuries & extorcyons. lxxxvii THe dysciple recyteth in his prom¦ptuary that after that a mā had do make a chyrche of vsuryes & extorcyons he made the bysshop to come for to dedycate it. And as the bysshop accompanyed with his cler∣kes dyde dedycate it he sawe behynde ye au¦ter the deuyl in habyte of a bysshop beynge in a chayre the whiche sayd vnto ye bysshop Wherfore consecratest yu my chyrche. Cease the. This chyrche apperteyneth vnto me of good ryght / for is is edyfyed of vsuryes & rapynes. Than as the bysshop & ye clerkes fledde the deuyll dystroyed the sayd chyrche with grete daūsynge. An almesdede or ony thynge that a man gyueth vnto god or vn∣to his chirche / or vnto ony of his sayntes of paradyse sholde be of good acquysycyon of good berynge wtout beynge made of thefte extorcyon or vsury. &c. or it shal not be agre¦able vnto god. He wyll not that a man take away ye goodes fro ony for to brynge them vnto hym. As the scrypture sayth in many places. Vn̄ eccl. xxxiii. Dona iniquorū nō a probat altissimus / nec recipit oblationē īi quo{rum}. Et michee. ca. i Intulistis de rapinis claudum et languidū munus / nō quid susci¦piam dn̄o debile qr rex magnus ego sum di¦cit dn̄s. &c. E. ¶Another example of an vsurer yt wol∣de not restore. lxxxvii. IT is wryten in the boke of ye gyft of drede how a preste gaue war∣ninge of thre thȳges vnto an vsu¦rer yt deyed. The fyrst was that he sholde repent hym. The secōde that he sholde confesse hym. The thyrde yt he sholde make full restytucion after his pu¦yssaunce. And the sayd vsurer sayd. I am content to do the two fyrst thynges / but ye thyrde how sholde I do it / for there sholde nothynge be left vnto me / ne vnto my chyl¦dren. And the preste sayd. Without these .iii thynges thou mayst not be saued / as sayth ye sages & the scryptures. And he answered I wyll proue yf it be true / for I wyll no∣thynge
restore. And so he deyed cursedly / & dred more ye pouerte temporall than dam¦pnacyon eternall. F. ¶Another example of an vsurer ye con∣fessed hym / & made restytucyon in ye en∣de of his dayes lxxxvii MEn fynde in wrytynge this ye whiche foloweth how the dys¦cyple recyteth in his promptu¦ary and sayth that an vsurer fell in grete sekenes ye whiche was warned by his frendes to confesse hȳ and to receyue all the sacramentes. And he sayd. What shall it serue me yt haue soo mo¦che deferred to confesse and amende. And the frēdes sayd. A man sholde euermore cō¦fesse hym / for peraduenture god shall gyue you his grace. And the confessour was cal∣led / vnto whom the vsurer sayd. My fader espyrytuall I wyll confesse me with good wyll. But I haue commytted so many syn¦nes / and therin am so bewrapped yt I can not tell how I may escape. Vnto whome the confessour sayd. Dyspayre ye not / but confesse you / for confessyon wel made hath suche vertue that all synnes there ben par∣doned. Than he confessed hym / & god gaue vnto hym suche grace yt he repented hym & wepte so strongely his synnes that wt payne myght he speke by force of wepinge. He ma¦de an entyer confessyon / restored the sayd vsuryes and thynges yl goten after ye coun¦ceyle of the confessour / and ended well his lyfe and his dayes. ¶Restitucio. A. ¶Examples of restytucyon. And fyrst example of a man named Fryderyke tor¦mented in purgatory for that he had not restored yll goten godes. lxxxviii. MEn fynde by wrytinge this yt whiche foloweth how the dys¦cyple recyteth in the boke of his promptuary and sayeth yt after yt a knyght was deed he appered vnto a citezyn his neyghbour in su¦che maner yt smoke & flambe yssued fro his nosethrylles / & he was couered wt shepe skȳ¦nes / & bare a plotte of erthe vpon his shol∣dres. Vnto whome the cytezyn sayd. Ar ye Fryderyke. And he sayd / ye. Fro whens co∣me ye / & what betokeneth the thynges yt I se. He answered. I am in grete paynes for yt I haue taken away shepe skynnes from a wydowe the whiche I fele now brennȳ∣ge. Also I haue drawen vnto me iniustly ye party of a felde yt weyeth sore / & bruseth my sholders. But yf my chyldrē restore my pay¦nes shall be lyght / so he departed. And whā the sones of ye sayd knyght herde these wor¦des of theyr fader they loued better that he sholde abyde in payne than restore ye sayd thynges. ¶This example denoteth that ye sayd Fryderycke had contrycyon & confes∣syon / but he dyde no satysfaccōn. And ther¦for he was in purgatory. And by yt / that ye sayd chyldren wold not restore it is to note yt one ought not to tary for his parents too do good after his dethe / but do it hȳselfe. B. ¶Another example of a childe yt was in the paynes of purgatory / for yt he resto∣red not money borowed. lxxxviii. MEn fynde by wrytynge this yt whiche foloweth how the dys¦cyple recyteth in his promptu¦ary & sayth yt a duchesses sone of .ix. yere olde was seke & shro¦ne hym & deyed. And after his dethe he ap¦pered to his moder / & sayd yt he was in gre¦te
payne in purgatory for that yt he had not payed the debtes borowed of the seruaun∣tes of his sayd moder for to go play. And yt at his dethe he remembred not to pay them or make to be payed. And the sayd chylde re¦quyred his moder that she wolde paye the sayd debtes / & that his payne sholde haue ende so yt they be payed. The whiche sayd yt with good wyll she wolde pay theym. And she made inquysycyon of the sayd seruaun¦tes. And made them al to be payde the whi¦che had sende to her sayd sone. And inconti¦nent that they were all payed the chylde ap¦pered to his moder agayne in grete clerete Vnto whome he sayd that he was delyue∣red from payne & put in grete felycyte. &c. ¶By this example a man sholde vnderstā¦de that him behoueth to be pure & clene for to go in to paradyse. Whan the sayd chylde was wtholden and caried from glory alone¦ly for siluer borowed / how shal these theues and pyllers entre the whiche wyll not resto¦re / whan the sayd chylde had taken nothyn¦ge malycyously was caryed. It is wryten i. ad corī. vi. Ne{que} fures ne{que} auari regnum dei possidebūt. &c. C. ¶Another example of a man tourmen¦ted in the paynes of purgatorye for the defaute of .vi. penyes that he ought to a woman. lxxxviii. IT is wryten in the promptuary of the dyscyple yt a man ought .vi pence to a wydowe / the whiche demaūded many tymes her pay¦ment. And the sayd man dyed wt¦out payenge it / howbeit yt he denyed not ye debte. After his dethe he apered to a deuout persone and prayed hym yt he wolde paye ye sayd .vi. pence / and that he was moche tour¦mented in purgatorye / & endured as many strokes as she had made steppes for to axe hym the sayd money / & yet sholde sustayne tyll yt she were payed. ¶By this example it is to be noted that by the defaute to pay that yt a man oweth he is letted to go in to paradyse / & is bounde to punycyon. D. ¶Another example of a relygious that was in the paynes of purgatorye for an halfpeny that he owed vnto a feryman or passager. lxxxviii. IT is wryten in dyaloguo cesaru yt a relygyous conuers of the ordre of Cysterciēcis was sent of his ab¦bot for a besynes / & he yode. And whan he came to passe ouer yt wa¦ter he promysed to pay an halfpeny vnto ye passager for his mede / the whiche he sholde haue sent vnto hym / & he was neclygent to sende it. Whan he came vnto his dethe he confessed him of the neclygence of the halfe¦peny not payed / for he cared not for so lytel a thynge. After his dethe he had ye sayd half¦peny before his eyen the whiche halfpeny be¦came so grete that it semed him that it was greter than all the worlde. And whan he ca¦me vnto the Iugement of god there was founde none other thynge yt letted the sayd relygyous to go to heuen. And at ye request of some saynt he was sent to his body & con¦fessed it & restored & was saued. E. ¶Another exāple how ye deuyll letteth to restore lxxxviii SOme maysters wryteth this the whiche foloweth how ye dis¦cyple reciteth in the boke of his promptuarye and sayeth that thre deuylles came vpon a ty∣me to a good holy hermyte. Of whome he axed the names. The fyrst sayd / close herte For whan ony hereth a sermon I close his
herte yt he seeth not ne repenteth his synnes The seconde sayth. I am called closynge ye mouthe. For yf ony wolde confesse hym & a¦uoyde our gynnes I close his mouthein let¦tynge him yt he ne may cōfesse hym. The .iii sayd. I am called close purs. For I lette to restore the yll goten goodes / & letteth to gy¦ue vnto poore of theyr goodes / & so I close ye purse. We ben assembled togyders to hel¦pe eche other. &c. ¶By this example it ap∣pereth yt the deuyls letteth a man to repent hym / to cōfesse / & to make restytucion. And it behoueth to do the contrary to haue sal∣uacyon. &c. F. ¶Another example of an abbot yt sente agayne money gyuen vnto the monaste¦ry / for yt it was come of vsury & cursed acquysycyon. lxxxviii THe dyscyple reciteth in his boke that an vsurer left by testamēt a grete somme of money about a. M. &. vi.C.li. vnto a monaste¦ry / wherof many grete possessy¦ons were bought. After the dethe of the ab¦bot was chosen another of good conscyēce yt was dyspleasaunt of the sayd money re∣ceyued. What dyde he. He solde his bestyall his moeuables & immouables & sent ye mo∣ney agayne to the executourse to thende yt they sholde restore to all those the whiche had ben dispoyled & greued. And for that / yt the sayd executoures wolde not take it but sent it agayne to the monastery ye good ab∣bot was sory & made the sayd money to be borne to the market before all the cytezyns the whiche were present / and to them sayd who so wyll take this money lete hym take it / yt it is ours I renounce & refuse it. For I doubt not but yt it be vniustly goten. Whan yt cytezyns sawe this thynge they were mo¦che edyfyed of the dede toke counceyle amō¦ge them & chose people ryght faythfull the whiche yelded the sayd money pertyculerly to all those yt had ben greued / & of whome the sayd money was comen. And in shorte tyme god restored vnto to the sayd mona∣stery in double more of money thā they had restored. And where they had but fewe goo¦des afterwarde in grete haboundaunce all was replenysshed. A doctour named Wyl∣lyam wytnesseth this to be verytable. And yt he sawe in the sayd monastery many of ye relygyous sayntes doynge myracles & re∣plete wt spyryte of prophecy. ¶Excommunicatio. A. ¶Examples of excōmunycacyon ayēst the theues & synners. And fyrst example how a whyte lofe became blacke & moy∣sty after that it was excommunyed and accursed. lxxxix SOme maysters wryteth this the whiche foloweth how ye dis¦cyple reciteth in the boke of his promptuarye and sayeth that there was an erle of Tholouse that sustayned & receyued heretykes / and euery suche persone is accursed by sentence of ryght / i{pre}o fctō / wt the heretykes. And an holy abbot was sente to the sayd erle to wt∣drawe hym fro the sayd dede the whiche ne myght be cōuerted by worde ne dede to dre¦de excōmunycacion. Than ye abbot sayd to ye erle. To thende yt you & yours knowe by dedes how the soule is vndone yt is bounde of excōmunycacyon I wyll yt one brynge me a white lofe. And than he sayd. O breed albeit that yu ne haste deserued cursynge to thende yt ye veryte of our faythe be shewed in ye / & the cursednes of ye soule that dredeth not excōmunicaciō. Excōmunico te. I curse ye. And as soone as he had spoken ye worde
ye sayd breed yt was whyte became blacke / he made it to be cut in two partyes / and it appered also blacke wtin moysty & corrupt. Afterwarde he sayd to thēde that ye knowe also the vertue of the absolucyon / he toke the sayd lofe & absoyled it / the whiche beca¦me in his fyrst whytenes and beaute. ¶By this example a man may vnderstande yt ye soules of people excōmunyed or accursed ben in horryble & foule estate yt hath deser∣ued to haue suche maledyccyon / whan the whyte breed became so vndone & moysty / Yf a persone excōmunyed knewe the grete euyll and maledyccyon yt is in it / & the pay∣nes the whiche ben to him prepayred in hell yf he deye in suche estate / he sholde loue bet¦ter to lose all the worlde yf it were his / and that his body were as small as flesshe to pa¦stees than to abyde in it. B. ¶Another example how yt storkes lefte theyr nestes the whiche were vpon a mā¦nes house incontynent that he was ac∣cursed. lxxxix. MEn fynde by wrytynge this yt whiche foloweth how the dys¦cyple recyteth in his promptu¦ary & sayth that the pope Gre¦gory the saynt excōmunyed a newe erle. And for yt he contempned ye sayd excommunycacyon by myracle the storkes the whiche had made theyr nestes vpon his hous yede to another place / wherof ye sayd man meruayled / and made hym to be assoy¦led. And incontinent the sayd storkes came agayne to make theyr nest vpon the house of the sayd erle. C. ¶Another example how the sparowes the whiche made noyse in the chyrche yo¦de out incontinent that they were accur¦sed. lxxxix. THe dyscyple recyteth in his ser∣mons how in ye chyrche of saynt Vyncent the martyr sparowes & cryed and lette the dyuyn ser¦uyce. And for yt none myght put them out the bysshop of ye place cursed thē & thretened them of dethe yf they entred af¦ter that. And more ouer yf a mā toke suche a byrde & bare it with force in the sayd chyr¦che forthwt it deyed. D. ¶Another example how the floures of an appletree fell & dryed as soone as the excōmunycacyon was drawen for a por¦tos yt was in it. lxxxix. MEn fynde by wrytinge how a thefe stole the porthos from a preest And for yt the sayd thefe was suspended he put ye boke in the creues of a yonge apple tre full of swete floures. The sentence of ye bysshop was borne. &c. And the day that it was caste in goynge to masse the people sa¦we the sayd tre floured / & whan they came agayne from the sayd masse they founde ye sayd floures vndone. The tydynges came vnto the sayd bisshop of this thynge / ye sayd boke was founde / & as soone as ye bysshop had assoyled the tre ye floures came agayne vnto the sayd apple tree. ¶By this exam∣ple these excomunyed or cursed may vnder¦stande that they lose all the goodes spyry∣tualles the whiche ben in them / & also god paradyse / & all good dedes. And also all the consenters and parte takers sholde drede / syth that the sayd apple tree the whiche had not done the yll loste her floures. And here a man may vnderstande that the good de∣des loste cometh agayne by the vertue of the absolucyon syth that the apple tree reco¦uered the floures.
E. ¶Another example how a rauen beca∣me hydeous & his feders fell from hym incontynent that ye bysshop had cursed for his rynge that the sayd rauen hadde taken. lxxxix. MEn fynde by wrytynge that a bysshop drewe one time a ryn¦ge from his fynger / & a rauen pryuely toke it & bare it vpon the hous betwene two tyles And afterwarde the sayd bysshop sought his rynge and was wrothe & accursed him yt had taken it. And in shorte tyme ye feders of the sayd rauen fell from hym & became so hydeous yt it was meruayle. And after∣warde within a lytell tyme the tyler foun∣de the sayd rynge / & the trouthe was kno∣wen. The sayd bysshop assoyled & reapelled the sayd sentence / & incontynēt the feders came agayne vnto the rauen as before / & was made fayre. &c. F. ¶Another example how excommuny∣cacyon caste Iustly or vniustly is too be dredde as it appered in two monkes the whiche made thē to be gelded. lxxxix. IT is wryten in vitas patrū how two seculers made them mōkes the whiche had enuy of the voyce euangelyst / but not after scyence They gelded theymselfe also as for to haue the realme of heuen. And whan the archebysshop herde of it he cursed them And they wende to haue done well / & they wrothed them agaynst hym sayenge. We ben gelded for the realme of paradyse / & he hath accursed vs / go we in to Iherusalem to the bysshop for to haue helpe agaynst the sayd archebysshop. And whan they were co¦men thyder and that they vnto hym had de¦clared the case he sayd vnto theym. And I accurse you of this thynge. They were yet wrothe & yode vnto tharchebysshop of An¦thyoche vnto whom they declared by ordre all the case. And he them cursed as the fore∣sayd dyde. And they sayd amonge themself Go we vnto rome vnto the pope / & he shall venge vs on the sayd bysshoppes. And thy¦der they yode & sayd vnto ye pope. We ben comen vnto the as chefe vnto the chyrche & of vs all / and they vnto hym recompted al vnto whome he sayd. And I you excōmu∣nycate / for ye ben separed. Than the mon∣kes defayled of all excusacyons & reasons. & sayd vnto themselfe. These bysshops hol¦deth togyder for that they resemble to sen∣nes. But go we vnto suche an holy man yt ne taketh hede vnto ye persones. Eamus ad illū virū dei sctm̄ epyphanū episcopū de cipro qr propheta est et personā hoīs non ac¦cipit. Whan they approched vnto the cyte of ye sayd prophete it was reueled vnto hȳ of theyr case. And he sent before them and tolde them that they ne sholde entre in to the cyte. And than they knewe theyr faute and sayd that they were culpable in veryte they repented & wolde do penaunce / in sa∣ynge they haue Iustly excommunycate vs This man here is a prophete / god hath re∣ueled vnto hym of vs. And they repreued themselfe ryght gretely of the gylte yt they had done. And whan god sawe theyr herte repentauntes and knowynge theyr faute reueled it vnto the sayd bysshop. &c. The whiche made them to entre in to the cyte / comforted them and receyued vnto cōmu∣nyon. And wrote agayne vnto the bysshop of Alexandrye that he sholde receyue them and that in veryte they had done penaunce and so was it doone. ¶By this example a man sholde vnderstande that sentence is to be dredde. How be it that they wened to do well and not to be excommunycate and yet they were. And incontynent they had
reknowleged theyr faute god wolde yt they were absoyled & receyued. G. ¶Another example how lightnynge cō¦sumed one that was excommunyed and accursed. lxxxix. THe dyscyple reciteth in his prom¦ptuary that one exōmunycate & obstynate entred in to the chyr¦che of the virgyn Mary. And in contynent lyghtenynge entred therin the whiche slewe hym / and the other had no harme. ¶A man sholde here vnder¦stande that one excōmunyed or accursed yt gooth vnto the chyrche and to speke and to talke wt the good agaynst the defence the whiche is made / and for to put the other in synne hurteth hymselfe / and better it were vnto hym to humble hymselfe and to be so¦lytary. &c. ¶Another example that one excommuny¦ed repented hym & afterwarde deyed befo∣re that he was assoyled his body appered as blacke as pytche. And after the absolu∣cyon he appered whyte as snowe. H. ¶Another example how a gardyn excō¦munyed bare no fruyte that it was ab∣soyled. lxxxix. MEn fynde by wrytinge this yt whiche foloweth how the dys¦cyple recyteth in the boke of his promptuary and sayeth yt the moder of the duke of bur¦goyne bought of a preste a ryght fayre gar¦dyn planted with fayre trees. And for as moche as the sayd gardyn bare no fruyte ye lady demaūded the cause. And it was sayd vnto her / whan the preste songe masse on ye sonday in the fruyte tyme the yonge men left the masse & the chyrche & yode to gader the fruytes and brake the hedges. After yt they had ben repreued & warned too resyst them & that they ne wolde obey he cursed ye gardyn yt it bare nomore fruyte. Tha he duchesse made to absoyle the sayd gardyn by the preste. The whiche commaunded wt that yt it sholde bere fruyte as it was accu∣stomed / & in lykewyse it was doone. Vnto purpose of this example it is wryten marci xi. {quod} dn̄s maledixit ficulnee / & statim aruit Our lorde Ihesus hath giuen his puyssaun¦ce vnto prestes to bynde & vnbynde. Vnde math. xvi. Quodcū{que} ligaueris su{per} terram erit ligatū etin celis. &c. Of good ryght the gardyn bare noo fruyte / for it was a curste. And after that it was assoyled ye yre of god was taken away / & it fructyfyed. Syth yt ye sayd gardyn yt had not offended was pry¦ued from fruyte & from all goodnes by mo¦re grete reason a persone excommunyed is pryued. &c. ¶Malediccio. I. ¶Examples of maledyccion. And fyrst exāple of foure monkes the whiche slew a bere. lxxxix IT is wryten in the dyalogue of saynt Gregory how a good rely∣gyous named Florentius requy∣red god yt he wolde sende hym so¦me cōsolacyon for to kepe his be¦stes. And whan he yode forthe of his orato¦ry he founde a bere. The whiche whan he bowed his wyst yt he was sort of god / & cō¦mytted his bestes to ye sayd bere to kepe as pastour & sayd. Kepe my bestes yt come ayē alway at. vi. of ye clocke. The bere was obe¦dyent and dyde so / & came somtime at syxe or at noone after the commaundement of his mayster in the tyme of his yonge aege.
And it befell that .iiii. monkes had enuy on the sayd Florenti{us} for yt theyr mayster dide not lyke myracle & slewe the sayd bere as he kept ye bestes. Whan the beere came not agayne to the hous at ye houre acustomed Florenti{us} was sory in awaytynge for hym And yode in the euentyde to the feldes and founde hȳ deed by the shepe. Whan he was enfourmed of ye case / & that he knewe how the monkes had slayne hym he bewayled ye beere / & the malice of his bredrē. And in his wrathe cursed the homycydes of ye beere / & sayd. I hope in god yt those the whiche hath slayne my beere yt dyde none yll shall haue vengeaūce in this lyfe. And forthwt yt sayd monkes were smyten with cruell sekenes / scʐ morbo elephātico. & theyr membres stȳ∣kynge so deyed. Wherof Florenti{us} was fe∣refull & wrothe / for he reputed hymself ho∣mycyde / for yt his his orayson was exalted of god. He wepte theyr dethe al the tyme of his lyfe / to thende yt a simple man ne shold presume to curse here after. &c. ¶This ex∣ample denoteth two thynges. The fyrst yt punycyon and maledycyon came vpon the four monkes for yt they slewe the sayd bere by enuy. The seconde yt a man sholde more soner requyre saluacyon & benedyccyon for his ennemyes than maledyccyon in as the sayd Florenti{us} was wrothe to haue requy∣red maledyccyon on the monkes. &c. ¶Septimum preceptum: ¶Luxuria. A. ¶Examples of people yt commytted le∣chery. And first of a woman dampned yt knewe lecherously one of her kynnesmē & dyde many other synnes / of whom ys¦sued two todes and bestes in confessȳge her. lxxxix. MEn fynde by wrytinge this ye whiche foloweth how the dys¦cyple recyteth in the boke of his promptuary and sayeth ye two freres yode to preche in ye countre about. Of the whiche the one was aūcyent & penytencer of ye pope. The other was yonge / innocent / & debonayre & came vnto the castell of a noble woman synner. She confessed her vnto the penytencer / & at euery synne yt she tolde the yonge frere sawe a tode or a beest yssue of her mouthe yt lept & ranne out of the chyrche. And at the laste as she wolde confesse a grete synne a dragon put out his heed / albeit he drewe it in agayne / for she had shame for to confesse it / and all the sayd todes & beestes came a∣gayne in to her mouthe. And after that the sayd freres were gone ye yonge frere recoū∣ted it vnto the penytencer. Than the sayd penytencer was wrothe & came agayne for to warne her to confesse her entyerly / and founde her deed. They put them in fastyn∣ges & oraysons. And on the thyrde day the sayd woman appered vnto them in a terry¦ble vysyon. For she bestrode a ryght terry∣ble dragon / & had two cruel serpentes that enbraced / gyrded / stynged / and bote with theyr tethe her brestes And had on her eyes two foule todes / & from her mouthe yssued fyre & sulphre right stynkynge. Her handes were deuoured of two dogges yt bote them Her eres were replete with arowes of fyre Her hede was full of venymous lysardes yt bote her sore. And whan ye freres sawe this woman for drede they fell vnto the erthe. Vnto whome she sayd. Frendes of god dre¦de you not. I am the ryght cursed woman synner yt ye confessed before yesterdaye. I made a confessyon faynt & not entyer / for I hyd one synne yt I had cōmytted wt my co¦syn. And ye penitencer coniured her in ye na¦me of god almyghty that she sholde tell the
causes of the paynes yt she had. And she an¦swered. The lysardes the whiche punysshe me in the heed is for the aournementes yt I bare. The todes the whiche punysshe me in the eyen is for the lokynges vnleful. The arowes of myn eeres is for the herynge of folysshe wordes. The fyry sulphre punys∣sheth my mouthe for the blasphemes / de∣traccyons / songes / vayne wordes & kyssyn¦ges yt I made. For the enbracynges & atou¦chynges vnlefull yt I made the serpentes tourmenteth my brestes. The dogges by∣teth my handes for yt I haue gyuen to hē that yt I sholde haue gyuen vnto ye poore Also for yt I haue aourned them wt rynges & Iewelles. And I ryde this dragon for ye pryde yt I had in rydȳge & lyftynge me vp in clothynges & garmentes aboue other / & for the lecherous thynkynges I am brent intollerably in the membres femynyne wt the thyghes knees / and legges. And soo¦daynly ye forsayd dragon terribly tourmen¦ted her & bare her in to helle / & neuer after she appered. ¶By this example is denoted many thynges / pryncypally how the sayd womē the whiche bereth on theyr hedes vn¦due aournementes / & that maketh enbra∣cementes shamefull & vnlefull / vpon theyr brestes as it is sayd in ye example shal haue strayte punycyon. Also by that yt she made not entyer confessyon for shame the todes & beestes the whiche were yssued retorned agayne in to her body. That is to say her sȳ¦nes confessed were not pardoned & retour¦ned in her. For saynt Bernarde sayth. {quod} sū¦ma dei pietas viniā non dimidiabit / aut ni¦chil / aut totū te penitente dabit. And vnto purpose that she had todes & bestes yt tour∣mented her / & the fyre that broyled her. It is wryten Ysaie vltīo. & marci. ix. Vermis eo{rum} non morit{ur} & ignis non extīguitur. Et legit{ur} iudith .xvi. Dabit eī eis de{us} ignem & vermes ī carnes vt vrant{ur} & sentiāt vs{que} in sēpiternū. This worde vermes / sygnyfy∣eth two thynges. The fyrst ben ye wormes todes & bestes of the erthe as sayth catholy¦con. The seconde is the remors of the cōscy¦ence / for the dampned shal euermore haue remembraunce & remors of theyr synnes yt they ben tourmented. ¶Another example of a curyall the which knewe lecherously a doughter yt he had holden vpon the onte. lxxxx. IT is wryten in the .iiii. boke of the dyalogue of saynt Gregory yt the∣re was a curyall in the prouynce of valere that made hȳ selfe dron¦ken the saterday of Eester after ye faste / & had holden vpon the fonte a dough¦ter the whiche he demaunded to dwel wt hȳ And he knewe her & loste her that nyght ye whiche is a thinge horryble to tell. Whan ye mornynge came yt he sholde aryse he thou∣ght yt he was moche culpable / & that nedes he must go to wasshe & bathe hym in lyke∣wyse as he wysshe him in the bayne he was¦shed the soylenes of the gylte of his synne. Than he yode to wasshe hym & dredde too entre in to the chyrche / but he dredde ye sha¦me of the worlde / & the language yf at su∣che solempnyte he yode not in to the chyr∣che. And yf he thider yode he dred the Iuge¦ment of god. Than he dredde the shame of the worlde / but in dredynge helde hȳ in thē¦de suspect in regardynge vnto euery of his moeuynges at what houre he sholde be gy¦uen vnto the deuyll for to tourment hȳ be∣fore all the people. And albeit that he dred hugely / he ne hadde none yll on ye sayd day And yede forth Ioyous of the chyrche. And the monday he entred in to the chyrche su∣rely without ony grefe or harme. And it was so that by syxe dayes / he hadde neuer none euyll. And he yode in too the chyrche
Ioyfull & assured in wenynge ye god ne had sene his synne / or yf he had seen it yt he had pardoned hym mercyfully. And ye seuenth day he deyed in the chyrche of sodayn dethe hoiby. And whan he was buryed flambe of fyre yssued out of his sepulcre / & was so longe space in the syght of all people. And there was in suche maner yt he brenned his body & bones / his sepulcre & all the erthe yt had ben throwen & put out. &c. ¶By this man that was punysshed is to vnderstāde yt so shall be the lechours impenytentes. Al¦so by that yt he confessed hym not / & that he dyde no penaūce / his case ne sholde be good to bere. For it is wryten luce .xiii. Nisi peni¦tentiam habueritis oēs simul peribitis. Al∣so he ne myght be puryfyed & made clene of his synne but onely by true confessyon as sayth saynt Ambrose Nullus pctō iustifi∣cari poterit / nisi prius cōfessus fuerit. And therfore he was abused to wene to take the culpe of synne away as in baynynge hym or wasshīge. Also for that / ye god punysshed hym not forthwt that he had done ye synne / is to vnderstande yt god the whiche is mer∣cyful punyssheth not incontynent that we fayle for to tary vs / that we sholde doo pe∣naunce. &c. C. ¶Another example of a woman dam∣ned for atyrynge and aournynge of her heed / & for to shewe her brestes / and for dauncynge / lepynge / & shamefull enbra¦cementes. lxxxx. THe dyscyple recyteth in his ser∣mons this the whiche foloweth the whiche is also wryten in o∣ther bokes and sayth that there was a preste yt put hymselfe oft¦tymes in afflyccyons & oraysons / & songe masse for his moder deed. And one tyme as he songe masse for her & desyred too knowe somwhat of her estate he sawe her fast by the auter in a basket of fyre holden wt two deuylles & bounde. Her heed was replete wt serpentes small as heeres / & had a tode on her breste that colled her about the necke wt her forefete & vometed flambes of fire in to her face. And had her handes & fete bounde with chaynes of fyre. The sayd preste mer∣uayled / and asked her of her estate. And she sayd that vnprouffytably he prayed for her and yt she was dampned. She sayd more ouer that the paynes yt she had in her heed of serpentes of fyre was for the aournemē¦tes & heeres that she had borne vpon her he¦de. And yt she sustayned the tode on her bre¦ste for yt that she had shewed her necke bare & her sayd brest. And that yt the sayd tode vo¦myted the brennyng flambes of tyre in her face was for that she had coloured & payn∣ted her sayd face. And for that yt she had of¦fended our lorde by enbracementes shame¦full of her handes & of her fete to lepe and to daunce she had them bounde w chaynes of fyre. Than she departed & went to hell. ¶By this example is denoted that aourne¦mentes and atyrynge full of pryde the whi¦che apperteyneth not vnto the estate of the persones ben to fle. And also the daūces vn¦shamefull / for in hell they shal be kept from lepynge / the fete & the handes shal be boun¦de of the Iustyce of god. Vn̄ mathei .xxii. Ligatis manib{us} et pedibus proucite eū in tenebras exteriores. Also by that yt the sayd woman had punycyon of the rode the whi¦che was on her brestes is exāple for al good women the whiche wyll euade punycyon / and haue saluacyon that they sholde hyde theyr sayd brestes and fayre flesshe. For it is a bayte and the lyne wherby the deuyll de¦ceyueth and taketh the persones. Also by ye beholdynge and regarde of suche thynges the persones appetyteth to do & fulfyll the synne of lechery that ledeth to dāpnacyon.
Vnde gregori{us}. Nō licet ītueri non licet cō¦cupisci. And sapyence sayeth. ecclesi. ix. ca. Propter speciē mulieres multi perierūt / & ex hoc concupiscētia quasi ignis exardescit. Et hieronimus dicit. {quam} gladi{us} igne{us} est spe¦cies mulieris quasi ex omni parte sui sagit∣tas mittunt / scʐ ad animas decipiendas. D. ¶Another example how .xxiii. thousan¦de men were brent with ye fyre celestyall for the syn̄e of lechery. And Balaam ga¦ue the counceyle. lxxxx THe hystory of Balaam is wrytē in the byble in the .xxii. & .xxiii. chapytre of ye boke of nombres. In the begynnynge of his lyfe he was good & prophecyed ye co¦mynge of our redempcyon. For he sayd yt a sterre sholde go out of Iacob. Orietur stel∣la ex iacob / the whiche denoteth the blyssed vyrgyn Mary. &c. Also he had suche gyft of god that those yt he blyssed were blyst / and those that he cursed were curst. And for yt ye Balaac made warre with the chyldren of ysrael / and yt he might not surmount them he sent to seche the prophete Balaam for to curse the sayd people of ysraell. And for the grete honours and rychesses that the kȳge Balaac made to offre hym / he was peruer¦ted & ouercome so strongly that he demaun¦ded of god by two tymes yt he myght go to curse the sayd people. And god not so accor¦ded. For his request was vniust & yll in two maners. Primo. For that he wolde curse ye people ye good had blyssed. Secundo. for to to haue golde / syluer / and honoures world¦ly. Vnde marci. xxii. dicit dn̄s. No ire cum eis / ne{que} maledicas populo qr bn̄dictus est And after yt Balaam had excused him to ye messagers of the kinge / he was yet so grete¦ly desyred & ouercome for worldly honours that he lept vpon his asse for to goo & speke wt the kynge. But ye asse yode backewarde & wolde not go his way / & yede ouerthwar¦te the feldes & drewe him amonge breres & thornes. He bette hym / but for nothynge he wolde go forwarde. And by the vertue of god the asse spake & hym demaūded. Wher¦fore smytest yu me. He answered. Thou hast deserued it / & thou mockest with me. And Balaam aduysed ye aungell ye helde a swer¦de all naked. Than Balaam worshypped hym vpon the erthe hastely. And the aūgell hym demaunded wherfore he hadde beten thyrdely his asse. I am come for to persecu¦te the. And yf thyn asse had not gone backe agaynst thy wyl I had slayne the / & he had lyued. And Balaam sayd. I haue synned. I knewe not that yu was agaynst me. And yf it dysplease the that I thyder go I shall re¦torne. And the aungell sayd vnto hym. Go wt these messagers / and kepe the that yu spe∣ke nothynge but that yt I shall cōmaunde¦the. Than Balaam yode. And whā he was in the cyte the kynge sent vnto hȳ gyftes & prynces / & was receyued in grete honoure. For to be shorte Balaam made to edyfy by thre tymes auters / & in thre places for to do sacryfyce to god of lambes & bulles to kno∣we yf god sholde consent more soner in one place than in another for to curse ye people of Israell. But god yt is not varyable con∣sented nomore in one place than in another Afterwarde for to obey to ye kinge Balaam counceyled hȳ how he sholde make to com¦myt fornycacyon in ye men of armes of ysra¦ell: wherby god sholde be wrothe wt them: & ryght cruelly punysshe them. And ye maner of ye counceyle was yt they prepayre all the fayre maydens of the cyte assyeged of ye ys∣raelytes / & that those fayre women sholde holde them at theyr dores / & theyr ydols by them. And yt whan the cyte were take ye mē of armes wolde go to ye fayre women. And so god wrothed ayēst thē. The yll coūcell of
the sayd Balaam was done & the synne ac¦cōplysshed. And god the creatour wrothed hym agaynst the sayd chyldren of ysrael in suche maner that fyre celestyall descended vpon them the whiche brēned .xxiii.M. In lykewyse as expoundeth Haymo vpon the wordes of saynt Poule the whiche ben wry¦ten .i. ad corī. x. Ne{que} fornicemur sicut qui∣dam eorum fornicati sunt et ceciderūt vno die viginti tria milia. And yet of the aboue sayd chyldren there was yet a thousande of the prynces the whiche were hanged by the commaundemēt of god & of Moyses as it is wryten numeri .xxv. And the Ire of god was appeased by that ye one of the chyldren of Ysraell named Fynees rose vp and slewe in the zele of god & of Iustyce a man and a womā in cōmyttynge fornycicaon. &c. All this sayd punycyon and this synne was by the counceyle of the cursed prophete Balaā the whiche requyred of god that he myght deye as the Iuste men. Vnde numeri .xxiii. Moriatur aīa mea morte iustorū / et fiant nouissima mea horū similia. He wolde deye well / but he wolde not lyue well. And ther¦fore his request was not Iuste for to haue well wtout deseruynge it.. ¶Stuprum. A. ¶Examples of deflouringe of vyrgyns And fyrst. Example how a vyrgyn was corrupt of a yonge man / & by malyce im¦posed the synne vpon saynt Machaire yt was pacyent. lxxxxi. IT is wryten in the lyfe of faders how the deuyll tempted a vyrgin the whiche was defloured. And whan she was grete her frendes asked her of whome she had con∣eyued. And she answered. This solytarye hath slept with me. And her frendes & men of the strete toke Machayre / & hanged pot¦tes & kettilles about his necke / & ledde him betynge through the stretes. And so moche they Iniuryed hym / bette & oppressed that he was in lykewyse as halfe deed / & he bare all pacyently. And a seculer man yt had my¦nystred vnto hym his necessytees was also rebuked in saynge vnto hym. Thou sayd yt he was an holy man / & he hathe defloured our doughter. For to be shorte they wolde not leue to bete the sayd Machayre tyll yt ye sayd man had pledged that he sholde nou¦rysshe the doughter. And after that he was pledged Machayre sayd vnto hymselfe. I fynde a woman it behoueth me to nourys∣she her. And he put hȳselfe to werke nyght and day & made baskettes. And the pryce that they were solde for he made to be born vnto the sayd woman / & he bare all pacyēt¦ly. And whan the sayd woman sholde chyl∣de she was sore seke / & so longly to trauay∣le that it was meruayle. And she was de∣maunded ye cause wherfore she chylded not She answered. It is for that / yt I falsely hath imposed the synne vnto the solytary the whiche is innocent / suche a yonge man hath commytted the dede. Whan the man pledge of Machayre herde the case he bare tydynges that the woman myght not chil¦de for the false cryme that she had imposed & that all the people came vnto hym to crye hym mercy & to do penaunce. Whan Ma∣chayre herde these tydȳges here to fle vain glory he abode not tyll the people came vn∣to hym for to gloryfye hym / he fledde in to another place solytarye. &c. ¶By the sayd doughter the whiche was punysshed for yt yt she had imposed the sayd synne by lyenge vpon saynt Machayre is for to vnderston¦de that lyers and yll sayers shall be punys∣shed of god. And that theyr lesynges shall be dyscouered and shewed before all. Vn̄ in
euangelio. Nichil occultū est quod non ma¦nifestetur: nec abscōditum quod nō cōgnos¦catur & in palā veniat. And by that yt Ma∣chayre had pacyence whan he was beten & iniuryed denoteth yt in aduersyte a mā shol¦de be pacyent. And that / yt Machayre dred vaynglory denoteth yt we sholde fle it & not abyde to be honoured and praysed of ye peo¦ple. &c. B. ¶Another example of a knyght damp∣ned & tourmented in hell yt toke the may¦denhede of a vyrgyn. lxxxxi. MEn fynde by wrytinge this ye whiche foloweth how the dys¦cyple recyteth in the boke of his promptuary and sayeth yt a knyght dyspoyled & toke the maydēhede of a vyrgyn. And after that he was deed she prayed for ye soule of hȳ. The sayd knyght deed appered vnto her vysibly in voyce ryght rough & horrybly. The whi¦che as she demaunded the cause of his hor∣senes / he answered that it was for that / yt he gloryfyed hymselfe in ye swetenes of his voyce in syngȳge the songes lecherouses & seculers. And she hym demaunded wherfo¦re he had in suche wyse the thyghes and the legges ryght blacke / scalde / scabby & full of woundes. He answered / for that yt I glory¦fyed me in ye beaute of my thyghes & stret¦ched them out & hath enorned them proude¦ly by the custome of a knyght. Now I wal¦ked amonge the thornes & am tourmented & prycked & fulfylled wt woundes. And she asked hȳ of thestate of his body / for he had an huge tode styckynge on his breste in su∣che maner yt with his two fore fete strayned his necke & his mouthe Ioyned to his / & his wombe stretchynge vpon his wombe / & wt his hynder fete helde & strayned his geny∣toryes & wronge hym terrybly. He sayd I suffre the kyssynge of this tode for the leche¦rous kyssynges yt I made vpon the & on ye other women. And for the embracementes this tode enbraceth me. And for the opera∣cyons of lechery I am tourmented in my genytoryes wtout ceasynge. And she hym demaunded yf he sholde be delyuered fro the sayd paynes. And he answered pray ye not for me / for it shall prouffyte me nothyn¦ge / for I am dampned eternally / & for that yt I haue dyspysed the medycyne of penaū¦ce. And whan he had spoken these wordes he departed. And after this sayd vysyon ye woman chose to be enclosed & there wepte her synnes. C. ¶Another example how Ammō ye sone of Dauyd was slayne of Absolon for yt / that he had defloured his syster named Thamar. lxxxxi. WE fynde wryten in the .xii. chapitre of the seconde boke of kynges that Ammon loued dysordonately his syster Thamar. And for the cōmyttyng of the sayd synne a man named Ionadab his frende couceyled him yt he sholde fayne hȳ to be seke in his bedde / & that he sholde de∣maunde yt his syster Thamar sholde visyte hym / & applye hym to ete / & so it was done. Whan Thamar had applyed hym to ete he put al the other out of the chambre / & there he prayed her of dyshonoure. She answe∣red. My broder do not this thynge / it shall be a cursed renowne in Israell / do not this foly. I ne may bere this rebuke & thou shalt be as one of the foles of Israell. Ammon wolde not beleue her / & was stronger than she and toke her by force and defyled her. And he hated her more than he had loued her before & chased her and put her out ry∣gorously. Than she sayd. The euyll yt thou doost me now is more greter than that / yt
thou dydest to me before. And she dispoyled her of her clothes of vgynyte / & toke other & so yode away wepynge & cryenge. And her broder Absolon vnto whome she tolde all he dede comforted her / & had Ammon in hate / & sayd nothynge to hym. And two yeres after Absolon made a grete dyner / vnto the whiche he badde Ammon and at the sayd dyner made hym to be slayne. And for bycause that he had defloured his sayd syster Thamar. &c. ¶And therfore many euylles cometh by harlottryses. The sayd Ammon commytted incest to knowe his sy¦ster / and defloracyon to breke her vyrgyny¦te. These ben two synnes reserued to ye bys∣shop. And the thyrde came after ye was mo¦che grete that absolon made to sle his owne broder. And the sayd Absolon was slayne & deyed myscheuously as it is wryten before in the fourthe commaundement. And it is to be noted that yt the sayd lechery was cō∣mytted by the cursed counceyle of Ionadab the whiche semed too be the fraude of Am∣mon. &c. D: ¶Another example how Sychem the whiche defloured Dyne the doughter of Iacob was slayne & his fader Emor / & those of the cyte. lxxxxii IT is wryten in the .xxxiiii. chapy∣tre of genesis how Dyne ye dough¦ter of Iacob yode forthe of her fa¦ders hous to thende that she wol∣de se ye women of the regyon. And whan she was in ye towne Sychem ye sone of Emor prynce of that londe behelde her / and coueyted and toke her by force & slepte wt her. And after he loued the vyrgyn so mo¦che yt he sayd vnto his fader. Demaunde this mayden yt she may be my wyfe. Than he yede to demaunde her of Iacob as his so¦nes came from the feldes / the whiche were angry of ye defloracyon of theyr syster. And the answere vnder treasō was made vnto Emor yt they ne myght gyue theyr dough∣ter vnto a man incyrcūcysed / but yf the ma¦les wolde be cyrcūcysed yt they sholde gyue togyder theyr chyldren in maryage / & they sholde be one people. This thynge pleased well vnto Emor & vnto Sychem & to all ye people. And they made all the males to be cyrcūcysed. And on the thyrde day after as theyr woundes were sore greuous ye two so¦nes of Iacob Symeon & Leuy entred the cyte & drewe theyr glayues & slewe Sychē & Emor & all the males of the cyte yt had bē cyrcūcysed. After they toke theyr sister Dy¦ne in the hous of Emor. And the other so∣nes of Iacob yode afterwarde in to ye sayd & dyspoyled it in the vengeaūce of the sayd synne / & wasted the shepe / the asses / and ye bestyall yt were in the houses & feldes / & led the women & chyldren in captiuyte. Whan this was done Iacob sayd to his sones. ye haue troubled me & put me in hate wt ye cha¦nanyens & ēhabytauntes of this londe / we ben fewe / they shall assemble them & bete me & my hous shal be broken. They answe¦red. Shall we leue our syster a brothell & a¦bused. Than god spake to Iacob & sayd. A¦ryse yu vp & go in to Bethell & abyde there. Iacob was obedyent & yode in to Bethell & sacrifyed there to god. And the terrour of god beset about so strongly his enemyes yt they durst not folowe hȳ. ¶By this exam¦ple is seen yt for to cōmyt the synne of leche∣ry grete yll cometh. For a lytell to haue ye cō¦pany of the sayd doughter only grete mur∣dres & debates proceded wtout the daunger of the losse of soules. E. ¶Another example of him yt kyssed and enbraced the ketles of ye kechyn wenȳge to enbrace vyrgyns. lxxxxii.
IT is wryten in the somme of ver¦tues & vyces how the prouost of the towne of Rome made on a ty¦me to take the vyrgyns for that they beleued in the crysten fayth And the sayd prouost made them to kepte in the kechyn to thende yt he myght ynough enbrace them. And as by nyght he entred with them in the sayd kechyn he was assot∣ted in his mȳde in suche wyse yt he thought to enbrace them / & he enbraced the ketylles and the pottes of the kechyn & kyssed them And so moche he enbraced & kyssed them yt he was fylled of lechery & was as blacke as coles. Afterwarde he yode to his seruaūtes the whiche taryed hym wtout not knowȳge that he was soyled and affoled. And whan they sawe him so blacke they wende that he had be chaunged to a deuyll. So they bette hym & after they fledde & left hym. And as he meruayled by hymselfe what it was / he yode vnto themperour to thende yt he shol¦de make queremony. And they fledde al as from the face of the deuyll & bette hȳ. And whan he had vnderstande of other what it was he went home & wasshed hym. And af¦ter made to brynge ye sayd vyrgyns before hym & commaunded to dispoyle them yt he might ynough beholde theyr beaute but by goddes power theyr clothes helde so fast to theyr bodyes yt by no force none myght dys¦poyle them. And so god kept them from de¦fame & fro the fylthe of lechery / & the sayd prouost was shamed. And therfore they yt wyll lyue chastely sholde requyre the helpe of god as the vyrgyns dyde yt god kept. ¶Consilium malum. F. ¶Example how an olde bawde coūcey∣led yll & deceyued a yonge womā. lxxxxi THe dyscyple recyteth in the boke of his promptuarye of a man yt had to go to Rome. Whan he de¦parted he left the gouernyng of his hous vnto his wyfe the whi¦che was yonge fayre & chaste. And as she gouerned her wysely a yonge man behelde her beaute / & coueyted to haue her by folys¦she loue / & her desyred by hym and by other But he was dyspysed / & she set nought by all his gyftes. And on a tyme an olde baude hym demaunded the cause why he languys¦shed & wepte. He to her declared the cause of the sayd loue / & she hym promysed yt she sholde make hym to haue her. And for too do that she made a lytell bytche yt she had to ere mustarde confycte wt breed for to ma¦ke it wepe. And she yode vnto the hous of yt sayd yonge woman / the whiche receyued her benygnety in wenȳge yt she was a good woman. And the yonge woman demaun∣ded of the olde the cause wherfore the whel¦pe yt she had brought wept so. And she toke her to wepe saynge. This lytel bytche whel¦pe was my doughter ryght chaste & ryght fayre that god hath chaunged in to a lytell bytche / & it deputed for to wepe so for yt she had lete a yonge man deye yt languysshed of her loue. And the yonge woman decla∣red vnto the olde yt suche a yonge man had requyred her in lykewyse as it is sayd. And the olde sayd / beholde how god hath done in you grete mercy / ye may knowe it by ye woūde yt he hath made vnto my doughter. And take hede yt there ne come vnto you sē¦blable thynge. And by the causes of yt sayd olde woman the yonge wyfe consented her vnto the loue of the yonge man & cōmytted ye synne wt hym. &c. The sayd olde bawde le¦cherouse in thought but dyspised by her fou¦lenesse was wors than yt deuyl / so ben these other bawdes / for where the deuyll myght do nothynge by his temptacyons the sayd
olde bawdes there worketh as dyde the be¦foresayd. And for that yt they haue the ma∣ners & condycyons of the deuyl the whiche ne counceyleth but euyll they shall go with h in to dampnacion and perdycyon eter¦nally. &c. ¶Adulterium. A. ¶Examples of aduouterers. And fyrst example of a woman dampned the whi¦che vsed her lyfe in lecheries & glotonyes and her husbande was vnto the contra∣ry the whiche lyued sobrely. lxxxxii. IT is wryten in the lyfe of faders that there was a man yt besyly la¦boured his lande / he was attem∣perate / softe / of good maners / weyke / and sekely of his body hol¦den in his bedde by langoure & lyued grete tyme / he kept tacyturnyte & scylence in su∣che maner that they the whiche knewe him not had wende that he had be dombe. And his wyfe was vnto ye contrary / for her wor¦des moeued vnto all persones and vnto all purpose that a man had spoken as her body had be a tongue. Noyses sourded vp often tymes amonge many for her. And she abo¦de in dronkenes with lecherous men / & soo moche was she gyuen vnto synne yt fewe men of the strete myght escape her lechery. In her body she had neuer dolour ne seke∣nesse. It befell on a time yt her husbande dy¦ed / & forthwt the ayre was moeued by thre dayes so moche that it rayned on his bedde and thonders & wyndes were so stronge yt he abode vnburyed those thre dayes. And ye sayd woman was vnto the contrary / for af¦ter that she had lyued longe time she deyed & it was fayre weder / clere / & peasyble. And they had a fayre doughter yt consydered the lyfe of her fader & that of her moder for to chuse whiche she myght take / and to beleue that yt she had seen wt her owne eyen / or to beleue that yt she had herde tell of clerkes. Than she slepte & there came before her as a grete man of body & of loke terryble the whiche sayd vnto her. Come to se thy fader & thy moder & afterwarde chuse to lyue of whyder thou wylte. And ledde her in to a grete felde ful of many floures in paradise & of dyuers fruytes / and of dyuers trees & of beautees inenarrables the whiche a mā ne may recompte. And she sawe her fader in Ioye and spake vnto hym and desyred to dwell in that place there wt hym. Than he that ledde her toke her by ye hande and sayd that she sholde come to se her moder / and ledde her in to hell the whiche is a place mo¦che lowe / dymbe & derke full of brennynge fyre stynkinge as sulphre / and there knewe she her moder in the sayd lowe place / & plon¦ged in the fyre vp to the necke the whiche cryed & wepte / strayned and grynded her teche of rage and of anguysshe / & had wor∣mes aboute her necke the whiche bote her. And as she lyft her eyen vpwarde she kne∣we her sayd doughter and sayd vnto her in cryenge. Alas my doughter for myn owne operacyons I bere these tourmentes. It semed me that the lyfe of sobrenesse & cha∣styte was but mockery. I beleued not that ye lyfe of lechery & rybaudry gaue suche tor¦mentes. Lo for the lytell delectacyon of le∣chery & of glotony / & for the delytes & worl¦dely Ioye yt I had I suffre so grete cruelte of fyre & tourment. And as she required her doughter for helpe he yt ledde her toke her & set her there as he had taken her / & sayd to her. Chuse now whiche lyfe thou wylte / eyther of thy fader or of thy moder. Than she toke relygyon & was saued. ¶By this example it appereth yt this woman yt lyued after her body was dāpned. For ye lytell de¦lectacyon yt she toke she brenneth and shal
brenne eternally & shall be in so grete pay∣nes that there is no wryter that it cā wryte ne clerke / ne tongue tell it. And her husbon∣de the whiche lyued sobrely is in Ioye eter∣nall. &c. Tu reddes vnicui{que} iuxta opera sua: dicit dauid in psal. B. ¶Another example of the dampnacion of a burgeys aduoutrer & of another wo¦man maryed. lxxxxii. MEn fynde in wrytynge this ye whiche foloweth how the dys¦cyple recyteth in his promptu¦arye and sayeth that an holy mā prayed for his wyfe depar¦ted & deed. She appered vnto hym & ledde hym in to a place obscure. In the whiche he sawe deuylles horrybles / the whiche keste in a tonne of fyre full of metall boylynge a burgeys deed beynge of her towne and the wyfe of another man / and they were brēt & bayned in the sayd metall and they swȳ∣med wtin it as peasen in the pot boylynge & they cryed bothe twayne / maledyccyō / ma¦ledyccyon. And the sayd holy man was ad∣meruayled. The sayd woman sayd wt those here I had ben bayned yf the mercy of god had not called me vnto penaunce / & after∣warde sayd. These two here hath left theyr propre maryages & hath drawen them vn¦to synne longe time togyders. And I haue ben theyr example & meane and vnto them I haue taught the way to aske pardon of the sayd synne of aduoutrye / but they ben deed wtout penaunce salutary. For the con¦fessyon that they made was wtout charyte & for the drede of dethe. And my confession was salutary & agreable vnto god / I made in it charyte of the loue of him. ¶This exā¦ple denoteth that punyssyon & dampnacyō foloweth to cōmyt lechery. And for that yt the confessyon of the burgeys / & of the wo∣man was not good it is to vnderstande yt in confessyon a man sholde haue true cōtry¦cyon & repentaūce to haue offended god by synne & to be agaynst his cōmaundemētes For those the whiche repente them for re∣de to be dampned / & alonely they loue but them selfe they ben out of the loue and cha∣ryte of god. For they ben not wrothe ne so∣ry to haue of offended god by synne as the sayd woman the whiche made confessyon in charyte & she was saued. No good dede done is merytoryous whan charyte there fayleth. As it is wryten .i. ad. cor. xiii. ca. ¶Another example of an aduoutrer that ye deuylles posseded at the entre of ye chyr¦che. lxxxxii. THe dyscyple recyteth in his ser¦mons of a man that after yt he had cōmitted aduoutry entred in to the chirche / & forthwith ye deuylles posseded hym & tour∣mented / & so myscheuously deyed he impe∣nytent before the people. D. ¶Another example of a womā aduou¦tres dampned that two dragons tour∣mented. lxxxxii. IT is wryten in the boke of gyftes yt an honest man wt his wyfe gaue to gods seruyce ony chylde yf it vnto them were gyuen of god or sente. And they had a sone ye whi∣che was good & relygyous. Than the fader and the moder dyde grete almesdedes / but the moder was deceyued & chylded .ii. chyl∣dren of other than her husbande yt she slewe secretly: & so she deyed wtout confessyō. And as her sone prayed for her in his masse she appered to hȳ in grete tourment & had two foule dragōs yt bote her pappes. She was
requyred to tell of her estate. And she sayd / I am dampned. Than as her sone was he¦uy she sayd. I trusted me in ye almesdedes yt I dyde & am deed wtout confessyon & cha¦ryt These two dragons yt biteth me is for the two chyldren yt I had in aduoutry whi¦che I sholde haue gyuē souke & nourysshed & I slewe them. ¶By this example is de∣noted yt dampnacyon cometh for cōmyttin¦ge of aduoutry & bawdry. And for that the sayd woman trusted in almesdedes yt she had done a man sholde vnderstande yt mor¦tall synne bryngeth to nought & maketh to forgete the good operacions done vnto sal¦uacyon & rewarde eternall & so dampneth the persones the whiche so deyeth wtout cor¦reccyon penaunce & amendemēt. Howbeit that those the whiche hath done in theyr ly∣fe of good operacyōs hath not so many pay¦nes in hel as yf they had done no good dede And therfore none sholde wtdrawe to doo good dedes. &c. E. ¶Another example of ye payne of a mā the whiche knewe the wyfe of his neygh¦boure. lxxxxii. SOme maysters wryteth this the whiche foloweth how ye dis¦cyple reciteth in the boke of his promptuarye and sayeth that a yonge man synned wt the wy¦fe of his neyghbour / vnto whome god sent a plaghe & he deyed of sodayne dethe wtout confessyon & wtout receyuynge the sacramē¦tes. The whiche by ye suffraunce of god vn¦to the terrour of other aduouterers he ap∣pered vnto his rybawde after his dethe in grete tourment and payne. And ye sayd wo¦man asked hym of his estate. He answered I am dampned for the aduoutryes yt I cō¦mytted wt the. And he sayd after. Wylt yu se how I brenne wtout and within / & keste of his vrine ye was as metall molten in brēnin¦ge fyre. Of this vysyon the woman had so grete fere yt she went to confesse / correct / & amended her lyfe. F. ¶Another example how a man sawe a woman punysshed for ye aduoutry yt she had commytted. lxxxxii. THe dyscyple recyteth in his ser∣mons that he hath redde that a man was rauysshed before the gates of hell the whiche sawe a woman ryght greuously tormē¦ted / and a flambe of fyre enuyroned her & beset about in all partes. And the man de∣maunded wherfore yt woman was tormen¦ted so greuously. The answere was gyuen that she suffred suche tourmentes for the ry¦baudryes yt she commytted with straunge men. G. ¶Another example of a yonge man yt synned wt a wedded woman. lxxxxii. ALso the dyscyple recyteth in ye boke of his promptuarye and sayth that a yonge man sinned with a woman maryed and {per}∣iured hȳselfe. The whiche was seke / the body of Ihesu cryst was brought vnto him / but he wolde neuer receyue it tyl he had made confessyon verytable of the de¦de / after he amēded hym and correcked his euyll lyfe. H. ¶Another example how two aduoute∣resses bette eche other in the departȳge of a pyece of lynnen clothe that was gy¦uen to them. lxxxxii
ESope sayth in his boke that two harlottes maryed habandoned them wt a man of auctoryte that gouerned hym not wysely ne ho¦lyly. After that he had synned wt the sayd women / & with the one more than with the other he gaue vnto them a pyce of lynnen clothe to departe betwene them for theyr hyre. And whan they were in ye strete there was noyse betwene them to departe the sayd clothe. And the one of them sayd yt she sholde haue more than the other / for she had ben there longer. They reuyled eche o∣ther & called harlottes as they were. And theyr husbandes the whiche knewe nothyn¦ge of ye cause of them came to defende eche of them theyr wyfe & bette eche other stron¦gly. And as they were in suche debate there came one Quidam yt departed theym / and sayd. Syrs it is no mater here but to depar¦te from hens. It apperteyneth well yt wyse men here them speke / & soo they deparded. And the sayd lynnen clothe was put in han¦de sequestred tyll ye sayd mater be dyscussed in iugement. &c. ¶By this example a man sholde vnderstande yt the mater of them yt cōmytteth lechery shall be dyscussed and iu¦ged before god yf it be not effaced by penaū¦ce. And in lykewyse as the sayd women we¦re defamed before ye worlde & opēly shewed theyr synne / al the synnes of al sȳners open¦ly shall be shewed in Iugement before all. And that yt the sayd harlot sayd yt she shol∣de haue more than ye other for yt she had bē there longer denoteth yt so moche more as a persone hath done of synnes & hath lōgest abyden in them shall haue in hell ye mo tor∣mentes / & vnto hym shall be gyuen more punycion than he yt hath done but one syn̄e anone past. Vn̄ apoc. xviii. Quantū glorifi¦cauit se pctōr in pctō suo et ī delicus: tātum date illi tormentū & luctū. I. ¶Another example how a quene rode vpon Arystotle yt was wyse and a grete clerke. lxxxxii THe dyscyple recyteth in his prō¦ptuary yt Iames de vitre sayh yt Arystotle taught kynge Alex¦ander that he sholde refuse to accede oft tymes vnto his wife the whiche was ryght fayre yt his courage ne were letted to puruey vnto the charge of the comune yt he had. And Alexander vnto hym obeyed. Whan the quene knewe it she was full of sorowe & began to drawe Ary∣stotle vnto her loue / for she passed by hym oft tymes all alone barefoted & her heeres vntressed hangynge doune to thende yt she myght drawe hym to her loue. In thende Arystotle was tempted & began to desyre her carnally / the whiche sayd. I ne wyll do it in no maner what so euer it be yf I se not in the some tokens of loue that yu tempt me not. Than come in to my chambre rampȳ∣ge wt fete and wt handes as an hors in berȳ¦ge me & I shall knowe yf yu mockest wt me And whan he consented vnto the condyciō she denounced this thynge vnto Alexan∣der / the whiche hyd hȳ & toke Arystotle as he bare ye quene. And as he wolde haue slay¦ne hym Arystotle sayd in excusynge hȳ. Yf it be soo happened vnto a wyse auncyent yt is to me yt hath be so deceyued of a woman yu mayst well se and knowe yt I haue well taught the / how may it come vnto the that arte yonge. Whan ye kynge herde these wor¦des he spared & made an ende of that / that he hadde begonne after his doctryne. etc. ¶By this example here a man sholde vn∣derstande that ye moost wisest ben as soone deceyued by lechery as the symple people. Also it is to be noted that the sayd Arysto¦tle hadde offended before god and was cul¦pable as and yf he hadde accomplysshed
the sayd lechery / for he had broken the com¦maūdement of god. Nō concupisces vxo∣rem proximi tui. &c. K. ¶Another example of a woman aduou¦tresse yt bare an hote yron. lxxxxii. IT is wryten in the somme of pe∣naunce yt a woman maryed ad∣uoutres was susspeccioned of her husbande / the whiche yode vnto confessyon to wepe her synnes / & after her confessyon bare an yren al reed be¦fore her husbande for too shewe yt she was clene & pure. And after yt she had doone the sayd myracle she enpryded her & assured re¦tourned vnto her sysie as before. And ones her sayd husbande apperceyued her wt the sayd synne / & hete secretely the sayd yron & put it in the place where it was. And after¦warde sayd vnto his wyfe. Gyue me suche an yron / where is it. Than she ranne to ta∣ke it wt her handes & she brenned them. &c. ¶By this example is denoted yt by the ver¦tue of confessyon her synnes were effaced & pardoned & dyde myracle / & for to retorne vnto synne she lost all and was wors than before Peccatum in matrimonio. quere exem¦pla .xxxvi. e. f. g. h. i. A. ¶Examples that in the solempnytees a man sholde abstayne from operacion of maryage. lxxxxiii. THe dyscyple recyteth in his sermōs of a man yt a man knewe his wyfe the vygyll of Eester. The whiche whan the preste put the body of god in his mouthe on Eester day it lept out. And as the sayd man sawe yt he was confessed / he repented hym / confest / & was houseled. B. ¶Another example how the chyldren of a mā & of his wyfe ne myght haue ba∣ptysme for the synne yt they commytted n maryage. lxxxxiii ALso men fynde by wrytynge that a man & a wyfe contemp¦ned not honestly in the operaci¦on of maryage. And they had thre chyldren the whiche coude not haue baptysme. And for to fynde reme¦dy & counceyle they yode vnto an holy bys∣shop to confesse theym. Vnto whome they sayd that theyr chyldren might neuer haue baptysme. And he axed them one after ano¦ther / eche of them by theyr selfe yf they ma¦de ony dyssolucion or dyshoneste in the ope¦racyon of maryage. And they answered ye one after ye other / ye / thus & thus. Than ye sayd bysshop sayd vnto them that it was ye cause wherfore theyr chyldren had not bap¦tysme for doynge that synne. ¶And ther∣fore a man sholde contēpne honestly in ma¦ryage / & to accede the one wt the other / or to make lygnage / or for too yelde the debte of maryage on her party / or for to fle & auoy∣de synne. C. ¶Another example how a woman chyl¦ded .ix. chyldren at a burden. lxxxxiii. SOme maysters wryteth this the whiche foloweth how ye dis¦cyple reciteth in the boke of his promptuarye and sayeth that there was a clerke a good chyl¦de approued of good maners the whiche cō¦uerted all vnto the prayse of our lady. By ye whiche he was bysshop of coleyne / & ye sayd bysshop arose on a nyght for to giue laudes to god & our lady. And after yt he had wal∣ked through his hall he behelde out at a wȳ¦dowe women yt bare in a panyer .viii. chyl∣dren
borne in yt nyght of a noble matrone of the cyte. The whiche for shame retayned one & gaue grete somme of money vnto ye women for to go drowne. viii. The sayd bys¦shop toke the sayd chyldren / baptysed them & made them to be nourysshed secretely / & made them to be instructe in lettre & in son¦ge .x. or .xii. yeres. The bysshop made his oc¦cupacyons wt a burgoys yt toke the chyldrē & they folowed hym. In thende ye sayd bys¦shop reueled ye dede vnto the burgoys and vnto ye moder of the chyldren. And by ye gra¦ce of god a cloyster was edyfyed / in ye whi∣che the bysshop & the chyldren yelded them vnto god. &c. ¶Sacrilegium. D. ¶Examples of men of the chirche leche¦rous. And first example how a preste for¦nycatour deyed sodaynly. lxxxxiii IT is wryten in the lyfe of saynt Loye bysshop how a preste of his bysshopryche was infamed of for¦nycacyon for a concubyne yt he hel¦de with him. And after yt the sayd preste was often tymes warned to abstay∣ne hym from yt synne / & that be wolde not the sayd bysshop excōmunycate hym & defē¦ded hym to synge masse. The preste dyspy¦sed the sentence & prepayred hym to synge masse. And whan he was at ye auter he fell towarde it & was strangled of the deuyll & deyed sodaynly before al ye people. ¶This example denoteth many thȳges. The fyrst fyrst is yt these lechours yt wyll not correcte thē & amende whan they ben warned shall be punysshed of god. The seconde is yt peo∣ple of the chyrche ne other sholde attende to receyue theyr creatour in synne / & without to haue wyll dysposed to abstayne them fro yll. For yll came to the preste. The thyrde is yt excōmunycacyon is moche to drede & for as moche as the sayd preste dredde not yll dyde come vnto hym bothe vnto body and vnto soule. &c. E. ¶Another example how two relygious were appostates / lecherous / & after dyd penaunce. lxxxxiii. IT is wryten in the lyfe of faders that two relygyous were tēpted of fornycacyon / they yode in to ye worlde & toke two wyues. After∣warde they sayd togyders. What haue we wonne where as we haue left the ordre angelycke for to come to this immun¦dycyte & vnclennesse / & after these thinges we shall come vnto the fyre of tourmentes Than retorne we vnto our hermytage / & do we penaunce of thynges yt we haue pre∣sumed. And they went in to ye hermytage & prayed the faders yt they wolde receyue them confessynge & penytentes of thynges yt they had cōmytted. They wete thā recey¦ued & enclosed an hole yere. And by penaun¦ce men gaue vnto theym breed & water by measure. In beholdynge theym they were semblables of one replexym. Whan ye tyme of theyr penaūce was accomplysshed they yssued. And the one was pale / lene / & sorow¦full / & ye other fayre & ruddy. And eche had meruayle for they had egally breed & water And they axed hȳ yt was lene & heuy what he dyde wt the thoughtes whan he was en∣closed. He sayd I thought yt I sholde go in to paynes for the euylles yt I haue cōmyt∣ted & my bones harded them to my flesshe for grete fere yt I had. They demaunded ye other what he thought whan he was enclo¦sed. He answered I yelded thankes to god yt had wtdrawen from me the soylenes of ye worlde & the paynes of hell / & called to ye cō¦uersacyon angelyke. And I reioyse whā I
thynke on my god. And the aūcyents sayd yt the penaunce of bothe twayne was egal towarde god. ¶By this example those the whiche hath cōmytted synne sholde retorne vnto god & doo penaunce as dyde the sayd relygyous. What shall it prouffyte vnto a persone to do synne at his pleasure / & after to be dampned. &c. F. ¶Another example of the punycyon & dampnacyon of a nonne that cōmytted lechery. lxxxxiii. MEn fynde by wrytinge this ye whiche foloweth how the dys¦cyple recyteth in the boke of his promptuary and sayeth yt a nonne slewe her chylde in her wombe / & so deyed without cōfessyon Afterwarde she appered vnto her cosyn yt prayed for her & helde a chylde of fyre in her armes / vnto whome she sayd. I am damp¦ned / & this chylde of fyre yt I bere I haue conceyued & slayne it. And I must bere it e∣ternally by punycyon. G. ¶Another example how a pylgrym sa∣we a prelate cast within the depnesse of helle. lxxxxiii. ARnoldus & the discyple recyteth in theyr bokes yt there was a pyl¦gryme yt solde his robe to drinke stronge wyne. And he dranke so moche yt he was dronken & lost his wyt / and yt men estemed yt he was deed And that houre his soule was borne in too hell in the place of tourmentes / & specyally in to a pyt brennȳge & couered with a lydde of yron enbrased in fyre. And there was ye prynce of derkenes / & the pylgrym sawe a∣prelate yt was presented vnto y sayd deuyll the whiche greted hym / & hym presented to drynke of a cuppe enbrased full of soulphre in fyre molten. And whan the prelate had dronken the lydde of the pytte was taken away: & the prelate was cast within ye pytte of fyre. And whan the sayd pylgrym sawe yt he had grete fere. And the deuyl cryed on hygh. Brynge me hyder yt pylgrym yt hath solde his vestement and made himselfe drō¦ken. And whan ye sayd pylgrym herde those wordes he behelde his good aungell yt had brought hym thyder / requyred his ayde / & promysed vnto god & him that he wolde ne¦uermore be dronken so yt he wolde delyuer him at that houre. And forth wt his sayd sou¦le was put in to his body. And the sayd pyl∣grym noted the houre & the day yt it so befel & went in to his countree and founde yt the sayd prelate deyed at ye daye & at the houre that he was borne in to hell. For he was of his countree wherby he wyst yt it was very table. And therfore the excesse of meet and drynke is to fle. &c. H. ¶Another example of a relygyous wo¦man dampned the whiche in her lyfe ga¦ue grete almesse / but she cōceyued a chyl¦de & slewe it. lxxxxiii. MEn fynde by wrytynge this yt whiche foloweth how the dys¦cyple recyteth in his promptu¦ary & sayth that the doughter of a kynge was soo moche de∣uoute / so good an almeswoman & chaste yt it was meruayle. She nourysshed all ye da¦yes of her lyfe a nombre of poore folke / of wydowes & of orphelyns. And it befel that by folysshe loke that she made vpon one of her seruauntes she coueyted to lye wt hym / and conceyued a chylde. And by the coun∣ceyle of an olde woman she dystroyed and slewe it. After that she had nomore Ioye & requyred to be put in relygyon. Her fader
put her / and there she was solytary wtout laughynge or playenge the whiche was ye example vnto other in all bounte & relygyō Afterwarde she deyed without confessyng her of yt synne / & within .xxx. dayes she ap∣pered vnto her abbesse to whome she sayd yt she was dampned. And the abbesse sayd. Alas tell me the cause wherfore / for yu was so good that yu was our light & our example in al goodnes. Than she tolde yt for ye sayd syn̄e commytted she was dampned. More¦ouer she sayd yt yf she had be confessed of it yt she sholde haue had pardon & yf she had commytted it a .M. tymes. ¶By this exā∣ple a man sholde vnderstande yt the good operacions saueth not the persones yf they deye in mortall synne wtout confessyon and correccyon. It is that / yt the prophete Ysaie sayth. Iusticia iusti non liberabit eū in qua cū{que} die peccauerit. &c. Also note well yt no persone ne sholde drawe backe to doo good dedes: & also he shold do as many as he may & albeit he sholde dampned for he shal haue the lesse of tourmentes in hell. &c. as it is de¦clared before. Quere. xlii. b. Also a man shol¦de vnderstande by this example yt by true cōfessyon all synnes ben pardoned. &c. ¶Castitas et bonitas. A. ¶Example how a vyrgyn sawe a preste chaste / pure / clere and fayre in synginge masse. lxxxxiiii IT is wryten in the promptuary of ye dyscyple yt there was a virgyn religy¦ous named Oda in the towne of Bendāce yt sawe yt as a preste of ye vyllage sāge masse his body & his holy vestements were deco∣red honourably. And whan he lyft ye hostye & put it on the corporas the aungels toke ye sleues yt they ne touched ye sayd hostye. And lyfted theyr handes enclinynge theyr hedes wt grete reuerence & worshypped ye body of god. Whan tyme came to receyue the sacra¦ment the vyrgyn was also rauysshed out of her thought / & sawe the body of the preste so pure & clere that she sawe ye body of god as by a fyole of crystal. Whan ye masse was ended & that ye preste had put of his clothes the vyrgyn came agayne vnto her selfe and sawe the body of ye preste lytell & lytell thyc¦ken & retorne in the first forme. And ye sayd mayden had suche grace yt she sawe those the whiche receyued theyr creature worthe¦ly. And she sawe on an Eester day yt all one¦ly .x. persones receyued theyr creatour wor¦thely in a chyrche. &c. ¶This example shol¦de moeue the prestes to accede in the holy sa¦cryfyce of ye masse worthely & holyly in esta¦te of grace for to haue ye grace that the sayd preste had. Also the virgyns sholde kepe ho¦lyly theyr chastite & maydenheed / & to lyue deuoutly in doynge good werkes as dyde ye the sayd vyrgyn for to gete grace towarde god. &c. B. ¶Another example how two relygyou¦ses were from crystmas tyll vnto ye feest of saynt Iohan to speke of god / & they wened not to haue ben but the space of two houres. lxxxxiiii. IT is wryten in the boke of ye dys∣cyple and in many other places approued yt two yonge vyrgyns relygyouses felawshypped togy¦ders the nyght of crystmas after the masse of mydnyght entred in to an hall deserte nere vnto the cloyster & bare with them thre pylowes otherwyse called cuys∣shyns. And one of them demaunded of the other wherfore she bare two cuysshyns. I shall syt on the one & ye other shall be betwe¦ne vs yt the chylde Ihesus also may syt. For
he hath sayd whan two or thre ben assem∣bled in my name I am in ye myddle of them Vn̄ math. xviii. Vbi sunt duo vel tres cō∣gregati in noīe meo: ibi sūm medio illorum. The two vyrgyns sate and spake of the na¦tyuyte of Ihesus & of good wordes / & we∣re in the sayd place wtout enoyenge theym tyll vnto ye day of saynt Iohan baptyst fro ye nyght of crystmas. And theyr abbesse de∣maunded them & made to seke theym ouer all. And it befell yt a vacabonde the whiche walked by the cloyster the vygyll of saynt Iohan entred in to the sayd halle & sawe ye two vyrgyns speke / laughe / and enioye thē & in the myddle of them there was a ryght fayre chylde. The sayd man bare the tydin¦ges vnto the abbesse of ye relygyouses that she demaunded. And she came in to ye sayd hall & sawe the fayre chylde & her relygyou∣ses the whiche enioyed them. Than she de∣maūded them what they dyde there. They answered yt they taryed tyl masse were ron¦gen of the day. And they wened to haue bē there but a lytel whyle as two houres. The chylde departed & the abbesse ledde them wt her. They were demaunded where ye sayd lytell chylde became. And they answered yt they had not sene hym. And ye abbesse sayd. Systers haue no drede / in your company hath be ye chylde Ihesus yt ye haue not sene I haue sene hym. He hath holden you in su¦che Ioy fro crystmas tyll ye vygyll of saynt Iohan baptyst yt is this day wtout hōger or thyrste. These relygyouses had grete Ioye therof / & of theyr systers that they demaun¦ded. &c. C. ¶Another example how a bysshop cha∣ste & pure sawe on Eester day some men confessed the whiche were blacke & other whyte. lxxxxiiii IT is wryten in the promptuarye of ye dyscyple & in the boke of gyf∣tes that an holy bysshop prayed god the day of Eester to knowe ye merytes & the estate of them yt re¦ceyued theyr creatour. And god exalted his oraysons / & in beholdynge the people there came some blacke as pytch / some enbrased as yron al reed as blode / & the other whyte & shynynge as the sonne. And the aungell of god appered vnto hym & tolde hym that the blacke were lecherous and proude. And they the whiche were enbrased were auary¦ous / & the blody were dyse players & blas∣phemers. And sayd vnto hȳ yt all they were vnworthy / & that vnworthely they had re∣ceyued theyr creatour / & that all be it yt they had had contrycyon & made cōfessyon / yet had they no purpose to abstayne them fro synne in tyme to come. And sayd afterwar¦de yt all the other the whiche where whyte & clere ben those the whiche had acceded wor∣thely wt ferme purpose to abstayne thē fro synne & to amende theyr lyfe. &c. ¶Another example. It is wryten in the ly¦fe of faders yt two men were sklaundred to be aduoutrers & dyshonestes. And for as moche as they were of the nombre of good people the bysshop prayed god yt he myght knowe yf the sklaunder were true. And as ye people acceded to receyue theyr creatour after the consecracion the sayd bysshop kne¦we the dedes of one & of euery of them / & ye soules in beholdynge theyr faces. And he sawe the faces of the synners as blacke as coles & theyr eyen replenysshed with blode He sawe the other the whiche had the vysa¦ges clere & clothed in whyte. And whā they had receyued the body of god he sawe lyght in some vysages / & in some flambe. And to thende yt he knewe of those of whom he her¦de the sklaunder he gaue vnto theym theyr creatour. And he sawe yt the one of thē had
the face clere & honourable / & was clothed with whyte clothes. And the other had the face blacke & horryble. And after yt they had receyued the light and the beaute of the one shone clere / and the other brent as flambe. And the bysshop prayed god yt he were en∣sygned of these two here. And the aungell came vnto hym the whiche tolde hym yt the sklaunder that he herde of ye men was true but the one was yet in synne & in wyl for to synne and therfore yu hast seen hym blacke / and enbrased wt flambe: The other was as yu hast herde / but for that / yt thou hast seen his face shyne is for that he hath recorded his syn̄es yt he hath done & hath renounced vnto those operacyons wt waylynges and teeres in requyringe the mercy of god / and in promysȳge yt he sholde not retorne vnto his synnes yf they vnto hȳ were pardoned And therfore his synnes ben effaced & put out / & is comen vnto suche grace as yu hast seen. And as ye sayd bysshop meruayled hȳ of the grace of god for that / yt he had ben so moche foule & the man of tourmentes / and with yt he had cored & besene hym with soo grete honoure. The aungell answered hȳ. Well mayst thou meruayle for thou arte a man / and our lorde is natural god & mercy full. They the whiche cease of synnes & ben penytentes & truely confessed god thē shall pardon & leue / not alonely the tourmentes but he them maketh dygne of honour. God hath moche loued the worlde yt he hath sent his sone to suffre dethe for the redempcion of synners yt wyll repent. &c. ¶This exam¦ple denoteth yt all they the whiche hath ben confessed at Eester receyued not theyr crea∣tour in estate of grace / for they haue not the condycyons yt ben requysyte vnto true con¦fessyon. That is contrycyon of herte / cōfes∣syon entyer & true / & satysfaccyon of werke by doynge penaunce / and abstynence from synne. &c. ¶Peccatū sodomiticum. A. ¶Examples of the synne of sodomye. And fyrst example of the lechery & pny¦cyon of those of Sodōme and of Gom∣more. lxxxxv. IT is wryten in ye .xix. chapytre of Genesis that in an euenynge as Loth sate in the market of ye cyte of sodome he sawe two yonge mē comynge / the whiche were two aungelles. He arose & yede before them / he worshypped them & prayed them for to go lodge in his hous / & sayd to theym. Ye shall wasshe your fete & in the mornyng ye shall go your way. And for yt they ne wolde go & wode abyde Loth them coged & they yode he wasshed theyr fete & apparayled theym well to suppe. And before that they wente to bedde the men of sodome came to demaū¦de of Loth the two men the whiche entred into his hous that they might knowe them lecherously & dyshonestly. The good man Loth wolde not delyuer them / and was an¦gry bycause they wolde cōmytte soo grete syn̄e / & sayd vnto them. I pray you my bre¦dren yt ye do not this sinne here. I had leuer take you my two doughters vyrgyns than ye sholde cōmytte this euyll synne wt these two men the whiche ben entred vnder the shadowe of myn assuraunce. And the sayd sodomytes wolde not leue / but sayd to him Shalt thou be our Iuge / we shall torment the more sooner than the men. Than they made grete force vnto Loth and almoost had broken his gates. And they ut bette so strongly yt they ne myght fynde ye dore. And the two aungelles sayd to Loth. Hast yu here none of thy sones in lawe / ne sones / ne doughters / take wt the al thy frendes frō this cyte. For we shall dystroye it for that yt theyr clamour is before god yt whiche hath
sent vs for to lose them. And Loth shewed this thynge vnto his frendes the whiche no¦thynge beleued it. Whan the mornynge ca∣m he aungell sayd vnto Loth yt he sholde departe lest that he perysshed not wt the sȳ¦ners. And for that yt he deferred they toke hȳ by ye hande / & his wyfe & his two dough¦ters & ledde them out of the cyte for that ye god had spared them. And the aūgels sayd vnto hym. Saue thy selfe & loke not behȳ∣de the. The wyfe of Loth had mynde vpon her goodes / & loked behynde her / & forthwt she was chaunged in to a salte stone. Whā Loth was gone forth god made to rayne fy¦re & sulphre from heuen vpon Sodome / go more / segor / bom / & oleale. These ben the .v cytees that he lost / & dystroyed / & the inha∣bitauntes the whiche were within them. &c ¶For yt Loth was mercyfull god suffred not yt he perysshed wt the yll. And for that ye Loth loued better to gyue his doughters than the two men is for the gretenes & hor¦rour of the synne / for it is a synne yt cryeth vengeaunce vnto god. Vnd gen̄. xix. Cla∣mor sodomo{rum} clamat ad me. And by that yt god them punysshed by fyre & sulphre yt is stynkynge is to vnderstande the vylete of the synne wherin they lyued. The rayne yt descēded vpon them was not water of gra¦ce & of nuriture / but it was of fyre & sulphre Wherof sayth the psalmist. Pluet pctōres laqueos ignis sulphre. Theyr lechery was anone past / but the tourmente is eternall. Momētaneū est qd delectat: sed eternū qd cruceat. Ite{rum} psal. Subito defecerūt & pe¦rieūt {pro}pter iniqitatem suā. They be al pe¦rysshed for theyr synne. &c. B. ¶Another example of ye slaughter that was made vpon the sodomytes Benia∣myn for the lechery yt they cōmytted in ye wye of Leuyte pylgrym. lxxxxv IT is wryten in the .xix. chapytre of the boke of Iuges yt an aunciēt man of the cyte of Gabaa lyft vp his eyen in an euentyde / & sawe a pilgrym wt his wyfe & his asses in the place of the cyte. He axed hym & knewe yt he came from Bedleem & that he ne had founde ony that wolde lodge hym. Than ye auncyent desyred hym to lodge in his hous & sayd vnto hym Pax tecū sit ego {pre}leo oīa q̄ necessaria sunt / tm̄ queso me ī platea ma¦neas. That is to say. Peas be wt the I shal take the all thy necessytees. I pray yt alone ly that yu abyde not in the strete. He brought in the pylgryme / wasshed his fete / applyed vnto his supper / & all that yt to hym was ne¦cessary. And as they toke theyr refeccion ye sones of the cyte chydren of the deuyl came cryenge to the auncient yt he sholde delyuer the man yt was entred in to his hous for to knowe hym lecherously. And the auncyent yode vnto them & sayd. My bredren do not this yll here / for I haue lodged hym / cease you of this foly I haue a doughter vyrgyn & he hath a wyfe I shall brynge them vnto you to thende that ye accōplisshe your leche¦ry. I pray you do not this syn̄e agaynst na∣ture in man. But for yt they ne wolde obey vnto the auncyent in noo maner. The pyl∣grym betoke them his wife the whiche abu¦sed & commytted so strongly theyr lechery all the nyght in the sayd woman yt in ye mor¦nynge she came to deye at the dore where her husbande was. Whan he foūde her deed he charged her vpō his asse & bare her in to his hous / and afterwarde brake her body in .xii. pyeces & bare them in to all the endes & partyes of Israell & tolde vnto them the case & sayd that they sholde make Iugemēt & sentence. Than .xl. M. men on fote of the chyldren of Israell assmbled them & made recenser to vnderstande of Leuyte husbon¦de of the deed woman as ye dede was done
And after yt he had agayne recounted all ye people of Israell of one accorde & wyll sayd yt they sholde neuer entre in to theyr houses tyll the synners were punysshed: They con¦stytued people for to brynge them vytayles And sent messagers in to the cyte of Gabaa to aske them wherfore they had cōmytted so grete synne / & that they sholde betake thē those the whiche had cōmytted the syn̄e for to take away the yll from Israell. Those of the cyte wolde not / & made theyr alyaunce for to defende them. But to be shorte grete warre was made for yt synne. And they mo¦ued thē in suche maner yt grete murdre was made on bothe partyes. But in conclusyon all the harlottes & all those the whiche su∣steyned in theyr quarell were slayne & de∣graded. In ye fyrst batayle there was .xxii. thousande men. In ye seconde .xxv. M. & an hondred men. At the thyrde whan ye towne of the sayd harlottes sodomytes was taken there was .xviii. M. slayne & .v. M. of them the whiche fledde. After that as they proce∣ded ferther they slewe two thousande / and brenned al the townes / stretes / & houses of the sayd sodomytes. Also they slewe bestes & people the whiche were in them / & by the wyll of god / as it is wryten in the .xix. & .xx. chapytre of the sayd boke of Iuges. ¶By this example men may se that grete occysy¦ons came for the horryble & abhomynable synne that was commytted in the sayd wo¦man. And not al onely were punysshed tho¦se the whiche had commytted the sayd syn̄e but with that all the consenters and alyes. and al that the whiche vnto them appertey¦ned was wasted. And so it appereth yt grete multitude of bodyes / of goodes / & of soules yode vnto perdycion for synne cōmytted in a woman. &c. C. ¶Another example of a man ye vsed his wyfe sodomytly. lxxxxv THe dyscyple recyteth in his prō¦ptuary yt a man knewe his wy∣fe sodomytly. And moche it dis¦pleased vnto his wyfe. An on a tyme agaynst her wyll he cō∣mytted in her the sayd synne. And inconty∣nent after he arose from his bedde for to go in to the chambres in the whiche his guttes fell from hym & descended by ye foundemēt with grete tourment. Than he toke hym to crye. The people came / & of dolour that he felte shewed his synne / & that god venged hym / and he stanke & myscheuously deyed &c. as reason was to commytte so horryble synne in his owne wyfe / & to soyle the holy sacrament of maryage. D. ¶Another example how a sodomytike deyed impenytent & dyspeyred him / the whiche sayd that he sawe hell / ye tormen¦tes & the deuyls. lxxxxv. ALso the discyple reciteth in his promptuary yt a Sodomytyke was stryken of god / & whan he came to the dethe he was war∣ned to repent him / to confesse & receyue the sacramentes of ye chyrche. And in dyspayre he answered. Wherfore shal I call on me the ayde dyuyne I se now late ye tourmentes in hell & the deuylles presents apparayled to rauysshe me. And as ye peo∣ple present bad hym make the sygne of the crosse the myscheuous deyed in lykewise as he had gyuen no force / and he tourned his face / closed his eyen / and with a grete and horryble clamoure he yelded his goost and deyed. &c. E. ¶Another example how a woman So¦domytyke was vnburyed and drawen horrybly. lxxxxv.
SOme maysters wryteth this the whiche foloweth how ye dis¦cyple reciteth in the boke of his promptuarye and sayeth that a woman culpable of the synne of sodomye deyed & was buryed. And the nyght folowynge a sowe ryght blacke wt se¦uen blacke hogges were seen openly wrote & dyggynge the erthe from her pytte & bra∣ke membre after membre of the sayd wo∣man / and drewe the guttes alonge & brake them. Whan this was done the sayd sowe & her pygges departed theym and kest grete stynke. F. ¶Another example how ye deuyls haue horrour of yt synne. lxxxxv. ALso it is wryten in the boke of hony bees yt a woman sodomy¦tike layde her in her bedde / and whan she synned in herself she herde the deuyll betwene her & the walle the whiche cryed fy / fy / fy. And whan she herde the deuyl in suche wyse cry she had fere / yode vnto confessyon / dyde pe¦naūce more than she had charge. ¶By the¦se examples it appereth yt the synne of leche¦ry is a synne yt moche dyspleaseth vnto god the whiche maketh to haue grete punycion & dampnacyon eternall. And therfore eue∣ry persone sholde wtdrawe to doo the sayd thynge & obey to god for to gete paradyse & escape punycyon eternall. ¶Octauum preceptum. ¶Testimonium. A. ¶Examples of fals wytnesses. And fyr¦ste example of a crysten man yt forsware hym cautelously on the awter of saynt Nycholas. lxxxxvi. IT is wryten in ye legende of saynt Nycolas that a Iewe lent money vnto a crystē man. Whan ye terme came yt he sholde yelde the money the crysten man sayd yt he had yel∣de it vnto hȳ. And for yt the Iewe ne might proue it he gaue it hym vpon his othe yf he wolde swere vpon the auter of saynt Nyco¦las. Than the crysten man put the sayd mo¦ney wtin his staffe clouen & perced craftely. And whā he was redy to swere he toke his sayd staffe vnto the Iewe whyles yt he shol¦de swere. And so sware surely yt he had takē hym ye sayd money. His malyce shall be dys¦couered. For as he yode in to his hous he sle¦pte in the way / & a carte passed ouer hym & slewe hym and brake the sayd staffe wher∣by the money and ye malyce was knowen. The deed man was reysed by the meryte of saynt Nycholas / & the Iewe conuerted hym the whiche had his money. &c. A man sholde vnderstande here yt the crysten man was periured & that his cautele excused not his synne. For god yt knoweth all toke the thynge after the trouthe & not after the ma¦lyce & cautele. Legit{ur} math .x. Nichil occul∣tū est quod nō sciatur / ne{que} abscōditū quod nō manifestetur. There is nothynge so hyd but yt it shall be knowen / ne nothȳge hydde but yt it shal be shewed. The synnes hydeth them in tyme / & also appere in tyme. Vnde catho. Tēporib{us} pctā latent et t{per}e parent B. ¶Another example how those the whi∣che kept the tombe of Ihesu cryst toke money for to wytnesse fals yt the dyscy∣ples had stole his body by nyght. lxxxxvi IT is wryten mathei vltīo. yt whā Ihesu cryst arose ye gardyens of ye tombe had suche fere yt they were as deed. Pre tīore aūtei{us} exterri¦ti sūt custodes & fctī sūt. &c. And
the maryes the whiche yode vnto ye tombe there founde an aungell yt had the face as lyghtnynge & his clothes whyte as snowe the whiche sayd vnto them. Drede ye not I knowe that ye seke Ihesus crucyfyed / he is not here / he is rysen / go ye and tell it vnto ye dyscyples. Whan the maryes were parted some of the gardyens of the tombe yode in to the cyte of Iherusalem & denounced vn¦to the prynces of the prestes the thynges yt whiche had ben done / & how Ihesus was rysen. And they assembled wt the auncients and toke counceyle to gyue grete some of money vnto the knyghtes the whiche kept the tombe for to say & wytnes yt the dyscy∣ples of Ihesus came by night as they slept & stale from them his body. And yf the pre∣sedent here speke of it we shall persuade hȳ of this thynge / & we shall do so moche yt ye shall be sure wtout harme. And ye knyghtes toke the money & wytnessed falsly as they had ben taught. And this thynge was dy∣uulgued & is yet amonge the Iewes / wher¦by they ben without faythe & beleue not in Ihesus. And by the sayd wytnesses ye peo∣ple is without beleue & descende in to hell in perdycyon. &c. And shall descende tyl vnto the tyme of Antechryst yt they shall knowe yt they haue ben deceyued / & than they shal repent them & be saued / in lykewyse as the scrypture sayth. In diebus illis saluabitur iuda / & israel habitabit cōfidenter. &c. A mā may than knowe clerely yt by fals wytnessȳ¦ge beforesayd innumerable people is gone & gooth to perdycyon & dampnacyon. Also it happeneth somtyme yt by fals wytnessyn¦ge of some a good man leseth his herytage & his good cause / wherby dampnacyon. &c foloweth / not all only to the fals wytnesses but also to those the whiche shal possede the sayd herytage vniustly yt is not theyrs and knowe it well & it wtholde wtout restoryng. C. ¶Another example of fals wytnessyn¦ge yt two auncyents made agaynst Su∣sanne & yll came to them. lxxxxvi. IT is wryten in the .xiii. chapytre of the boke of Danyell yt two aun¦cyent prestes in ye tyme coueyted to cōmyt lechery wt the fayre Su¦sanne & watched her & toke her on a tyme al alone in her gardyn vnder ye fote of an apple tre / vnto whome they sayd. Lo¦the dores of the gardyn ben shytte noo per¦sone ne may se vs / wherfore consent yu vnto vs yt we may haue thy company / & yf thou wylt not we shal make fals wytnes ayenst the yt a yonge man hath had thy company. Than Susanne wayled & was sory & sayd Anguysshes ben to me on all partes. Yf I do this that ye saye dethe is vnto my soule. Si enī hoc egero mors michi est. And yf I obey not vnto you I shall not escape your handes that is your fals wytnessynge & the dethe corporall. For in yt tyme ye women the whiche commyted lechery were stoned and slayne. And Susanne sayd. Better it is to me wtout operacyon to fall in your handes than to syn̄e before god. Than she toke her to cry for helpe. And also the sayd anncyen∣tes cryed agaynst her. And the seruauntes ranne vnto the crye. After ye euery of them had tolde theyr case / for to be shorte ye sayd Susanne was put in Iustyce / the whiche wept lokynge to heuen & had her herte and her trust in god / the whiche leueth not his seruauntes. Than the auncyēts put theyr handes on her heed & before all the people shewed yt they sawe the sayd Susanne com¦myt ye sayd synne of lechery wt a yong man yt was stronger than they & fledde. The peo¦ple beleued yt the sayd auncyentes sayd true for they were Iuges. So they cōdampned ye sayd Susanne vnto dethe. Than she cry¦ed vnto god by a grete voyce & sayd. God
eternall ye knowest the thynges hydde & all thynges before yt they ben made / yu knowest that they haue borne fals witnesse agaynst me  I deye. And so it is yt I haue nothȳge done of the thynges that those here hath cō¦posed malycyously agaynst me. And god ex¦alted her orayson. For as men ledde her vn¦to the dethe y• holy goost spake by ye mouthe of a lytell chylde named Danyell & sayd wt an hye voyce. I am clene of this blode. And the people hym demaunded who it was ye whiche spake. He answered & sayd to them. The foles of Israel the whiche hath Iuged & codampned Susanne vnto ye dethe hath not knowen veryte. Retorne lyghtly vnto Iugement / for they haue spoken fals wyt∣nessynge agaynst her. Than they retorned hastely / & the sayd fals wytnessers were se¦parate and conuaynquisshed to haue made fals wytnessyngr. For the one of them sayd yt he had seen them cōmytte the sayd synne vnder an holyn tree. And ye other sayd vn∣der a plom̄e tree. The people blyssed god ye whiche saueth those yt truste in hym / & they toke the two fals auncyent prestes the whi¦che were Iuged vnto dethe & slayne as rea¦son was. For saynt Ysydore sayth. Iudiciū qd aliis imponis s{pre}e portabis. Et paui{us} ad romanos .ii. In quo eī iudicas alterū tei{pre}m condēnas: eadē enī agis q̄ iudicas. The sayd Iuges had iuged Susanne vnto dethe for the synne of lechery. And for yt it was roun∣de that they were culpables of ye sayd yn̄e they also condempned theymselfe to bere & to haue suche payne. And therfore of good right they were slayne. Also our lorde sayth in the gospelles of saynt mathewe .vii. & iu∣ce. vi. Nolite iudicare scʐ iniuste & non iu∣dicamini in quo eī iudicio iudicaueritis iudi bimini. Iterū in eodē loco. Nolite condem¦nare scʐ iniuste: & nō comdēnabimini. That is to vnderstande. Ne Iuge ye iniustly and ye shall not be Iuged. Certaynly ye shal be Iuged in ye Iugement that ye haue Iuged And wyll ye not to condempne other & ye shall not be condempned. For ye shall be cō¦dampned of yt condempnacyon yt ye condē∣pne other as y Iuges were. ¶This exam¦ple denoteth yt the two auncyents were har¦lottes / fals wytnessers / fals Iuges / & ho∣mycydes. And the blyssed Susanne was chaste / clene / & good / the whiche loued bet∣ter to be dyffamed & slayne than to cōmitte lechery & to dysobey vnto god. In likewyse sholde honest women do / & they shall haue prayse & rewarde eternall in paradyse. Su¦sanne was neuer so moche shamed as she is loued / praysed / and rewarded of the sayd dede. &c. ¶Periurium. A. ¶Exāples of people periured. And fyrst example of thre persones the whiche per¦iured them for to impose fals crymes a¦gaynst a patryarke lxxxxvii. IT is wryten in thy story ecclesya∣stycall that in Iherusalem there was a patryarke ryght Iust and good. And some of his subgectes hated hym for yt he helde good iu¦styce. And thre persones imposed on hym fals crime yt they affermed wt othe. And the fyrst sayd. Yf it be not so I perysshe by fyre For they were not beleued for the excellēce of the patryarkes lyfe. And ye seconde sayd I be hurte & seke of a sekenes / scʐ morbo re¦gio. The thyrde sayd. I lose the eyes. And all hapened as they had requyred for theyr periurȳge & lyenge. The fyrst fals wytnes was brent wt all his hous / progeny / & mey∣ny / and his goodes. The seconde was cōsu¦med of the sayd sekenes from hede to fete. The thyrde whan he herde what was beco¦me vnto his felawes dredde & shewed all. &
wept so moche yt he lost his eyen. &c. ¶By this example is denoted yt the thre men be∣foresayd were detractours & yll spekers to take away the good renowne of the patry∣arke. Also they were periured / lyers / & fals wytnesses / and therfore of good ryght god sent vnto them suche payne as they had re¦quyred / but the punycyon infernall is yet more to drede for it is eternall. &c. B. ¶Another example of a man the whi∣che periured him / & he myght not drawe backe his hande. lxxxxvii. MEn fynde by wrytinge this yt whiche foloweth how the dys¦cyple recyteth in the boke of his promptuary and sayeth yt a man periured hym on the se¦pulchre of saynt Pancrace / & forthwt he ne myght drawe his hande backe. And so ap∣pered his malyce & lyenge before all / & soo was cōfused. And as it is sayd / he yt lyfteth his hande or that toucheth the gospel or the holy thynges & periureth hym the sayd han¦de apperteyneth vnto the deuyll tyl yt he be repented. C. ¶Another example of a man yt wolde for were hȳ for borowed money. lxxxxvii IT is writen in the promptuary of the dyscyple yt a cytezyn lende vn¦to his neyghbour a quātyte of mo¦ney. And whan the terme came to pay the borower denyed the debt. And for hat he was cyted agayne in Iuge¦ment he denyed it & wolde swere. And as he bowed the kne he lost speche & myght no¦thyng say. After he was redressed & the spe¦che came to him. Secondly he wolde swere in denyēge it / & as he kneled agayne he lost the speche / & so it was knowen to al that he wolde pariure hȳ. & before god he was par¦iured as it is wryten in ye decrete. Parat{us} iurare falsū iā pariur{us} est .xxii. q. v. D. ¶Another example of two men ye whi¦che pariured them / & the one was lepre and the other seke of ye fyre of saynt An∣thony. lxxxxvii. THe dyscyple recyteth in his ser∣mons this the whiche foloweth the whiche is also wryten in o∣ther bokes & sayth yt an vsurer repented in his dethe & prayed his frēdes to restore the money yt he had ta∣ken of them. And the fyrst promysed & sayd Elles be I stryken wt the fyre of saynt An∣thony. The seconde promysed & prayed / el∣les be I a lepre. They were neclygent to re¦store after his dethe / & wolde wynne some thynge or they restored & forthwt they were seke as they had prayed. ¶This example denoteth yt a man sholde holde promesse & restore to other / or punycyon shall folowe. And it is to note yt semblably as ye prayers of the good ben exalted to theyr honoure & prayse of god: so whā yl mē defayle of theyr promesse on payne of punycyon god exal∣teth theyr requestes to theyr cōfusyon. E. ¶Another example of a kynge & many of his people yt pariured them & deyed so¦daynly. lxxxxvii. SOme maysters wryteth this the whiche foloweth how ye dis¦cyple reciteth in the boke of his promptuarye and sayeth that a kinge of Fraūce named Tro¦atari{us} was acursed for a synne / & he yode to the pope with many lordes and excused hym with othe that he was not culpable. And the pope assoyled theym all and them
admynystred by condycyon yt yf they had sworne fals & vnworthely accede vnto the eucaristie yt they sholde deye wtin the yere. And vnto them there came of vengeaunce dyuyne. For the sayd kynge & the nobles & the parte takers in retournynge from the court of the pope deyed of sodayne dethe wretchedly. F. ¶Another example of Maryners the whiche forsware them for drede to gyue almesse to a poore man. lxxxxvii. THe dyscyple recyteth in his prōp¦tuary that a poore man demaū¦ded almes of maryners. And yt mayster of them made an othe that they had not in theyr shyp but stones / & that he shold cease to demaun¦de of them. Than the poore man sayd. And syth yt ye swere all etynge thynges be sto∣nes. And euen forthwith all yt was to be ea∣ten in the sayd shyppe was chaunged in co∣lour & forme of stones / these thynges aby∣dynge as they were before. The sayd mary¦ner was a lyer / periured / & euyll spekynge wout mercy / & therfore the prayer of ye po∣re man was herde so that yt the whiche was to be eaten became stones. &c. G. ¶Another example of hym yt constray∣ned a man to swere & knewe wel that he sholde forswere hym. lxxxxvii. IT is wryten in the sermons of ye dysciple yt a man made to cyte in Iugement another for money lē¦de the whiche he denyed. And the lender hym constrayned & made hym to swere / howbeit that he was certay-yt he sholde forswere hȳ. And in ye nyght fo∣lowȳge ye sayd lender was rauisshed by vy¦syon in the Iugement of god / & there sawe Ihesu cryst yt sate in his syege of mageste yt whiche hym demaunded the reason of the soule of hym that he had made to forswere of his propre soule. The whiche were bothe twayne to condempne to perdycyon. And the Iuge him demaunded wherfore he had receyued the othe syth yt he knewe wel that he sholde be forsworne. And he sayd / for he denyed me my thynge. And the Iuge sayd Had it not ben better vnto the to haue lost that thynge than thy soule & his. Than the Iuge made to bete hym. And he awoke & recounted & shewed his woundes & brusȳ∣ges in his body the whiche ne myght heele tyll that he was repentaunt of the dede wt confession & penaunce. ¶This example de¦noteth yt a man sholde loue the saluacion of his neyghbour as of hȳselfe. Diliges {pro}xi∣mū tuū sicut tei{pre}m. And that a man sholde sooner lete to lese ony thȳge temporall thā to constrayne ony to swere / whan he is cer¦tayne that he sholde forswere hym & shall be dampned. &c. H. ¶Another example of a chorle the whi∣che gaue vnto the deuyll that yt he had to eate as two clerkes hym demaunded ye almes. lxxxxvii. MEn fynde in wrytynge this yt whiche foloweth how the dys¦cyple recyteth in his promptu¦arye and sayeth that an her¦myte dwelled at the fote of a mountayne. And before his wyndowe in a corner the deuyls helde theyr syege & chap∣tre & deuysed of theyr werkes / & of the ruy¦nes of persones. And the mayster deuyll as¦ked of a deuyl yf he had brought ony thȳge to ere. And he answered / ye / yt is of wheet / of breed / of butter / & of meele / & that a chor∣le had gyuen hȳ. And yt he it brought vnto wytnes ayenst his corswerȳge. For as two
poore clerkes demaunded hym asmesse / he sware by the holy charite of god yt he had no¦thynge to ete yt he might gyue. And as they agayne demaunded he sayd. I gyue al to ye deuyl yt I haue to ete. And I haue brought yt he hath giuen me in the reprefe of his per¦iurynge. Whan the deuylles were gone the hermyte made to cast the sayd meet in a dy¦che yt no persone sholde taste it. ¶This ex∣ample denoteth yt ye sayd churle was wtout mercy / he was pariured & a lyer / & that the deuyl forgeteth not the thynges yll done & spoken. Also it is daunger to gyue ony thyn¦ge to the deuyll / ye gyft is soone preferred / but it is not soone forgoten & effaced. ¶Mendacium. A. ¶Examples of lyenge. It is to be noted yt all fals wytnesses & pariurers be lyers ¶How saynt Iherome made a lye before god the whiche cōmaunded yt he were be¦ten / & after the sayd Iherome dyde pe∣naunce. lxxxxviii. IT is wryten in ye legende of saynt Iherome yt the begynnȳge wher∣by the sayd Iherome studyed holy scryptures & toke strayte & parfy∣te lyfe was yt in his yonge aege he was seke of a feuer & came to the dethe / his soule was rauysshed in Iugement before ye chayre of the Iuge. And in yt place there he had so moche lyght & clerete of them ye whi¦che were present yt he was cast vnto ye erthe & durst not loke vpwarde in heyght. And he was asked of what condycyon he was. He answered I am crystyen. And he ye whi¦che preceded sayd to hym. Thou lyest / thou arte cyceronyen & not cristyen. He helde his peas. And ye sayd Iuge cōmaunded that he were beten. And as they bet him he cryed. Miserere mei dn̄e miserere mei. That is to say. Lorde haue mercy on me. And those yt whiche sate wt the sayd Iuge yode on knees before hym & prayde hȳ yt he wolde pardon his youthe / & that he wolde gyue him place of penaunce vnto his herrour. In yt tyme he studyed the boke of Tulye & of Platon / the bokes seculers & fables hȳ pleased. And he wolde not studye the bokes of prophetes And he began to swere & to say to our lorde Syr yf euer I rede seculer bokes I shal re¦nye the. And was lefte in his worde by his othe & he reuyued sodaynly. And he founde the traces of his betinges yt he had betwene his sholdres tyght horrybly. And after he redde and estudied the bokes dyuyne / he dy¦de penaunce / wepte right bytterly / & made so many bokes yt he is one of the foure doc∣tours of the chyrche. ¶This example deno¦teth that all lyenge or lesynges ben to flee. for god it seeth & knoweth. Also it denoteth that the clerkes sholde studye scyence dyuy¦ne and not worldly scyence deceptyble and those of fables. &c. For suche scyence is foly anenst god this sayth scrypture. Vnde sapi¦entia huius mundi stulticia est apud deum. Also the amyte of this worlde is the enmye of god and those the whiche it studyeth. Vn̄ iacob .iiii. ca. Amicitia huius mundi mimica est deo. Et quicū{que} voluerit amicus esse hu∣ius seculuminicus dei constituitur. And for that saynt Iherome was culpable he was reproued of lyenge and beten. ¶Detractio. B. ¶Examples of detraccyon. And tyrue example of some relygyous the whiche made detraccion of theyr broder the whi¦che deyed. lxxxxviii.
SOme maysters wryteth this the whiche foloweth how ye dis¦cyple reciteth in the boke of his promptuarye and sayeth that one of the relygyous of the mo∣nastery of saynt Gregory deyed by the seke¦nes of brennynge ague / & as he was in the last pange to yelde vp his spyryte some mō¦kes the whiche were there presentes left to saye ye psalmody for to speke & make detrac¦cyon of hym. After he reuyued & sayd to ye monkes. Bredren god pardon you of that yt ye haue made of me detraccyon. Ye haue engendred me lettynge / not a lytell but mo¦che grete. For I haue ben accused as wel of you as of the deuyll all in one tyme yt I ne¦wyst vnto what sklaunder first to answere Yf ye see ony in tyme to come yt deyeth ma∣ke no detraccyon of hym / but haue ye hym in compassyon / for he gooth in Iugement where he shall haue moche to āswere of his accusatours. &c. C. ¶Another example of a detractour dā∣ned for his detraccyons. lxxxxviii. MEn fynde by wrytinge this yt whiche foloweth how the dys¦cyple recyteth in the boke of his promptuary and sayeth yt there was two clerkes fela∣wes / wherof the one was detractour & a ly∣er so yll yt he ne spake wel of no persone. As he came vnto the dethe he was warned of his sayd felawe to confesse hym & amende. The whiche dyde not & contēpned his sayd admonycyon. And whan he approched the dethe he promysed his felawe yf yt it pleased god to appere to him wtin .xx. dayes / & so he departed & dyed. And soone after on a day by the suffraūce of god to gyue example to other he appered to his felawe blacke all en¦brased wt fyre within & wtout. And whā his felawe sawe hym he defayled for feere yt he had / vnto whome he sayd. I am the cursed thy felawe for whome thou prayest vayne∣ly / for I am dampned perpetually. And he axed how it was wt him at the dethe. He an¦swered. As I was in ye last pange I was brought before the Iuge / & as I helde my peas for drede I sawe many soules clerer than ye sonne the whiche stretched theyr hā¦des out agaynst me vnto the Iuge & cryed Lorde venge our blode on this lyer detrac∣tour the whiche hath vs dyffamed by lesyn¦ges before the men. At this voyce the Iuge behelde me with vysage wrothe / & in behol¦dȳge hym I was all ferefull & confused of the ylles that men spake ayenst me in seyn∣ge that I was culpable I forgate my selfe & dyspayred me of the mercy of god & was Iuged and am dampned eternally. ¶By this exāple a man sholde vnderstande that detraccyon is a grete synne / for ye good per¦sones detracted demaunded vengeaunce and punycyon & it was doone. With grete payne is that synne pardoned / for it beho∣ueth to restore the good renowne as after shall be declared. Et ideo hieronim{us}. Non facilis venia praua dixisse deiectis hōmibus To moche speche noyeth. For there ensueth punycyon & dampnacyon. D. ¶Another example of a detractoure yt had his tongue amonge todes. lxxxxviii. MEn fynde by wrytynge this yt whiche foloweth how the dys¦cyple recyteth in his promptu¦ary & sayth that there was a man a ryght grete detractour of relygyous / clerkes / & of other good men he departed and deyed. And after in grete tyme as a man digged in his sepulchre men founde all his body in erthe & dust / but his venimous tongue was hole amonge todes
the whiche remoeued it & wolde gnawe it but they ne myght / in shewynge yt the ton∣gue was not worthy to retorne in to erthe for that yt it had hurt many a man / and yt the cursed man that owed the sayd tongue was tourmented in soule and after the Iu¦gement shall be in body & in soule eternally wtout to be cōsumed. Vn̄ apoc̄. ix. Deside∣rabunt mori et mors fugiet ab eis. E. ¶Another example of a detractour yt bo¦te & wasted his tonge. lxxxxviii. THe dyscyple recyteth in his prō∣ptuary that a preste was so abā¦doned in vyce of the tonge that almoost he made detraccyon of all and infamed greuously other men. Whan it came before his dethe he was furyous / & in his furour bote hymselfe / bra¦ke & wasted his cursed tongue venymous in shewynge before all that his tongue had spoken cursed wordes dygne of punycyon & payne. F. ¶Another example of a fader yt slept as he herde detraccyon. lxxxxviii. IT is wryten in the lyfe of faders of a good auncyent fader named machetem the whiche was moche solytary / vnto whome god gaue suche grace that as often tymes as he was in conuent wt the other bredren for to here the seruyce & collacyon espyrytu¦all he neuer slepte & yf he had ben there the longe day & the nyght. But as sone as ony spake worde of detraccion / or ydle worde he was forthwt aslepe. ¶Vnto thexample of this good fader a man sholde kepe hȳ from slepynge in ye seruyce & predycacyons / and frome herynge of euyll wordes. G. ¶Another example yt as a knyght ma∣de detraccyon of a deed man he appered vnto hym. lxxxxviii. IT is wryten in the legende of ye deed be dyes yt as a knight was layde in his bedde by his wyfe he made detraccyon of another knyght deed. The whiche appe∣red to hym sodaynly & sayd. Frende pardō me & cease too make detraccyon for I am in grete paynes in purgatory. And he hym demaunded / may a man helpe ye. He answe¦red / ye. And he demaunded him / wylt thou yt suche a preste or suche pray for the. Than he shoke the heed in token yt it pleased hym not / for that yt he was in mortall synne. Af∣terwarde he demaūded yf he wolde yt suche an hermyte prayed for hym. He answered I wolde well / yf he prayed for me lyghtly I sholde be delyuered. ¶These examples denoteth yt a man sholde cease hȳ of detrac¦cyō / for it is a vyce yt dyspleaseth vnto god & vnto the sayntes of paradise. And in that yt the deed body desyred the prayer of ye her myte & not of the other is to vnderstande yt ye prayer of good folke is exalted & not they of synners. But the holy sacrament of the masse enpayreth not for an yll preste. ¶Loqui. A. ¶Examples of some the whiche hath vt¦tred cursed wordes. And fyrst example of a man letygyous ful of stryfe & dyscor¦de the whiche sayd at his deth yt all those that he had troubled them opposed ayēst hym & enforced to sle hym. lxxxxix. THe dyscyple recyteth in his boke yt Guilliam sayth yt there was a man so letygyous full of stryfe & fury∣ous that from his yonge aege he ne myght
lyue in rest wt his owne kynnesmen but dys¦corded with all them in his hous & without the whiche was greuously seke & in ye dethe bedde he toke the sacramentes of the chyr∣che vnworthely. And hastely amōge ye peo∣ple the whiche were present he cryed horry¦bly. Aryse ye al & take armoures & kepe me for all theym the whiche I haue troubled oppose them agaynst me & enforce them to sle me. And wtout taryenge his eyen tour∣ned terrybly / & in cryenge myscheuously he deyed. ¶This example denoteth yt the iust men and sayntes of paradyse aryse in Iuge¦ment agaynst the sinners the whiche them hath troubled & that hath brought forth cur¦sed wordes ayenst god & taken away theyr goodes. Wherof it is wryten sapientie .v. Stabunt iusti cū magna cōstancia aduer∣sus eos qui se angustiauerūt / et qi absuler̄t labores eo{rum}. And by this a man shold kepe hym from spekynge yll of another & to do hym yll. For none yll shal byde wout punys¦shement. B. ¶Of a woman ful of wrathe yt myssay¦ed her mayden. lxxxxix. IT is wryten in the promptuarye of the dyscyple & in other bokes yt there was a lady yt oft tymes her∣de the predycacyons / but she was so impacient yt whan she came fro the chyrche she stryued wt her mayden that was good & deuoute. This sayd lady wro∣thed her for nothynge & without cause / and myssayed her sayd mayden. The whiche mayden on a tyme requyred her lady that she myght go to here the predycacyon that a relygyous well renowmed sholde make. And she answered by courage wrothe and harty. Abyde at home and kepe the hous. he was obedient and taryed. And as she as in the kechyn with grete affeccyon to her the worde of god she made a request vnto our lorde in saynge. My lorde Ihesu cryst teche me to doo thy wyll. And forthwt Ihesu cryst appered vnto her in sayenge. What coueytest thou. And she answered to here the worde of god. And Ihesus began to preche vnto her and sayd. Kepe thre thȳ¦ges that I shall tell the and yu shalte be sa∣ued. Holde thy peas in maledyccyons / be yu pacyent in trybulacyons and aduersytees / ne yelde thou euyl for euyll / but do good vn¦to those that shall do the euyll. She answe¦red I shall do it with a good wyll / and in∣contynent Ihesus departed. And whā her maystresse came agayne from the chyrche she missayed her. And the sayd mayden hel¦de her peas and gaue her no worde to āswe¦re. And the maystresse was moeued with Ire and bette her. And the mayden sayd to her selfe / in trybulacyons thou sholdest be pacyent. The lady sayd. What is that / that thou spekest. She answered. I haue kepte better ye sermon yt the man made me this day than ye ne do many where ye haue ben this yere / for ye be not amended. Than ye sayd mayden shewed vnto her maystresse how Ihesu cryst had preched vnto her and that she wolde kepe his worde all his lyfe. Whan the lady had herde the sayd wordes she thought vnto her selfe of the case & was afterwarde pacyent. &c. ¶By this exam∣ple is moche to be noted in regarde to doo thre thinges the whiche god tolde vnto the mayden. And it behoueth to vnderstande that she was so good that she vnto hym suf¦fysed to do the sayd thynges / for god seeth and knoweth all. Also it is a grete thynge of pacyence / and to here the worde of god / And to se good example by the good lyfe of the mayden the maystresse correcked her selfe and became humble and pacyent to∣warde echone.
¶Another example the dyscyple recyteth in his sermons that there was a vyrgyn soo moche chaste deuoute / a gyuer of al∣messe / and charytable that meruaylous it was to wete / but impacyente she was in thynges that came vnto her. And the aū∣gell appered vnto her and sayd. Thou la∣bourest moche lawfully and doest of good werkes and operacyons for to possede the Ioyes eternelles / but thou ne mayst be sa¦ued for thyn impacyence and thou labou∣rest for nought. And she requyred the said aungell that he wolde praye for her yt god wolde gyue vnto her pacience / and he pra¦yed for her Afterwarde she corrected her∣selfe / and was so pacyent yt all men mer∣uaylled and wele she fyned her dayes. &c. C. ¶Another example of him the whiche sayd vnto his seruaunt pull of my hose de¦uyll / and forthwith the deuyll vnhosed hȳ in his house. lxxxxix IT is wryten in the dialogue of saȳt Gregorye that a man named steuē wery of walkynge came in to his house / & in his we called his seruaunt and sayd vn¦to hym come deuyll and vnhose me. And forthwithin haste at that voyce the poyn¦tes began to vnknytte and vndo to then∣de that appertly he appered as the deuyll the whiche was called was redy to drawe of his hoses & that he obeyed hym. And in contynent that the sayd Steuen sawe yt he had hugely fere and toke hym to crye & to saye. Departe thou acursed fro me. It is not vnto yt that I spake it is vnto my seruaunt. And forthwith at the sayd voy∣ce he ceased. And therfore a man shold not call the deuyll in Ire / for he is not ferre of he is by the for to tempte the / for to decey¦ue the / for to counsayll the ylle d for to drawe the backe to do or goo dds. Also yf thou call hym by Ire  synne and cursed¦nes / he is redy and apparylld for to ser∣ue the as he vnhosed y sayd Steuen and incontynent that he seeth that a man re∣penteth hym he draweth hym backe as he dyde whan Steuen had fere & sayd vnto hym that it was not he to whom he spake and that it was vnto his seruaunt. After the examples & wrytynges that men fyn¦de it is grete daunger to speke often of ye deuyll / or to call hym / or to put in him his fayth / his hope and his loue / or to gyue hȳ¦selfe vnto hym / or to make alyaunce and couenaunt with hym & to bylue in his ef¦fectes. For in so doynge men renoūce vn∣to god & vnto baptysme that man hthe receyued in sayenge. Abrenuntio sathane et omnib{us} pompis eius. Also a man is pri¦uate from paradyse / frome the company of god & from his sayntes / and frome all thinges celestyelles and spyrytuelles / and draweth to the man with the deuyll and with the dampned of maledyccyon & per∣dycyon. And man byndeth hymselfe vnto payne and punycyon eternell. &c. D. ¶Another example of a man the whi¦che sayd vnto his wyfe go thou in the de∣uylles name. lxxxxix IT is wryten in the dialogue cesar that a man full of wrathe say v∣to his wyfe in his Ire / go thou in the de∣uylles name. And forthwith the ul en∣tred in to her and tormented her greuou∣ly / of the whiche thynge the man was mo¦che wrothe / and promysed that he she neuer curse / ne his wyfe ne persone / nor other creature what so euer they were. &c
E. ¶Another example of the woman the whiche put dyuysyon in a good maryage THe disciple recyteth in his sermōs that a man & his wife lyued togy¦ders .xxx. yeres in peas without that that the deuyll myght put betwene them hate ne dyscorde one onely tyme. And whan ye deuyll sawe that he myght nothynge doo he came vnto an olde woman vnto whom he promysed a payre of newe shoes soo yt she coude fynde the meane to put dyscord betwene the sayd man and his wyfe. And she promysed to do it. Than she came vn∣to the man vnto whome she said that his wyfe loued more another man than hym And that she sholde slee hym yf he prouy∣ded not wysely in his case. And the sayd man ne wolde byleue it. The olde woman yode vnto his wyfe vnto whom she said. Thy husbande loueth another womā bet¦ter than the. And whan souper tyme ca∣me they behelde other with indygnacyon Than bothe tweyne put fayth vnto the wordes of the olde woman. And the other daye the sayd olde woman gaue coūsayll vnto the sayd wyfe that she sholde take ye grete knyfe of her husbande and that she sholde were it in holy water and after put it vnder her husbandes bedheed and that he sholde loue her as he dyde before / soo yt he slepte upon it. And afterwarde ye sayd olde woman yode vnto the husbande / vn¦to whome she said that he sholde wake by nyght and that he sholde take hede vnto his case or elles his wyfe sholde kyll hym By this token yt he sholde fynde his knyfe vnder his beddes hede. And he byleued ye sayd olde woman / foūde his knyfe vnder his beddeshede / and stroke it in his owne wyfe. Than ye deuyll put a payre of shoes at the ende of a staffe / & toke them vnto ye said olde woman as he had promysed her Vnto whome he sayd. I dare not appro∣che vnto the of drede that thou ne deceyue me as yu hast done ye man & the wyfe. Su¦che people ben wors than the deuyll & vn∣to them apperteyneth more grete punycy¦on. For where the deuyll ne had power to put dyuysyon and to trouble the sayd ma¦ryage. The olde woman it wrought & mo¦re stronge was the homycyde of the sayd woman. And therfore a man sholde here note that the sayd olde woman & her sem¦blables the whiche in suche wyse put diuy¦syon where there is good loue demaunde penaunce a man ne sholde denye it theim but a man sholde gyue vnto them playne punycyon & penaunce without ony mer∣cy. For it is a synne the whiche is agayne the synne of ye holy ghost. Inuidentia fra¦terne dilectionis the whiche hathe not of remyssyon as vnto the payne ne in thys world ne in the other. Also yf suche people wyll go in to paradyse before yt they there entre it behoueth that they haue true con∣trycyon / confessyon / & ful punycyon for by satysfaccyon by penaunce in this worlde / or in purgatorye / & yf they deye without correccyon & amendement they shal haue in helle punycyon and dampnacyon eter∣nell without ony mercy. F. ¶Another example of the woman the whiche had the partye vpwarde brent in the chirche after her dethe for her cursed tongue. lxxxxix IT is wryten in ye .iiii. boke of ye dia∣logue of saynt Gregorye / how that a nōne was chaste in ye lawe partyes / but she had cursed language / whan she was deed she was buryed in ye cathedral chirch
And in that nyght the gardyen of the chir¦che sawe by vysyon yt she was taken vp & borne before the grete aulter & cut by the myddell & that the one partye was brente and the other was not. Whan the mornȳ¦ge came he tolde the sayd thyng vnto his brederne / the whiche yode before the sayd aulter in the chirche / and founde the appa¦rence of the brennynge in the stones as yf the sayd woman there had be brente cor∣porelly. G. ¶Another example of an aduocate yt whiche loste his tongue in his dethe for he had habounded in yll langages. lxxxxix. MEn fynde by wrytynge in the bo∣ke cesarii this yt whiche foloweth how the disciple recyteth in his promptua¦rye. And sayeth yt whan an aduocate was deed / men ne foūde of tongue in his mou∣the. And of good ryght he loste his tongue in his dyeng. For in his lyfe he solde it ma¦ny tymes in defendynge causes vniuste & in callyng them in wyttyngly by fauours and by gyftes that he toke vniustely / in ly¦ke wyse as recompteth cesarius. By thys example it is to be noted that a sholde wt∣drawe hym from yll spekynge. For whan a persone haboundeth wyllyngly in his ly∣fe in cursed languages / in his dethe he le∣seth his speche / and he ne may confesse hȳ to crye god mercye and to dispose of suche thynges as he sholde do. Also in the mem∣bre wherin a persone hathe moost offen∣ded / in the same membre shal he suffre the moost of torment. That is to vnderstond yf an aduocate be dampned for his cursed tongue / he shall fele the mo of tormentes in his said tongue than in other membres Vn̄ ber. In quo aūt mēbro magis crea∣tor offēdit{ur}: in eo graui{us} pctōr torquet{ur}. The cursed dyues habounded in cursed langa∣ges in dyenge. And therfore signantly the gospell sayeth that he playneth hym that his tongue was brente more sooner than another membre. And also saynt  maketh mencyon in the appocalypse o dampned tormented for cursed words / Et dicit illud apo. xvi Cōmanducauerūt linguas suas pre dolore: et blasphamarūt deum pre doloribus suis. &c. H. ¶Another example how the aungels ben present whan a man speketh of good wordes / and whan yl wordes ben spoken the deuylles ben redy. lxxxxix. THe dyscyple recyteth in the booke of his sermons that a ryche man badde one tyme many of his parentes & neyghbours vnto dynere with hym. The whiche he put at one table / and in a secon¦de table he set and put many poores. and one of those poores the whiche was a holi man sawe that they sayd benedicite / and as they ete the fyrste two loues / the aun∣gelles were amonge them the whiche en∣uyronned and beset aboute at the said dy¦ner / they spake of god and of all good wor¦des. And afterwarde they began to speke of worldly thynges and vycyous & of de∣traccyons. And incontynent the sayd ho∣ly man sawe that the deuylles were pre∣sent by them / and the aūgelles fledde fer of & gaue place vnto the deuylles the whi¦che lepte and enioyed them & beset theym aboute. Than the said holy man began to wepe bytterly. And after in thende of the dyner they toke them to speke of god and of good maners salutaryes & the sayd aū¦gelles came agayne right ioyous & the de¦uylles
fledde. And whan the sayd man de¦uoute sawe this thynge he began to laugh gretely. And after that graces were sayd th sayd man deuoute was asked ye ques∣tyon wherfore he had wepte & afterward laughed. Than he tolde them the cause in admonestyng them yt in etynge & drynkȳ¦ge they sholde speke of god / for god & hys aūgelles there ben present. And vnto the contrary ye deuylles ben present in detrac∣cyons & cursed wordes. Vnto this purpo∣se it is wryten math. xviii. Vbicū{que} fue∣rint duo vel tres congregati in noīe meo / ibi ego sū in medio eorū. &c. That is to say whan two or thre men ben assembled in ye name of god in spekyng of hym / god is in the medyll of them. &c. ¶Audire. I. ¶Example for those the whiche here cursed wordes. And how the syster of saȳt damyen was tormented for that that she hadde taken pleasure to here the songe of daunces. lxxxxix THe dyscyple recyteth in his booke & sayeth / that ye syster of saynt da¦myen appered vnto hym after her dethe. Vnto ye whiche damyen she sayd that she was in grete paynes in purgatorye. And the sayd Damyen demaunded her ye cau∣se. She answered yt it was for that / yt she beynge ones in her chambre herde ye songe of those the whiche daunced. And she ther¦in toke pleasure & dylectacyon of the whi∣che dylectacyon she ne dydde penaunce in this worlde / & for that cause she sholde be punysshed .xv. dayes in purgatorye. By this example a man shold vnderstonde yt it is grete daunger vnto the soule as to he¦re vaynwordes or yll syth that ye sayd wo¦man had suche punycyon. Vn̄ sapiens. ec. ix. Cū saltatrice ne assiduus sis nec audi¦as illā: ne morte pereas & efficatia ei{us}. &c. K. ¶Another exāple how two marchaū∣tes sayd vnto theyr curate that they cou∣de nothynge sell wtout othes & lesynges. IT is wryten in the dyalogue ce∣sarii how two marchaūtes of co¦loyne confessed them vnto theyr curate yt almoost they ne myght sell nothynge wtout lyenge / swe∣rynge & pariurye / and the preest sayd vn∣to them. Vse ye of my counsayll & ye shall do the better. Kepe you from swerynge & leyenge in sellynge this yere / & ye shall se how it shall be with you. They promysed hym and dyde so / And the deuyll letted so the byars that in all the yere they solde as nothynge. And afterwarde sayd to theyr curate whan they came agayne vnto him that the obedyence hadde ben vnto them ryght dōmageous / for that yt they had no¦thynge solde. And the sayd preest them cō¦fermed in the fayth / and sayd vnto them Perseuer ye in suche maner that for none aduersyte ne pouerte ne swere ye / nor lye and god shall blysse you. And so they pro∣mysed to do it. And incontynente god ap∣pesed theyr temptacion & solde more than all the other / & in shorte tyme they were moche ryche. &c. This example denoteth that the deuylles ben wrothe whan ony wt¦drawe them fro synne as to swere. It is here to be vnderstonde yt by that yt the de∣uyll letteth the marchaūtes to sell / yf ony be ferme in the fayth for to resyst wele / ye deuyll is vaynquysshed & he departeth as he dyde whan the sayd marchauntes byle¦ued
theyr curate / and swere not: ne lye mo¦re for pouerte the whiche vnto them may come. In lyke wyse sholde these marchaū¦tes withdrawe them from swerynge and wele shall come vnto them / bothe tempo∣relly and spyrytuelly. L. ¶Another example how a bysshoppe was tormented in purgatorye for that yt he had herde detraccyons of his clerke. THe disciple recyteth in his sermōs that a bisshop was borne in to pur¦gatorye to do penaunce / & he was gretely tormented of the stynche of his clerke beȳ¦ge in helle the whiche mounted tyll vnto hym for that yt he herde somtyme his de∣traccyons / & had not hym ynoughe egre∣ly corrected / how be it that of other thyn∣ges the said bysshop had be good. This ex¦ample denoteth that punycyon foloweth vnto theym the whiche hereth with good wyll detraccyons and yll wordes. Quia agētes & cōsētiētes pari pena punient{ur}. &c M. ¶Another example that yll came vn¦to kynge Roboam ye whiche gaue answer proude vnto the chyldren of Israhel / and byleued ye folysshe coūsayll of yonge men. IT is wryten in the .xii. chapytre of the thyrde boke of kȳges that after the dethe of kynge salamon the people of Israhell came vnto Roboam the sone of the sayd Salamon for to constytute hym kyng. And the sayd people made vnto hȳ a requeste in saynge. Thy fader vs hathe gretely kept vnder & gyuen vs grete char¦ges / now dymynysshe vs a lytell of ye said charges and we shall serue the. Than the sayd Roboam sayd vnto them that on the thyrde daye he sholde gyue them answer / And fyrste he counsaylled with the acy¦entes & wyse counsayllers of salamon / yt whiche sayd vnto hym. Yf thou obeye at this daye vnto the people / & that thou ac∣corde vnto theyr petycyon / & that thou spe¦ke swete wordes vnto them they shal ser∣ue the in all tymes. Afterwarde the sayd Roboam counsayled hym with yong men the whiche had be nourysshed with hym / the whiche counsaylled hym that he shold saye vnto the people. My lytell fynger is more grete than ye backe of my fader / my fader hathe bet them wt staues / & I shall put to aboue that & shall flayle you wyth scorpyons. Than whan the thyrde day ca¦me he lefte the coūsayll of the auncyentes & wyse / and gaue vnto the people a prou∣de answer of yonge men folysshe coūsayl¦lers. And for this proude answer the peo∣ple of ye two lygnees of Israhell was mo¦ued in ire / & made another kynge named Hierobam. And of the sayd people of Is∣rahell ne abode with Roboam but the peo¦ple of the lygnee of iuda and of beniamin & warre was betwene the sayd Roboam and Hierobam in al theyr lyues. Also it ap¦pereth as for to byleue the false counsayll of yonge men the whiche were proude / ye sayd Roboam was not lorde of his people and had warre all his lyfe. &c. N. ¶Another example of an erle reple∣nysshed with many synnes that ye deuyll bare awaye. lxxxxix. THe dyscyple reciteth in his promp¦tuary yt in a solempnyte as the ab¦bot of Clugny & many other were in the
palays of an erle / a man not knowen on horsbacke entred sodaynly in to ye palays before them all / the whiche cōmaunded ye sayd erle that he sholde ryse vp & folowe hym for he had to speke with hym. The er¦le ne wolde resyste rose hym vp & yode vn¦to the dore of the palays / wher at he foun¦de an horse redy for to lepe on / then the er∣le lepte vpon his backe / & he that was co∣me toke the rayne of the brydell & lyfte hȳ vp in to the ayre before them all and bare hym awaye. And the sayd erle cryed myse¦rably. Succurrite ciues succurrite. He by∣leued in the cytezyns of the towne yt they sholde socoure him / but they ne myght for anone he was ronne out of theyr syght / & borne awaye of deuylles in body and sou∣le / & was no more afterwarde sene ne foū¦de. Yf the deuylles lyfte hym in to the ayre it was for to make hym fal alowe and for to punysshe hym in helle for his synnes. O. ¶Another example of a woman im∣pacyent yt the deuyll bare awaye. lxxxxix. IT is wryten in the dialogue cesarii of a woman impacyent in her yre / as she was troubled put her fete in a bacȳ & afterwarde lepte out bakwarde / & sayd I lepe in suche wyse from the puyssaunce of god in to the puyssaunce of the deuyl / & incontynent the deuyll toke her & bare her awaye thorowe the ayre in ye syght of ma¦ny the whiche were presente & neuer after was she sene. &c. P. ¶Another example of a man the whi∣che condampned hymselfe vnto the deuyl for his impacyence. lxxxxix. THe dysciple reciteth in his sermōs that an archedeken & his dyspen∣cer oue as they yode vnto rome for the dyspence of the goodes of fortune. And ye sayd dyspencer was impacyent and com∣maunded hymself vnto the deuyll / and in that iourneye as he past the water. the de¦uyl drowned hȳ. And wtin a lytel tyme af¦ter his dethe he appered vnto a chanoyne his frende vnto whome he tolde all the ca¦se before sayd / & that he was in grete pay¦nes and tormentes for his impacyence / & also for that yt he was cōmaunded vnto ye deuyll. Q. ¶Another example of a clerke impa∣cyent yt wrathed hȳ agayne god. lxxxxix. THe disciple reciteth in his sermōs that a clerke was foure yere seke. and in his sekenes was impacyente / and sayd vnto god. Thou hast taken my body & I shall take the soule & shall gyue it vn∣to the deuyll. And in his impacyence sayd Deuyll take my soule. And it was done forthwith by ye dyuyne Iugement of god Nonū {pre}ceptū: et decimū. cogitatio mala A. ¶Examples of yll thoughtes / & fyrste how a woman a greate gyuer of almesse was dampned for ye delyberacyon of wyll to cōmyt lecherye. C. IT is wryten in the some of penaū∣ce yt a woman deuoute & a gyuer of almesse confessed her often vnto the bys∣shop of ye cyte / & therfore he loued her mo∣che
bycause of her holynes. It happened one daye she behelde a yonge man by con∣cupyscence carnall & by reason dysposed & fyxed had the wyll to haue his companye without other thyng / but by many tymes that she confessed her / & also in the dethe she had it in remembraunce / she had sha∣me to tell it & excused her vnto herselfe sa¦yenge. Sith that I haue not done ye dede that it was nothynge / and that she wolde not speke it. And so she deyed without con¦fessyon and contrycyon. After her dethe ye sayd bysshop made her honourably to be buryed in his chapell where of custome he made his prayers / for asmoch as she was of grete people. And that he loued her for the holynes of her. And in the nyght after that she was buried before matyns ye said bysshop wende to make his oraysons in ye said chapel. And as he approched it semed vnto hym that it was full of fyre / in lyke¦wyse as a brennynge ouen. Albeit he put his trust in god & approched & sawe vpon the tombe of yt woman a gyrdyron of fyre & a body stretched aboue it & all full of fy∣re & the deuylles wt instrumentes of yron the whiche embraced the fyre in tornynge her from one syde to another. And whan the sayd bysshop sawe that it was ye sayd woman coniured her and her demaūded wherfore she was dampned. And she an∣swered & sayd yt it was for the thought of lecherie that she had not confest her of. &c By this example a man sholde vnderston¦de yt god dampneth & punyssheth the per∣sones for the yll thoughtes. And by more grete reason for the yll operacyons. B. ¶Another example how a woman de¦syred a clerke to vse of her embracements THe dyscyple reciteth in his promp¦tuarye & sayeth yt a woman caste her eyen on a clerke vnto whome she said yf thou wylt consent to vse of myn emra¦cementes all my goodes shall be thyne. by many tymes he refused her / & she yode to accuse hȳ before the Iuges of oppressyon done vnto her. Than the iuge made hym to be put in pryson / and the sayd woman was so prycked wt lecherye yt she mounted vpon a walle with a laddre & lete herselfe fall where the sayd yongman was & desy¦red hym to cōmytte lecherye / the whiche ne dyde it. And the iuges herde tell that ye sayd woman was in the sayd pryson ma∣de the clerke to go oute & wende yt he had be an enchauntour & full of malices / they made to alyght a greate fyre / wherin he was caste. And as he brende & that the sy∣des were than dyscouered & that men my¦ghte se his lyghtes he cryed aue maria so hye that all herde hym. Than one of ye co∣synes of ye woman fastened a staffe in his mouthe & sayd vnto hym. I shal take fro the thy oraysons / & him strangled in suche wyse & stopped his brethe. And the bones were buryed in the felde / ye wiche dyd ma¦ny myracles. And ouer his tombe a fayre chirche was made. And by this example a man maye vnderstonde yt the said yong man was chaste & good the whiche loued better to be in pryson / dyffamed brente & to dye a martyr than to breke the cōmaū∣demente of god by cōmyttynge lecherye. / Also it is to be noted yt the sayd harlot syn¦ned mortally / & brake the cōmaundement of god. Also she was homycyde of his de∣the dygne of punycyon and dampnacyon And the yongman gate prayse / paradyse & Ioye eternell /  so sholde we doo / & the woman deserued shame & punycyon. &c.
C. ¶Another example how a noble wo∣man brake this cōmaūdement whan she desyred & requyred her porter to cōmytte lecherye  albeit that she dyde nothyng / for he wolde not consent. C. THe dyscyple recyteth in his promp¦tuary that a noble woman as she was aone vpon a daye in the castell whe∣re she dwelled was sodaynly enflambed with lecherye that she ne myght bere the fyre of loue. And she dyscended downe vn¦to the porter of the castell and prayed him by grete instaunce that he wolde medle wt her / vnto whome he answerd. Madame what is that yt thou spekest / where is thy wytte / beholde god & take hede vnto thin honour / but of al these thynges she forced her nothyng. And whan she sawe herself in suche wyse repulsed of the sayd porter / by inspyracyon of god she yssued forthe of the castell & ranne vnto the water froson vnder the castell / & therin kepte her so lon¦ge that all the flambe & embracement of lecherye was quenched / and afterwarde came vnto the sayd porter & yelded hym thankes and praysynges that he had in su¦che wyse repulsed her and sayd vnto hym Yf yu woldest gyue me a thousande marke of golde I ne sholde suffre nowe that thȳ¦ge wherof I prayed the not longe ago. & she retorned in to her place. The sayd por∣ter is to be loued before god & the worlde / For by his resystence ye lady corrected her & resysted and loued hym after more than yf he had cōmytted the sȳne. This here is example for to gaynsaye those the whiche praye to doo ylle. Also for to holde hym in coldnes for to resyst agayne ye embrasyng of lecherye as dyde the sayd lady within ye sayd water. &c. D. ¶Another example of a frere ye whi∣che delyted him in the thought of fornyca¦cyon without resystyng vnto it. And ther¦fore his aungell was sorye / & the orayson of the holy fader was not exalted. C. IT is wryten in the lyfe of faders yt as a frere was tempted of the spy∣ryte of fornycacyon he yode vnto a grete auncyent fader vnto whome he sayd. Fa∣der shewe me thy charyte & praye for me For I am tempted & solycyted of fornyca¦cyon. And the sayd auncyent fader prayed for hym. And secondly agayne that frere came vnto the sayd auncyent & repeted ye sayd wordes. And the aūcyent ne dyspray¦sed hym but prayed god for him and sayd My lorde god reuele me of this thynge of fornicacion the whiche is in this frere / for I haue prayed vnto the / & he ne hathe of rest ne of ayde agayne the spyryte of forni¦cacyon. And god reueled that thynge the whiche was agayne that broder. And the auncyente sawe ye broder the whiche was sette & the said spyryte by him that played with hym / & the aungell the whiche was sent vnto his ayde was there / the whiche had indygnacyon ayenst ye sayd frere / for he ne enclyned hym towarde god / but mo¦re sooner delyted hym in his thoughtes / & enclyned all his thought. And by yt the aū¦cyent knewe that the cause proceded of ye sayd frere yt his orayson was not exalted. And he shewed it vnto hym sayeng / thou consentest the in thy thoughte. &c. Also he taught hym to resyste agaynst those thou∣ghtes / & was delyuered thrughe ye doctry¦ne of the sayd auncyent. E. ¶Another example of a man the whi∣che ne resysted agayn his sȳnes & for yt an
of an hermyte was not herde. C. IT is wryten in the lyfe of faders yt a man the whiche lefte the worlde for to serue god in hermytage was deuou∣te and proued a good hermite. And whan one seculer his compaygnon herde the re∣nowme of hym yode to vysyte hym. And bare vnto him brede in a sacke. And requi¦red hym that he wolde pray for hym to ab¦steyne hym from his synnes. The whiche hermyte hym promysed / but he prayed hȳ that after .xv. dayes he wold retourne vn¦to hym. And whan he was come agayne at the sayd terme / the hermyte demaun∣ded hym yf his sȳne pleased vnto hym yet as before. He answered that he was wors than before tyme. And the sayd hermyte prayed hym yt he wolde yet retourne at ye ende of .xv. dayes / & within the terme the sayd hermyte put hym in grete oraysons and afflyccyons more than before for the sayd man. And whan he retourned and yt he tolde hym that he was yet wors ye said hermyte vnderstode yt for his neclygence & for yt that his synne pleased vnto him wt¦out resystynge vnto the contrary that his orayson was not exalted. Than the sayd hermyte toke ye sayd sacke wherin he had brought the brede / & fylled it with grauel & afterwarde prayed hym that he wolde put the sacke vpon his sholders / & that he wolde bere it. And as he wende to do it the hermyte drewe vnto the contrary. And he apperceyued that the hermyte drewe vn∣to the contrarye vnto hym. Than he sayd vnto hym I may not lyfte vp the burden for that that thou drawest it agayne me / And the hermyte sayd vnto hym / ryse vp nowe & I shall ayde the. And whan they lyfte bothe twayne of one accorde they lyf¦te it vp ryghte easely. Than the hermyte sayd. In lyke manere I ne may ayde the to take the awaye from synne. For thou re¦systest agayne me. Thou hast thy desyre a¦greable & thou resystest not agayn it. But put thy ayde to resyst agayne thy synne / & god & I shall helpe the / For yf thou helpe not thyselfe we can not ayde the nor saue the. &c. This example denoteth that ye syn¦ners the whiche wyll be saued sholde do yt that is in them for to take them from syn & for to resyste agayne it. For for nothyng setteth hym the good man in ye arse of his carte all myree yf his beestes ne drawe hȳ That is to saye thou shalt not be saued by another / yf thou put not payne of thyselfe A. ¶Another example of a monke vnto whom god sente euery daye of good brede and fayre / & after that he had of though∣tes foule and lecherous / and of elacion he loste the sayd brede. C. i. IT is wryten in the lyfe of ye faders that there was a monke aourned with so moche of contynence / good opera∣cyons and of vertues that god wolde sen¦de vnto hym some remuneracyon in this worlde. And whan he was in oraysons & hymnes / god made to be borne vnto hym of brede vpon his table fulfilled with mer¦uaylous swetnes / & whytenes / of the whi¦che he toke his refeccyō. And after yelded graces vnto god of his bounte / and retor∣ned in oraysons & in hymnes. This mon∣ke had many reuelacyons of god / and ma¦ny admonycyons of thȳges to come. And as he was in suche thynges he beganne to gloryfye hymself of his merytes. And in contynent neclygence and slouthe entred in to his herte soo that he was slouthefull for to go in orayson as he was acustomed
And his soule was wery in suche wyse as of to grete laboure / and wolde reste hym / his thoughtes rauysshed hym by dyuers thynges. And one foule and vyle thought entred in to his herte albeit after the oray¦sons he yode as he had be of custome and founde of brede & toke his refeccyon / but he ne cared not to amende his yll though∣tes / & apperceyued not the dommages of his mutacyon. And in that daye he was prycked gretely and embraced by though∣tes lecherous and of foule concupyscence that he rauysed hym to retourne in to the worlde. And he kepte hym that daye to re¦tourne. And as he had be of custome ma∣de his oraysons / & afterwarde yode to ta∣ke his refeccyon & founde of brede but mo¦re soylled & foule than he had had of custo¦me / than he meruaylled hym and was so¦ry. And he vnderstode that the lyknes of ye monstre that he had thought behelde him Albeit he toke his refeccyon. Afterwarde the thyrde daye foule thoughtes prycked hym / and was in his thought in suche wy¦se as with a woman present & lyenge to∣gyder. And hym thoughte that he embra∣ced her / and that he was couched for to cō¦myt the operacyon vnclene. Albeit he pro∣ceded the daye folowynge / and he yode in orayson / but he had the eyes wandrynge / and the thought chetyue. Whan the euen∣tyde came he yode to take his refeccyon / founde of brede but soylled and drye. and in lyke wyse as gnawen with rattes and dogges. Than whan he sawe it he toke hȳ to wayll and to wepe / not as he sholde do with herte for to quenche the flambe of su¦che lechetye / albeit he ete of the brede / but not so moche as he wolde / ne so moche as he had acustomed. And afterwarde as the thoughtes prycked hym they drewe ye che∣e vnto the worlde departed by nyghte And after yt he was moche wery of wal∣kynge / wolde reste hym / and founde ther dwellyng some freres. The whiche whan they sawe hym / ranne before hym & recey¦ued hym in lyke wyse as an aungell / was¦shed his fete / linuiterent / exorted them to go vnto orayson set the table and accom∣plysshed the offyces of charyte. After that he had his refeccion and that he was a ly∣tel rested the freres demaūded hym some worde of edyfycacyon so as of a grete wy¦se fader & instructe and asked him how o∣ny myght escape the bandes and tempta∣cyons of the deuyll / or yf there came vnto them the thought of foule temptacyons / how they sholde call them agayne. Than he was compulsed to teche them of ye said temptacyons and thoughtes he them in∣structe & taught suffycyently. And vnder∣stode in hymselfe the sayd temptacyons / and reknowleged his defaute & sayd. how I teche the other and am deceyued mysel¦fe / or how shall I correcke the other and a mende not myselfe / acursed fyrst do thou that that thou techest vnto other. Whan he had reknowleged in his herte his faute sayd adieu vnto the freres and ranne has¦tely in to his dēne from whens he was de∣parted and sayd. Yf god ne had ayded me I had be descended in to helle. By the ay∣de of god and of the freres the whiche ha∣the made me to reknowlege I am comē agayne. And he abode in his place all hys lyf in wepynges and in wayllynges to do penaunce and loste the brede celestyall / & laboured ye tyme of his life for to haue his sustentacion. This example denoteth ma¦ny thinges. The fyrst that god gyueth vn¦to his seruauntes rewarde / grace / & glory in asmoche as he sente of brede vnto the monke. The seconde is yt by synne a man leseth the sayd rewarde and the grace of god & all goodes. For he loste ye brede. The thyrde is to instructe other a man saueth
hymselfe as deed the sayd monke the whi¦che reknowleged his faute & corrected hȳ by that yt he taught ye sayd freres & by pe∣naunce he saued hymselfe. &c. B. ¶Another example how a frere ye whi¦che was tempted in his thought of the es∣peryte of fornycacyon & god suffred that he sawe it in a foule woman. C.i. IT is wryten in the lyfe of ye faders that a holy man had nourysshed a man chylde in a forest. The whiche whan he was growen he was tormented with ye spyryte of fornycacyon. And wolde go in to the worlde for cause of lechery. & whan the holy fader sawe that he was wrothe & by two yeres reteyned hym by fayre wor∣des in comfortynge hȳ. In thende he said that he was prycked that he ne myght no more bere it. And the holy man sayd vnto hym. Goo than in to the worlde and mary the thou mayst be saued. Than the yonge man waxed Ioyous / but ye holy man said vnto hym I demaunde the one thynge of grace the whiche is that thou go fyrst vn∣to a foūtayn in suche a forest / & that yu fast there forty dayes in requyrynge the ayde of god yt thou mayst chese a good woman For it is a greate cure wherof speketh the wyse. eccle. xxviii. Multeris bone beatus vir. More ouer the sayd holy man bad hȳ take of brede as moche as he wolde / than he was obedyent. And whan he hadde fas¦ted .xx. dayes as he was in orayson he felt grete stenche. The whiche as it creased by two houres with greate payne myght he bere it. And there came vnto hym a right foule woman / blacke / vyle / lothsome / stȳ∣kynge blered / full of scabbes / from whom the sayd stynche proceded / & she came vn∣to the sayd yonge man / vnto whome she sayd. Where arte thou my frende / by gre¦te tyme I haue soughte the. I loue ye mo∣che. I appetyte the aboue all men. And ye sayd yongman demaūded her. What wyl¦te yu ryght foule stynkynge intollerable / & she sayd I wolde haue the to lye with me Than the sayd yongman spytte in her fa∣ce & sayd be it neuer so that I haue suche a loue so lothsome foule & stynkynge. And the sayd yongman demaunded her / what arte thou / from whens comest thou / and how do men cal the / and she answered. I am the synne of lecherye. And it is nowe two yeres that I ne cessed to seche the / & it was whan thou feltyst fyrst the tempta¦cyons of the flesshe. And ye said yongman sayd. Yf I had wyst yt the synne of lecherie had be so stynkynge & so moche abhomy∣nable I sholde not haue wylled to retorne in to the worlde. And from nowe forth I shall kepe vnto god vyrgynyte. And he re¦tourned vnto the holy man / vnto whome he recompted ye sayd vysyon. And he sayd vnto hym / yf thou haddest abyden vnto forty dayes / mo grete thynges had be re∣ueled vnto the. And the said yongman ser¦ued vnto god in vyrginyte & dwelled in re¦lygion. &c. ¶Yf sortes of people lecherous sholde consider wele this example / & how lecherye is stynkynge / vyle / & abhomyna¦ble before god & the ylle the whiche therof procedeth in thende of ye dayes / they shol∣de correcte theym as dyde the sayd yonge man. &c. C. ¶Another example of a yong man ye deuyl walked with bycause of his though¦tes that were yll. C.i. MEn fynde by wrytynge here how that he dyscyple recyteth in hys
sermons and sayth that one tyme a man hadde of yll thoughtes in walkynge / and forthwith the deuyll assocyate hymself wt hym in semblaunce of a man and yode wt hym. And as they yode togyders the sayd man dred / entred in to a chirche that they founde he repented hym and yode to con∣fessyon / for it was lente. And whan he yo∣de forthe of the chirche he foūde the deuyl at the yate / the whiche behelde those that came forthe of whome he demaunded his compaygnon. And he sayd loo I am here the whiche came hether with the / goo we our waye. And the deuyll answered hym thou arte not my felowe that came wt me The deuyll knewe hym not for that / that he hadde confessed hym and that god had pardoned hym. And by that confessyon ef¦faceth the synnes and separeth from ye de¦uyll. Also yll thoughtes ben to drede / for ye deuyll is not ferre of. &c. D. ¶Another example how it behoueth to yelde accompt at ye daye of Iugement of yll thoughtes. Ci. IT is wryten in the epystyll of a bysshoppe named Cirulius how saynt Iherome areysed a deed man / ye whiche tolde that whan his soule was seperate from the body it was borne before god in iugemen¦te. Also soone as a man may shytte ye eye / and that all the synnes that he had done / spoken / and thought in all his lyfe appe∣red clerely vnto the Iuge and before all / as yf they had be present so that there abo¦de not the moost lytell thoughte / but that it appered clerely in lyke wyse as it had be thought. &c. ¶Cogitatio bona. A. ¶Examples of thoughtes / and fyrste example that a frere wonne seuen crow∣nes a nyght in resystyng agayne yll thou∣ghtes and temptacyons the whiche came vnto hym. Cii IT is wryten in the lyfe of the fa¦ders that an aūcyent fader had a dyscyple proued. And this said fader had of custome in ye euen∣tyde to teche his sayd dyscyple / and after to gyue vnto hym his benedyc∣cyon / and than suffred him to slepe and it befel one daye that some relygyous came vnto the sayd auncient / and after that he had recomorted them and instructe they departed. After he came in the euentyde to teche his sayd dyscyple as he had accus¦tomed to do. And for as moche as he was wery he slepte. And the sayd dyscyple sus∣teyned & wolde not slepe ne leue his said mayster tyll that he had had his benedyc∣cyon and leue of hym & that he was wa∣ked. And the deuyll tempted hym in hys thought by seuen tymes that he sholde de¦parte and that he sholde go to slepe / but he resysted vertuously vnto the said thou∣ghtes / and neuer remeued. And at myd∣nyght the auncyent awoke and foūde his sayd discyple by hym / vnto whom he said Sone haste not thou departed tyll vnto this houre. And he answered no / for thou hast not gyuen me leue. And the auncient sayd / wherfore haste thou not waked me He answered. I had drede to dystourbe ye The sayd auncyent rose hym vp / said ma¦tynes and instructe his dyscyple / & after∣warde gaue vnto hym leue for to slepe / & as the sayd auncyent satte hym alone he was as in a traunce. And he sawe an aun¦gell
the whiche shewed vnto hym a glory¦ous place and a syege in yt place / & vppon the sayd syege seuen crownes. And ye said auncyent asked hym ye whiche shewed vn¦to hym that thynge in demaundynge vn∣to whom the sayd syege was and ye crow∣nes. He answered vnto thy discyple / he ha¦the deserued to haue the place and ye sye∣ge for the good conuersacyon of him / and he hathe deserued to haue the seuen crow∣nes in this nyght. And the sayd auncyent had meruayll / called his dyscyple and de∣maunded hym what he had done the said nyght. He answered that he had nothyng done. And the auncyent wende that by hu¦mylyte he ne wolde confesse vnto hym / & sayd vnto hym. I shall not be contente wt the yf thou tell me not what thou hast do¦ne or thought this nyght. And ye sayd dys¦cyple doubted and thought that he sholde answere / and for that that the auncyente hadde commaunded hym to tell. He an∣swered I haue done none other thyng but that I haue thought seuen tymes & was moche impugned in my thoughte that I sholde go my waye and that I sholde sle∣pe before that thou had gyue me leue / but for that that thou haddest not gyue me le∣ue I yode not but susteyned & resysted tyl that thou were waked and yt thou haddest gyuen me thy benedyccyon. Whan ye said auncyent herde these wordes he vndersto¦de that at all the tymes that he resysted in his thought as many tymes he deserued to haue crowne of god. And therfore a mā sholde resyst vnto all yll thoughtes for to haue vyctorye agayne the deuyll / and for to haue rewarde in paradyse. &c. B. ¶Another example how that a relygy¦ous apostate the whiche repented hym it appereth that the wyll of a body is repu∣ted for the dede. Cii IT is wryten in libro cesarii yt synt bernarde had a monke the whiche lefte the habyte of his ordre by the admo∣nycyon of the deuyll and toke to gouerne a parysshe. And engendred a sone and a doughter on a concubyne. Than it befel yt after that he had dwelled there many ye∣res his abbot past by the parysshe wherin the sayd monke enhabyted / & came to lod∣ge in his house withoute that yt he knewe ony thynge and without knowynge hym Albeit the monke knewe hym wele & re∣ceyued hym also proprely as his owne fa∣der / and vnto hym he admynystred & vn∣to his compaygnons & vnto theyr marys all haboundauntly in theyr necessytes. Er¦ly in the mornynge whan saynt bernarde had sayd matyns he was prepared to goo his waye. And hadde not spoken vnto the monke for that that he was gone ryght er¦ly vnto ye chirche. He sayd vnto ye preestes sone. Go and bere suche message vnto thy mayster / & that chylde was dombe from his natyuyte the whiche was obeyssaunte at his cōmaundemente & apperceyued in the vertue of the cōmaunder ranne vnto his fader and brought absolutely the wor¦des of saynt bernard and sayd. The fader abbot cōmaundeth the suche thinges and suche. Whan the fader herde the fyrst voy¦ce of Ioye toke him to wepe and secondly and thyrdly made hym to repete the wor∣des. And enquyred dylygently that yt the abbot had done / vnto whome he sayd / he hathe done none other thinge to me but yt he sayd vnto me. Go and tell vnto thy fa∣der these wordes. Than the preest was cō¦tryte of so greate and euydent myracle / & came hastely vnto the holy man and felle prostrate at his fete in wepynge and said
vnto hym. My lorde fader I was your re¦lygyous in suche wyse am I named and I departed at suche a tyme. Than I pra¦ye your good faderheed that I maye goo agayne with you vnto the monastery for god hathe vysyte myne herte in youre co∣mynge vnto whome saynt bernarde an∣swered & sayd. Abyde me here. And whan I haue done my besynesses I shall come anone this waye / & I shall lede the with me. And the sayd monke dredde ye dethe / the whiche he had not dredde before / and sayd. My lorde I drede to deye in the spa¦ce of this tyme. And he hym answered. / Know thou for certayne that yf thou dye in suche condycyon & purpose thou shalte be founde to be monke before god. And so he departed. Whan yt abbot came he foū∣de hym deed & newly buryed. Than he cō¦maunded that men sholde open his sepul¦cre. And those the whiche present were de¦maūded what he wolde do. He answered I wyll se yf he lye in the sepulcre as mon∣ke / or as clerke. They answered we haue buryed hym as a clerke in habyte seculer. Than the erthe was taken awaye and ye monument open wherin he had be bury∣ed. And he appered before al in tonsure of monke. And god was magnified of them all the whiche reputed and toke the wyll for the dede. &c. C. ¶Another example how a thefe came vnto an hermyte in good wyll to amende hym / the whiche hermyte dysdeyned him wherfore euyll came vnto hym. C.ii. THe dysciple reciteth in his sermōs that a thefe was moche sorowful of his synnes & had good wyll to amende hym the whiche prayed an hermyte that he wolde receyue hym in to his felyshyp / for he purposed neuer to cōmyt tho synes and to serue god euermore. And ye hermy∣te ne wolde receyue hym / & dyspraysed hȳ in his herte and lete hym go without con∣solacion. And as the thefe wolde haue ma¦de hym an hermytage a tree yt he hewed fell vpon hym and slewe hym. And in su∣che wyse he deyed in grete contrycyon of herte. Than the sayd hermyte sawe that aungels came and bare the thefe in to he∣uen / & was sory and sayd. Wherfore ma∣ke I my dwellynge here in this hermyta¦ge. This man hath be a cursed thefe / and for his good wyll he is nowe mounted in to heuen. And I haue be here soo longe & I ne maye enter. And in that cōmocyon sayd. I go in to the worlde & I shall be a thefe / and in thende I shall be saued / and as he excercysed hym to cōmyt theftes he was pursued of the people of the cite. and in fleynge he fell and slewe hymselfe and the deuilles came the whiche toke the sou¦le and bare it in to helle. &c. ¶This exam¦ple denoteth that by the contrycyon and good wyll that the sayd thefe had he was saued. Also it is wryten ezechielis. xviii. / Inquacū{que} die ingemuerit peccator oīm iniquitatum eius non recordabor. And ye sayd hermyte was dampned by that that he chaunged his lyfe from good in to ylle Vnde ezechielis. xxxiii. Iustitia iusti non liberabit eum ī quacū{que} die peccauerit. &c ¶Eucharistia. D. ¶Examples of the eucharistie. And fyrste example of an abbot ye whiche sayd that the hostye consecrate was not the ve¦ry body of our blessyd lorde Ihesu cryste /
but that it was his fygure. Cii. IT is wryten in the lyfe of faders yt an abbot was grete in lyfe actyue / the whiche perseuered in greate labours / but he was symple in the fayth. For he er∣red and said that it was not naturelly the body of oure lorde Ihesu cryste the hostye consecrate in the masse yt we receyue / but sayd yt it was his fygure. And whan two auncyentes herde tell that he spake suche wordes consyderynge his lyfe & conuersa∣cyon how symply and ygnorantly he spa∣ke the sayd worde / they came vnto hym & sayd. Abbot we haue herde tell that an in∣fydele hathe sayd that the brede consecra¦te in the masse that we receyue is not na∣turelly ye body of Ihesu cryste / but that it is his fygure. And he sayd it is I ye said it And the sayd auncyentes gaue vnto him ensygnementes & techynges that he sayd not wele. And he sayd vnto them that yf he ne myghte knowe manyfestly the sayd thynge that he wolde nothynge byleue / & the sayd auncyentes sayd. Praye we vnto god this weke and we byleue that he wyl reuele it vnto vs. The sayd abbot was cō¦tente / & all thre yode in to theyr houses / & put them in orayson. And whan the sayd weke was accōplysshed / these abouesayd came in to the chirche on the sondaye the whiche put them in a place apperynge as in the pulpyt from the whiche they se al ye secretes of the preest. And ye eyes of theyr vnderstondynges were open. And whan the loues consecrates were put vpon the aulter they sawe in lyke wyse as thre chyl∣dren lyenge on the aulter. And whan the preest put forth his hande for to breke the sayd brede consecrate the aungell of oure lorde and redemptour dyscended from he¦uen vpon ye sayd aulter ye whiche had in his hande a knyfe & cut that chylde and ye blode ranne in to the chalyce. And whan the preest brake the brede consecrate in ly∣tell partyes. In lyke wyse the aungell cut the membres of ye chylde in lytell partyes And the sayd abbot approched for to recey¦ue the holy cōmunyon. It was gyuen vn¦to hym seule in forme of flesshe soylled wt blode. And whan he sawe it he dredde & to¦ke hym for to saye & to crye. I byleue my lorde that ye brede the whiche is consecra∣te on the aulter that it is thy body. And ye wyne the whiche is consecrate in clalyce / that it is thy blode. And forthwith ye flesh that was in his hande was chaūged into the lykenes of brede after ye mystere / and after the sayd abbot receyued his creatou¦re / & yelded vnto hym graces & was con∣fermed in the lawe. ¶By this example a man sholde vnderstonde that after that ye wordes sacramentalles ben pronounced that the hostye is no more brede / & that it is the precyous body of Ihesu cryste he ye whiche is borne of the vyrgyn marye / and the whiche hathe suffred dethe on ye crosse for to redeme vs. Before the consecracion the hostye is brede. And after the consecra∣cyon the sayd brede is transmuted vnto ye precyous body of Ihesu cryste. And note wele here that thou ne sholdest worshyp ye hostye ne ioyne the handes for to do it ho∣nour tyll that the wordes sacramentales ben pronounced / that is tyl that the preest lyfte vp the hostye. For that sholde be ydo∣latrye to worshyp the brede the whiche is one of the creatures of god / & to gyue vn∣to it the dyuyne honour the whiche apper¦teyneth alonely vnto god. Incontynente that the preest hathe consecrate he lyfteth vp the hostye / & than thou it sholdest wor¦shyp & byleue stedfastly that it is the pre∣cyous body of Ihesu cryst naturelly not a lonely his fygure as byleued the abbot. It
is wryten ioh. vi. Ego sū panis viuis qi de celo descēdi. Si quis māducauerit ex hoc pane viuet īeternū. That is to say. I am the brede of lyfe the whiche am dyscended from heuen / who so eteth of this brede / yt is to vnderstonde in the estate of grace & that he perseuer in suche wyse tyll vnto ye dethe he shall lyue in perdurabylyte. And that chapytre iohannis .vi. is wryten. Ca¦ro mea vere est cibus et sanguis me{us} ve∣re est potus. That is to say certaynly my flesshe is the viande and nourysshynge of the soule. And my bloode is the drynke by the whiche she is replete▪ Also we rede. ioh ii. capit. yt god chaūged the water in to wy¦ne at a weddynge. He hathe also puyssaū∣ce to chaunge the brede in to his body / and ye wyne in to his blode after that it is his wyll. Whan the preest pronounceth ye wor¦des that he hathe instytute ye whiche ben wryten in the euangelystes. Hoc est enī cor¦pus meum. Hic est enī calix saguīs mei. &c A man sholde not abasshe him yf ye hostie chaunge his nature & that it be transmu∣ted vnto the precyous body of Ihesu crist We rede more strongly. Moyses the whi∣che was man mortall chaunged many ty¦mes his rodde in to a serpent before pha∣raon. And whan he wolde the serpent be∣came a rodde. Also we rede that moyses made grete haboundaunce of water to ys¦sue out of a roche for to gyue vnto the peo¦ple of Israhell the whiche murmured. al¦so the waters of the chyldren of Israhell were soo bytter that beestes ne people ne myght drynke it. And at the commaunde¦ment of moyse ye whiche put his rodde wt in the waters they became swete & chaun¦ged theyr natures Also we rede yt an axe ye whiche was without hafte & fell in to de∣pe see came agayne vnto the hafte & swā∣me agayne nature at the voyce & at the cō¦maundement of ye prophete helyseus the whiche helde the sayd haft of wodde. The yron of his nature is heuy. And albeit at the cōmaundemente of a mortall man it swāme vpwarde on the water. Sith that it is so yt mortal men ye whiche ben ye crea¦tures of god hathe done the sayd thynges it foloweth wele that god the whiche is ye creatour of all thynges may chaūge ye bre¦de in to his precyous body. It is more gre¦te thynge to create than to chaunge. Also notwithstondynge yt there ne is but one god / so is he entyery in all the hostyes wt out dymynucion. verbi gratia. Whan ony man speketh his voyce is harde & entreth in euery of the auditours. Also whan the preest bryngeth forthe the wordes of god it entreth & extendeth in to all the hostyes & ben consecrate / & god is entyerly in eue¦ry of them without ony dymynucyon. Al∣so yf all the men of the worlde helde euery of them a glasse in theyr hande whan the sone shyneth euery man sholde se the sone in his glasse / & it ne is but one sonne. Also it ne is but one god the whiche is veryta∣bly in all the hostyes consecrate. Sythe yt the hostye is the very body of Ihesu cryst the sone of god celestyall & borne of ye vyr¦gyn marye a man sholde receyue hym ho∣nourably & holyly / & him behoueth to pur∣ge his conscyence of synne. Vnde paulus. Expurgate vetus fermentū vt sitis noua cōspersio. That is to saye. Take awaye ye olde leuayne / that is synne to thende that ye be newely spryncled. Et legit{ur} ad roma∣nos .xiiii. Abiiciamus opera tenebrarū & induamur arma lucis. Put we out ye ope∣racyons of derkenesses tho ben of synnes And put we oute the armes of lyghte tho ben of vertues and charyte. &c. Men put not of wyne in a foule vessell to thende yt it be not loste / ne of roses / ne of fayre flou¦res in the trough before the hogges to the ende that they ne be soylled ne wasted. al∣so
a man ne sholde put the precyous body of Ihesu cryste in a body fulfylled wt syn∣nes. &c. vnde mathei .vii. Ne{que} mittatis margaritas ante porcos ne forte cōculcēt eas pedib{us} suis. Itē in codē capitulo. No lite setm̄ dare canib{us}. Whan a lorde tem∣porell cometh to lodge in thy house / thou makest it clene / prepayrest it and takest a¦waye all immūdicites & thynges fylthy & vnclene. In lyke wyse sholdest thou doo whan thou wylte receyue thy creatoure. / For yf thou receyue hym in mortall synne vnworthely that is vnto thy dampnacion Thou receyuest hym the whiche shall iu∣ge the & condempne the. Vnde paui{us}. i co xi. ca. Qui enī māducat & bibit īdigne iu∣ditiū sibi māducat et bibit. sequit{ur}. Re{us} erit corporis & sāguinis dn̄i. And therfore pro¦ue wele thy conscyence to knowe yf it be wele made clene by confession before that thou receyue thy creatoure. Vn̄. i. ad co. v. Probat aūt seipsū homo: & sic de pane il∣lo edat: et de calice bibat. The good and ye ylle receyue hym / but dyfferently. For the good receyueth hym vnto theyr saluacion And the yll vnto theyr dampnacyon. Su¦mūt boni sumūt mali sorte tamē inequali vite vel īterit{us}. ¶Example yt iudas ye whi¦che receyued his creatour in mortal synne And incontynent yt he had receyued hym ye deuyl entred in to his body. And he had more grete puyssaunce in hym than befo∣re. Vn̄. iohānis. xiii. Cū ies{us} intīxisset pa¦nē dedit iude & post bucellā tūc introiuit ī illū sathanas. &c. And incontynent iudas rose him vp & yode vnto the Iewes for to take & delyuer oure lorde the whiche was grete maledyccyon for hym. Vn̄ luce. xxii. Te homini illi {per} quē fili{us} hominis tradet{ur} Our lorde sayd vnto his dyscyples. I ha∣ue chse you twelue & one of you is a deuil Vnde ioh. vi. Ego vos duodecī elegi: et vn{us} ex vobis diabol{us} est. That was iudas that our lorde called the deuyl / he was his dysciple. And for his couetyse to haue. xxx pence he was peruerted he was traytour thefe / fayntyf & betoke and delyuered his owne mayster in the handes of his enmy¦es the whiche was innocent & iuste for to put hym vnto dethe. And therfore in the ende and conclusyon all maladyccyon / dā¦nacyon / & perdycyon / came vpon the said iudas. Vnde mathei. xxvi. Meli{us} esset il∣lisi nat{us} nō fuisset homo ille. Quia dixit. Quid vultis michi dare et ego eum vobis tradā. Et legit{ur} mathei. xvii. Peccaui tra¦dens sāguinē iustū. Sequitur. Proiectis argēteis in tēplo recessit & abieno laque se suspēdit. It had be better vnto hym that he had neuer be borne / for he hanged hym selfe / his entraylles fel out of his bely / and is dampned. legit{ur} actuum. i. De iuda qui suspensus crepuit medi{us} & diffusa sūt oīa viscera eius. By his synne he slewe hym∣selfe as it is said / & was deposed of his pre¦lature of his offyce & sent into helle in to ye place yt he had deserued to haue. And ano∣ther had his sayd prelature. And in lyke¦wyse shall it be done of the ylle the whiche folowe his lyfe / his maners & condycions Legit{ur} in actib{us} apostolorū. Fiat habita∣tio eius desserta & episcopatū eius accipi∣et alter. Et dauid ī psal. Fiāt dies ei{us} pau∣ci et episcopatū eius accipiat alter. &c. F. ¶Another example of a woman ye whi¦che toke her to laughe as saynt Gregorye admynystred vnto her on Ester day. Cii IT is wryten in the legende of saint Gregorye / yt on an ester day as the sayd saynt Gregorye admynystred ye peo∣ple / whan he came vnto a woman & that he sayd / corpus dn̄i nostri iesu christi. &c.
she began to laughe. Whan saynt gregory sawe ye sayd thinge he withdrewe his han¦de and put the hostye on the aulter. And after that the other were admynystred he called the sayd woman & demaunded her wherfore she had laughed. She answered I laughe for yt that thou hast sayd yt thys lytel porcion of brede that thou woldest gy¦ue me that it is the body of Ihesu cryste / Than the holy man made a sermon vnto the people / & warned them to go in oray∣son and to praye that it wolde please vn∣to god to shewe the trouthe of this thynge and for to take awaye the erroure from ye sayd woman. And whan ye orayson was accomplysshed saynt gregorye yode vnto the aulter & the sayd hostye appered vysy¦bly before all to be corporell in flesshe. and the partye of the lytell fynger was blody / Than saynt gregorye sayd vnto the wo∣man. From now forth byleue thou truely the wordes of god. Panis quē ego dabo raro mea est pro mundi vita. That is for to saye. The brede that I shall gyue vnto the it is my flesshe for the lyfe and redem¦cyon of the worlde. After that at the pra∣yer of the sayd saynt and people the hostie came agayne in symylytude of brede / and the sayde woman was confermed / and byleued in the sacrament. &c. God wyll yt ye hostye appere vnto vs in lykenes of bre¦de for two causes. The fyrst is to haue re∣trybucyon to byleue yt that we se not. The seconde bycause it sholde be vnto vs cruel¦te to ete vncouth mete / as rawe flesshe. & therfore we sholde byleue without doubte in the consecrate hostye. &c. G. ¶Another example of a cursed preest yt receyued ye hostye wrongfully. Cii. THe dyscyple recyteth in his promp¦tuarye and sayeth that as a secu∣ler preest sange one tyme masse / another stondynge by sawe in the patent in the ty¦me to receyue not ye lykenes of brede / but of a chylde / the whiche whan ye preest wol∣de haue receyued him he tourned his face and resysted with his fete & his handes yt he shold not entre in to the mouthe of the sayd preest. And this deuoute man sawe this thynge not alonely one tyme but ma¦ny. Vnto whome the cursed preest one ty∣me amonges other sayd. All tymes whan I take the body of Ihesu cryste I take it with so grete dyffyculte that I meruayll therof. And ye deuoute man sayd vnto hȳ I coūsayll the that thou correcte the / and I haue sene that of the. Than the preest corrected hym. And as he songe afterwar¦de the sayd deuoute man sawe the chylde the whiche ioyned the handes / assembled the fete and entred in to the mouthe of ye preest hastely and easely &c. By this exam¦ple a man may vnderstonde yt god dwel∣leth not ne yet wyll dwell by grace with ye synners in the synne / but wyll dwell and enhabite with the good the whiche ben in ye estate of grace. And therfore euery man sholde correcte hymselfe & amende. &c. H. ¶Another example of a chylde of .ix. yeres the whiche was admynystred at his dethe. Cii. THe dyscyple recyteth in his boke & sayeth that as a yonge chylde se∣ke replenysshed with the holy ghost requy¦red that the body of Ihesu cryste shold be brought vnto hym. And as his frendes re¦frayned it he cryed strongly. Gyue me the body of our lorde / giue me the body of our
lorde. Whan this thynge was spoken vn∣to the preest he answered. That it was no sure thynge to gyue ye body of Ihesu crist vnto suche a chyld the whiche knewe not what it was. And the preest toke an hosty vnsacred & bare it vnto hym & sayd. Here is the body of our lorde. And god inspyred the chylde for to dystroye the falsnes and infydelyte of many the whiche vse theym yll. And answered. Wherfore wylte thou deceyue me this is not the body of our lor¦de that ye offre me. Than the preest was meruaylled of this thynge & ymagyned yt this chylde was enspyred dyuynely / yode to fetche vnto hym the holy cōmunyon / & that chylde receyued it enough deuoutly. I. ¶Another example how that a horse / an oxe / & an asse knewe Ihesu cryst with in the sacrament & dyde hym honour. Cii IT is wryten in the promptuary of the dyscyple yt a deuoute bysshop & an herytyke stroue togyders of the veryte of the body of Ihesu cryste. And for to pro¦ue this thynge they put of otes in a vessel & put the eucharystye vpon ye otes by cau∣tell. And afterwarde ledde theder a horse an oxe & an asse the whiche ne touched vn¦to the prouende / but bowed the knees and worshypped our lorde. In lykewyse as yf they had vsed of reason. Whan the said he¦retyke had sene that he conuerted hym & after was faythfull / vnto purpose of this example it is wryten ysaie .i. Cognouit bos possessorē suū: & asin{us} {pre}sepe dn̄i sui: is¦rahell aūt me nō cognouit et popul{us} me{us} nō intellexit. That is to saye. The oxe ha∣the kowen his possessour. And the asse the crache of his mayster. Certaynly Israhell hathe not knowen me / & my people hathe not vnderstonde me. That is to vnderstō¦de that the beestes irreasonables knowen theyr mayster. And the men reasonables ne knowe theyr god lorde & master. &c. K. ¶Another example of the hors of a Ie¦we the whiche knewe Ihesucryst in ye sa∣crament of the eucarystye. Cii. THe dyscyple reciteth in his promp¦tuarye that as a good preest bare the body of Ihesu crist for to admynystre vnto a seke body he met a Iewe vpon a fayre hors / & the said hors bowed ye knees before ye body of Ihesu cryst. And ye iewe ne myght make hym to passe for the stry∣kynge with the sporres tyll that the body of Ihesucryst was paste. And a voyce frō heuen was harde. Know thy creatoure yt thou denyest to be borne of ye vyrgyn ma∣rye. And whan the Iewe sawe that he re∣pented hym byleued in Ihesu cryste and receyued baptysme. Also yu infydele whan thou seest these examples here thou shol∣dest byleue stedfastly in ye holy sacrament to worshyp it and to conuerte ye vnto god as dyde the Iewe. &c. L. ¶Another example of a woman the whiche put the body of Ihesu cryst before the hogges. Cii. THe dyscyple recyteth in his booke and sayeth that in the tyme that alberte regned in his bysshopryche a wo∣man came vnto hym to confesse that the deuyll ne wolde suffre yt she sholde byleue in the sacrament of the aulter yt it was the body of Ihesu crist: & put it before hogges
For all the hogges bowed ye knees & wor∣shypped the sacrament. And ye cursed wo∣man wolde se the experyence & put the bo¦dy of Ihesu cryst vpon the broche & rost it afterwarde with fyre as roste. And after¦warde ye droppes of blode began to drop / This thȳge done she was not yet content She toke the body of Ihesu cryst & bury∣ed it in the erthe / & moche of blode yssued aboue the pitte / in lyke wyse as in boyllyn¦ge out of the erthe. At this thynge ye sayd woman repented her & byleued the very body of Ihesu crist to be in the sacrament of the aulter & confessed this thynge vnto the sayd bysshop & her sȳne / and receyued perpetuall penaunce of hym. This exam∣ple sholde withdrawe al vnfaithfull from errour / & sholde worshyp theyr creatour / or they shall be wors than hogges the whi¦che yode on knees. Be ye not so incredule and without byleue as was the sayd wo∣man the whiche wolde nothynge byleue tyll that she hadde sene the experyence of the dede. &c. T. ¶Another example of a mayden the whiche shedde ye body of Ihesu crist vpon the cabysshe and cole wortes. Cii. THe dyscyple recyteth in his promp¦tuarye & saith that it happened in the yle of saynt Iames that a mayden se¦culer was posseded of ye deuyl. And a prest demaunded of the deuyll the whiche was in her wherfore he tormented her so cruel∣ly and so longly the sayd woman. He an∣swered by the mouthe of the mayden / she had well deserued it. And ye preest demaū¦ded hym wherfore. He answered for that that she hathe layde the ryght hye god on the cabysshe herbes. And bycause that he vnderstode not this thynge & that the de∣uyll ne wolde expounde it to hym. He de∣maunded of the woman yf she had vnder¦stonde that yt the deuyll had spoken yt she wolde expounde it to hym / & incontynent she confessed her synne and said. Whan I was yonge. I entred in to a lytell gardyn to gadre cabysshe herbes that ye lytel wor∣mes ete. And I loged a woman tourmen¦ted on nyght vnto whom I expounded ye dōmage of my gardyn yt these lytell wor∣mes ete my cabysshe herbes. She answe¦red that she sholde teche me a good mede∣cyne. Take the body of Ihesu crist and af¦terwarde breke it in lytell partyes & shed them vpon the cabysshe herbes / & inconti¦nent they shall cease them. And I mysche¦uous hathe had more curyosyte of my ly∣tell courte & gardyn than of ye sacrament & byleued the woman. And whan ester ca¦me I drewe ye body of Ihesus frome my mouthe / & dyde as I had be taught. And the sayd thynge that I dyde made me to be put in torment in lyke wyse as wytnes¦seth the deuyl. &c. A man may here vnder stonde that ye sayd olde woman gaue cur¦sed counsayll the whiche a man sholde fle And the yonge woman was infydele and ryght yll to do the sayd coūsayll. And ther¦fore she had deserued to haue punycyon & torment / & so done all vnfaythfull people And therfore they sholde drede punycyon and dampnacyon eternell. &c. N. ¶Another example yt the oxen knewe Ihesu cryst in the sacrament in ye felde. THe dysciple reciteth in his sermōs how theues brake a chirche and to¦ke the shryne the whiche is called custodye & ye body of Ihesu cryst & yode theyr way
And whan they ne foūde but relyques wt in it & the body of Ihesu cryste they gaue no force / and lefte it in theyr neyghbours felde. Whan the mornyng came the labou¦rer with his oxen came to laboure his lan¦de. And whan the oxen came nere vnto ye sayd cheste or pyxe / as all abasshed houed styll in suche maner that for pryckynge ne for strykynge ne wolde they go no ferther soo moche yt the labourer wrathed hym a∣gayne theym & sayd the deuyll was in his oxen. He ne sawe clere for it was ryght er¦ly. & auysed the boxe or pyxe before ye fete of his oxen. Than he vnderstode the cau∣se of his rebellyon / lefte all in the felde / yo¦de vnto his towne to tell the case vnto the preest & vnto other. They came vnto the sayd felde with the crosse / encenser / & ta∣pres & brought agayne the body of Ihesu cryste. &c. Thou infydele yf thou ne do ho¦noure vnto thy sauyour the whiche is in ye sacrament thou arte wors than the oxen / & beestes dombe the whiche ne wolde go no ferther for betynge ne otherwyse agaȳ theyr creatoure. O. ¶Another example how ye hony bees made vnto Ihesu cryste a chapell and an aulter in doynge hym honoure. Cii THe dyscyple reciteth in his promp¦tuarye & sayth that as a woman nourysshed many bees that deyed & prouf¦fyted nothynge / she sought of remedye / & it was tolde her that yf she put by them ye body of Ihesu cryst that they sholde prouf¦fyte withoute dethe. Than she yode vnto the chirche & fayned that she wolde be ad∣mynystred / toke the body of Ihesu cryste bare it and put it in a hyue of bees. Vnder¦stonde the grete meruayl & puyssaunce of god. The bees knewe theyr creatoure / the whiche made hym a ryght fayre chapell a¦boute hym of the swetnes of waxe & hony that they gadred. And in that chapell ma¦de an aulter of the selfe matere and ut aboue it ye holy body of Ihesu cryst. God blyssed theyr operacyons. And at ye tyme whan the sayd woman opened the hyue / & that she had sene so fayre enoratorye she had shame / ranne vnto the preest and con¦fessed vnto hym all that yt she had done & sene. Than the preest toke the parysshyn∣ge with hym came vnto the vessel / ye bees flewe awaye and in laudynge theyr crea∣tour keste a crye. They founde a fayre ly∣tell chapell made of the matere made wt the bees the whiche was of grete artyfy∣ce and crafte. For it had of fayre lytel wal¦les and couerynge / wyndowe / dore / alter They meruaylled them and bare it with the body of Ihesu cryst vnto theyr chirche with grete louynge and praysynge. &c. yf the said bees dyde honour vnto theyr crea¦tour / so sholdest thou doo or thou sholdest be more insensyble than they. &c. P. ¶Another exāple of ye sone of a Iewe the whiche was preserued from brennyn∣ge / for that that he had receyued the body of god. Cii. MEn fynde by wrytynge that in the towne of cerram there was two Iewes the whiche dwelled amonges the crystyens in a strete. And the daye of ester the sone of one of the Iewes was moued in grete deuocyon vnto the sacramente / The curate seynge his stedfaste purpose / gaue vnto hym his sauyoure. And whan the fader of ye sayd chylde herde tell what his sone had done he was wrothe & bet hȳ
And at that houre the Iewe baked of bre¦de. And the ouen was all embrased with grete fyre / toke his chylde and kest hym wt in the ouen. The moder of the chylde the whche sawe the sayd thynge ranne vnto the said ouen / and many other loked with in it and sawe the chylde the whiche pla∣yed without hauynge yll within the sayd fyre. The myracle was incontynent shew¦ed ouer al the towne. The people ran the∣der the chylde was drawen out withoute hauynge yll. And in no maner of ye world the Iewe wolde not conuerte hym. And for his infydelyte they toke hym and was caste within the ouen / and he was forthwt brente. Q. ¶Another example of a man the whi¦che ne wolde leue his synne / who came to receyue his creatoure agayne the defence of the preest. Cii. THe discyple recyteth in his promp¦tuary that a preest knewe in con∣fesyon how a sȳner was not contryte / for he had no wyll to absteyne hym from his synne. And therfore he defended hȳ to re∣ceyue his creatoure. And vpon this thyng tremblȳge he therto acceded. And ye prest said vnto him. God be Iuge bytwene the and me / and gaue vnto hym the body of god. And incontynent that he had it in his mouthe his throte brake & the body of ihe¦su cryste yode forth & sodaynly he deyed. R. ¶Another example of the punycyon of one of the relygyous of saynt bernarde ye whiche receyued his creatoure in mortall synne. Cii. MEn fynde by wrytynge how saint bernarde knewe that one of his re¦lygyous was in mortall synne / whome he admonested gretely in confessyon to put hym in the estate of grace &c. but the syn∣ner ne wolde confesse him. And at ester he presented hym at the table of our lorde as the other dyde. Whan it came to receyue hym in his ordre the sayd saynt bernarde sayd generally that none ne shold receyue his creatour in mortall synne. And ye syn∣ner sayd appertly gyue me that the whi∣che is myne. Than saynt bernarde vnder¦stode that he was obstynate and stedfaste in his synne made the crosse before hym & sayd. God be Iuge bytwene the and me. / And whan he hadde receyued the body of Ihesu cryste in the mouthe fell deed befo∣re all sodaynly. This example here sholde moue the synners to purge theyr conscien¦ces of sȳne before that they receyue theyr creatoure. &c. S. ¶Another example of a holy fader ye whiche drewe backe the synners to recey∣ue theyr creatour in synne. Cii. IT is wryten in the lyfe of ye faders that god gaue so grete grace vnto a holy fader named Eulogium that he ap¦perceyued the merytes and the synnes of those ye whiche came to receyue theyr crea¦toure. And he withelde some monkes the whiche wold accede vnto the table of our lorde to whome he sayd. How are you soo hardy to come vnto goddes borde. Fyrste he sayd vnto one. Thou hast had thought of fornycacyon this nyghte / & sayd in thy herte there is no dyfference betwene the iuste & the synner to accede vnto the sacra¦ment. And sayd to another thou hast ma¦de
a doubte in thy herte how a man may sanctefye the cōmunyon. And the sayd ho¦ly man put a parte those the whiche were in synne / & sayd that they sholde repente them and do penaunce or that they were acceded. &c. T. ¶Another example of the punycyon of some the whiche retourned vnto theyr glotonyes & synnes after ester. Cii. THe dysciple recyteth that it is wry¦ten in the booke of the souerayne bysshoppes ye some men after the feest of ester that they had receyued theyr creatou¦re retourned vnto dronkennes / playes / fo¦lyes / & sinnes / but they ne abode vnpunys¦shed. For from theyr mouthes there rāne stynkynge bloode the whiche entred with in theyr bodyes and choked and drowned them. Also sodaynly water & rayne discen¦ded from heuen the whiche them moysted and marde / & dystroyed all the cornes and fruytes of theyr possessyons / and with yt water proceded dragons so venymous yt the people ne myght go ne come / but that they were in daunger of dethe. For to ta∣ke awaye the said punycyon an holy man prayed for them deuoutely. Vnto whome the aūgell of god appered & sayd. I pray the tell me what sholde a man do wt those the whiche enclose the sone of ye emperour in a ryght darke pryson & stynkyng for to waste hym. The man of god answered yt a man sholde vndo those the whiche do su¦che thynge. And the aungell sayd vnto hȳ What sholde a man do with hym the whi¦che putteth the body of god in the stynkin¦ge myre. And the man of god sayd vnto hym ye men sholde brenne hym. And ye aū¦gel sayd vnto him. Those for whom thou prayest haue not they done suche a thyng on the holy daye of ester. They receyued the holy cōmunyon & afterwarde yode to daunces & dronkenesses agayne the holy sacrament that they had receyued / & thr∣fore god is wrothe agayne theym. Whan they herde this thyng many repented thē and appesed the ire of god. Vnto the pur∣pose of this example a man may take the wordes of the gospell the whiche ben wry¦ten mathei. xii. Cū immūd{us} spirit{us} exie∣rit ab homine: scʐ per cōfessionē ambulat {per}loca arida querēs requiē & nō īuenit: tūc dicit. Reuertar in domū meā vn̄ exiui va∣dit & assumit septē alios spūs secū nequio res se et ītrantes habitant: ibi: & fiūt nouis¦sima hoīs illi{us} peiora priorib{us}. That is to vnderstonde whan ye yll spyryte is yssued from the man by confession he walketh on ye one syde & on the other for to deceyue hȳ And yf the sayd man retourne vnto sȳne or yf he delyte hym / or yf ony synne be not wele confest / the yll spyryte sayeth. I shal retourne in to my house frome whens I came. Therder he gothe and taketh seuen other spyrytes wors than he / & they entre & dwell there & the laste thynges of ye said man ben made wors than the fyrst. Soo toke it vnto the sayd people the whiche re¦torned vnto synne after ester. &c. V. ¶Another example how the eucharis∣tie prouffyteth vnto those that ben deed / & fyrste example of a man the whiche was delyuered from purgatorye by the sainge of thre masses. Cii. IT is wryten in dialogo cesarii that a yonge man was receyued in ye re¦lygyon of cleruaulx / whiche kepte shepe / and as he was in the felde with his shepe,
one of his parentes lately deed appyered vnto hym. And ye sayd yongman hym de∣maūded from whens he came. He answe∣red I am deed and tormented in greate paynes. And the conuers him demaūded yf a man myght helpe hym. He answered yf I myghte haue thre masses in your or∣dre I sholde be delyuered. And ye sayd con¦uers yode to tell the pryour of the house yt that he had sene and herde. Whan the pry¦our had herde this thynge with good wyl he sayd a masse and also commaunded to two of his bretherne. And incontynent af¦ter ye deed body appered vnto ye sayd yong man yelded hym thankes and sayd yt by ye benefyce of thre masses he was delyuered from purgatorye. X. ¶Another example of a frere the whi∣che sholde be .xv. yeres in purgatorye and he was delyuered by one masse. Cii. IT is wryten in the lyfe of faders of the ordre of prechers this the whi∣che foloweth how the dyscyple recyteth in his sermons and sayeth that there was a fader pryour prouyncyall in the holy lan∣de / humble / gracyous / & deuoute. And as he was one tyme in orayson in the chirche of the freres after matyns he lyfte vp his eyes agayne the walle with herte / and he sawe in lyke wyse as the shadowe of a fre¦re in beynge and had habyte blacke & soyl¦led. And as he demaunded what he was he answered I am suche a frere the whi∣che of late deyed. And whan I lyued I lo¦ued the moche. And he demaunded of the sayd frere how it was with hȳ. He answe¦red yll and hardly. For I sholde be in har¦de payne tyll vnto .xv. yeres. And he hym demaunded wherfore he sholde so hardly and longly be punysshed the whiche had lyued so relygyously and deuoutly. He an∣swered / ne demaunde that / for after the iuste iugement of god the creatour I ha∣ue wele deserued suche payne / but I pray the ayde me. And he hym promysed that so he sholde doo vnto his power. Whan it was daye the prouyncyall began to synge masse for the deed body And after ye ostye was consecrate and lyfte vp in holdynge it in his handes began to praye god so as in this wyse sayeng these wordes. My lor¦de Ihesu cryste yf the soudan the whyche is kynge of paynyms helde a prysoner in bondes & that his chamberere the whiche had serued hym twenty yeres demaūded hym the sayd prysoner for his seruyce the sayd soudan ne sholde hyde hym lyghtely My lorde be noo more harde than the sou∣dan of ye sarazyns. I am thy chamberier and haue serued the by many yeres. thou holdest this frere my frende in captyuyte and bondes I praye the yt thou gyue him me of thy grete debonayrte for my seruy∣ce. And in grete teres and lamentacyons in repetynge ye sayd wordes many tymes ended his masse / & the nyght folowyng af¦ter matynes he sawe the deed frere befo∣re hym beynge in habyte whyte & ryghte clere. And he hȳ demaūded what he was he answered I am the frere ye whiche ap∣pered yesterdaye vnto the. And he him de¦maunded how it was with hȳ. He answe¦red wele by the grace of god. Thou haste demaūded me of god and he hathe gyuen me vnto the. And I am delyuered frome purgatorye. I yelde ye graces & louynges and I go with the felysshyp of sayntes / & forthwith he departed. &c. ¶Another example is wryten in dialogo cesarii of a man ye whiche sholde be in pur¦gatorye
two thousande yeres & was dely¦uered in two yeres by the suffrages / mas¦ses / and good operacyons of a bysshop / & of other good men. ¶Perditio bonorum. Y. ¶Example yt in lyke wise as water de¦parteth frome ye pot perced or broken. In lyke wyse dothe the vertues of a man by mortall synne. Cii. IT is wryten in the lyfe of faders yt that a good fader named arrene{us} wolde se the operacyons of the worlde / & as he was in his oratorye he herde a voy∣ce the whiche sayd vnto hym. Arrene{us} go by the countree to the ende yt thou behold the operacyons of the worlde. And whan he was gone forthe of his oratorye he saw a man the whiche drewe water of a welle and put it in a vessell perced & holed from the whiche it ranne incontinent. And ther¦in ne abode nothynge. And the sayd arre∣neus passed ferthermore & sawe a man ye whiche made and assembled a burden of wodde / and whan he had made it he assa∣yed to lyfte it & to lye it on his sholdres / but for that yt he ne myght lyft it and that he founde it moche heuy he yode yet to as∣semble of wodde / & put it yet within that burden or fagot / and made it in suche wy¦se two or thre tymes / and the lesse myght lyfte it on his sholdres. Afterwarde ye said arrene{us} yode ferthermore and sawe two yonge men vpon two horses before ye ga∣te of the cyte the whiche bare before them alonge logge ouerthwarte / and wende to entre in to the cyte by the sayd gate / but they ne myght for the sayd logge / for they ne obeyde the one vnto the other for to en¦tre within. And after yt the aungell came vnto the sayd arreneus / vnto whome he demaunded what he had sene. And he an∣swered as it sayd is of the man the which drewe of water. And the aungell expoun∣ded vnto hym the sayd thynges / and said vnto hym. By the man the whiche drewe of water is to vnderstonde that the man the whiche dothe almesdedes & good ope∣racyons in mortall synne / anone it depar¦teth from hym for the synne as dothe the water from the vessell perced. And the se∣conde man the whiche thou haste sene the whiche assembled of wodde / that is to say that the man the whiche assembleth and cōmytteth sȳne vpon synne ne may moūt in heyght for the weyght of ye synnes. and by those the whiche ne myght entre in to the cyte that bare the wodde ouerthwart ben vnderstonde proude people & hatefull the whiche ne wyll humble them & to con¦corde togyders ne shall entre in to the cy∣te of paradyse. This exāple denoteth thre thynges. The fyrste that mortall syn cha∣seth awaye the good operacyons frome ye persones. The seconde is that synne is of itselfe so heuy that it letteth to mounte in to paradyse & maketh to fall in to the pyt of helle as dyde sathan ye whiche fell from paradyse. Vn̄ luce. x. Videbā sathanā si∣cut fulgur de celo cadentē. And that that a man putteth yet more wodde in his bur¦den & yet the more heuy he fyndeth it and more yll to lyfte vpon his sholdres deno∣teth yt whan a man cōmytteth sȳne vpon synne. And more shyftly a man falleth in basse / and the lesse a man moūteth in pa∣radyse. The thyrde is that hatred & discor¦de the whiche is betwene neyghbours let∣teth to entre in to the cyte of paradyse. ¶Finis iniquorum est peccatum.
z. ¶Examples that mortall synne is a ly¦ne by the whiche the deuyll holdeth ye syn∣ners. And fyrste how the deuylles helde a man bounde with a chayne and ledde him with grete ioye. Cii A Doctour named Vyrydarias sa∣yeth in a sermon this the whiche foloweth how the dyscyple recyteth in his booke / and sayeth that god gaue vnto an hermyte this gyft to knowe the hertes of men the whiche came one tyme vnto the chirche where the preest confessed. And ye sayd hermyte sawe that the men entred in to the sayd chirche blacke & horryble / ye whiche were accompanyed with deuylles the whiche were ioyous. And the aūgels the whiche them kepte were sory & sepera¦te ferof. And as they retourned from con¦fessyon than ye deuylles were sory and de∣parted from them / and the aungels were ioyous the whiche approched. And amon¦ge the other ye sayd hermyte sawe a man the whiche was boūde by the necke with a chayne that the deuylles ledde with gre¦te ioye. And his aungell folowed ferre of And this sayd man yode vnto confessyon as ye other / but he came agayne more blac¦ker than before. And the deuylles bounde him more strongly than he was And whā the said hermyte sawe that approched vn¦to the sayd man / & tolde vnto hym that yt he had sene. And the sayd synner had gre∣te drede and sayd. I haue offended god in many maners. And also I haue hydde a grete synne. He retourned vnto confessyō & came agayne clere / & the deuylles were sory & the aungelles ioyous. So by trewe confessyon & repentaūc he was vnboun∣de of his synnes & of the deuylles / & was assocyate with the good. &c. & ¶Another example that a man beynge in mortall synne is so boūde that he maye not do no good operacyon the whiche vn¦to hym is merytoryous. Cii THe dyscyple recyteth in his promp¦tuarye and sayth that as mayster thomas theologycyen sholde deye he beyn¦ge in his bedde he sawe the deuyll fast by hym / vnto whome he sayd / What doest yu here blody beest. Tell me what thynge it is the whiche noyeth you moost. And as he helde his peas he adioygned & sayd. I coniure the by the god lyuyng the whiche shall come to iuge the quycke & the deed yt thou tel me the trouthe. And the deuyl an¦swered and sayd. There is nothynge the whiche taketh awaye so moche our force as contrycyon & confessyon oftentymes made. For whan a man is in mortal sȳne all his membres ben so bounde that he ne maye moue hym for to do good operacyō the whiche vnto hym is merytoryous / & whan he confesseth his synnes he is after¦warde franc mouable & vnbounde for to do all good operacyons. This example de¦noteth two thynges. The fyrste is that by mortall synne a man is terrybly boūde wt the handes of the deuyll. The seconde is that by confessyon a man is vnboūde as it is sayd. &c. r. Another example how the deuyll lyeth out his snares for to deceyue vs. Cii IT is wryten in the lyfe of faders yt as saynt Anthony was in orayson vpon a hye mountayne he sawe al ye worl¦de replenysshed with halters of the enmy of helle. And he toke hym to wepe & sayd /
what shall that man be yt maye passe and escape the snares here. And a voyce from heuen came vnto hym ye whiche sayd / an¦thony seule humylite passeth and escapeth these laces. Here whan a man hathe hu∣mylyte the snares ne may touche hym for his humylyte. ¶This example denoteth two thynges that the snares of the deuyll ben caste out for to deceyue vs. And ther∣fore hym behoueth to kepe hym from fal∣lynge in to synne that a man ne be taken The seconde is that a man escapeth ouer all in hauynge humylyte. &c. ¶Mors bonorum. A. ¶Examples that those whiche hathe a¦complysshed the wyll & the cōmaēdemen¦tes of god & ben departed of good dethe / hathe had consolacyon of god & of ye sayn∣tes of paradyse. And fyrst example how a holy fader sawe in his dethe ye prophetes and Ihesu cryste. Ciii. IT is wryten in the lyfe of faders of a holy fader the whiche at the hour of his dethe his dyscyples presente began to enioye hym & appered fayre & whyte & spake ioyous wordes. Than his discyples hym demaunded vnto whom he spake. he anwered. Ne se you not the holy patryar¦kes & agayne as he spake ioyously was as¦ked vnto whom it was. He answered. Ne se you not the holy prophetes. Thyrdly he sayd. The holy appostles come. Fourthly he said the aungelles come. And lastely he sayd. Ryse ye vp for Ihesus is come / and in sayenge these wordes he deyed. The de¦the of this good man was ryght gloryous and blyssed. And also suche is it of al those the whiche deye in the estate of grace. Vn̄ apo. xiiii. Beati mortui qui in dn̄o moriū¦tur. Also his dethe was moche precyous before god / and so is that of the iust perso∣nes. Vn̄ psal. Preciosa ē in cōspectu n̄i. The iuste persones the whiche hath liued wele in this worlde / & also perseuered tyll vnto the dethe hath thre ioyes at theyr de¦partynge. The fyrst is that they se all the good dedes that they dyde euer in ye state of grace / that is to vnderstonde all the al∣mesdedes / oraysons / & werkes of mercye And all the trybulacyons yt the body hath borne pacyently in doynge fastynges / ab∣stinences / to wake late / to ryse erly / to lye harde / to be poorely clothed & suche other thynges. &c. Vn̄ ezechi. xviii. Iustitia ius¦ti erit su{per} eū: & impietas impii su{per} eū erit et ysaie .xxix. Erit nobis visio oīm quasi verba libri signati. Examples of some the whiche hathe sene the good & the ylle that they haue done. Quere post. c. xxii. d. The seconde ioye is that they se the deuylles cō¦fused degetted & also to departe as wroth In lyke wyse the iuste loue & prayse god / Vn̄ psal. Benedictus deus qui non dedit nos in captionē dentibus eorū. Example. Quere. lvi. f. The thyrde ioye that the iust shall haue at theyr dethe is yt they shall se Ihesu cryst yt they haue receyued worthe∣ly in the sacrament. And the aungelles as¦systentes to comforte them & ayde theym & for to present theym before god the whi∣che vnto them is grete ioye. Also ofte ty∣mes they haue of the sayntes of paradyse after ye wyll of god / as had the good man beforsayd. Innocent sayeth in his thyrde boke of the vylyte of humayne condycyon that the good & the yll se Ihesu crist as he was put on the crosse before that the sou∣le parted from ye body / ye good vnto theyr consolacyon / & the yll vnto theyr confusyō to the ende they haue shame yt they be not redemed & part takers vnto the merite of
his passyon. Vn̄ legit{ur} apo. i. Viderūt in quē pupugerūt. And a man ne sholde vn∣derstonde that yf a iuste man dye sodaȳly tha the sodayne dethe taketh awaye hys merytes & his bounte / & that he ne maye be saued. Vnde poeta. Mors iusti subita quā precessit bona vita. Nō tollit merita: si moriatur. B. ¶Another example how the sayntes of paradyse & the aūgelles & god came vn¦to the departynge of a holy fader. Ciiii. IT is wryten in the lyfe of ye faders that whan the tyme came that the abbot Sysois sholde deye many aūcyen∣tes came to vysyte hym / the whiche sawe hym shyne in the face / & he sayd vnto thē Brederne comforte you here is the abbot anthony the whiche is come vnto vs here and a lytell whyle after sayd. Here is the company of prophetes. And agayne hys face shone more clere than the daye / & he sayd. The blyssed appostles ben present / & the auncyentes the whiche presente were behelde and vnderstode that he spake vn¦to some body. The whiche sayd vnto hym that he sholde declare with whome he spa¦ke. And he sayd the aungelles be come to fetche my soule / and I them supply that they tary a whyle for to do penaūce. And the faders sayd vnto hym. Abbot thou ne haste of indygence to doo penaunce. And he answered them. I saye you in veryte yt I ne remembre me yet to haue take ye be∣gynnynge of penaūce. They apperceyued by his spekynge that he was perfyte in ye loue of god. Than his fae shone as the so¦ne & sayd vnto them. Beholde beholde for our lorde is come. In this worde he died And all the place was replenysshed with good odour. By this example a man shol¦de vnderstonde that the dethe of the good is moche precyous before god / after the saynge of the psalmyst. Preciosa est incō¦spectu dn̄i mors sctō{rum} eius. And also that they ben comforted & receyued swetely of aungelles & sayntes of paradyse / & set in Ioye eternell. &c. C. Another example how a woman sawe Ihesu cryste in her dethe. Ciiii. SAynt gregorye recompteth yt whā a woman named tarcille came to ye aite daye of her dethe she loked vpwar∣de & sawe Ihesu cryst come. And with a grete courage she began to crye to them ye were by her / departe ye departe for Ihe∣sus is come. And as she vnderstode in hȳ that she see / her holy soule parte from her body. And so grete swetnes of odour mer¦uayllous there folowed that that odoure shewed vnto all that Ihesu cryst was co∣me theder. &c. D. ¶Another exāple how a frere shewed Ihesu cryst with the fyngre at his dethe in syngynge. Ciiii. IT is wryten in the lyfe of faders yt there was a frere of the ordre of pre¦chers greuously seke & for that yt he appro¦ched vnto ye dethe / & that he had a ioyous face a frere hym requyred that yf he had / had ony consolacyon spyrytuell in herte yt he wolde tell it hym. He answered. For ye grete Ioye yt I haue I ne maye hyde it / this daye I haue taken it for my lorde ie∣su cryste hathe promysed me to be in pre∣sence
at my dethe. And ye frere hym requy¦red in the name of Ihesu cryst that whan he sholde se hym that he wolde shewe him by some tokens or with the fynger. He an¦swered that soo sholde he doo yf it pleased god. The thre dayes after the sekenes gro¦ged hym men stroke on the table for to as¦semble the freres as it was of a custome / And the freres ranne in to the fermery / & as they were in orayson in abydynge hys dethe the seke man stretched forth his fyn¦gre in a certayne place. And as his eyes were confused at the dethe he toke him to synge & to saye in syngynge ioyous. In galileā iesū videbitis sicut dixivobis. that is to saye yt ye shall se Ihesus in galilee / yt is in paradyse as he hathe tolde you / whā he had fyned these wordes he deyed in go∣de consūmacyon / for he had lyued in thys worlde of a holy lyfe. And by that reason it was yt he dyffyned wele his dayes / vn∣to this purpose saynt austyn sayeth. Mor¦te mala mori nō potest qui bonā ante du∣xerit vitā. Et iheronim{us} dixit. Nō memi ni me mala morte vidisse hominē qui bo∣nam ante duxerit vitā. E. ¶Another example how a good rely∣gyous woman was comforted of saynts of paradyse the whiche were at her dethe IT is writen in the fourth boke of ye dyalogue of saynt gregorye that a good relygyous woman named rachetee had two relygyeuses of her habyte wt her her dyscyples of the whiche the one had to name romula. These thre religiouses wo¦man dwelled togyders the whiche lyued of a holy lyfe replenysshed with good ma∣ners & with vertues / but a poore lyfe cor∣porell they ledde. And ye sayd romula was replenysshed wt greate pacyence / of soue∣rayne obedyence / kept scilence of her mou¦the & toke hede moche vnto the vsage of orayson the whiche was seke in bedd by many yeres / & in a nyght the sayd romu∣la called her sayd maystresse rachetee and sayd vnto her. Mater veni. Mater veni The whiche came with the other syster / & at the houre of the verye mydnyghte as they were in one bedde / lyght celestyal dis¦cended in to theyr house ye whiche it reple∣nysshed all. And the said lyght was so gre¦te yt the presentes had grete drede And as they were in that drede & lyght they herde noyse as many men entrynge in the hou∣se. But for the grete fere & lyghte they ne might se those the whiche entred in to the sayd house with the sayd lyght. And there entred so swete odoure yt it was meruayl And the sayd Romula began to comforte her sayd maystresse and her syster ye whi∣che were in fere & sayd. Noli timere ma∣ter nō morior modo. And after yt she had sayd that she sholde not deye at that hour the sayd lyght dymysshed lytell and lytell but the grete odoure abode. And so it pas∣sed the seconde & the thyrde daye that the sayd odour abode. And the .iiii. nyghte the sayd romula called her sayd maystresse / & whan she was come she demaunded ye bo¦dy of god & receyued it. And before yt they parted frome bedde there arryued before the dore of the house two companyes / the one of men / yt the other of women ye whi∣che songe melodyously. The men songe ye psalmodie. And the woman answered in doynge the seruyce celestyall of exeqyes of the sayd romula she deyed. And her sou¦le yode with the aungelles & sayntes the whiche came to fetche it. And of asmoche more as they mounted in to the skye / soo moche the lesse herde they of the songe of the psalmodie. And the sayd odour also de¦parted.
&c. F ¶Another example how a holy bisshop was comforted at his dethe of the sayn∣tes of paradyse. Ciii. IT is wryten in the dyalogue of sa∣ynt gregory of a good holy bysshop named probus. Whan it came vnto hys dethe his fader assembled many physycy∣ens for to hele hym. The whiche sayd af∣ter that they had vysyte hym that he shol¦de deye. And than the good bysshop sayd vnto al those that they sholde go with his fader to take theyr refeccyon after theyre laboure. The whiche theder yode / & there ne abode with hym but one yonge chylde / & after that the sayd chylde sawe some co¦me entre clothed with whyte & theyr faces clere & shynynge as the sōne. The whiche chylde after that he was stryken with the grete lyght the whiche proceded of theim he toke hym to crye & demaūded of them what they were. At the whiche voyce the sayd bysshop was moued / behelde them ye whiche entred / he knewe them & began to comforte the chylde the whiche trembled for fere & sayd vnto hym. My sone drede the not for saynt Iuuenall & saynt Eleu∣there martyrs ben come vnto me. And ye sayd chylde ferefull of that vysyon ranne oute and tolde to the physycyens & to the fader the sayd vysyon. The whiche ranne and founde the bysshop deed. For his sou∣le yode with those that the sayd chyld had sene▪ &c. G ¶Another example how a mayden na¦med gelyne was comforted at her dethe of saynt peter. Ciii. IT is wryten in the dyalogue of sa∣ynt gregorye of a good noble may∣den named Gelyne / the whiche was ma∣ryed / and was one yere with her husban∣de the whiche deyed. And whan she was wedowe she put her vnto ye seruyce of god in the chirche and monastery of saynt Pe¦ter. And there lyued holyly in al symplesse in makynge oraysons and grete almesde¦des. Whan it came to thende of her days that she was wery of sekenes in a nyghte as she had two candelles lyght by her bed saynt peter appered vnto her betwene ye two forsayd candelles. And she enioyed her & sayd vnto hym. Who is there my lor¦de ben my sȳnes pardoned. Vnto whom he sayd benyngly in bowynge downe the heed. They ben pardoned ye / come thy wa¦ye. And for as moche as in ye sayd monas¦terye there was a holy relygyous that she loued before the other she requyred vnto holy peter in saynge. I praye the that my syster named benet come with me. and he answered ye shall not be so / but suche one in this wyse named shall come with the And she that thou requyrest shall come af¦ter the / the thyrty daye. Than the sayd ap¦postle departed. And her moder abbesse was called: vnto her she recompted ye said vysyon. And she deyed the .xxx. daye with her that the appostle had sayd. And ye .xxx daye after she yt she had requyred folowed her and also deyed. &c. A. ¶Another example how a preest fled ye company of a woman yt was comforted at his dethe of sayntes of paradyse. ciiii.
IT is wryten in the dyalogue of sa∣ynt gregorie of a good preest ye whi¦che i the drede of god gouerned a chirche fldde the famylyaryte of a woman / and wolde not yt the woman of his house shol∣de admynystre ony thynge vnto hȳ / And absteyned hym from all thynge vnlefull / & also lyued of a holy lyfe. Whan it came that he laboured at the dethe / & that he ne myghte almoost speke he apperceyued yt the sayd woman of his house put her han¦de vnto his nose for to knowe yf he were deed / & his spyryte feruently came agayn & began to saye. Recede a me mulier: ad huc igniculus viuit. Departe thou fro me woman yet a lytell fyre lyueth take away the strawe. Than the woman departed. / And ye vertue of his body all grewe / and with grete gladnes and Ioye he toke hȳ to crye / ye ben welcome my lordes. Wher¦fore haue ye wylled to come vnto one soo lytell your seruaunt. I come. I come / I yelde you thankes. And for that ye he repe¦ted ye said wordes his frendes were by hȳ demaunded hym vnto whome he spake: Vnto whome he sayd as in meruayllyng And se you not the appostles saynt peter and saynt poule ye whiche ben here come / And he tourned towardes them & began to saye. I go. I go. And as he spake these wordes he yelde vp his spyryte. B. ¶Another example how a frere fled in to heuen as sone as an arowe. Ciiii. THe dyscyple reciteth in his promp¦tuarye that a frere of the ordre of prechers appered with grete Ioye after his dethe vnto another monke the whiche was his frende famylyer. And as he was asked of his estate amonge other thȳges he sayd / that neuer arowe shotte oute of a grete bowe fledde so sone in to a place as my soule fledde before god whan to depar¦ted from the body. For I had lyued fyfty yeres in the ordre to serue Ihesu cryst in good conuersacyon. &c. C. ¶Another example of the dethe of a pylgrym the whiche was comforted of ye aungelles of paradyse. Cii i IT is wryten in the lyfe of faders of a holy man relygyous so moche lo∣ued of god that yt the whyche he requyred in orayson vnto hym was graunted. And he prayed god that he myghte se the soule of a synner & of a iuste man how they ben drawen from theyr bodyes at theyr dethe And as he was in his oratorie ther entred a wulfe the whiche toke his vestyment wt his mouthe & drewe it. Than the sayd fre¦re rose hym vp & yode after the sayd wul∣fe / the whiche ledde hym faste by a cyte & lefte hym there by a monasterye. In the whiche was a man that had a grete name and was reputed solytayre & good of the worldy people but he was an ypocryte / ye whiche was at deyenge. And the fader ye whiche was theder come behelde yt men made vnto hym greate lyghtes of tapres & lampes for his buryenge. And at ye hou∣re of the sayd dethe he sawe the deuyll the whiche helde a brased hoke & put it in his mouthe & tormented hym longe & sayde / In lyke wyse as this soule hathe not suf∣fred me to reste one houre. In lyke wyse ne shall I haue of mercye of it tyll that I haue seased it horrybly. And he seaced it & bare it awaye. Afterwarde the said fader yode in to ye cyte & foūde a pylgrym seke /
and layde on the erthe of whome no man toke hede / & there was one daye to behold hym. And whan the houre of dethe came he sawe saynt Myghell & saynt gabryel ye whiche dyscended by the sayd soule ye one on the ryght hande & the other on the lefte hande & prayed the sayd soule yt she wolde come forth of ye body & she came not forth so as she ne wolde leue her body. And ga∣bryell sayd vnto Myghell. Take this sou∣le that we maye be gone. And myghel an¦swered. God vs hathe cōmaunded that it go forth without dolour. And therfore we ne may take it forth by force. And mighel cryed with a grete voyce vnto our lorde & sayd vnto hym. What wylte thou that we do wt this soule / for she ne wyll come forth to go with vs. And a voyce came theder the whiche sayd. I sende vnto you dauyd with his harpe / & all those the whiche syn¦ge the salmodye of Iherusalem to thende that at the swete songe she come forthe of ye body. And incontynent they dyscended by the sayd soule / & at the swete songe she came forthe in to ye hande of saynt migh∣ell / & they yode theyr waye with grete ioy D. ¶Another example how a knyght sa∣we ye dethe of an yll man. And more ouer the dethe of a good man that the aungels bare in to heuen. C.iiii IT is wryten in the boke of the dys∣cyple that a noble knight wolde en¦tre in to relygyon. The whiche sente hys seruaunt to tell vnto the abbot yt he wold be relygyous in his abbay. And gaue him in charge that he sholde saye that he was dombe / but redy to obey vnto al thynges And thought that yf he held not peas his tongue sholde lese hym al the good dedes that he sholde doo. And that knyght there was receyued. And men wende yt he had be dombe. And one tyme he yode with the abbot vnto a knight the whiche laboured vnto ye dethe. And he sawe yt the deuylles drewe the soule oute of the body of hym ye whiche deyed horrybly / & he had pyte and wepte. And as they came agayne frome thens another knight came vnto ye abbot the whiche hym promysed that he wolde renounce the worlde and that he sholde be a monke. And as he yode before the sayde abbot on an yll brydge for to proue ye way he fell before ye sayd abbot and was drow¦ned. And the sayd knyght sawe his soule in habyte of monke that the aungelles ca¦me to fetche & to bere in to heuen he was all replenysshed with ioye. And whan the abbot was in the cloystre he said vnto the knyght that he cōmaunded hym in ye ver∣tue of obedyence that he sholde tel hym yf he myght speke / wherfore at the dethe of the two sayd men he had in suche wyse cō¦tempned / vnto whome the sayd knyghte sayd. Thou hast done yll. For agayne my purpose thou hast made me speke / but I shall tell it the. And he vnto hym recomp∣ted all by ordre how he had sene the soule of the one that the deuylles had taken hor¦rybly from the body & bare it awaye and that the aungelles hadde borne the other. Than the abbot fell at his fete on knees. &c. And the sayd knyghte refused his pro∣messes & good dedes yt he vnto him wolde do / but he wolde be enclosed in some place to thende that he myght kepe his purpo∣se yt he had to kepe taciturnyte & scylence. E. ¶Another example of a holy fader the whiche deyed in the drede of god. Ciiii.
IT is wryten in the lyfe of faders yt a holy fader was seke ye whiche as he was sene to drede the dethe / the freres hym demaunded wherfore he dredde. and he answered in this manere. Brederne I haue kepte the cōmaundementes of god after my puyssaunce / but I am a man & I knowe not yf my operacions hath plea¦sed vnto god or naye. And therfore I ne am sure tyll vnto that that I come vnto hym. &c. F. ¶Another example of a pryour relygy¦ous that sayd that he dyed lawfully faith¦fully / amyably and ioyously. IT is wryten in the lyfe of faders yt the pryour of a couent was in a gre¦uous sekenes replenysshed with meruayl¦lous pacyence. And he sayd oftentymes one thynge the whiche is wryten in ye can¦tycles with grete dolour of deuocion. Di¦lect{us} me{us} michi & ego illi donec aspiret di es & īclinent{ur} vmbre. Also he sayd vnto his brederne .xv. dayes before his dethe that he sholde deye of that sekenes in ye solemp¦nyte of the feest of the vyrgyn Marye the whiche thynge was done. For at the fyrste euen songe of the natyuyte of the vyrgyn Marye he deyed / & was buryed that daye He had songe the last masse of the vyrgyn Marye. And also of her he had made hys laste predycacyon. Whan he sholde deye a∣none he made to assemble before hym his brederne vnto whome he sayd. Knowe ye my brederne yt I deye lawfully / amyably faythfully & ioyously. And expounded it in this wyse. I deye lawfully. For I deye in the fayth of Ihesu cryst & of the sacra∣mentes of the chirche. Amyably / for I ha¦ue perseuered in the dyleccyon of god vn∣to myn aduyse syth that I entred in to ye ordre. And I haue studyed how I might best please hym. Faythfully for I knowe wele that I go vnto god. Ioyously for I go from one lande replenysshed with my¦serye vnto a good countree. I passe from wepynges vnto Ioye sempyternell. &c. G. Another example of a monke the whi∣che was chosen to be bysshop & he refused it and deyed wele. Ciiii. IT is wryten in the promptuary of the dyscyple that Arnoldus sayeth that a monke of cleruaulx was chosen to be bysshop / the whiche refused it agaynst the wyll of his abbot / & of ye bysshop / & so∣ne after he deyed. And he appered after his dethe vnto his famylyer / ye whiche de∣maunded hym yf the dysobeyssaūce befor∣sayd had noyed hym. He answered yt nay and afterwarde sayd. Yf I had taken the bysshopryche I hadde be dampned. And sayd more ouer an horryble worde. The es¦tate of the chirche is come vnto that yt she is not dygne to be gouerned but of yll bys¦shoppes. &c. H. ¶Another example of the dethe of ma¦ny holy persones of the whiche the Byble maketh mencyon. Ciiii. THe holy scryptures maketh men∣cyon of the dethe of many holy fa∣ders that it sholde be longe thynge & con∣fuse for to wryte. And for to be shorte who so wyll se in the byble lette hym studye in the chapytres the whiche foloweth here. /
Fyrst it is wryten of the dethe of abel ge∣nesis .iiii. cap. Of ye dethe of abraham. ge. xxv. of the dethe of Ysaac genesis .xxxv. of the dethe of iacob gene. xlix. of the dethe of Ioseph gene. l. Of the dethe of Aaron nu∣meri .xx. Of moyses the whiche deyed in the lande of Moab yt oure lorde buryed / & neuer man ne knewe his sepulcre. In ly∣ke wyse as it is wryten deuterono. xxxiiii. Of the dethe of dauid it is wryten primo paralipo. xxix. of the dethe of zacharie it is wryten secūdo. paralipo. xxiiii. of the deth of Thobye it is wryten thobie .xiiii. of the dethe of his sone it is wryten thobie vlti∣mo / of ye dethe of iob / it is wryten iob. xlii. of the dethe of mathathias .i. machabiorū ii. of the dethe of saynt Iohan baptist ma¦thei xiiii. Of the dethe of the poore lazar begger yt the aūgelles bare in to Abrahās bosome it is wryten luce. xvi. of the goode thefe the whiche deyed whan our lorde de¦yed it is wryten luce. xxiiii. of the dethe of saynt Steuen the whiche was stoned / it is wryten actuum .vii. &c. ¶Mors malorum. A. ¶Examples of those the whiche hathe not wylled to do the wyl of god ne to accō¦plysshe his cōmaundementes ben deed of an yll dethe in paynes & dolours / & fyrste example / how the deuyll drewe the soule of a cursed ryche man with a crochet and a woman wedowe was comforted of the vyrgyn marye and of the vyrgyns. Cv. VYcent sayeth in the .viii. boke of ye myrrour hystoryall yt there was a ryche curate vycyous in a parysshe ye whi¦che had vnder his cure a noble ryche man & a poore woman wedowe / the whiche de¦yed in one tyme. Whan ye sayd ryche man was seke he sente to seche the curate to vy¦syte hym & to admynystre the sacramen∣tes the whiche curate theder yode quykly and was moche more curyous to haue ye said ryche man couched on feders in a fay¦re bedde couered with purple wt precyous vestymentes / and aourned with golde & with precyous stones. And also he founde many seductoures the whiche gaue vnto hym consolacyons of flateryes / & his wy∣fe / his chyldren / & housholde the whiche ly¦ed. And in this thynge hangynge there ca¦me a messenger vnto the sayd curate frō the sayd wedowe strongly seke for to con∣fesse her and to vysyte. And the sayd prest the whiche put all his entente for to sow∣ke the ryche synner ne answerde nothyng And a deacon ye whiche was presente had pyte of the poore wedowe & dredde yt she sholde deye without receyuynge the sacra¦mentes / spake vnto the curate the whiche answered by grete furoure. O that thou arte of lytell counsayll ye whiche wylt that we leue this noble man our patron for to go vnto ye olde wedowe. And the deacon answered. Ne trouble you not / yf you cō∣maunde me I shall vysyte her. And the deacon yode theder by his cōmaundemēt And bare the body of Ihesu cryste. The wedowe was gretely poore of worldly go¦des / but full of good operacyons. ¶She was prostrate vpon the erthe / and a lytel of strawe vnder her. ¶Whan the deacon was at the dore he was meruaylled & res∣ted him. For he sawe there the vyrgin ma¦rye / and grete company of vyrgyns stan∣dynge by the wedowe / and marye chered her / vysyted and with a clothe wyped the swetynge from her vysage. And whan ye quene of heuen and the vyrgyns sawe the body of our lorde Ihes{us} they yode on theyr
knees and worshyppeth the sacramente / Whan they were redressed they assured af¦fably the deacon that he sholde entre. and the vyrgyn mary sayd that he sholde not drede. And that he sholde confesse and ad¦mynystre the sayd wedowe & so he dyde / And afterwarde he said of the psalmes to cōmaunde the soule with grete ioye to de∣parte. After came in to the hous of ye sayd ryche man. Whan he was at the dore he sawe of blacke cattes by the bedde of the said ryche man ye whiche cryed take away these cattes comen to this wretche. And in thende a deuyll blacke as an ethyopien horryble of face & of voyce menassable hel¦de in his hande a hoke the whiche he put in the throte bolle of ye sinner for to drawe out his soule. The whiche ne founde in all his vysytacyon of refresshynge in his con¦scyence. Than the dethe occupyed hym he had fere and trembled / and the deuyl iu∣ryous drewe hugely the soule oute of the throte bolle with his crochet. And the cay∣tyf kest an horryble sygh & so deyed / & the other deuylles stroke vpon ye soule / & bare it vnto the place of derkeres & of dethe e∣ternell. And as the deacon behelde & sawe this thynge by the suffraūce of god he had so grete fere that he fell vnto the erthe & was as halfe deed. And incontynente the vyrgyn marye appered vnto hym ye whi∣che layd vnto hym. Ryght dere frende dre¦de the not / for ye cursednes byabolyque ne shall noye the / beatytude celestyall is ap∣paraylled vnto the / & he hym redressed in yeldynge graces vnto the vyrgyn marye & afterwarde prouffited moche for ye said reuelacyons. By this example a man shol¦de vnderstonde yt the dethe is moche cruel & yll vnto synners in lyke wyse as sayeth the scryptures. Vn̄ psal. Mors pctō{rum} pes¦sima. O mors {quam} amaraē memoria tua ho¦mini īiusto. O dethe how bytter is the re∣membraunce of ye vnto the man viuse / These synners inobedyentes shall haue pryncypally foure dolours at theyr dethe the whiche also may be taken vpon ye wor¦des of dauyd yt sayeth in psal. Circūe∣derunt me dolores mortis et torrētes īiqi∣tatis conturbauerūt me: dolores īferni cir¦cūdeder̄t me: {pre}occupauer̄t me laquet mor∣tis. That is to saye the dolours of ye dethe hathe me enuyronned & beset aboute and the ryuers of iniquyte me hathe troubled the doloures of helle hathe me compassed aboute / ye panges of dethe hathe me vsur¦ped. The fyrst dolour yt these synners ino¦bedyentes shall haue at theyr dethe is seke¦nes corporell yt shal be so cruel yt it shal per¦turbe all his membres / & shall seperate ye soule from ye body ye whiche shall be so gre¦te doloure & bytternes yt the herte of man ne may thynke it. There was neuer man in this worlde endured so horryble dolour as is the dethe / & the soule shall drawe all his strengthes not thynkynge of his nour¦ryture bodyly but on his doloures as it is sayd. Circūdeder̄t me dolores mortis. Al¦so grete doloure shall be at the departyng of the body & of ye soule. For they were gre¦tely delected and enioyed togiders Also it shall be grete dolour to leue the wyfe / the chyldren / the golde the syluer / the heryta∣ges / manors / houses / rentes / londes and possessyons. Also to leue the wyne / ye ale / the flesshe / and the other lyuynges for to go dwel in a place where no good is sowē gadred ne founde / not soo moche as one droppe of water. Example of the cursed ryche man the whiche was denyed of one droppe of water. For to be short it shall be dolour to leue the pleasaūces and dylecta∣cyons of the body & of the worlde. Catho sayeth. Non eodem cursuco respondent vltima primis. The laste thynges ne an∣swereth vnto the fyrst in one selfe course /
Also the euangelyst sayeth yt the last thyn¦ges of a man ben made wors than ye fyrst Vnde mathei. xii. luce. xi. Fiunt nouissi∣ma hominis illius peiora prioribus. The sende dolour that the synners shal haue in theyr dethe is to vnderstonde by that yt dauyd sayeth. Torentes iniquitatis con¦turbauerunt me. That is to say that they shall se and knowe in them and vpon thē all ye synnes that they haue cōmyt & done for the whiche they shall be punysshed iu∣ged and condampned / the whiche shal be vnto them drede & doloure. It is wryten luce. viii. Nichil est occultū quod non ma¦nifestetur: nec absconditum quod non co∣gnoscatur et ī palam veniat. There is no¦thynge so secrete but that it shal be many¦fest / ne hydde but that it shall be knowen and that it shall come openly and appere before all. Also in the ende of the man all shall be discouered soo that a man shall se appertly all his operacyons good and yll Vnde eccle. xi. In fine hominis denuda∣tio operum ulius. In beholdynge a multi¦tude of people a man knoweth that suche one is clothed with grey / with blacke / and with whyte. &c. Also at the iugement and whan the soule shall be seperate from the body a man shall knowe yt suche one was lecherous / thefe / or murdrer. &c. as yf the synnes were paynted vpon the persone. / Vnde ezechielis .xviii. Iustitia iusti erit super eum & impietas impii super eū erit The iustice of the iuste shall be vpon him and the synne of wycked shall be vpon hȳ Also the synners shall bere theyr confusyō and theyr synnes that they haue done. vn̄ ez. xliiii Peccatores portabūt confusio∣nem suam et scelera sua que fecerunt. Et ysaie .xxix. Erit nobis visio omnium qua∣si verba libri signati. And whan ye sȳners shall se that they haue not done of penaū∣ce / and that they shall haue no more no ty¦me nor place to doo it / theyr synnes shall trouble them and gyue greate bytternes / The thyrde doloure is to vnderstonde by dolores inferni circumdederunt me. For the iniuste synners shal se the paynes the whiche vnto theym ben prepayred for to punysshe theym and torment. And for to susteyne payne corespondent vnto euery synne cōmyt. Example of a madde man the whiche in his dethe sawe helle open / & the fyre and the tormentes the whiche vn¦to him were prepayred for to punysshe hȳ and sayd that his iugement was thenne made. Quere. lxvii. ca. Another example of a sodomytycque the whiche sayd at his dethe that he sawe helle open appertely & the tormentes and ye deuylles present for to rauysshe hym. Que. lxxxxv. d. The .iiii. dolour is to vnderstonde by preoccupaue∣runt me laquei mortis. That is that these synners shall se at theyr dethe ye deuylles / in theyr foule fygure the whiche shal be to them an horryble torment. Example of a sone the whiche sawe theym at his dethe. Quere. lxii. b. Also the synners shall haue another grete dolour at theyr dethe / in ly∣ke wyse as sayth some doctours. For they shal se Ihesu cryst in lyke wyse as he was crucefyed vnto theyr confusyon to thende that they haue shame that they ne be rede¦med and partakers vnto the merytes of his passyon for theyr synnes cōmytte. Vn̄ apo. i. ca. Viderūt in quem pupugerunt. And ye blessyd Ihesu shall demaūde them reason of theyr operacyons. And by that they shal haue grete dolour at theyr dethe whan they shall se and knowe theyr dam∣nacyon and perdycyon eternell. &c. B. ¶Another example how a ryche sone deyed impenytent ye whiche sayd that his iugemente was made / and that he sawe
the deuylles. Cv. THe dyscyple recyteth in his ser∣mons that there was a yonge man the whiche lyft hym vp a∣gaynst god & agaynst his owne helthe the whiche cōmytted ma¦ny euylles in saynge / in playnge / in cōmyt∣tynge lechery / & in lyuynge after the volup¦tuosytees of his body. Afterwarde he fel in to a greuous sekenes / & as he laye and that men apperceyued in hym no contrycyō his cousyn that satte by hym sayd to hȳ. Thou art sore seke prepayre the vnto god by true contrycyon / confessyon / & in receyuynge ye sacramentes / & call hym the whiche hathe suffred for the on the crosse yt he wyll par∣don the thy synnes. And he answered in dis¦payrynge hȳ. What tellest yu me of cōfession & to receyue the sacramēts. I neuer in my lyfe receyued god verytably / but I haue al way lyued ayenst god / and also I haue cal¦led god in yre. Than am I now left of him so yt I neuer may fynde grace / for I am se∣tenced eternally vnto the fyre pardurable / & vnto the dethe eternall. And I am now in the puyssaunce of all the deuylles / & after¦warde sayd. Seest yu this grete garner of wheet / I tell the yt there are mo deuylles as¦sembled about me that there ben cornes in ye sayd garner. Than he deyed & yelded his soule to the deuyls the whiche caryed hym. C. ¶Another example of a monke ypocrite yt eate in secrete & fayned to fast / & the in¦fernall dragon choked him. Cv IT is wryten in the dyalogue of saynt Gregory that a monke was by estymacyon a good relygyous For men wened yt he was replete with vertues and good maners but in thende he shewed that he was none suche. Whan his bredren wende yt he had fa¦sted he eate secretely & also shewed wtout∣forthe other than he was within. Whan it came vnto his dethe his bredren of his rely¦gyon came thyder wenynge yt he had sayd good wordes & salutaryes / but he toke him to tremble & to be in grete confusyon and to say. Whan I was with you & that ye wen¦de yt I fasted I eate secretely / & I am now gyuen vnto a dragon for to deuour me the whiche byndeth my knees & fete wt his tay∣le / & putteth his heed in my mouthe & dra∣weth my spyrite out. And after yt he had spo¦ken these wordes he deyed / & the dragon ga¦ue hym neyther tyme ne space to do penaū¦ce. God suffred that this thynge was many¦festly shewed to thende yt al ypocrytes fayn¦tyues knowe that they shal be dampned yf they correct them not in tyme & in place. ¶Iudicia dei: A. ¶Example how a monke requyred of god yt he myght se his Iugementes / the whiche sawe them & knewe theym that they were Iust & harde to knowe. Cvi IT is writen in the lyfe of ye faders that a monke solytary of the par∣tyes of egypt requyred of god too shewe hym his Iugements. And for as moche as he contynued to beseche god to se this thynge / god sent vn∣to hym an aungell in semblaunce of an aū∣cyent fader the whiche sayd to hym. Come go we se the holy faders & requyre we them the holy worde & theyr benedyccyon. And after that they had sore laboured & walked they came to knocke at the dore of an holy fader the whiche receyued them benygnely and after orayson wasshed theyr fete / them refeccyoned & gaue of that yt he had chary∣tably. And in the mornynge in grete Ioye
gaue them lycence. And whan they depar∣ted the aungel toke & hydde a platter wher¦in they had eaten & bare it away. And the monke began to murmure agaynst the aū∣gell wherfore he had taken the platter of so good a man the whiche had done to them so moch goodnes. And as they walked ye sone of ye good man came after thē to demaund the sayd platter. And the aungell slewe hȳ Whan the sayd monke sawe yt he was sory & sayd. Maledyccyon is wt me that suche a thynge is done vnto so good a man. It suf¦fysed not to take from hym his platter / but more his sone hath be slayne. And after that they had walked yet thre dayes they came to the dore of an auncyent the whiche had two dyscyples & strake at the dore. And the auncyent sent one of his dyscyples demaū¦dynge them what they wolde & what they were. They answered / we ben of laboure & wolde haue thy benedyccyon / & to here thy worde. And the sayd auncyent sente theym worde yt he myght not entende & that they sholde go theyr wayes. And they hym pra∣yed yt he wolde lodge them to passe yt nyght for they were weri. And he sent vnto them that they shold go theyr way / & asked why they helde thē not in theyr place & that they sholde go as vacabondes. And they prayed hym agayne yt he wolde lodge them for the nyght alonely. And sayd it is nyght and yt they dredde to be deuoured of euyl beestes. And he commaunded his dyscyple that he sholde put them in the stable. And in ye euen tyde they ne myght haue no lyght ne other thynge of the sayd mayster. But one of the dyscyples bare vnto them a lytel breed and water / and prayed theym that they sholde say nothynge vnto his mayster. And they abode so all the nyght. And whan the mor∣nynge came the aungell of god sayd vnto the sayd dyscyples. Pray ye vnto your may¦ster that he gyue vs orayson / and that we haue a gyfte to gyue hym. And whan that he herde that he sholde haue a gyft he descē∣ded. And the sayd aungell gaue vnto hym ye platter that he had taken of the good mā And whan he had taken it he retorned in to his chambre & shytte the doore vnto hym. And whan the sayd monke sawe yt he was indygne towarde hym that yode with him & knewe not that he was an aungell / vnto whom he sayd. Departe thou fro me / for I shall goo no more wt the. Thou hast taken ye platter of a good man the whiche hath done vnto vs so moche of goodnes & hast gyuen it vnto so yl a man. And morouer thou hast slayne the sonne of the good man that dyde to vs so moche charyte. And the aungell an¦swered. Thou hast prayed god that he wol∣de shewe the his Iugementes / and he hath sent me to shewe them the. The platter yt I haue taken from the good man was not co¦men of good inquysycyon / and it was not conuenable that soo good an holy man had in his hous ony euyll thynge. But that the whiche is comen of euyll is comen to him yt is vnto his ruyne. And I haue slayne the so¦ne of the good man / for yf I had not slay∣ne hym he ha slayne his fader this nyght And whan the monke herde those wordes he yode on knees before the sayd aungell / & knewe that it was the aungell of god / the whiche departed incontynent frome hym. And he knewe that the Iugements of god ben iust. &c. B. ¶Another example that an hermyte murmured agaynst god for his dyuers Iugementes. Cvii MEn fynde by wrytinge this ye whiche foloweth how the dys¦cyple recyteth in the boke of his promptuary and sayeth yt an hermite murmured in his
herte of the dyuers Iugementes of god for that / yt those the whiche lyued yl had godes And vnto the contrary those the whiche ly¦ued well had of trybulacions / and somtime those the whiche had ledde a good lyfe had in thende dethe abiecte the yll the fayre en∣de. And the good loste oft the temporall go¦des / & yll had prosperyte. And as the sayd hermyte thought moche on the sayd thyn∣ges he prayed god yt he wolde shewe hȳ his Iugementes. Than an aungell came vnto hym & sayd that he was sent from god for to shewe them vnto hym / & that he sholde come after hym. The sayd aungell was in fourme of an hermyte pilgrym. Whan they had walked they came fyrst to the hous of an hermyte the whiche they founde broken & wasted with wolues. Of this thynge the sayd hermyte was moche admeruayled & sayd. This here was an holy man the whi∣che lyued here solytaryly fyfty yeres to ser∣ue god. And god hathe suffred yt he hath be broken wt beestes. And the aungell of god sayd vnto hym. Thou seest here one of the Iugementes of god. Secondly they came vnto another yt had his hous set on an high roche aboue these / vnto whome the aungel preched of pacyence agaynst aduersytees & trybulacyons agaynst impacyence. And in wepynge & grete contrycyon he confessed yt as he had ben there by the space of .xl. yeres wt grete afflyccyon of penaunce at the laste he was vaynquysshed so strōgly in his mȳ¦de that he wolde leue his good lyfe and re∣torne in to the worlde. And whan the sayd aungell sawe hym veray contryte he toke hym & kest hym in to the see & drowned hȳ And whan the hermyte sawe this he was in grete fere & fledde / but the aūgell called hym agayne & sayd to him. Drede thou not god had shewed the here his seconde Iuge∣ment. Thyrdly they came in to the hous of the thyrde hermyte yt receyued them gladly & gaue theym drynke in a cuppe of syluer yt he had. And ye aungel toke the sayd cuppe se¦cretely & put it in his bosom & bare it away Afterwarde they came by nyght to ye hous of a knyght robber & with grete payne they were receyued to lodge & euyl entreated & tourmented of reproches & rebukes / & not∣withstandinge men gaue them somwhat & a bedde yll apparayled. In the mornyng ye aungell wolde not departe tyll he had spo∣ken wt his hoost. And he drewe out the sayd cuppe & gaue it hym. Whan thermyte sawe yt he was admeruayled & murmured in his herte of yt he had seen. After in another ny∣ght they came to ye hous of another knyght yt receyued them ryght wele / albeit he trea∣ted them ryght meanely. And in the mornȳ¦ge whā they sholde parte he was prayed of the aungell yt his onely sone engendred shol conduyte them on the way. And as ye chyl∣de ledde them he toke & slewe hym and kest hym in to a dyche. Whan the hermyte sawe that he fledde & sayd. Thou art none aūgel thou arte a deuyll. And the aungell sayd to hȳ. These thynges that yu hast seen ben ye Iu¦gements of god occulte & hyd that yu requy¦red too knowe. Vnderstande yu the causes. The fyrst hermyte that we founde deuou∣red knowe yu that it was comen vnto hym in crowne of martyrdome yt he hath deser∣ued to haue by lōge tyme & requyred of god by grete prayers. The seconde hermyte yt I kest in to the see after yt he was conuerted vnto god & that he had contrycyon & good repentaunce / so he is well deed & is gone to god wtout hauȳge other payne but onely ye dethe yt I haue gyuen hym. And yf he had not be slayne whan the temptacion was to men agayne he had accomplysshed that / yt he had conceyued & had ben lost. The thyr∣de hermyte is a contemplatyfe and of good prayers. But the deuyll by his cautele had procured hȳ lettinge in his oraysons & hath
ordeyned yt a ryche man gaue vnto hym ye cuppe of syluer for to pray for hym. And I haue taken it from hym / for whan he wol∣de praye there came vnto hym of thought what he myght do wt the sayd cuppe that ye theues ne sholde stele it from hym / soo the thought of the sayd cuppe letted his hert to praye god. And by that he shal retorne in to oraysons accustomed wtout hauȳge ony let¦tynge. The fyrst knyght where we yode is an yll man yt is not worthy to haue remu∣neracyon celestyall / & for a lytell goodnes yt he dyde vnto vs we gaue vnto hym remu∣neracyon temporall in gyuynge him ye sayd cuppe. The seconde knyght was a good ho¦spytaller yt dyde grete almesses / & for that he had none heyre he prayed the relygyous men yt they wolde pray vnto god for hym yt he myght haue lygnage. And god hath gy∣uen vnto him this sone yt thou hast seen yt I haue slayne / he is retorned to do ye werkes of mercy that he had left to do vnto ye poo∣res / & also he hath left to do many ylles that he dyde for to assemble tēporall goodes vn∣to his sayd sone. Also we haue {pro}cured theyr helthe that they sholde conuerte them vnto god & shall do good dedes after the dethe of theyr sayd sone. ¶By these thynges before sayd a man may knowe yt the Iugements of god ben Iust & harde to knowe as vnto vs. And therfore it nedeth vs not to enquy¦re forther ne to knowe than our entende∣ment ne may comprehende. Non oportet sapere plus{quam} sapere oportet. &c. C. ¶Another example how a holy bysshop was punisshed by the Iugement occulte and hydde of god for that / yt he receyued a vestyment of an vsurer. Cvi. IT is wryten in ye legende of sayn∣tes that after yt saynt Fortyn bys∣shop was deed he sawe two aun∣gels yt came vnto hym to bere his soule / & the thyrde aūgell came wt a whyte bokeler and with a swerde shynȳ∣ge yt yode before. And afterwarde he sawe the deuylles the whiche cryed / & herde that they sayd. Go we before & make we batayle before hȳ. And whan they were before they keste brennynge dartes / but the aungell yt yode before receyued them on his bokeler. Than the deuylles put them agaynst ye aū∣gelles & sayd. This man spake often of ydle wordes / & he ne sholde wtout hauynge pay∣ne a blyssed lyfe. And the aungel sayd vnto them. Yf ye ne brynge forthe the pryncypal vyces agaynst hym he ne shall perysshe for the small. And the deuyll sayd. Yf god be ry¦ghfull this man shall not be saued / for it is wryten. Yf ye be not conuerted & do in lyke¦wyse as one of my lytell ye shall not entre in to ye kyngdome of heuen. Vn̄ math. xviii Nisi cōuersi et efficiamini sicut peruuli nō intrabitis in regnū celorum. And the aūgel in excusynge hym sayd. He had indulgence in his herte but the customaunce of men cō∣tynueth. And the deuyll sayd. In lykewyse as he toke yll by custome so shall he receyue vengeaunce by the souerayne Iuge. And ye aungell sayd that he was Iuged before god And than the aungell began to fyght & the aduersaryes were confused. And the deuyll sayd. The seruaunt the whiche knoweth ye wyll of his mayster and lorde and dooth it not shall be by many woūdes & plages / as it is wryted. Luce. xii. Seruus sciens volū tatem domini sui et non faciens plagis va∣pulabitur multis. And the aungell sayd. What thȳge hath not this man accomplys¦shed of the wyll of his lorde. And the deuyll sayd. He hathe receyued gyftes of an euyll man. And the aungel sayd. He beleued that
ech one had done penaunce. And the enne∣my sayd / he sholde haue proued the perceue¦raunce of penaunce before yt he had taken ye gyft The aungell sayd / go we before god / but the deuyll was vaynquysshed. And the deuyll agayne came to fyght & sayd. Wene ye yt the Iuge be veray god the whiche pro∣mysed yt all synne that is not punysshed in this worlde shall be punysshed in perdura∣bylyte. This man had a robe of an vsurer & he was neuer punysshed / where is than ye ryghtwysnes of god. And the aungell sayd Holde thy peas / for thou knowest not the se¦crete Iugementes of god / euermore whan the soule wyll do penaunce ye mercy of god is with hym. And the deuyll answered / the∣re ne is here noo place of penaunce. Vnto whome ye aungell sayd. Thou knowest not the profundyte of the Iugementes of god. And than the deuyl smote the sayd bysshop soo harde yt after that he was restablysshed to lyfe the trace of ye stroke abode styll. And the deuyls toke one of the dampned yt they tourmented in the fyre of hell & kest hym a∣gaynst ye sayd bysshop in suche maner that he had the cheke & the sholder brent. Than the sayd bysshop knewe yt it was that man the whiche had gyuen vnto him the sayd ve¦stement. And the aungell sayd vnto hym. Yf thou haddest not take ye gyft of this man the whiche is deed in synne this payne had not brente in the / & thou hast this payne of bren̄ynge to suffre for that yt thou receyued the gyft of the vestement of the sayd vsurer And the deuyll sayd. Yet he resteth to passe by the strayte gate / wherby we may hȳ sur¦mount / & the deuyll sayd vnto the aungell. God commaundeth to loue his neyghbour as hȳselfe. And the aungel answered. This man hath doone many good werkes vnto his neyghbours. And the aduersarye sayd. It suffyseth not yf he hath loued thē as him selfe. Vnto whome the aungell sayd. The fruyte of loue is also wel to be done / for god shall yelde vnto eueryche after his operacy¦ons. And the ennemy sayd. But he shall be dampned for that / yt he hath not accomplys¦shed the tokens of loue. Than the company of the deuylles the whiche fought with the aungelles were vaynquysshed. &c. In then¦de the sayd bisshop was brought agayne in to his owne body / & his neyghbours wepte the whiche wende that he had ben deed. Af¦ter that he ouerlyued by somtyme and fy∣ned his dayes in good reste / peas / and ma∣ners. D. ¶Another example of the Iugement & horrible punycyon the whiche was done of an archebysshoppe that was named Vdo. Cvi. MEn fynde by wrytinge this ye whiche foloweth how the dys¦cyple recyteth in the boke of his promptuary and sayeth yt it is all knowen & manyfest in the countre where is happened / how in the countree of Saxony there was an archebis¦shoppe Metropolytayne named Mayden∣burc founded of saynt Mauryce. In that cyte studyed a scoler named Vdo the which had harde engyn and wytte / and myght no¦thynge lerne / and therfore was he beten & moche tourmented of his maysters of the scole. And on a tyme that he had be moche beten he went out of the scole and entred in to the chyrche of saynt Mauryce in the whi¦che he fell prostrate & put him in grete deuo¦cyon to requyre the debonayrte of ye quene of heuen & the ayde of saynt Mauryce for to enlumyne his entendement. And as he was there in prayers he slept somwhat / vn¦to whome appered the moder of mercy and sayd vnto hym. I haue herde thyn orayson I gyue vnto the not alonely the gyft of scy¦ence
/ but wt that yu shalte be archebisshop of my prynce Mauryce after that ye archebys∣shop that is shal deye. And yf thou gouerne well the chyrche yu shalte haue grete rewar∣de. And yf thou do vnto the cōtrary yu shalt deye in body and in soule. Whan these thyn¦ges were spoken the vyrgyn Mary depar∣ted. And the yonge man arose vp & yode to studye the lesson yt he had accustomed. And whan he came to speke and to dyspute he surmounted the other & appered ryght sa∣ge & experte in all scyence / and they all mer¦uayled that herde him & sayd. How this mā here is enspyred in all scyences / is not this Vdo the whiche was beten yesterday as a beest / & this daye he is approued to be euen as a phylozophre. Two yeres afterwarde ye archebysshop deyed / and Vdo was electe of all to be metropolitayne. After yt he was confermed & put in honour he lyued well so¦me lytel tyme. And for as moche as honou¦res chaunge the maners he was neclygent to perceuer & to lyue after the counceyle of the vyrgyn Mary / and forgate his helthe. Morouer he habandoned his body vnto vo¦luptees / and wasted the goodes of his chyr¦che / & vyoled not alonely the women secu∣lers but those of relygyon. And morouer ye whiche is worse he suffred those of his dycc to commyt all vyces wtout ony drede / soo yt his lyfe was in hate and vnto al detestable. And many yeres after yt the sayd archebys∣shop had broken the ayre by his synnes / in a nyght as he hadde in his bedde with hym an abesse relygyouse of the ordre of Cyster∣cienses yssued of the castell ryall / he herde a voyce yt vttred terrybly the wordes the whi¦che foloweth. Fac finem ludo / qr lusisti satis voo. That is to say. Vdo make an ende of thy play / for thou hast played ynough. The¦se thynge herde Vdo had suspycyon yt they were mockynges fayntyfes. And in ye mor∣nynge in perseueringe he retorned vnto de¦lyces / so that he was harde and durate as a stone without correccyon / wtout hauynge compunccyon ne drede for the voyces thre∣tenynge that he had herde. The nyght folo¦wynge he herde a semblable voyce. And the fole was perseuerynge in his malyce as be¦fore. The thyrde nyght he lay with the sayd abbesse / and as he excercysed ye foule & styn¦kynge worke of lechery the wordes before∣sayd were brought forthe in grete terroure Facfinem ludo / qr lusisti satis vdo. Whan he had herde this thyrde voyce he was abas¦shed & wayled a lytell / but he refused not. Certaynly the acursed was nere his dāpna¦cyon & he hasted him not to go vnto penaun¦ce. I wyll tell a thynge meruaylous / & but wordes verytable. And yf all the people of Saxonye where this thynge was done hel¦de theyr peas / all the elementes wolde crye that these thynges here after ben manyfe∣sted. Thre monethes after one of the chano¦nes of the sayd chyrche metropolytayne na¦med Frederycus moche venerable & of gre¦te holynes / in a nyght as he was in ye quere of the chyrche of saynt Mauryce feruently in orayon & besought god the creatour for the holy chyrche vnyuersall / & pryncypally for his owne metropolytayne yt the condu∣ctour of all & the Iuste Iuge eyther yt soone he wolde make to deye theyr chyef archebis¦shop Vdo / or that he wolde chaunge hym to better. His prayer and his worde had ef∣fecte / for a vysyon terryble folowed. He sa∣we that a grete wynde came in to the chyr∣che yt blewe out all the lampes of the same. So he toke a place / his heeres stode vp / the voyce was enclosed in the faucettes of his throte. Afterwarde came two yonge men ye whiche bare two tapres the which set them on the corners of the grete auter. And all ye place was replenysshed of theyr lyght. Af∣ter them entred two other / & one of theym bare tapytes the whiche they spred honestly
before the auter. And the other sette theron two chayres of golde. After them came one alone ye helde in his hāde a swerde al naked And he standynge in the myddes of ye chyr∣che cryed strongly in sayng. All the sayntes of whome the relykes ben here aryse ye vp and come vnto the Iugement of god. The¦se thynges spoken there appered ryght gre¦te multytude of the one sexe & of the other ryght clere. Some ordeyned in habytes as knyghtes. Other in pontyfycall vesture of chasubles / & they all entred in to the quere and set them there on the one syde & on the other by ordre after theyr merytes. After∣warde there appered .xii. men & in the myd∣des of them there went one clerer than the sone / the whiche had the crowne of a kynge & sceptre ryall. Whan the sayntes sawe hȳ they worshypped hym hastely & made hym to sytte in the chayre. And ye quene of heuen aryued more clerer than the mone and the sterres after whome folowed a clere turbe of vyrgyns. All the sayntes worshypped ye moder of god. And Ihesu cryst came before her / toke her by ye hande / & sette her honou∣rably by hym. Fynally saynt Mauryce glo¦ryous duke appered with his legyon .vi. M vi. C. lx. &. vi. the whiche of one courage pro¦strate them & worshypped our lorde saynge O rightwyse Iuge & conduter of the heuēs gyue Iugemēt. These thinges spoken they stode vp & hym requyred reuerently. Vnto whome our lorde Ihesu cryst sayd. I kno∣we well what ye requyre gyue vnto vs the archebysshop Vdo. And incontynent some of the presentes departed & drewe the cur∣sed Vdo from the bedde of the sayd abbesse a ledde hym myserably. Whan saynt Mau¦ryce saw him he sayd. My lorde ryghtwyse iuge / Iuge iustly / here is Vdo he is no bys∣shop but a wulfe / no pastoure but a rauys∣sher / a sleer / & deuourer of thy flocke. This here is also he vnto whome thy lady moder hath giuen scyence to whome she hath recō¦maunded this chyrche made in thonour of thy name & of me and of my felawes: & him before warned & sayd. Yf thou gouerne the well thou shalte haue lyfe pardurable. And yf yu gouerne the yll yu shalte deye in body & in soule. Morouer he hath be warned thre ty¦mes & he wolde not correcke him / & he hath prophaned & brought vnto nought not all onely this chyrche but himselfe & the soules the whiche were vnto hym cōmytted / & wt that hath vyoled folyly & fouly thyn espou¦ses. Than yu ryghtwyse iuge / Iuge iustly. These thynges spoken our lorde yt preceded in Iugement in beholdynge ye sayntes sayd What thynke you of this to be doone. The champyon yt helde the swerde al naked cry¦ed with an hye voyce saynge. He is culpable of dethe. And the Iuge & all the sayntes the whiche were present concorded in sentence & treated togyders what maner of dethe he sholde suffre. Than ye iuge sayd / he hath deserued to lose his heed. That is to haue it smyten of. Whan these wordes were spokē the champyon bad Vdo hastely to stretche out his necke. Whan Vdo had stretched it & yt the champyon had lyft vp the swerde to gyue ye stroke one cryed & sayd. Holde thyn hande tyll the relykes ben taken from hym Than one Quidā came vnto Vdo holdȳge a chalyce. And the champyon smote many strokes wt his fyst vpon the necke of Vdo / & at eche stroke an hostye soyled yssued out by ye mouthe of Vdo & fell in to the chalyce. The whiche hostyes our lorde toke reuerēt¦ly & wasshed them for to take away ye fylth Afterwarde he put theym wtin the chalyce vpon the auter / & enclyned hym besemyng¦ly wt his company & yode his way & depar∣ted. And after that the sayd champion toke the myscheuous Vdo and beheeded hym. And than all that company departed. Cer¦taynly the beforesayd chanone a Iust man
the whiche sawe this thynge / not in dreme but with eyen open abasshed tremblynge founde fyre in the place of the relykary and lyghted agayne the lampes of the chyrche. And as he was yet abashed of the dede & ad¦meruayled hym / lytell and lytel he toke har¦dynes / approched al in peas vnto the place of Iugement / & sawe vpon the awter ye cha¦lyce wt the hostyes & the heed cast ferre from the body & the pauement wette of ye bloode Than he began to crye and to saye. O tray¦tre beholde. O grete myracle. O that ye Iu∣gement of god is to drede. O yt it is a thȳge horryble as to fall in to the handes of the ly¦uȳge god. For of those the whiche endureth longly to thende that they conuerte theym whan they wyll not conuert them they dā∣pne themselfe more hardely. After all ye thȳ¦ges beforesayd the sayd chanone shytte the gates wt the keyes. And suffred not in ony wyse that none entred tyl vnto the tyme of the rysynge of the sonne that he called all ye clerkes and lay men. Than he opened ye ga¦tes and shewd vnto all the meruaylous & cruell vengeaunce how god ye creatour had Iuged & punysshed the archebysshop Vdo And recounted by ordre all the dede in lyke¦wyse as it is before wryten / how it was do∣ne. And the same day one of ye chapelayns of ye sayd archebisshop named Brunet whā he had made parfayte and accomplysshed his lygacyon cōmysed by the prouynce sent his seruauntes before / & he was oppressed greuously to slepe. He auysed a tree wel sha¦dowed & derke descended from his hors & teyed faste the rayne of his brydle vnto his arme & slept. Whan he was in rest he sawe in vysyon a gaderȳge of horrible blacke spy¦rites wt busynes / trompets / tympanes / spe¦res / glayues / & axes / the whiche hasted thē to come vnto the place. Whan they were al¦togyder there was one of thē prynce & most horryble of stature. And they made a chay¦re & set hym in it. And wtout longe tarienge an other multytude of spyrites as grete as the other appered cryenge / mockynge / and dauncynge / wherof one came hastely cryen¦ge. Gyue place / gyue place here is our prȳce Vdo yt approcheth. After this saynge ye sa∣talytes of Sathan ledde vnto theyr prȳce the soule of the cursed Vdo in semblaunce corporall hauynge a chayne of fyre strayte about his necke / agaynst whome Sathan arose & salued hym by wordes peasybles in yll and treason. Thou arte ryght welcome O prynce aydour & delatatour of our real∣me / here we ben redy to yelde vnto the ye re¦warde equyualent for thy deseruynges / & also vnto all our faythfull frendes. And as Vdo helde his peas Sathan sayd to ye pre∣sentes. Our frende is ryght wery in his co∣minge hyder / & therfore it pleaseth vnto vs yt he be chered / gyue vnto than to ete / he re¦fused it & tourned his heed. And his myny∣sters constrayned hym vyolently to ete of todes & serpentes / & after they made hym to drynke of ye lycoure of sulphre / yet he spa¦ke not. And Sathan commaunded him sa¦ynge. Suche a prince be ledde to be bayned & incontynent brought agayne. And there was a welle not ferre of that had a couerin¦ge on the mouthe. Whan it was vncouered flambe deuourynge lept vp vnto the heuen The whiche wasted noc all onely the trees & mountaynes & stones / but the water be∣ynge nere vnto it dryed & cōsumed. The de¦uyls kest the soule of the sayd Vdo wtin the layd welle / & afterwarde drewe hym out ye whiche was all on fyre as yron enbrased & reed / & bare hym vnto theyr prynce / ye whi∣che laughed & sayd. Hast yu not had a softe bayne as a prynce. Than Vdo sawe hīselfe dāpned. And begā to blaspheme & say. Sa¦than cursed be yu / thy felawes / & thy subge∣ctiō & thy reame. Cursed be god yt hath crea¦ted me. Cursed be the erthe the whiche bare
me: Cursed be my parents that begate me and cursed be all creatures in heuen and in erthe. Than all the deuylles with theyr prȳ¦ce clapped theyr handes & sayd. Truly this man here is worthy too dwell wt vs / for he can wel our cantycle & our offyce. Than be he put to our pryncypall scole of the damp∣ned to thende yt he se / here / lerne / fele / & fro¦thensforthe neuer to yssue. Scantly had he ended his wordes yt the deuylles toke that cursed soule & kest it and plonged in to hell with so grete shoutes and noyse as yf ye he∣uen and the erthe & all the mountaynes of the worlde were moeued to smyte togyder Whan the chapelayne beforesayd had seen & herde the sayd thynges he dredde hugely Than the prynce of derkenes shewed hym wt the fynger & sayd. Take hede that ye cler∣ke the whiche beholdeth vs fle not the whi∣che hath ben euermore defensour / messager & currour of his euylles. Than in lykewyse as he hath ben encreaser of his synne so lete hym be partener of the vengeaunce / & ther¦fore be he plonged in the welle wt his lorde. Whan he had spoken that as the deuylles wolde rauysshe hym he enforced hym to fle and awok sodaynly / & his hors was so afer¦de yt he lepte hyder and thyder & ranne dra∣wynge the meschaunt man tyl that he was vnbounde of the rayne yt was about his ar¦me. And wt grete dyffyculte he lepte vpon his hors & came to the cyte metropolytayne And whan he knewe yt his lorde was deed he approued the vysyon to be true / & recoū¦ted al the thynges the whiche vnto hym we¦re comen in the way / & all that / yt he hadde seen & herde. So they knewe the thynge to be veritable. Whan the cytezyns had seen & herde this terryble thynge they drewe ye ca¦rayne of the body ferre fro the cite in a place full of fylthe. And for ye in the sayd place be¦stes infernalles were by wyse counceyle ye cursed body was brent & the asshes casten in to a water. A thȳge meruaylous men tel yt al the fysshes left the place & yode in to ye see and were there tyl god was apeased by fastynges & letanyes. Ten yeres after scan¦tely came they agayne. The demonstrūce of the sayd horryble thynge appereth on ye whyte pauement where the sayd Vdo was beheded. For the cruour of the effusyon of ye blode enharded so strongly in the stones of the pauement yt it semeth that the sayd blo¦de be of thessence of ye stones the whiche ben there yet. And ouer yt place where the decol¦lacyon ben alway tapytes spred. And whā they synge (Te deū laudam{us}) vpon a bys∣shop chosen he is borne vnto the sayd place & there they prosterne them in orayson to ye ende yt the bysshop that is chosen beholde ye sayd thynge / & also to kepe hȳ yt he perysshe not as dyde the other. ¶This thynge was done of our lorde to the terrour of bisshops & yll prelates to thende that they tremble to here the terryble Iugement & the cruell vengeaunce of god. ¶This example deno¦teth many thynges. Fyrst yt the sayd Vdo vsed yll the scyence & the counceyle yt he had of the vyrgyn Mary. Also those the whiche vse yll the scyence that they haue of god bē to punyshe and synne gretely. Vn̄ iacob. iiii Scienti bonū facere & non facienti pctm̄ ē illi. Also he vsed yll of the prelature & of the goodes of the chyrche yt god had gyuen vn∣to hym. He sholde be the lyght of vertues & of bounte / & he was the sklaunder of ye peo¦ple / and the example of derkenesses and of synne. Also he vsed his lyfe in lecheryes and was corrupter of vyrgynyte & chastyte / & therfore he was worthy of punycyon. Also he wolde not correke hym and yet he was warned from god. And for yt he was so ob¦stynate & harded in synne & replete of car∣nall pleasaunces yt he wolde not correcke hȳ of good ryght he was iuged & punisshed in body & in soule as it is sayd. This here is
the example of all prelates / curates / & peo∣ple of the chyrche / they sholde vnderstande here yf they vse yll of the dygnyte & charge that they haue yt god shall punysshe theym cruelly more than these symple persones ye whiche ne knoweth / a / ne / b. And therfore who so loueth hym kepe hym from doynge yll. ¶Another example in mani bokes how the dyscyple recyteth in his promptuary & sayth yt in the dyoc & archebysshopryche of Maydenburgh / there was an archebisshop named Loye / the whiche was in a daunce the whiche was in a towne of his sayd dioc & of his sygnoury of women vyrgyns & of other of masculyn sexe. And by ye suffraun∣ce of god as men sayd the fyre toke in ye base court of the hous where the daunce was / & the sayd fyre brent it & no persone ne deyed amonge so grete nombre of men & women the whiche were there / but ye archebysshop and a mayden yt he had ledde in the daunce And albeit some persones felle by the wyn∣dowes & ne ranne in poynt of dethe. ¶Peni inferni. A. ¶Examples how mortall syn̄e maketh the synners inobedyentes to haue many paynes & doloures wtin the fyre of hell. And fyrst example of a fader of an hous∣holde the whiche sawe two pondes & the tourmentes of hell. Cvii. MEn fynde by wrytynge this ye whiche foloweth how the dys¦cyple recyteth in the boke of his promptuary & sayth that ye fader of a housholde yelded his soule to god / & all his houshold watched hym & kept his body by nyght / by the dyuy¦ne mercy he reuyued & yode vnto ye chyrche to yelde thankes vnto god. And al yt he had he gaue to the chyrche & to the poores. After¦warde he yode vnto an hermytage / & by a water made his dwellynge / & entred wtin ye sayd water & lete his clothes to be ysy & fro¦sen nere vnto his flesshe. And after yt he en¦tred in to a bayne ryght hote / & susteyned suche payne tyll vnto the dethe. And whan he was repreued to endure suche payne he sayd. Yf ye hadde seen that yt I haue seen ye sholde do wt me that I doo / or more greter thynge. And he recounted terryble thinges of the paynes of hell in saynge yt whan his soule departed fro his body an aungell led hym in to a valey of infynyte gretenes. In the whiche there were two pondes / the one was full of wormes & of flambes of fyre ey¦grely brennynge & hote. And the other pon¦de was frosen / & there was terrible coldnes of snowe & of hayle. And these two pondes were full of soules terrybly tourmented / ye whiche whan they myght no more sustayne the grete cruelte of the fire they passed in to the colde. And they yt myght not sustayne ye coldenes passed in to the hote. &c. Afterwar¦de the aungell ledde him by derkenes right thycke & there sawe lytell flambes & lytell hepes & assemblementes of fyre the whiche proceded from he furneys of hell & moun∣ted as hye as sperkles of fyre & men of fyre thorow them proceded / & there felte stynke intollerable / & there herde wepynges / way¦lynges / & howlynges incomperables & sa∣we the deuylles ryght terrybles yt helde ho¦kes of fyre / the whiche coueyted to catche ye fader of the housholde to cast hym in ye fur∣neys / but ye aungell defended yt they sholde not touche hȳ. For ye iuge had commaūded yt he sholde retorne in to his body for to doo penaunce. And there he dyde suche penaūce yt it passed mannes reason. After he deyed ioyously. &c. To ye purpose of this example yt speketh of ye fyry ponde saynt Iohn̄ sayth apo. Qui nō est īuēt{us} ī libro vite script{us} mis¦sus ē ī stagnū ignis ardētis & sulphuris. He
the whiche is not founde wryten in ye boke of lyfe whan he is deed is sent in to a ponde of fyre brennynge and of sulphre. This pon¦de here wherof speketh saynt Iohan is not of colde water or boylynge wherin the syn∣ners ben plonged / drowned / or boyled / as fals money makers / but it is by symylitude as a ponde or a cawdron of fyre and of sul∣pre molten brennynge & boylynge wherin the dampned ben sent there to be plonged / smored / brent & broyled the whiche is the se¦conde dethe that cometh after the dethe cor¦porel / wherof speketh saynt Gregory in his moralles. Fit miseris mors sine morte / fi∣nis sine fine / defect{us} sine defectu. &c. ¶Ex∣ample of a fader & his sone the whiche were seen in hell in tourmente of fyre brennynge boylynge as dooth the peason in a potte on the fyre. Quere .lxxiii. Also saynt Iohan sa¦yeth in the appocalyps that the homycydes fornycatours / enuenymours / ydolatres / & all lyers shall be sent in to a ponde brennyn¦ge of fyre & sulphre the whiche is the secon∣de dethe. Vn̄ appoca. xxi. Pars illorū erit ī stagno ardenti igne et sulphure {quod} est mors secunda. Vnto ye purpose of the seconde pō∣de the whiche was frosen & that the damp∣ned passed from the ponde of fyre in to that of the colde. It is wryten iob. xxiiii. Ad ca¦lorem nimium transiet ab aquis niuiū. And from the grete cruelte of colde & of tormen¦tes that the dampned haue god sayeth in ye gospelles yt they shall wepe & grynde theyr tethe of grete payne yt they shal endure. Vn¦de math. viii. xxiiii. Et luc. xiii Ibi erit flet{us} et stridor dentium. B. ¶Another example how a ryche man was put in a chyare of fyre. Cvii THe dyscyple recyteth how a deuout man sawe by vysyon a ryche man ledde in to hel yt had ben moche honoured in this worlde & exceded in worldly glory / in glotony / lechery / in songes / and in dyuers solaces. And the prynce of the deuylles rose vp from his chayre / came before hym / and made hym to sytte in a chayre all of fy / & sayd vnto hym. Syt yu here for the honour that thou hast had in the worlde. And was constrayned to drynke of lycour ryght byt∣ter / stynkynge / & foule. And they sayd to hy that it was for yt he had dronken in ye worl∣de the drynkes ful of swetenesses / & two de¦uylles were there wt trompettes the which blewe in his eeres yt the flambes of fyre yo∣de out by the eyes / nosethrylles / mouthe / & eres. And it was sayd vnto him yt it was for the bayne / & songes that he had herde in ye worlde. And they put serpentes about his necke and vnto his armes / and sayd vnto hym yt it was for the embracements of wo¦men that he had hadde in lyuynge lecherou¦sly. &c. C. ¶Another example of a woman that sa¦we ye paynes of her husbonde & of other dampned. Cvii THe dyscyple recyteth in his ser∣mons this the whiche foloweth the whiche is also wryten in o∣ther bokes & sayth yt a knyght ryght puyssaunt was abando∣ned in tourneyments the whiche lyued my¦serably / and myscheuously deyed. His wyfe the whiche abode wydowe was ryght de∣uout and holy. The whiche recompted vn∣to her broder Albert mayster of the ordre of the prechours that after ye dethe of her sayd husbande she was rauisshed in spyryte and sawe by the soule of her sayd husbande gre¦te multytude of deuylles assembled. And the one of them the whiche appered to be mayster commaunded vnto his company¦ons & felawes yt they sholde put a payre of
hosen on his fete of the whiche the pryckes otherwyse called dartes perced hym from the plante of the feete tyll vnto the brayne. Afterwarde he made hym to be clothed in a haubergyon wherof the pryckinges perced all his body on all partes before & behynde Afterwarde he made to put on his heed an helme of the whiche the pryckes in descen∣dynge perced hym tyll vnto the plante of ye fote. Afterwarde he made to put vpon his sholder a shelde otherwyse called a marke or token the whiche was so heuy that al his membres were frusshed. After yt the prince of the deuylles had made all these thynges to be done to the sayd cursed soule he sayd a¦gayne vnto the sayd deuilles. The custome of this man was yt after his tourneymēts that he vsed baynes / and after his baynes that he was layde in his bedde & by hym a tender mayden the whiche he enbraced and wt her medled / appropre ye hym semblable thynges. And wtout taryeng the sayd soule was moche tourmented bayned in a bayne of fyre / and afterwarde layde in a bedde of fyre brennynge & fast by hym a tode of the gretenes of ye bedde the whiche was so hor∣ryble & had so terryble eyen yt of the enbra∣synge & of the atouchynge & of the kissynge that the sayd tode made and of the horrible lokes he was more brent and tourmented than he ne had be before of the sayd armou∣res / of the bayne / & of the bedde. Alas what paynes haue those the whiche in suche wy∣se ben tourmented. That blyssed woman yt sawe by the dyspensacyon of god the thyn∣ges before sayd vnte ye soule of her sayd hus¦bande was so moche tourmented that mer¦uayle it was all the dayes of her lyfe of the recordacyon of the vysyon before reherced of her husbande. D. ¶Another example how a seruaunt sa¦we his mayster the whiche was ledde in to paynes. Cvii. MEn fynde by wrytynge this ye whiche foloweth how the dys¦cyple recyteth in his promptu¦ary & sayth that there was a noble man oppressour & perse∣cutour of poore people & loued the worlde. The whiche as he rested hym in his bedde his seruaunt the whiche lay before his chā∣bre was rauysshed by vysyon before yt thro¦ne of god. And there sawe his sayd mayster yt was accused of all ye thynges yt he had do¦ne / and for them sentence of dampnacyon was gyuen and was ledde of deuylles befo¦re Lucyfer wt grete dauncynge. Vnto who¦me Lucyfer sayd. Approche vnto me myn owne faythfull seruaunt yt I may kysse hȳ And whan he was before hȳ Lucyfer sayd Peas be not with the in eternyte. Agayne Lucyfer sayd. He had of custome too bathe hym / lede hym vnto the bayne. Than was he bayned of a bayne infernall & moche tor¦mented wt the nayles of the deuylles / and some kest fyre vpon hym. After he was lay¦de in a bedde infernall. And Lucyfer com∣maunded that after the bayne men sholde gyue hym to drynke in the chalyce of ye yre of god. And he was constrayned to drynke of fyre & sulphre molten togyders. And as he cryed it suffysed Lucyfer sayd. He had of custome to here symphonyes. So there aro¦se vp two symphonyatours the whiche we¦re two deuylles wt instrumentes full of fyre the whiche blewe agaynst hym in suche ma¦ner that from his eyen & his mouthe & fro his nose the flambes of fyre yode out. After Lucyfer made hym to be brought and sayd to hym. Thou hast songe of sōges synge me one. And he sayd. What shall I synge / but that cursed be the day yt I was borne. And Lucyfer sayd vnto hym. Synge a better songe. And he answered. What shall I syn¦ge
/ but cursed be the fader that begate me And lucyfer sayd vnto hȳ / synge yet a bet¦ter. And the accursed said / but that cursed be that god the whiche hathe suffred that I was borne vpon ye erthe / vnto this pur¦pose sayeth the psalmyst. Nō mortui lau¦dabunt te dn̄e: ne{que} oēs qui descēdunt in ī¦fernū. And lucyfer sayd / here is the songe that I wolde haue / lede hym vnto the pla¦ce yt he hathe deserued. And he was caste in to a pytte of fyre. Than ye deuylles ma∣de so grete daunsynge that it semed that all sholde fall. And at the sayd daunsynge the seruaunt of the sayd man awoke. The whiche ranne vnto ye chambre of his sayd mayster & founde hym deed. Than he tol∣de the sayd vysyon. &c. A. ¶Another example of a scoler of Pa∣rys the whiche appered vnto his mayster after his dethe in grete tormentes. Cviii IT is wryten in ye legende of ye deed that one of the maysters of Parys named scilo prayed ryght gretely his sco∣ler that yf he deyed that he wolde appere vnto hym after his dethe for to denounce vnto hym of his estate yf it pleased vnto god. And one tyme after he appered / the whiche was clothed with a cloke of par∣chemente all wryten withouteforth of so∣phyms / & within enflambed with fyre / & the sayd mayster demaunded hym what he was He answered I am he the whiche hathe promysed to come agayne vnto the & he was axed of his estate he sayd. Thys cloke weyeth more on me than a grete tou¦re / the whiche is gyuen me to bere for the vaynglorye yt I toke in the argumentes / of sophistrye / yt is to saye fallacyous. And the flambe of fyre ye whiche brenneth me is gyuen for the furres delicyeuses that I wore. And as the sayd mayster sayd that suche payne was lyght to bere. The deed body sayd vnto hym that he sholde sret∣che out his hande & that he sholde fele the lyghtnes of his payne. And whan he had stretched out his hande ye sayd deed body lete fall a droppe of his sweet the whyche perced the sayd hande more soner thenne sholde do an arowe / & sayd vnto hym. I am all suche. And the sayd mayster felte so horryble torment that he was soo ferde that he lefte the worlde & entred in to rely¦gyon. In lyke wyse as telleth the chaun∣ter of parys. &c. B ¶. Another example of the soule damp¦ned yt wepte the tyme yt he had lost. IT is wryten in the booke of dre∣de yt as a holy man was in oray∣son he herde by the wyll of god a voyce horryble wepynge. He de∣maunded who it was yt in suche wyse wepte. Answer was made the whi∣che sayd. I am a soule dampned. And he demaunded wherfore wepest thou so byt∣terly. He answered & sayd that one of the thynges wherfore he & al the dampned so¦rowe moost fore is that yt they haue loste & consumed the tyme of grace vnprouffy∣tably in synnynge / where in an houre by repentaunce they myght haue goten gra∣ce and escaped the tormentes wherin they be and shal be eternally. By this example these synners sholde vnderstonde that it is the moost grete good dede that may be in them as to be in the state of grace wele confessed / & repentaunte of theyr synnes. Also by that that this soule wepte in helle is vnto the purpose of that that the euan∣gylles
saye that the dampned wepe in hel Vnde mathei .viii. Et luce .xiiii. Ibi erit flets et stridor dentiū. Vnto this purpo∣se tongdalus ye whiche sawe the tormen∣tes of helle & afterwarde was brought a∣gayne tolde yt he sawe in helle a torment of an yzy ponde where the soules the whi¦che therin were tormented cryed so horry¦bly that they were herde vnto heuen. And after where the sayd tongdalus spake of the pytte of helle he herde grete cryes and howlinges of soules & thondre so horryble that no man ne myght thynke ne tongue declare the horryble crye and the noyse ye whiche was in the sayd torment. &c. C. ¶Another exāple of two men ye whi∣che were in paynes whan saynt taurayn areysed them. Cviii IT is wryten in the legende of saint taurayn ye tydynges were brought vnto a ryght honourable man that his so∣ne and his squyere were deed. And for to abredge the matere saynt taurayne arey∣sed the sayd sone. The whiche yode incon∣tynent on knees before saynt taurayne & requyred hym to be baptysed. And after that he was baptysed sayd vnto his fader Halas fader thou knowest what mysera∣ble lyfe we lede & what paynes those sus∣teyne the whiche ben semblables vnto vs And what glorye is vnto those ye whiche loue and serue vnto that god the whiche is to be honoured of man. Certaȳly I ha¦ue sene hym to be in the company of aun∣gelles and to praye vnto god for vs. And whan ye sayd sone areyed had spoken the¦se wordes & many other vnto his fader he yode on knees before saynt tauryn & cau∣sed hym to baptyze him. And also his wy¦fe moder of the sayd reysed. And for to be shorte in that daye soo many of grete lor∣des as of lytell people a thousande & two hondred persones were baptyzed. And af¦terwarde at the request of the sayd sone a¦reysed saȳt tauryn areysed also afterwar¦de the squyer ye whiche wytnessed that he was in grete paynes whan a messengere came to tell him of the souerayne maister that he were brought agayne & taken vn∣to saȳt tauryn. And this said squyer arey¦sed sayd vnto the said sone. He the whiche hathe brought me agayne heder cōmaun¦deth the that thou dispose the to retourne vnto hym. And incontynent a feuer toke hym / & after the cōmaūdement deyed. D. ¶Another example of .iii. deed men a¦reysed the whiche recompted of ye paynes of purgatorye and of helle / & how they we¦re in iugement before god. Cviii IT is wryten in the epystyll of ye ho∣ly bysshop named sirillus that by ye merytes of saint Iherome the whiche ap¦pered vnto saynt eusebe thre deed bodyes were areysed for to take awaye a grete er¦roure the whiche regned in ye tyme amon∣ge the grekes yt it came in the latyns of ye heretykes yt sayd that the ylle persones ne sholde haue of tormentes in helle tyl vnto ye daye of Iugement yt the body & the sou¦le shold be remyt togyders. The thre deed bodyes yt were areysed lyued .xx. dayes / ye whiche were demaunded why they wepte so sore. And the one of them sayd vnto hȳ yt asked it. Yf thou knewe the paynes the whiche before yesterday I endured thou sholdest haue euermore cause to wepe. & he was requyred to tell what paynes he hadde endured and suffred within helle. /
He sayd that the dampned & those in pur¦gatorye haue so grete paynes yt yf a perso¦ne sholde endure in this worlde all ye pay¦nes / tormentes / & afflyccions that a man may thynke / that ne sholde be but conso∣lacyon to endure al that / in regarde of the leest payne of purgatorye / or of helle. Also he sayd / yf ony lyuynge had felte the expe∣ryence of the dolour the whiche is in helle or in purgatorye / that he sholde loue bet∣ter to endure tyll vnto thende of ye worlde without ony remedy togyders all the pay¦nes and tormentes that all the men & wo¦men hath endured one after another syth Adam vnto nowe / than to be tormented one daye in the leest payne that is in helle or in purgatorye. And therfore yf ye axe me what ye cause is wherfore I wepe. It is for that yt I knowlege me to haue syn∣ned ayenst god / and that iustely he punys¦sheth the sȳners. Wherfore I wepe to ha∣ue deserued suche punycyon. Afterwarde he was axed wherin dyffereth ye paynes / and tormentes of purgatorye / and those of helle. He answered that they ne dyffere as vnto ye qualyte & quantyte of paynes they ben of one self gretenes / but they dif∣fere in asmoche as the paynes of helle ha∣ue none ende. And also the dampned shal haue augmentacyon of tormentes in Iu¦gement whan they shall there be tormen¦ted in body and in soule. And the paynes of purgatorye shal haue an ende. For whā the penaunce is accomplysshed / those of purgatorye ben delyuered. Also he was as¦ked yf those the whiche ben in purgatory and in helle haue egalle tormentes or dy∣uers. He answered that the one haue mo∣re greate tormentes and dyuers than the other after the quantyte and gretenes of synnes that they haue cōmytted. And al∣so the dampned albeit that they ben in a place of paynes / yet fele they more grete tormentes the one than ye other / after the quantyte / and qualytees of synnes that they haue commytted. For in the persone where there is more of matere of synne / and more strongly the fyre hym taketh & brēneth more cruelly. Also he was demaū¦ded how he bare the dede whan the soul yssued out frome the body. He answered / Whan myne houre of dethe came in pla∣ce where I was he foūde so many of de∣uylles that a man ne myghte nombre thē for the grete multytude the whiche were so horrybles to beholde that a man ne can thynke more grete payne than it is. Ony man had leuer caste hymselfe more soner in a fyre flambynge and brennynge than to beholde them with the eye / the whiche deuylles came vnto me & brought agayn vnto my mynde all ye cursed operacyons that I had done agayne god esmouynge that I ne had more of esperaunce of ye dy¦uyne mercy the whiche I haue gretely of¦fended. And certes knowe ye yt yf ye mer∣cy of god ne had ayded me I ne might ha¦ue resysted vnto them. For whan my spy∣ryte was destytute of all force lytel and ly¦tell I me consented vnto theyr wordes / & saynt Iherome arryued more clere than the sōne with grete multytude of aūgels the whiche came vnto myn ayde. And the said saynt Iherome blamed them / & they departed with grete howlynges and cla∣mours. &c. For to abrydge this mater the sayd areysed sayd that his soule was bor∣ne before god in iugemente in lyke wyse as a man may shyrte the eye / but how ne of whom he ne knewe. More ouer he said all the synnes that he had done / spoken / & thought in all his lyfe appered clerely vn¦to the iuge & before al in lyke wyse as they had ben present / so that there ne abode ye moost lytell thought but that it appered / so it had be thought. Also he sayd that he
was replenysshed with so grete fere that meruayll it was. And that grete multitu¦de of deuylles were there present the whi∣che wytnesse the ylles that we haue done in declarynge the place / the maner and ye tyme & the ylles that men spoke agaynst vs / we ne maye agayne saye them in noo maner. For the iuge knoweth and seeth al Also the iustes and presentes it sene and knowe. Alas what shal I saye / we ne aby¦de more than the sentence to be broughte forth agayne vs. For all the presents crye vnto the iuge yt we ben dygne of tormen∣tes. And almoost noo good dede appered wherin we hadde esperaunce to haue the mercye of god. And whan he ne resysted more as to bryngforth the sentence ye whi¦che is iustely gyuen agayne the synners ye blyssed saynt Iherome was present. Also were presente saynt Iohan baptyst saint peter / and grete multytude of aungelles the whiche requyred of the Iuge that our sentence were yet dyfferred a lytell of ty∣me for ye reuerence and deuocyon that we had made vnto the sayd saynt Iherome / And for to destroye the errour the whiche regned in the worlde. And he was accor∣ded vnto the sayd saynt Iherome that yt he requyred. The whiche ledde vs with hȳ And shewed vs the glorye of ye blyssed sou¦les and the paynes of helle and of purga∣torye / to thende that we myghte wytnes certayne that thynge yt we haue sene. The whiche thynges be not here wryten for by¦cause of shortnes. And wolde that we we∣re put within the paynes of purgatorie to thende that we sholde proue the experyen¦ce of the paynes the whiche there ben in ye whiche we were put. For to abrydge the sayd saynt Iherome vs cōmaunded that we sholde come agayne in to our bodyes And that we sholde wytnes that that we had sene / and vs promysed that on the .xx daye yf we dyde dygne penaunce of ye syn¦nes that we had cōmytted that we sholde deye agayne with saynt Eusebe the whi∣che sholde deye on the said daye & we shol¦de haue glorye. And so our soules were in contynent within theyr bodyes. &c. E. ¶Another example how a deuyl said that the soule of the erle Guyllaume was in horryble payne. Cviii. IT is wryten in dialogo cesarii this the whiche foloweth how the dyscy¦ple recyteth in his boke & sayeth that as a knyght was at the dethe in his bedde all alone the deuyll appered vnto hym vysy∣bly in forme and semblaunce of a she ape the whiche had the hornes of a gote. And whan he se hȳ there in suche wyse he had fere and hym demaunded what art thou & what sekest thou. He answered I am a deuyll the whiche am come for to fetche thy soule. Vnto whome the sayd knyghte sayd departe thou fro me cursed there / I haue cōmaūded it vnto Ihesu cryste that I haue receyued in the sacrament. And ye deuyll sayd. Varlet yf thou wylte doo me homage I shall yelde vnto the helthe and I shall enryche the aboue all thy parents And the knyght hym demaunded where ben thy tresours. He answered treasours infynyte ben hydde nere vnto thy courte / And the sayd knyght asked hym / tell me where is the soule of the erle guyllaume ye whiche is lately deed. He answered. It is in helle in soo grete fyre that yf the moost grete mountayne were there it sholde be consumed in lesse of tyme than to close ye eye. And that payne there is but a bayne of mylke in the regarde of the daye of Iu¦gement where he shall receyue the payne
And he asked hym of another man. And he answered he hath be .xxxi. yeres in pay¦nes / but a monke and a mynchen hath de¦lyuered hym by good dedes. And agayne he demaunded the deuyl. From whens ca¦mest thou whan thou came to me. He an∣swered. I & my felowes were at the dethe of an abbesse awaytynge her soule. And ye knyght hym demaunded. How many ben ye. He answered that the moost grete fo∣rest of the worlde hathe not so many of le¦ues as we were. And the knyght demaun¦ded hym. What haue ye done. He answe∣red Alas nothynge / she was a good rely∣gyous / & saynt Myghell came theder the whiche bete vs & departed in like wyse as departeth the poudre before the wynde / & he was axed yf he were at the dethe of su∣che an abbot. He answered yt there is not so moche of grauell in the see as ther was of deuylles / but we ne dyde nothynge / for the vyllaynes monkes ye whiche there we¦re & groned as hogges ne wolde let vs to approche. And the sayd knyght sayd. how dare ye go vnto the dethe of so holy a man And the deuyl sayd I was at the dethe of the sone of god / & set me on the arme of ye crosse / wherfore dare I not than go vnto the dethe of suche a man. &c. F. ¶Another example how a relygyous wolde more sooner entre in to a fyre than to beholde the deuyll. Cviii THe dyscyple recyteth in his promp¦tuarye & sayeth yt one tyme a rely¦gyous came vnto ye dethe ye whiche cryed horrybly / cursed be the houre that euer I was relygyous / and after helde his peas And within a lytell whyle afterwarde he began to laugh with a Ioyous face & said Naye. But blessed be the tyme that I en∣tred in to the ordre. And blyssed be the glo¦ryous moder of Ihesu cryste that I loue and agayne helde his peas. The freres ye whiche were by hym and herde these wor∣des wepte and prayed for hym. Two hou¦res after he sayd vnto a frere the whiche was by hym / call my bredern. For god ha∣the exalted theyr prayers. And he said vn¦to them whan they were entred. My bre∣dren ye were troubled of the fyrste worde I sayd vnto you / but the cause of ye wor∣de was for that that the deuylles horryble appered vnto me / the whiche wolde ra∣uysshe my soule. And for the drede I was rauysshed out of my selfe & cursed ye houre that I entred in to relygyon I tell you yt yf a grete fyre were here melled wt brym∣stone / and that I had to chose to put me within it or elles to beholde agayne ye de∣uylles in ye forme that I haue sene theym I sholde chose more sooner to put me in the fyre than to beholde them afterwarde the quene of heuen and of mercy came the whiche chased awaye the deuylles. And whan I se her I conceyued esperaunce / & for the grete ioye that I hadde I haue laughed and blyssed the houre that I en∣tred in to relygyon and the vyrgyn mary Whan he had spoken these wordes he de∣yed debonayrly. &c. A. ¶Another example how the vysyon of the deuyll is horryble. Cix. IT is wryten in some bokes this ye whiche foloweth that the dyscyple recyteth in his promptuarye and sayeth yt the abbot of saynt agathe came vnto co∣leyne with one of his monkes & a conuers with a woman demonyacle. And whan ye
abbot asked the deuyl of some thynges he ne wolde anwer. The abbot sayd after∣warde. I coniure the by hym that I ha∣ue trayted in the masse that thou answer me. And incontynent the deuyll answerd vnto tho thynges yt men demaunded hȳ After the abbot coniured hym yt he sholde go forthe of the woman. The deuyll an∣swerde. And wheder shall I go. The ab∣bot sayd I haue opened my mouthe to ye ende that thou ther entre. The deuyl sayd I ne maye there entre / for this daye the ryght hault god there entred. Than ye ab∣bot sayd. Lepe vpon my two fyngers / my thombe & that nexte it. The deuyll answe¦red I wyll not for yu hast this daye traye∣ted the ryght hault wt them. And he sayd vnto hym that he sholde go forth. The de¦uyll sayd the ryght haulte ne wyll it not / I shall be yet two yeres in her / & than she shall be delyuered. And soo was it done. / Than the monke & the conuers prayed ye abbot that he wolde shewe hymself vnto them in forme naturell. And he fyrste re∣fused it afterwarde he wolde it & sayd vn∣to the deuyll. I cōmaunde the in ye vertue of Ihesu cryst that thou appyere vnto vs in thy naturall kynde. And the deuyl said And wyll ye not departe yf ye se me not / and the abbot sayd naye. Than the deuyll shewed hymselfe so horryble within ye bo∣dy of the woman that it was meruayll to se / his eyes sparcled as a furnayse embra¦sed in fyre smokynge. Whan ye sayd mon∣ke & conuers sawe yt they fell vnto ye erthe as deed for fere / yu abbot had also fallen yf he had not cōmaūded ye deuyll to take his fyrste forme. The whiche thynges he dide & the deuyll sayd. Thou neuer cōmaūded me soo folysshe a thynge / knowe thou for certayne yt yf yu haddest not receyued this daye the dyuyne thynges / none of you ne had reported vto ony man that ye I ha∣ue shewed / wenest thou that a man may seme & lyue / naye. In thende the monke & the conuers were reuyued by colde wa∣ter. &c. B. ¶Another example how a man con∣sydered yf after a hondreth thousande ye∣res the dampned sholde be delyuered frō helle. Cix. THe dysciple reciteth in his promp¦tuarye and sayeth that as a man moche seculer & delycatyf thought one ty¦me vnto hymself yf after a hondred thou∣sande yeres the soules of ye dampned shol¦de be delyuered frome paynes. And his thought answered hym that naye And af¦ter a hondred thousande yeres naye. And yf after as many of yeres as there are of droppes of water in the see naye. And in thynkynge suche thynges he was moche troubled. And as he was ferfull he began to vnderstonde & to apperceyue that the louers of ye worlde acursed & in derkenes the whiche renne in paynes eternelles for a lytell of tyme that they lyue in this worl¦de in ioyes transytoryes in the wyll of the flesshe. A man sholde here vnderstande yt whan the synners deye impenytentes / ob¦stynate / & abyde in theyr synnes & theym bere with them with takynge awaye the gylte of the sayd synnes by contrycyon & penaunce ne without askynge ony grace ne mercy of as moche as whan they lyue in this worlde & that they haue the tyme & the place that to doo. And for as moche as the soule is eternell and immortal the whiche shall be sente in to the fyre of helle there for to abyde / and that she shall haue with her euermore synne the whiche is ye matere of the fyre that it shall brenne. In
lyke wyse the soule shall euermore suffre payne and euermore shall brenne with ye sayd fyre the whiche neuer shall haue mer¦cy nor grace. &c. C. ¶Another example that it enioyed vn¦to a persone to be in a good bedde wtoute departynge. Cix IT is wryten in the promptuary of the dyscyple yt the bysshop of mar∣seylle sayd vnto hymselfe. Whan I was a louer of the worlde / & had gyuen me vn¦to worldly vanytes I began to thynke o∣ne tyme of the eternyte of the paynes of helle. And I sayd in my herte. Yf thou we¦re establed to lye the euermore in a bedde softe & delycatyf in suche manere that yu sholdest not departe for ony occasyon soo euer it sholde be / with greate payne shol∣dest thou susteyne that. How mayst thou than lye & brenne in suche payne eternell / intollerable in helle yf it falle that thou be theder sente. By this occasyon I lefte all and made me monke. &c. D. ¶Another example how a yongman made hym relygyous for to thynke yf his fayre membres sholde be the pasture and the matere of the fyre of helle. Cix IT is wryten in some bookes this ye whiche foloweth how the dyscyple recyteth in his promptuarye and sayeth that one tyme as mayster iordayn perse∣waded a yonge man noble fayre of mem∣bres that he sholde entre in to the ordre of prechers / he founde hym that he was not prompte that to do. And he sayd vnto hȳ in the ende of ye wordes. I praye the that thou do it incontynent for the loue of god or beholde thy handes and the other fayre membres / what dōmage shall that be yf so fayre membres shall be the pasture of ye fyre eternell. And he dyde it. For for this thynge he entred in to ye ordre and so con∣temned hymselfe for the loue of god. ¶Rapina. E. ¶Another example of ye punycyon of a knyghte the whiche toke awaye ye cowe of a woman wedowe. Cix. SOme maysters hathe wryten this the whiche foloweth how the dys∣cyple recyteth in his boke of sermons and sayth that one tyme a knyght toke away the cowe of a woman wedowe / & as she wepte and prayed hym to restore it for to nourysshe her chyldren. The knyghte an∣swered. Yf I toke her not another after me sholde come the whiche shold take her After her dethe by the suffraunce of god the sayd knyght was sene that fyrste ma∣ny grete deuylles hedeous and blacke hȳ tormented ryghte cruelly and horrybly / & specyally one amongest all the other ceas∣sed not to bete hym & to torment hȳ with out beynge wery / or without leuyng hym Than the sayd knyght hym demaunded Wherefore tormentest thou me more than all the other deuylles the whiche ben here He answered / yf I tormented the not a∣nother sholde the torment as thou saydest to the good woman of her cowe that thou tokest awaye / yf thou tokest her not ano∣ther sholde take her. &c. By this example
it is to vnderstonde that the sayd knyght was ryght dygne of payne and punycyon For he dyde vnto the good woman that yt he e wolde a man sholde do hym agayn the cōmaundement of god the whiche is loue thy neyghbour as thyselfe / ne do vn¦to another no more than thou woldeste a man shold do the. Vnde leuitici .xix. & ma. xxii. Diliges proximū tuū sicut teipsum Et thobie .iiii. Quod ad alio tibiodis fie∣ri. vide ne tu aliqn̄ alteri facias. Et ysido. Quod non vis pati nō facias quod nō vis tibi fieri alteri nū{quam} īferas. Non inferas alii mala ne patiaris similia. The sayd knyght had no wyll that a man sholde ta¦ke awaye his cowe as he dyde vnto ye said wedowe. And for yt was he punysshed &c. F. ¶Another example of a rauyssher in payne the whiche toke ye gote of a woman wedowe / and dyde of greate oppressyons vnto his subgectes. Cix. THe dyscyple recyteth in his promp¦tuarye and sayeth yt a relygyous of the ordre of cysternencis laboured vnto ye dethe / he sawe saynt benet the which ca¦me vnto the seperacyon of his soule / the whiche shewed vnto hym many houses of the saued and of the tormentes of ye dam¦ned. And amonges ye other he sawe a gre¦te prynce borne brennynge and resydente in a chayer of fyre. And before hym there was of fayre women ye whiche put theyr faces of fyre in his mouthe / & he brenned tyll vnto the nombryll / & he was bette hor¦rybly. This sayd man had be a puyssaunt prynces lecherous. After ye sayd lecherous he sawe another that ye deuylles dyde fle / And afterwarde they caste & spryncled of salte vpon hym. And vpon a gyrdyron of fyre brente hym & rosted. This sayd man had be a lorde cruell the whiche made of greate oppressyons vnto his subgectes / & made of demaūdes iniuste vnto ye poores Afterwarde ye sayd relygyous sawe ano∣ther the whiche rode a horse of fyre & had a token of fyre the whiche otherwyse men call a bokelet / & bare a gote of fyre. And after the tayle of the gote he bare an haby¦te of a monke. This sayd man was a ra∣uyssher the whiche toke the gote of a wo∣man wedowe. And whan he was seke he receyued ye habyte of a monke / not by cha¦ryte ne by wyll to abyde in the ordre yf he myght be hole. But by theadmonycyon of his frendes / and for that he drewe the ha∣byte of a monke after him. Afterwarde ye sayd relygyous sawe many other people the whiche susteyned many other paynes after the symylytude of the maners that they had synned in this worlde. It is that wherof the sage speke. Sapiē .xi. Per q̄ peccat homo: {per} hec et torquet{ur}. By ye thyng that a man synneth by that shal he be tor¦mented to thende that he haue euermore remors in his conscyence that ylle that he endureth its gyuen vnto hym for his pro∣pre synnes. Vnde Ysaye vltimo: et marci. ix. Vernus eorū. s. morsus consciētie non morit{ur} & ignis nō extinguit{ur}. A. ¶Another exāple how a myller was borne to se the tormentes of helle and af∣ter was brought agayne in to his body. MEn fynde by wrytynge this ye whi¦che foloweth how the dyscyple re¦cyteth in his promptuary & sayth that as a man preched of the crosse a carle vsurer bought agayne a vowe for moneye that he had made vnto ye sepulcre of iherusalē
And yode vnto the dyspensatour fraude∣lently / & gaue vnto hym for his sayd vow an hondred shelynges as he myghte wele gyue xlviii.li. without dysherytynge hys chyldren. And as this sayd carle sat at the tauernes he sayd vnto the other the whi∣che hadde made of vowes. Ye foles shall passe the see in peryll of your lyues & shal dyspende your substaunce I haue bought my vowe for fyue pounde / saued my lyfe & dwell sure in my house. And also I shal haue semblable rewarde as you. And in a nyght as he was in his bedde wt his wyfe he herde in his mylle mouynge tempeste In lyke wyse as the wheles gryndynge / And he sayd vnto his sone goo se who is in the mylle He yode & retourned anone wt grete fere. Of whom the mayster demaū∣ded. What hast thou sene. He answered I had so grete fere at the dore of the mylle / that I muste nedely come agayne. And he sayd yf the deuyll were there yet shold I go to see what it is. Than he caste hys vestiment vpon his sholdres & yode vnto the myll / he was all naked but of the said vestyment. He opened th dore and loked within / & sawe two horses ryght blacke / & a blacke man by them & said vnto ye car¦le hast the lepe vpon this hors the whiche is brought vnto the. That carle had fere / and the blacke man said vnto hym / what taryest thou / caste awaye thy vestymente and come / there was on the vestyment a crosse. He was dyspeyred at ye voyce and callynge of the deuyll kest awaye his ves∣tyment & lepte vpon the hors. And ye blac¦ke man lepte vpon the other hors / & they were ledde incontynent in dyuers places of paynes. In the whiche ye acursed sawe his fader & his moder. And many other yt he had knowen. And he sawe a knight na¦med Helye of the castell Horst the whiche was mounted vpon a cowe his backe to∣wardes the hornes. The whiche cowe ran on the one side and on the other & tormen¦ted horrybly the sayd knyght in strykyng hym with her hornes on the backe. Ad ye carle him demaunded wherfore he sustey¦ned suche payne / & he answered. I haue rauysshed this cowe & taken awaye from a woman wedowe without mercye. And therfore she me tormenteth without mer¦cy. Afterwarde there was shewed vnto ye sayd carle a sege of fyre and it was sayde vnto him. Thou shalt retourne euen now in to thy house. And after thre dayes thou shalte come agayne in to this place here / and thou shalte take thy rewarde in thys syege. After these wordes here the deuyll brought hym agayne in to his mylle And he founde his wyfe and his housholde as halfe deed / vnto whom he tolde that / that he had sene. And howe it happened. The preest was called for to chere hym and to counsayll hym to confesse hym / & to haue contrycyon. And he answere what prof∣fyte me these wordes here I ne maye re∣pente me. For I se that in vayne I shold confesse me. And I knowe that of neces∣syte it is to accomplysshe in me yt the whi¦che is dysposed. And the acursed deyed so withoute receyuynge the sacramentes of the churche. &c. B. ¶Another example that a knyght de∣yed / and after was brought agayne in to his body / the whiche recompted of a bryd¦ge ryght strayte vpon a water by ye whi∣che hym behoueth to passe. Cx. IT is wryten in ye dyalogue of saint gregorye that a knyght deyed and within a lytell after came agayn in to his body ye whiche told yt he had sene a bridge
vnder the whiche brydge ranne a water stynkynge & darke. And on the other syde of the brydge there was medowes smellȳ¦ge swete & aourned with all floures And in those medowes were assembled of peo∣ple clothed in whyte the whiche were ful∣fylled of swetnes & odour of the sayd flou¦res. And at the sayd brydge there was su¦che probacyon that whan ony of ye vniust there passed he fell in to the blacke water stynkynge / & the iuste passed tyll vnto the place delectable. And ye sayd knyght sawe there withoute the brydge a man named peter bounde with grete weyght of yron / And he demaunded wherfore he suffred suche payne. Answer was gyuen yt whan men gaue hym ony for to do vengeaunce he desyred it more to do by cruelte than by obedyence. Also the said knight sayd that he sawe a pylgrym ye whiche passed vpon the brydge all ouer of also grete auctory∣te as he had lyued in the worlde clenely. & he sawe another named steuen ye whiche as he passed the sayd brydge his fote slode in suche wyse that he than fell of the sayd brydge in lyke as halfe. And thenne some men ryght blacke lyfte them vp from the sayd water the whiche drewe hym down¦warde by the thyes. And some men ryght fayre clothed in whyte toke hym by the ar¦mes & they drewe him vpward / & as this stryfe was ye sayd knyght was put agaȳ in to his body. And he ne knewe whiche of them sholde vaynquysshe / but saynt Gre¦gorye sayth that it is to vnderstande that the ylles that he had done stroue agayne the almesdedes. And by the other the whi¦the drewe hym downwarde appered yt he had not parfytely resisted vnto the sȳnes of the flesshe. This exāple ought to drawe all persones to lyue clenely / purely / & ho∣lyly to thende that they may passe ye sayd brydge vnto the place delectable without fallynge in to the torment beforsaid. And the synners sholde also correcte theym of yll and to do penaunce / or they shall falle of the sayd brydge in to the sayd water / wherin they shall be punysshed. A. ¶Another example of the vysyon of Tongdalus ye whiche suffred many pay∣nes in purgatorye & sawe of the tormen∣tes of helle & after was brought agayne in to his body. Cxi. IN the yeres of our lorde a thousan¦de .xlix. There was a man named Tongdalus in a cyte of the lande of Irlō¦de. This sayd tongdalus was noble of ly¦nage / a fayre man yonge of age / curteys of all goodnes & of grete honour. He was grete and ryght appert of the arte of chy∣ualrye. Also he was wele spekynge / and good in dysportynge / & of asmoche more as he trusted in his beaute & his force of asmoche the lesse was it vnto hym of the helthe of his soule And yf ony man sayd ony thynge to hym for ye helthe of his sou∣le he was greuid with hȳ / he dyspyted the holy chirche / he ne daygned to beholde the poores in theyr indygence. More ouer he gaue that yt was his in playes for to haue the preyse of the worlde & many he hadde of frendes and of compaygnyons. And it came one daye that he sat at table wt one of his compaygnyons for to eate. And in∣contynent that he had taken of the mete he deyed of dethe sodayne and the body fel vnto the erthe / In lyke wyse as it neuer hadde hadde soule. The seruaūtes ranne vnto hym / the meete was taken awaye / wepynges / and lamentacyons were ma∣de / men range the belles The people was moche ameruaylled of the dethe the whi∣che
had taken this noble man so sodayn∣ly. He dyed the wednesday about ye houre of none. And from that houre tyll vnto ye saterdaye at none he abode so the body wt¦out buryenge for that that in the left par∣tye he had a lytel of hete. And on the sater¦daye at none the soule came agayne vnto the body. And so by the space of an houre he behelde those the whiche were by hym / vnto whom he made a token that he wol¦de haue the body of god. And after that he had receyued it he began to prayse god & to yelde vnto hym graces and sayd. Syr all puyssaūt more grete is thy mercy than all my synnes. And afterwarde said this worde the whiche is writen in the psalter That is to saye. How many trybulacions and ylles hast thou shewed vnto me / and I beynge conuerted thou hast quyckened me. And hast brought me agayne from ye depnesse of the erthe. And incontynente yt he hadde spoken tho wordes he departed / and gaue vnto ye poores that that he had and promysed aboue all thynges to leue the lyfe that he hadde before ledde / and al that he hadde sene and suffred he recomp¦ted it vnto vs and sayd. Whan my soule yssued out of my body she knewe & sawe ye synnes that she had done. And soo began she to doubte. But she knewe not what it was yt she sholde doo. And she wolde ren∣tre within my body / but she myghte not / But she ne durste goo oute / for she dredde her synnes of al partes / & she ne had trust in nothynge but vnto the grete mercye of god. And so began to wepe & to tremble / and she knewe not what she sholde do / & anone after / she sawe come vnto her soo grete nombre and multytude of deuylles that all the house stretes & places of ye cy∣te were full the whiche enuyrōned her on all partes / the whiche deuylles sayd. Sin¦ge we vnto this soule the songe of dethe / that we vnto her sholde synge / for she is the doughter of the dethe pardurable and the vyande of the fyre extynguyble enne∣mye of the lyght and frende of derkenes∣ses. And afterwarde and agayne her they grynned and whetted theyr tethe & sayd vnto her. Vnhappy soule here is ye people that thou haste chosen with whome thou shalte entre in to helle in pardurabylyte / Thou haste ben a nouryce of sclaundre / a louer of dyscorde that we loue. Wherfore arte yu not proude / wherfore ne knowest yu not thy lecherye / where is thy vanite and vayne gladnes / where ben thy laughyn∣ges ryght vntempred / where is thy force wherin thou trustedest so moche. Wherfo¦re ne shyttest thou not the eye / wherfore ne tryppest thou with thy fote. Wherfore ne thynkest thou the greate malyce that yu were wonte to doo in vanytees and syn∣nes. And as these forsayd deuylles sayde these wordes I loked towarde the heuen and sawe a ferre of a lyght scende in ly¦ke wyse as it hadde ben a sterre ryght cle¦re and shynynge In the whiche I hadde esperaunce that ther was some ayde that god sente vnto me. And as it approched vnto me I apperceyued wel that it was the aungell of god the whiche had kepte me in thys worlde. And whan he appro∣ched vnto me he also greted me swetely & sayd. God the salue Tongdalus. ¶And whan I sawe soo fayre a yongman ye whi¦che greted me so swetely by my propre na¦me / by grete Ioye I answered. Alas my lorde the dolours of helle hathe besette me aboute. And the panges of dethe hathe oc∣cupyed me / as it is wryten. Dolores in∣ferni circumdederunt me: preoccupauer̄t me laquei mortis. And the aungell answe¦red. Thou callest me nowe lorde and I ha¦ue be euermore with the / but Iuge yu not that I were dygne of suche grete honour.
The soule answerd. Syr I neuer se the before. And the aungel sayd. From ye hou¦re that thou were borne I haue euermore be with the in all places where thou were And thou ne woldest neuer bileue my coū¦sayll. Than the aungell lyfte vp his han∣de amonges the deuylles & shewed vnto hym one the whiche dyde vnto hym wors than the other & sayd vnto hym that is he the whiche coūsaylled the whiche thou by¦leued and dyde his wyll / but be thou sure that thou shalt haue the mercye of god / & thou shalt suffre a lytel of tormentes that thou hast deserued. Come thou after me / and that yt I shall shewe the so kepe thou it & put thou it in thy memorye / for thou shalt retourne agayne within thy body. / Whan the soule hadde herde this she was moche ferefull & she approched vnto the aungell. Whan ye deuylles herde this wor¦de they were madde. For they sawe that they ne had of puyssaunce to doo yll vnto the soule an blasphemed god in sayng yt he was not ryghtfull / for he yelded not vn¦to euery man after his deserte. And of the grete woodnes wherof they were ful they bet eche other. And they departed frome thens sorye and heuye as enraged. Than the aungell sayd vnto the sayd soule. Co∣me after me. A syr thou goest before / these deuylles shall take me behynde & shall le∣de me in to helle. The aungell answerde / Haue thou no fere for we haue more grete ayde than they ne haue. Si deus {pro} nobis qis cōtra nos. Yf god be for vs there is no∣ne that maye noye vs. It is wryten by ye prophete dauid Cadēt a latere tuo mille et decē millia a dextris tuis: ad te aūt non appropīquabit. verūtamē occulis tuis cō∣siderabis et retributionē pctō{rum} videbis. / That is to saye a thousande shall falle on thy left syde / & ten thousande on thy right side. Certaynly they shal not approche vn¦to the. Albeit thou shalt consyder by thyn eyes & thou shalte see the retrybucyon of thy synnes. And whan he had sayd these wordes they yode forthe. B. ¶Of the valeye. WHan they were gone longlye togy∣ders by so grete derkenesses yt they had no lyght / but yt the whiche pro∣ceded of the aungell / they came in to a va¦leye moche horryble / ye whiche was ryght depe and ful of brennynge coles. And abo¦ue that valeye there was a couerynge of yron brennynge of thyknes syxe fadome the whiche was more hote than yt whiche brente vnderneth. From thens yssued soo grete strenche the whiche greued more ye soule than all that yt he had before suffred Aboue the sayd couerynge dyscended ma¦ny chetyues soules the whiche there were fryed as a man fryeth bacon in the panne And afterwarde they were strayned tho∣rowe the coueryng as waxe / & fell and dys¦cended in to the welle of the sayd valeye / vpon the brennynge coles where they we¦re tormēted of a newe torment / thus sayd the aungell. This payne suffreth those the whiche haue kylled faders or moders / or other people by delyberacyon or dede. and after this tormente they shall be ledde in to more grete: but thou ne shalt suffre this said torment albeit that thou hast wele de¦serued it. C. ¶Of the beest horryble. AFter they entred in to a way mo∣che horryble croked & harde. And whan they had gone longe in derkenes / ye soule sawe a ferre a beest moche horrible &
ferefull of ye gretenes incredyble / more gre¦te than all the mountaynes yt he had before seen. She had the eyen as grete fyres bren∣nȳge / & had the mouthe so grete yt it semed vnto hym yt there myght well entre .x. M. men of armes. There yssued out of his mou¦the fyre inextynguyble / & stynke incompa∣rable. Grete multytude of soules entred by ye mouthe in to the wombe of the sayd beest the whiche soules cryed horrybly of tormen¦tes that they were in. And before the sayd beest there was grete multytude of deuyls the whiche bette and tourmented the sayd soules & after put them within ye sayd beest And whan the soule had longe beholden ye sayd beest she was moche ferefull & sayd to the aungell. Syr wherfore approche we vn¦to this tourment. The aungell answered. We may not go by other way / for none esca¦peth this tourment but those that god hath chosen to be in his cōpany. This beest that yu seest is called Acherons the whiche tour∣menteth all the auarycyous. Of this beest it is wryten. Absorbebit fluuiū et non mi∣rabitur / & habet fuditiam {quod} influat iorda∣nis in os eius. That is to say. He shall swa∣lowe a streme or water & it shall be no mer∣uayle / & also haue affyaunce that the water of Iordan renneth yet through her mouthe And whan they had spoken this they came before the sayd beest / & the aungell depar∣ted and left the soule amonge the deuylles. And incontynent the deuylles beset her a∣bout and there tourmented her with grete tourmentes as woode dogges. And after∣warde they ledde her wt them in to ye wom∣be of the sayd beest. Therin she suffred ma∣ny bytynges of dogges / of beres / of lyons / of serpentes / & of other beestes that she had neuer seen ne knowen before / & there had of grete tourmentes of deuylles / brennyn∣ge of fyre / sharpenes of sulphre / derkenesse woundes / to plundge / to crye / and grete ha¦bondaunce of dysease and of trybulacyon. There was the sayd soule accused of her sȳ¦nes yt she had committed. And for the grete heuynes wherof she was full she strake her selfe on ye chekes tare them with ye nayles of her owne handes / & wende there to be dā¦pned pardurably. And anone she foūde her selfe out of the sayd beest / but she wyst not how she came out / & she was layde ferre of moche feble. Afterwarde wtin a whyle of ty¦me she opened her eyen & sawe her aungel by her. Than had she grete Ioye albeit that she was moche tourmented / & began to gy¦ue praysynges vnto our lorde of his mercy And the aungell touched her & comforted her. &c. D. ¶Of the ouen with the flambe. ¶Afterwarde they yode another waye / & whan they were gone longely by derkenes they sawe an hous moche hygh the whiche was rounde as an ouen. In the sayd hous there was well a thousande wyndowes / from the whiche yssued fyre strong / sharpe & moche hote. Whan the soule sawe ye sayd hous she had grete feere & sayd vnto the aū¦gell. A syr we approche to the gates of dethe Alas caytyfe who shall delyuer me fro this tourment. The aungell answered. From ye fyre the whiche yssueth out by these wyndo¦wes thou shalt be delyuered / but in to the hous it behoueth to entre. Whan they were approched they sawe wtin the sayd hous in the myddes of the fyre grete multytude of deuylles the whiche helde axes / knyues / ha¦chettes & other instrumentes of yron shar∣pe for to tourment the soules yt were there of the whiche soules there was grete multy¦tude. Than sayd the soule vnto the aungel Syr I pray the yf it please the yt thou dely¦uer me fro this tourment / & in all the other where thou shalt lede me I graunte me to be there tourmented. And the aungell sayd This tourment is greter than al those that
thou hast seen / but yet shalte thou se greter Now entre here for the deuils tary for ye as dogges enraged. Than the soule began to quake and to tremble of ye grete feere yt she had & prayed the aungell moche yt he wolde make hym to passe the sayd tourment / but it vayled hym nothynge. And whan the de∣uylles herde yt she was graunted vnto thē for to tourment they toke her with theyr in¦struments & tormented her sharpely. The mayster of this hous had to name Phister∣nus. His hous was ful of fyre brennynge in the whiche soules strayned theyr tethe and wayled for the grete doloures that the suf∣fred. And there were men & women / not al onely of people of the worde / but also of re¦lygyon. There was this soule tourmented the whiche sayd yt she had wel deserued that yt she had suffred. But whan it pleased god she founde herselfe out of the sayd tourmēt & she wyst not in what maner. Thn she ad¦uysed her aungell by her to whome she sayd A syr where is the worde that the prophete Dauyd speth. Mia dn̄i plena est terra. That is to say. The erthe is full of the mer∣cy of god. Than the aungell answered and sayd. By those wordes many soules ben de¦ceyued. God is ryghtwyse though that he be full of mercy / & many syn̄es he vengeth and punissheth / & also he pardoneth. Yf god pardoned all the synnes wherfore sholde ye man be Iust. And yf a man ne dredde ye tor¦ments wherfore sholde he drede to do syn̄e & his wyll. And what sholde it nede yt these synners sholde repente theym and confesse them of theyr synnes yf they ne drede god. God by his grete mercy spareth ye synners in theyr lyfe and tarieth them for that they sholde do penaunce. But yf they ben obsty∣nate in theyr synnes & wyll not reuerte he theym punyssheth for theyr synnes after theyr dethe. And god sōtyme taketh awaye the goodes temporelles from the Iust for to punysshe them temporally of some outra¦ges that they haue done / and also to then∣de that they enpryde them not. But he ke∣peth vnto them the goodes perdurables of his glory. E. ¶Of the cruell beest & of the ysy ponde. ¶After the aungell ledde ye soule in to ano∣ther place wherin they sawe a beest moche meruaylous the whiche had two fete & two wynges & the necke ryght longe. And his neb and his nayles were as yren / and from his sayd neb yssued a flambe a fyre by ryght grete sharpenes & force. And the sayd beest was vpon a ponde full of stronge yse. The whiche beest deuoured ye soules within his wombe in such maner yt they became as vn¦to nothynge by the tourmentes yt they suf∣fred. Afterwarde he put theym out of his wombe wtin the yse of the sayd ponde. And there were they tourmented of newe tour∣ment. And all the soules the whiche into ye ponde descended were in throwes in lyke∣wyse as women with childe. And not alone¦ly the women / but also the men as the wo∣men. And within theyr belyes they felte the sharpe bytynges that the serpentes made / of the whiche they were engryped. And the¦re were the caytyues soules tourmented. And whan ye tyme came & approched that they sholde chylde they cryed so horrybly yt they fylled hell of noyse and of howlynges. Than they chylded serpentes as well the men as the women. And the sayd serpen∣tes yssued not onely by the membres wher∣by ye women chylde naturally. But also by the armes / the fete / and all the other mem∣bres yssued out the horryble beestes ye whi∣che hadde hedes of fyre brennynge moche sharpe / wherwith they tourmented ryght cruelly the sayd soules from whens they ys¦sued. And the sayd beestes hadde horryble tayles and nedles about theyr tayles made as they were crochettes and hokes made
as yf they were crochettes. And whan they yssued from ye sayd caytyues soules yf they myght not drawe theyr tayles after them for the hokes they retorned they nebbes & smote the soules & gnawed them vnto the synewes and bones / and of the grete payne and tourment that they suffred they keste so grete and horryble cryes that they were herde vnto the heuen. Morouer ye sayd sou∣les were replenysshed of dyuers maners of beestes on theyr membres the whiche dyde them ete and gnawe vnto the bones. And they had tonges the whiche fastened wtin ye sayd soules tyll vnto the lyghtes. This pay¦ne sustayne the fals monkes / chanons / the false nonnes & these other benefyced of ho∣ly chyrche the whiche haue not well kepte theyr bodyes from euyll doyenge / ne theyr mouthes from euyll saynge & spekynge. Al¦so those the whiche hath vsed lechery sustey¦ne this payne & tourment. And for that / yt thou arte culpable it behoueth the to sustay∣ne this sayd tourment. Whan the deuylles herde this worde they toke the sayd soule & gaue it vnto the sayd beest to torment and to deuoure. And whan she was in tourmēt as the other soules and yt she was engriped with serpentes as the other / and whan the tyme came yt she sholde chylde the aungell came vnto her & touched her / and she was incontynent hole / and sayd vnto her / come after me. F. ¶Of the valey of smythes. ¶Afterwarde they yode in to another way moche horryble & dyseasefull full of so grete derkenes that they had no lyght but of the clerenes of the aungell. And it semed yt they descended from a ryght hygh mountayne in to a grete and depe valey. And the more that they yode the lesse hadde the soule of es¦peraunce for to retorne vnto lyfe. Than the soule sayd vnto the aungell. Syr whyder go we. The aungell answered. This waye ledeth vnto dethe. And ye soule sayd. What is that than that the scrypture sayth. La∣ta est via que ducit ad mortem et multi sūt quuntrant per eā. That is to saye that the way the whiche is large ledeth vnto dethe: and many there ben the whiche entre and go by that way. The aungell sayd. Of this speketh not the scrypture / but of the cursed waye of the worlde wherby men comen  to this way. And whan they were descēded in to the sayd valey moche depe they sawe there of forges. Than the aungell sayd vn∣to ye soule. The mayster of this valey is cal∣led Vulcain the whiche by his engin and fal¦senes hath casten many soules in to paynes and tourmentes. Than sayd the soule vnto the aungell. Syr shall I suffre this tormēt The aungell answered / ye / thou shalte suf∣fre this tourment. And whan the deuylles herde that worde they beset the soule about and toke it with theyr Instruments of yren that they helde / and sayd vnto the holy aun¦gell none harme / and keste it in to a chym∣ney full of fyre brennynge. And began too blowe the fyre of theyr furneys in lykewyse as men blowe whan the yren is in the fur∣neyse. And so they tourmented the soules yt whiche were there tyll that they came as to nothynge. And whan they were so brent & tourmented they toke the sayd soules with theyr Instrumentes of yren .xx. an hōdred or two hondred and layde them on an hepe vpon an anuelde of yren / and the deuylles the whiche were in other forges sayd. Cast vnto vs these caytyues soules we shall yet tourment them agayne. Than the deuilles kest them vnto them agayn the whiche we¦rein the other forges. And after that they hadde ben there stongly payned and tour¦mēted they kest them vyolently vnto thos∣of the fyrst forges. And before that they ca∣me to the grounde they were taken agayne and so they keste theym from one vnto an∣other
and tourmented tyll vnto that / yt the skinnes / the flesshe / and the bones came as vnto nothynge. Of this mater is wryten. Prouerbiorū .ix. Parata sunt derisoribus supplicia / et mallei percutientes stultorum corporibus. After that the caytyues soules were so tourmented as it is sayd they desy∣red the dethe but they myght not deye. Vn∣to this purpose it is wryten. Apocalipsis .ix. In diebus illis querent homines mortem et non inuenient eam / et desiderabunt mo∣ri et mors fugiet ab eis. And whan the sayd soule had suffred longly these tourmentes the aungel came vnto her and toke her and had her out of the fyre where she was / and sayd vnto her. How felest yu thy selfe now Remembre the that for as moche as thou hast done thy wyll and the delyte of thy bo¦dy thou hast suffred soo grete tourmentes. But the soule had not soo moche force that she myght answer one worde for the grete tourment that she had souffred. Than the aungell sayd vnto the soule. Illud psalmi. Dominus mortificat et viuificat deducit ad inferos et reducit. Comfort the / for our lorde quyckeneth and mortifyeth / ledeth in to helles and bryngeth agayne. And al be it that the tourmentes that thou haste seen ben moche grete yet shalte thou se moche more greter from the whiche thou shalt be delyuered by the mercy of god. And knowe thou that al those soules that thou hast seen here abydeth the Iugemente of god. But those the whiche thou shalte se from hensfor¦the ben all redy Iuged. Goo we now for∣warde for thou arre not yet comen vnto ye paynes of hell. And the aungel touched her and heled as he hadde ben accustomed for to do. &c. G. ¶Of the pytte of hell. ¶After that they entred in to a waye / and whan they were a lytell gone forwarde in spekynge one vnto the other there came to the soule sodayne horrour and colde intolle¦rable & stynke and derkenes more thycket than those before / trybulacyon and anguys¦she so grete that it semed vnto ye soule that all the foundementes of the erthe trembled vnder her fete and sayd vnto the aungell. Syr wherfore is it that I ne may holde me on my fete as I haue acustomed to do. And whan she had sayd this she ne myght reme¦ue from the place for the grete feere that she had / and incontynent the aungell departed in suche maner that she myght noo morese hym / and forthwith she began to dyspayre For she founde that the whiche is wryten. Ecclesiastes .ix. Nec opus / nec ratio / nec sa¦pientia / nec scientia erunt apud inferos que tu {pro}peras. That is to say that in hell there ne is operacion / ne reason / ne wysdome / ne connȳge wherby man may ayde hym. The caytyf soule was in lykewyse / for she might not helpe herselfe / the whiche herde terry∣ble cryes and howlynges of soules / & thon∣der so horryble that no man may thynke it ne tongue declare the horryble crye and the noyse that there was. Vnto this purpose god speketh in the gospell. Illud math .xxii & .xxiii. Ibi erit fletus et stridor dentium. Than ye soule loked about her for to knowe yf she myght se the way wherby they were comen / and she sawe a grete square dyche in lykewyse as a cysterne. And from that dyche yssued oute a pyler of flambe and of smoke togyders moche horryble and styn∣kynge. And that pyler of fyre was so hygh that it stretched vnto the heuens. And in yt flambe there was grete multitude of soules and of deuylles togyders the whiche moun¦ted with the sayd flambe in hyghe in lyke∣wyse as lytel flambes. And of tourmentes the whiche they suffred they came as vnto nothynge / and after that they fell agayne in to the dyche tyll vnto the botome. Vnto the purpose of this sayeth the psalmyste.
Tu vero reduces me in puteū interitus. And whan the soule had beholden this she wolde haue drawen her abacke / but she ne myght lyft her fete from the grounde. And whan she had assayed many tymes to re∣moeue her and that she might not she was moche ferefull / and of the grete wodenes yt she hadde she tare and rent her chekes with her owne handes and nayles & cryed. Alas caytyfe wherfore may not I deye. And the deuylles the whiche mounted with ye sayd flambe herde ye sayd soule in suche wyse crye soo they be set her about with theyr instru∣mentes of yron wherwith they tourmēted the soules and sayd in this wyse. Caytyfe soule worthy of payne and tourment from whens art thou comen hyder / thou ne hast yet nothynge felte ne suffred / thou shalt en¦dure now that yt thou arte worthy by ye syn¦nes that thou hast commytted. From the whiche tourment thou ne mayst neuer de∣parte ne within it deye / but euermore thou shalt lyue and brenne in tourment without lyght / conforte ne helpe. And frō now forth thou ne mayst haue mercy. For thou art co∣men vnto the gates of dethe / and thou shalte be borne streyght in to the tourments of hell. He that hath brought the hyder hath de¦ceyued the / now lete hym delyuer the from our handes yf he can / for thou shalt se hym nomore. And they sayd the one vnto the o∣ther. Wherfore tary we so longe that we ne ne gyue this soule vnto Lucyfer for to de∣uour it / and so they thretened it of dethe par¦durable. And these deuylles aboue sayd we¦re blacke as coles with horryble lokes / and theyr eyen were as the lampes brennynge. And theyr tethe as whyte as the snowe / & they hadde tayles lyke as scorpyons / and theyr clawes of yren and grete large wyn∣ges. And whan they hadde sayd these wor∣des the holy aungell appered vnto the sayd soule and sayd vnto her. Enioye ye dough∣ter of lyght for thou shalte haue mercy and not Iugement. Thou shalt se of grete tour¦mentes and paynes / but thou shalte suffre none. Come than after me & I shall shewe vnto the the ryght cursed ennemye of hu∣mayne lygnage. Those the whiche ben the∣re haue no lyght and they shall not se the / but thou shalte se them well and theyr tour¦mentes. H. ¶Of the prynces of derkenes and of theyr cursed felawes the whiche ben in paynes. ¶After these thynges spoken and seen the the soule approched vnto hym and sawe the prynce of derkenes in the botome of helle. and what and how grete tourmentes she sawe there the entendement ne may com∣prehende it / and a man ne may expresse it ne declare. That is to say yf he had an hon∣dred hedes / and that euery heed hadde an hondred tongues yet they might not recom¦pte the paynes of hell. There was one the ryght worste deuyll the whiche was more greter than all the beestes tht he had seen before. The whiche was blacke as a rauen. He hadde the fourme of the body of a man from the fete vnto the heed excepte that he hadde wel a thousande handes. And he had a tayle well an .C. cubytes longe / and .x. of gretenes. And he hadde nayles of yren gre∣te and longe as well on the fete as on ye han¦des longer & greter than the speres of kny∣ghtes. His nebbe was moche longe and gre¦te. His tayle was right longe and sharpe all full of pryckles sharpe poynted for to gre∣ue and tourment the myserables soules. And that moost horryble deuyll laye vpon a gredyron of yren / vnder the whiche there was grete habundaunce of brennynge so∣les. Also there was grete multytude of de∣uylles the whiche blewe and kyndeled the fyre. About that ennemy there were so ma∣ny deuylles and of cursed & myserable sou∣les
that no man myght beleue that of all ye worlde from the begynnynge myght be ys¦sued and brought forthe soo many soules. And that deuyl was bounde by euery Ioyn¦ture of al his membres with grete chaynes of yren and of copre brennynge. And of the grete tourment and vehement woodnesse wherof he was full he tourned hym from ye one syde vnto the other / and stretched out his handes in the multytude of the sayd sou¦les and toke them and streyned them in ly¦kewyse as men may do a clustre of grapes in theyr handes for to make the wyne come forthe. And in suche maner he strayned thē that he eyther brake theyr heedes / or theyr fete / or handes / or some other membres. Af¦terwarde he syghed and blewe and dysper∣peled the sayd soules in to many of ye tour∣mentes of the fyre of hell. And incontynent that pytte or welle wherof we haue before spoken kest stynke & horryble flambe. And whan that cruell beest drewe agayne vnto hym his brethe all the sayd soulles that he hadde shedde with flambes and sulphre fell and entred in to his mouthe / the whiche he deuoured. And whan some soules escaped hym by aduenture bytwene his handes he smote them with his tayle. And that deuyll the whiche in suche wyse tourmented ye sou¦les horrybly was tourmented aboue all o∣ther. Than the aungell sayd vnto the soule This deuyl that thou seest here is called Lu¦cyfer the whiche is the fyrste creature that god made the whiche was in the delyces of paradyse before that he descended from he∣uen / and yf he were not boūde he wolde do many euylles and perturbacyōs. And they the whiche thou seest the whiche ben wt him there are a partye of the aungelles of derke¦nesse. And the other partye ben men & wo∣men the whiche ben descended from Adam the whiche ben all redy Iuged the whiche a¦byde many the whiche haue renyed Ihesu cryst / or dooth the operacyons of them the whiche renye hym. Here ben the yll prelates and prynces of whome it is wryten sapien∣tie .vi. Potentes potenter tormenta patiē∣tur / fortioribus autē fortior instat cruciatio That is to say that those that ben myghty in dygnyte and in power shall suffre tour∣mentes with grete puyssaūce. That is whe¦re as they haue myscheuously vsed the puys¦saunce that god hath gyuen vnto them. All the other tourmentes that thou hast seen al be it that they ben ryght grete yet are they nothynge to compte in regarde of this here And the soule sayd. Certes syr thou sayest true / for I am more greued and tourmen∣ted to se alonely the tourment and to fele ye stynke the whiche is there than all the tour∣mentes that I haue suffred hyder to. Wher¦fore I pray the yf it please the that thou ta¦ke me from hens. Also I se many of my fe∣lawes that I loued moche and helde theyr company moche dere where as I haue now grete horrour for to se them. And certaynly I vnderstande and knowe that yf the gre∣te grace and mercy of god were not my so∣cour that I haue deserued for my synnes to be punysshed and tourmented eternally as they ben. And the aungell sayd vnto hym. O my blyssed come and conuerte the in thy rest / for god hath done well vnto the / thou shalt not suffre these tourments here. And thou shalt se them no more yf thou forgete not the thynges that thou hast seen / and yf thou deserue them not agayne. The soule of the sayd Tongdalus sawe many other tourmentes / and of the Ioyes of the saued the whiche hath be left bycause of shortnes for they ben moche longe to recounte and wryte. ¶By the scriptures and examples before sayd it dooth appere that the synners inobedyentes vnto god sholde correcke thē and amende whyles that they lyue in this worlde yf that they wyll escape and eschue
the inestymable tourmentes of hell and ge¦te the realme and the glory eternall. Vnto the whiche glory we may goo cum illo qui est benedictus in infinita secula seculorum. Amen. ¶Ihesus. A. ¶Examples that the name of Ihesus dooth many goodnesses. And how it de∣lyuered a man fro many perylles & tour¦mentes. Cxii IT is wryten in many bokes that as saynt Patryke preched in Ir∣londe he prayd god deuoutly that he wolde shewe hym some token by the whiche the wycked yll men myght haue feere and also repente theym. And sodaynly a ryght grete hole or pyt ap¦pered / and it was reueled vnto hym that ye place of purgatory was there. In the whi∣che place yf ony wolde descende he sholde haue none other payne. Many the whiche herde this thynge therin entred the whiche came neuer agayne. And a man named Ny¦colas the whiche hadde commytted many synnes there descended too thende that he myght repente hym of his synnes. And he founde first an oratory and whyte monkes the whiche sayd vnto him. Be thou stedfast and cōstaunt. For it behoueth the to sustay∣ne many temptacyons. And he theym de∣maunded what remedy he myght haue a∣gaynst the sayd temptacyons. They answe¦red whan thou felest thyselfe tourmented with paynes crye hastely. O iesu christe ad¦iuua me. That is to say. O Ihesu cryst hel∣pe me. And whā that he was departed frō them the deuylles ranne sodaynly vpon hȳ in lykewyse as wylde beestes famysshed. And as they dyde in this wyse vnto him he recorded hym of his counceyle and sayd. O iesu christe adiuua me. And incontynent he ne wyst where the beestes became. He yode ferdermore and founde a ryght grete fyre / in to the whiche the deuylles kest hym. And incontynent that he hadde sayd. Iesu chri∣ste adiuua me / forthwith the fyre was put out and quenched. He walked yet ferder & sawe a welle ryght depe from the whiche ys¦sued smoke and grete clamour of soules the whiche were tourmented. And whā the de∣uylles hadde casten hym within it he cryed Iesu christe adiuua me. That is too saye. Ihesu cryst helpe me / & forthwith he was delyuered. At the last he sawe a brydge that was ryght narowe and strayte. And there he hadde grete terroure / the whiche brydge hym behoued too passe / but he myght not. And he sette one of his fete vpon ye brydge and sayd. Iesu christe adiuua me. And soo he sayd at euery steppe tyll that he had pas∣sed the brydge on the other syde. And whā that he was past he came vnto a fayre me∣dowe wherin grewe many fayre and dele∣ctable floures / of the which floures and me dowe proceded good odoures and smelles. And afterwarde he came agayne vnto lyfe and .xxx. dayes passed he came vnto para∣dyse by the inuocacyon of our blyssed sauy∣our and redemptour Ihesu cryst. ¶Vnto the example of the abouesayd man the whi¦che was delyuered from all tourmentes & paynes incontynent that he hadde called ye helpe of Ihesus. In lykewyse thou man & woman call deuoutly the name of ye blyssed lambe Ihesus in all aduersytees / fortunes tourmentes / losses / temptacyons / sekenes∣ses / necessytees / anguisshes / perylles / infyr¦mytees / and thȳges doubtables and well shall come vnto the. This name Ihesus is interprete sauyour. Iesus īterpretatur sa¦uator. For by ye meryte of his passyon he sa∣ued al he worlde. He brake hell / saued & de¦lyuered all the good persones the whiche
were in the lymbe of the holy faders & ope∣ned paradyse vnto all good crystyens. Also Ihesus is the kynge of kynges / the Iuge of Iuges / and of all grete and lytell. It is he that gyueth Ioy and beatytude eternal vn¦to the good / and that punyssheth and dam¦neth the euyll. Ihesus is holy and debonay¦re vnto the good / & also he is terryble and ruell vnto the euyll. And therfore sayth ye psalmyst. Sanctū et terribile nomen eius initium sapientie timor domini. Also the na¦me of Ihesus is in excellēce aboue all other Vn̄ paul. ad phyl. Vocatū est nomen eius super oē nomen. Also the name of Ihesus is loued and dredde aboue all names / and in namynge hym all creatures reasonables sholde bowe the knee / be it in paradyse / in this worlde / or in hell. Vn̄ paul. ad phi. In nomine iesu omne genu flectat{ur} celestrium / terrestrium / et infernorum. The men and women of this worlde call hym in theyr be∣synesses and necessytees / and the deuylles of hell drede hym. For to be shorte the name of Ihesus ought to be loued / honoured / cal¦led / dredde / and redouted / for it is replenys¦shed with bounte / beaute / and holynes infi¦nyte & inenarrable. That is the whiche pas¦seth all entendementes. &c. B. ¶Another example how the deuyl was chased from a woman in ye name of Ihe¦sus. Cxii. MEn fynde by wrytynge this ye whiche foloweth how the dy¦cyple recyteth in the boke of his promptuary & sayth that a womā demonyacle was on a tyme brought vnto saynt Bernarde vnto thende that he sholde hele her. And the de∣uyll before many the whiche were presente sayd. O that I wolde goo oute with good wyll from my lytell lambe here. My lorde wyll not that I go out. And saynt Bernar¦de sayd. Whiche is that lorde. He answered The creatour of all. And saynt Bernarde sayd. Sawest thou hym euer. And ye deuyl sayd. I haue seen him in glory. And ye saynt sayd. Thyder thou woldest retorne. And he sayd in mockynge. The houre is to late for to go thyder. Than saynt Bernarde com∣maunded hym in the name of Ihesu cryst that he sholde go out. And the deuyll sayd. O name terryble thou me constraynest to goo forthe / and incontynent he wente oute and the woman was heled of her infyrmy∣tee. &c. C. ¶Another example how that the name of Ihesus vaynquyssheth ye tēptacyons of the deuyll. Cxii THe dyscyple recyteth in his ser∣mons this the whiche foloweth the whiche is also wryten in o∣ther bokes & sayth that a man was meke and had of custome that euery tyme yt the deuyll gaue vnto hȳ ony temptacyons he yode vnto prayer and called god in sayge. Iesu dulcis miserere mei. Swete Ihesus haue mercy on me and helpe me. And forthwith the deuyll depar∣ted from hym. ¶And on a tyme a holy fa∣der herde that the deuyll sayd that the de∣uylles were repelled by the vertue of this worde Ihesus. D. ¶Another example how ye name of Ihe¦sus gyueth many vertues. Cxii. SOme maysters wryteth this the whiche foloweth how ye dis¦cyple reciteth in the boke of his promptuarye and sayeth that a yonge man moche deuoute and Innocent made orayson and prayer in
demaundynge that he myght haue ye loue of god. And the aungell of god gaue vnto hym a lytell scrolle wryten in this maner. Iesu christe fili dei viui propitius esto mi∣chi pctōri. And sayd vnto hym. Open thy mouthe and eate this wrytynge / by ye ver∣tue wherof the deuylles shall be vaynquys∣shed / the heuens ben opened / the synnes bē taken away / the trynyte is drawen to / and the aungelles serueth him deuoutly. Whan the yonge man had eten the sayd wrytynge he had in hym all tho thynges as he was en¦formed. E. ¶Another example how by the name of Ihesus a clerke was delyuered and a thefe conuerted hym. Cxii. IT is writen in the promptuary of the dyscyple that there was a cler¦ke lecherous and vycyous ye whi∣che as he wolde go to commyt his synne it befell that as he passed by a forest wherin there was hydde a thefe ye whiche spared no persone but yt he slewe hȳ or dyspoyled him. And whan the sayd thefe herde hym passe he sayd. What arte thou yt passest here by. The clerke answered. I am the poore seruaunt of Ihesu cryst for drede that he ne knewe what to answere. Than the sayd thefe sayd. I demaunde the what thou arte. The clerke answered. I am the indygne seruaunt of Ihesu cryst. The thefe demaunded hym thyrdly / what arte thou. And the clerke sayd agayne. I am the vn∣prouffytable seruaunt of Ihesu cryst. And ye thefe thought vnto hym selfe / of whome arte thou seruaunte / and he sayd vnto the clerke. For the loue of Ihesus goo thou in peas. And the thefe in mummelynge sayd vnto hymselfe. Ihesus. Ihesus. Ihesus. And by the vertue & power of the holy na¦me Ihesus the thefe was conuerted. And after that he neuer commytted theft ne ho¦mycyde. In the mornynge he yode to con∣fessyon and sayd that for heryng the name Ihesus he was conuerted / and the clerke in the namynge of Ihesus was preserued. The whiche sayd blyssed be ye name of Ihe¦sus / for by ye name of hym I shall absteyne me from synne. F. ¶Another exāple how a relygyous was heled of the feuers by the vertue of ye na∣me Ihesus. Cxii MEn fynde by wrytinge this yt whiche foloweth how the dys¦cyple recyteth in the boke of his promptuary and sayeth yt a frere mynour had herde ma¦ny myracles of the name of Ihesus. And as this sayd relygyous was tourmented of ye euyll of feuers he wrote this name Ihesus within the water & after dranke it & incon∣tynent the feuer left hym. This thyng hap∣pened in Irlonde G. ¶Another example how by the name of Ihesus a woman pardoned vnto her en¦nemyes. Cxii IT is wryten in the boke of gyftes that a woman ne myght be apea∣sed. And her husbāde wrote in her forhede the name of Ihesus / & in contynent she forgaue all. H. ¶Another example ye one wolde not par¦don for the loue of Ihesus. Cxii THe dyscyple reciteth in his prom¦ptuary yt there was a mā obsty¦nate vnto whome men sayd on a tyme. Pardon thy rancoures / & enmytees for ye loue of Iesus
He answered. Neyther for god ne for ye de∣uyll I ne may pardon them though that I sholde entre in to helle perpetually. And a frere approched vnto hym wt deuocion and wrote in his forhede wt his fynger Ihesus nazarenus / and incontynent the synner be¦gan to wepe & sayd. For the loue of Ihesus I pardon all. I. ¶Another example how the temptaciō of the deuyll was taken away with ye to∣ken of the crosse / & in amynge ye blyssed Ihesus. Cix. THe dyscyple recyteth in his ser∣mons this the whiche foloweth the whiche is also wryten in o∣ther bokes & sayth that the de¦uyll tempted a man & his wyfe so terrybly yt they wolde hange themself to thende that they sholde euade the miseryes of this worlde. And as they were heuy of theyr temptacyons of the deuyll yt they ne myght slepe ne ete the one demaunded of ye other the causes of theyr heuynesses. And they sayd eche to other yt they wolde hange thēselfe. And after yt they appoynted theyr cordes for to hange them the woman coun¦ceyled her husbonde yt they sholde drynke of good wyne yt they had before theyr dethe to thende yt they myght deye the easelyer. And so they agreed / & as they wolde drynke ma¦de the sygne of the crosse in ye name of Ihe∣sus. The deuyll fledde & the temptacyons were taken awaye. After contrycyon they dyde penaunce / and well they ended theyr dayes. K ¶Another example that in namynge ye name of Ihesus the deuyll is repelled & his temptacyons & persuacions taken a way. Cxii. MEn fynde by wrytynge that ye deuyll tempted often tymes a man the whiche by ye councey¦le of sages yode in orayson & cal ed the name of Ihesus as soone as had perceyued the temptacion and sayd. O swete Ihesu haue mercy on me & helpe me & forthwith the deuyll departed & the temptacyon left hym. L. ¶Another example of a noble man the whiche pardoned ye homycyde of his bro∣der. And the crucyfyx enclyned his heed in the chyrche Cxii. THe dyscyple recyteth in his boke that it is wryten that a man sle¦we the broder of a noble man & afterwarde fledde and left the countre. And it befell that as ye noble man yode through the countree with grete company of people wtout thynkynge on the sayd dede met in a felde the homycy¦de the whiche had slayne his broder. He dre¦we his swerde hastely for to sle hym. And ye sayd homycyde fell prostrate vnto the erthe and cryed. Right noble man haue mercy on me for the loue of Ihesus the whiche is py∣teable & hath redemed the worlde by his de¦the. Hastely the sayd noble man toke him to wepe and withdrewe his hande & his swer¦de without strykynge hym. And as he was reproued of his taryeng and foly of the peo¦ple agayne he stretched out his hande for to smyte hym the whiche was prostrate / and the culpable demaunded pardon and remis¦syon of his mysdede in the name of Ihesus And secondly he withdrewe his handes. Thyrdly he was blamed of his people for yt he had not slayne hym. And ye vnhappy dre¦dynge yt dethe humbly requyred pardon a∣gayne. And ye noble man of warre & nobler of herte sayd. I pardon the the dethe of my
brode. And without tarienge he herde ryn¦ge to a masse yt day & entred in to ye chyrche And the tymes he bowed his knees before the crucyfyxe. And an holy man yt was in the chyrche sawe yt the crucyfyxe enclyned the heed humbly at euery of the sayd times yt the sayd noble man bowed ye knees. Thā he that had seen alonely the sayd thinge cal¦led & drewe asyde the sayd noble man and demaunded him what he was. I am borne in the londe / and sayd a noble knyght. And the holy man sayd. Dere frende hyde yu no∣thynge fro me. Wherin trustest thou moost to haue deserued vnto the dyuyne mercy. Than the knyght sayd. I am a synner and haue gyuen me to the worlde / and nothyn∣ge is aduysed in me but yt suche a case hap∣pened me this day. And he it vnto hym de∣clared. Also the holy man tolde vnto hym that yt he had seen / & exhorted hym to be py∣teous / mercifull / and good. Her Guillerm{us} dicit. M. ¶Another example how Ihesu cryst wolde not pardon one deed tyll that he had demaunded pardon of his broder yt he had offended. Cxii. IT is wryten in the lyfe of faders that the prouyncyall of the prouȳ¦ce of Rome of ye ordre of prechers admonested the treers that they sholde kepe them dylygently fro troublȳge one another / & vnto them recoū¦ted this example the whiche was comen in this wyse. A frere troubled me on a tyme iniustly / and afterwarde within a fewe da¦yes he deyed from this present worlde with out beynge at peas wt me. And in a nyght in slepȳge he appered vnto me for to be par¦doned. And as he demaūded me pardon I me aduysed that he was deed / and I sayd vnto hym. Go broder and demaunde par∣don of our sauyour and redemptour Iheu cryst in whose hande thou arte. The which departed fro me. And as he demaūded par¦don of Ihesu cryst in lykewyse as I sayd to hym. Our lorde Ihesu cryst answered vnto hym. I shall not graunte the pardon but yf thou demaunde pardon fyrst of hym that thou hast offended. And in that nyght the sayd body came agayne vnto me and brought me agayn the wordes of Ihesu & agayne demaunded me pardon and had it. Afterwarde he sayd vnto me. Broder Ny¦colas beholde what yll it is as to offende his broder / and that it is a greuous thynge as not to be at peas and faythfull accordaūce with hym. &c.: ¶Natiuitas christi. ¶Examples of ye natyuyte of Ihesu cryst And fyrst example how that a nonne yt whiche habandoned herselfe vnto synne had mercy in requyrynge the sone of the blyssed vyrgyn Mary on ye day of Cryst¦mas. Cxiii. MEn fynde by wrytinge this yt whiche foloweth how the dys¦cyple recyteth in the boke of his promptuary and sayeth yt a nonne left her ordre & was an open harlotte. And many yeres after∣warde she came agayne vnto her monaste¦ry and gaue herselfe vnto penaunce. And as she thought on the Iugement and on ye Iustyce of god and on the horryble paynes of hel she despayred / as who sayth that she was not worthy to haue pardon for ye mul¦tytude and gretens of her synnes. And as she thought on the Ioyes of heuen she de∣fyed herselfe that noo soylenes ne corrup∣cyon of syn̄e there sholde entre. And as she thought on ye passyon of god she regarded
how many of paynes he had suffred for her in wepȳge she cryed & sayd. Quid retribuā dn̄o pro oīb{us} que retribuit michi. What thin¦ge shall I graunte vnto god for all the thȳ¦ges yt he hathe gyuen vnto me. And in one of the solempnytees of the natyuyte of our sauiour she wept and thought Quod puer nat{us} est pro nobis. That is to say yt the chyl¦de is borne for vs. And that a chylde is ap∣peased wt a lytell thynge whan he is offen∣ded. Than she yode before the ymage of the vyrgyn Mary the whiche helde her chylde betwene her armes & thought on the chyld∣hode of our sauyoure / & there was moeued in grete teeres by bytter contrycyon of her¦te that god gaue vnto her. And with all her herte & might in wepynge requyred pardō of our lorde for his benygne chyldhode that he came in to this worlde to saue the syn̄ers Than she herde a voyce the whiche sayd vn¦to her yt for the benygnyte of his infancy yt she alleged she sholde knowe yt all her syn∣nes were pardoned. After these wordes he¦re she amended her lyfe ryally & fyned well her dayes. &c. ¶Vnto the example of this synneresse yt demaunded grace & obteyned pardon in the name of the natyuyte & infā¦cy of Ihesu cryst / so sholde these synners do & they shall haue grace yf they haue gretely offended / for so dyde ye nonne. Whan a chyl¦de is wrothe he is lyghtly appeased / & so is Ihesu cryst. Vn̄ ysaie. lv. Derelinquat īpi¦us viam suā & vir iniquus cogitaciones su¦as & reuertatur ad dominū & miserebit{ur} ei{us} Also whan our lorde Ihesus was borne ye aungelles gaue glory vnto god and songe / peas vnto men of good wyll. Vnde luce .ii. Gloria in excelsis deo: & in terra pax homi¦nib{us} bone voluntatis. And yu synner yt hast commyt lechery / theft. &c. yf thou wylt re∣pente the & demaunde gce as it is sayd yu shalte be pertener vnto ye natyuyte of Ihe¦su cryst & of the nombre of those for whome peas was songe. And vnto the contrary yf thou be obstynate in synne peas shal not be songe betwene god & the. And also yu shalt not be partener vnto the redempcyon of ye sayd natyuyte of Ihesu cryst the whiche na¦tyuyte was ryght meruaylous whan the ly¦tell chylde Ihesus yt had be conceyued of ye holy goost in ye vyrgyn wtout corrupcyō / se∣de / ne atouchement of man as ye scrypture sayth. Vn̄ cantat{ur}. Bn̄dicta et venerabilis es virgo maria: q̄ sine tactu pudoris inuēta es mater saluatoris & in vua. An̄. Nesciēs mater virgo virū. &c. He was borne of the vyrgyn Mary wtout payne ne dolour / and wtout fraccyon ne ouerture. Peperit sine dolore saluatorē sclo{rum} i{pre}m regem angelo{rum} sola virgo lactabat vbere de celo pleno. In lykewyse as the face of man is wtin the my¦rour or glasse / & the sonne passȳge through ye glasse wyndowe wtout ony fraccyon / sem¦blably Iesus the sone of god entred within the vyrgyn Mary whan he was conceyued of ye holy goost. And yode forthe of her wom¦be in the chyldynge wtout fraccyon ne ope∣nynge / ne wtout hauynge ony payne ne do∣lour / & was vyrgyn before the chyldynge / in the chyldynge / & after ye chyldynge. And soo she was moder & vyrgyn togyder. For she chylded as it is sayd the sauyour of the worlde / the kinge of aungelles / & gaue him souke of her brestes the whiche were ful of the mylke of paradyse. Vbera de celo ple∣no. &c. B. ¶Another example how the chyldeho∣de of Ihesu cryst delyuered a relygious from temptacyon. Cxiii: THe dyscyple recyteth in his ser∣mons this the whiche foloweth the whiche is also wryten in o∣ther bokes & sayth yt a clerke founde hymselfe in necessyte yt
whiche vowed vnto the vyrgyn marye yt he sholde entre in to relygion / & he entred in to yt of the freres prechers. Afterward he was tempted horrybly of apostasye. / Than he worshypped the enfance of god on our ladyes lappe / & requyred him that he wolde ayde hym / or gyue hym lycence to go in to another relygyon. And in we∣pynge and wayllynge he kyssed deuoutly the fete of the ymage. And hastely he ap∣perceyued suche consolacyon that he per∣seuered in the seruyce of god in relygyon. C. ¶Another example that Ihesu cryste appered vnto a woman in the lykenes of a ryght fayre chylde. Cxiii THe dyscyple reciteth in his promp¦tuarye & sayeth yt a deuoute wo∣man had affeccyon specyally towardes ye enfance of our lorde in the tyme of the na¦tyuyte of Ihesu cryste & prayed our lorde that he wolde shewe vnto her the face of his enfance / and after some dayes a fayre chylde assysted as she abode in the chirche in orayson in lyke wyse as she had accus∣tomed / of the whiche enfant she demaun∣ded / yf he coude his aue maria. The whi∣che answered. Saye it vnto me before / & whan she sayd benedict{us} fructus ventris tui / the chylde sayd I am he / & he vanys∣shed out of her syght. Than the sayd wo∣man cryed in enioyenge her / come agayn chylde ryght dere / ryght swete / and ryght welbeloued. And so ceased not to calle by xxx. dayes / & the .xxx. daye Ihesus came the whiche sayd. I the whiche am called am comen vnto the / nowe thou shalte co∣me after me & shall regne with me / yt whi¦che in enioyenge herself deyed debonayrly Another example .lxxxxiiii. b. quere āte. ¶Passio christi. A. ¶Examples of the passyon of our sa∣uyour & redemptour Ihesus. And fyrste example of a grete synner the whiche ba∣re vnto his dethe sekenes for his sȳnes in the remembraunce of the passyon of oure lorde Ihesu cryste. Cxiiii THe disciple reciteth in his sermōs & sayeth that a grete synner was constytute vnto the dethe / & he toke his sy¦kenes in reparcussyon of his synnes as he sayd. It is good reason that I endure yl in all my membres yt whiche hathe offen∣ded god by synne. And in suche anguisshe he gaue hym to thynke on the passyon of our lorde Ihesus. That is to vnderstond yf he endured in his heed & heere it was of good ryght / for he had aourned his said heere & offended god the whiche for to re∣deme hym had endured ye crowne of thor∣nes. And also his eyes the whiche hadde made the fals lokes were derked & suffred & that was of good ryghte. For oure lorde endured for to redeme hym that his eyen were bended with a kerchyef / & hys face stryken & buffeted. And yf his body yt whi¦che had cōmytte the lecheryes pleasaūces carnalles and synnes suffred it was good reason. For our lorde endured for to rede∣me hym that his body was rente beten & hewen. And also his mouthe the whiche had spoken yll wordes & dronken to exces suffred payne it was of good ryghte. For oure lorde endured for to redeme hym to drynke vynagre & gall. And so of ye other membres as the handes yt whiche had do¦ne of cursed operacyons. And the fete the whiche walked yll wayes & he bare ye said sekenes wyllyngly for his owne sinnes in thynkynge that god had had the fete & the
handes perced & endured dethe for to re∣deme hym. And it is not to doubte but yt he had helth with ye good thefe whan his soule parted frome this worlde. &c. This here is a grete example to instructe al per¦sones for to do penaunce as dyde the said man whan they shall come vnto ye bedde of dethe. For yf they take paciently ye said sekenes & the dethe for theyr owne sȳnes in sayng yt they haue wele deserued puny¦cyon & theyr mēbres yt haue offended god as it is sayd in the example. Suche puny¦cyon corporell by sykenes shal serue for pe¦naunce for the synnes cōmytte after con∣fessyon / & shal be agreable vnto god. saȳt gregorye sayeth. Si passio christi ad me∣moriē reducit{ur} nihil ē quod nō equo aīo tel¦leret{ur}. Yf ye passyon of Ihesu cryst be brou∣ghte vnto mynde / yt is to vnderstonde yt he hathe endured for to redeme the frome hel wt moche paynes. There is none aduer¦syte so harde but yt thou shalt endure it wt good courage. Yf the kynge bere a greate maste for the loue of the / thou sholdest be¦re for the loue of hym a strawe. The good thefe yt was hanged on the right hande of Ihesu cryste bare the dethe agreably and blamed the yll thefe. vnde luce .xxii. Nos quidē iuste: nā digna factis recipim{us} mor¦tē: hic vero: scilicet xpūs nichil mali gessit He sayd that he receyued the dethe Iuste∣ly / & that he hadde wele deserued it for his propre dedes. In so sayenge he confessed that he was a synner and that he toke it wyllyngly in gre by penaunce & punycyō for his owne synnes / so he had confessyon & dyde penaunce. It is gretter penaunce to endure the dethe for his synnes / than it is to faste & to saye oraysons. Also whan a man confesseth openly in iugement his synne as dyde the good thefe / it is more grete thynge than to confesse it vnto one onely / but the custome is to be absoyled of hym the whiche hathe auctoryte. God ab∣soylled ye sayd thefe & gaue vnto hym par¦don of his synnes in consyderynge ye gre∣te contrycyon / confessyon / & fayth that he had in sayenge vnto the yll thefe. Nō ti∣mes deū et memēto mei dū veneris in re∣gnū tuū. Also it was grete penaunce as it is sayd yt he toke the dethe for the punycy∣on of his synnes. And therfore of good ry∣ght god sayd vnto hym. Thou shalt be wt me this daye in paradyse. Hodie mecum¦eris in paradyso. Before that a man dieth hym behoueth to demaūde grace and par¦don. For it sholde be to late after ye dethe. Vn̄ eccle. xviii. Ante lāgorē adhibe medi¦cinā: et ante iuditiū īterroga te ipsū et in cōspectu dei īuenies {pro}pitiationē. That is to vnderstonde / take medecyne / that is pe¦naunce before that thou fal in to langour in helle & aske thy conscyence before yt the Iugement be made of ye. And yu shalt fyn¦de of debonayrte & mercy before god and saynt gregorye sayth. Qui t{pre}s agēdi pe∣nitētiā {per}dit: frustra ante ianuā paradisi cū {pre}cibus venit. He the whiche leseth the tyme to do penaunce / cometh as voyde & for nought before the yate of paradyse wt prayers to demaunde lyfe eternell. &c. B. ¶Another example of the swetnes of the passyon yt a man hadde yt sayd fyue ty¦mes pater noster. Cxiiii. THe dyscyple recyteth in his booke of sermons & sayth yt there was a man the whiche loued moche god for ye re¦uerence of the fyue woūdes of Ihesu crist he sayd euery daye fyue pater nosters / & one tyme our lorde appered to hȳ and ga∣ue hym fyue meruayllous swetnesses / soo that he studyed alonely for to serue god: /
And he prouffyted gretely in good opera∣cions & vertues / & in thende he fyned wel his dayes / & yode in to paradyse. &c. C. ¶Another example of a knyght ye whi¦che ne myght deye on the gybet for that yt he sayd euery daye thre pater nosters in the honour of ye passyon of Ihesus. Cxiiii IT is wryten in the dyalogue ce∣sarii yt a knight was accused vn¦to the emperour yt he dyspoyled & wasted his lande ye whiche kni¦ghte was taken & hanged by the cōmaundemente of the sayd emperour / & on the thyrde daye ye cosyn of the sayd kni¦ghte hanged passed therby wt his seruaūt the whiche had cōpassyon of hym / for he was a fayre man & a noble approched vn¦to the gybet for to vnhange hym & to bu∣rye hym. And he spake vnto them on the gybet & sayd / vnhange me for I am yet alyue. They wende yt it had be a fantasye And he the whiche hange agayne said / ne doubte you not / certainly I lyue yet by ye grace of Ihesu cryste & by the ayde of the vyrgyn Marye. The whiche was vnhan¦ged & ledde in to the cyte / at whom ye peo¦ple meruaylled. And the sayd knyght vn∣hanged demaunded the preest & the sacra¦ment of the aulter. And in grete contrycy¦on of herte & of teres he confessed hym & after receyued the creatour. More ouer ye preest demaūded hym before the people yt he sholde tell the cause wherfore god had done vnto hym suche grace to hange thre dayes without deyenge / he answerde / by¦cause yt I dyde vnto god a lytell seruyce / yt was / to saye euery daye fyue tymes pa∣ter noster / and fyue aue maria before yt I dyde ony other thynge / in the honour of ye passyon and of the fyue woundes of Ihe∣su cryste. And one pater noster in the ho∣noure of the sacramente of the hostye the whiche is the very body of Ihesu cryste yt the people receyueth euery daye in requy∣rynge of god that in the ende of my dayes I myght receyue hym / the whiche thyng our lorde Ihesus gaue me by his mercy▪ and that I ne myght deye tyl that I had receyued hym. After that this said knight had sayd thus & that he had true contry∣cyon of his synnes made confessyon & re∣ceyued his creatour as it is sayd he deyed & ended wele his dayes. Wherfore it is a good thynge as to serue god & to haue in remembraunce his blyssed passyon. &c. D. ¶Another example ye it toke wele vn¦to a man the whiche made memorye of ye passyon of our lorde in his lyenge downe and rysynge from his bedde. Cxiiii THe disciple recyteth in his sermōs yt a mā was accustomed as oft ty¦mes as he layde hym downe & rose frome his bedde he prayed god yt whan he shold dye he myght haue true confessyon & said this tytle. Ies{us} nazaren{us} rex iudeo{rum} mi∣serere mei / & made the token of the crosse with his thombe vpon his heed / his face & his brest in sayenge In noīe patris & filii & spūssancti amen. And god suffred that he deyed sodaynly / & as the deuylles wold rauysshe hym there came a man shynyn∣ge & clere the whiche chased them And as he ledde hym thorowe the derkenesses so∣daynly he departed / & there proceded gre∣te light frō thens as he was wonte to ma¦ke the crosses. Afterwarde there came de∣uylles yt wolde take hym / but they durste not for bycause of the crosses on hȳ Than
the sayd man bryght & shynynge sodayn∣ly appered vnto hym & sayd. Albeit that thou hast wele wonne to be Iuged & con¦dampmed after the exigence of thy sȳnes neuertheles the souerayne Iuge spareth the & wylleth that thou retourne in to thy body for the deuocyon yt thou haddeste to∣wardes his passyon & that yu caldeste his name tryumphall in the sayd tytle & for the impressyon of the crosse. And the sayd Iuge wylleth yt thou confesse thy synnes & that thou amende thy lyfe / & so he dyde For after he lyued and ended wele his da∣yes. By this example a man sholde vnder¦stonde that the crosse maketh ye deuylles to drede / it chaseth them / it taketh awaye theyr force / & setteth them at noughte. &c. E. ¶Another example of a woman the whiche loued the passyon of Ihesu cryste the whiche deyed on the good fryday and was saued. Cxiiii THe disciple recyteth in his sermōs that it is wryten that a noble wo∣man matrone loued the passion of Ihesu cryste / and for the honour of hym & of his passyon she toke afflyccyō on her body on the frydaye / desyrynge to goo bare foted but bycause she was noble for to kepe ho∣noure she yode not / but put bygge grauell in her shoes in the honoure & reuerence of ye passyon. Also whan her husbande was out by ony dayes she laye not on no feder bedde. And amonges the prayers that she made to god / she requyred hym yt he wol∣de gyue her grace yt she myghte dye on yt daye & in that houre yt Ihesu cryste was crucefyed / to the ende yt in the honoure of his passyon her body had afflyccyon on yt day / & so it happened. For at ye same hour she chylded a sone the whiche lyued after / but the sayd matrone deyed of the greate payne. And as a frere precher the whiche had confessed her prepayre hym to syng ye masse of requyem for her the saterday af∣terwarde the vygyle of eester / he was we¦ry of the seruyce & slepte. And in slepynge she appered vnto hym & sayd. Thou shalt not synge masse of requyem for me / but yu shalte synge gloria in excelsis / for I am in the glorye of the sayntes of paradyse / Whan the sayd relygyous was waked he ne wolde put no fayth vnto his dreme / & the pryour sente vnto hȳ forthwith a mes¦senger that he sholde synge for her masse of the daye. The said relygyous wende to haue excused hym & prayed yt it were recō¦maunded vnto another but ye pryour wol¦de not / & sayd that in that daye he sholde synge the masse of the daye vnto ye couent And it was done after ye worde of ye sayd matrone ye whiche hadde appered in sle∣pynge. &c. F. ¶Another example that oraysons the whiche ben made in the remembraūce of the crosse & of the passyon of our lorde ihe¦sus pleaseth hym moche. Cxiiii. THe disciple reciteth in his sermōs that it is wryten that an hermyte of a holy lyfe prayed god perseuerauntly yt it wolde please hym to shewe vnto him what seruyce pleased hȳ moost amongest all seruyces. And for as moche as the oray¦son of one Iuste is moche worthe in lyke wyse as sayeth the scrypture. Multū va∣let deprecatio iusti assidua. It befel one ty¦me that as the sayd hermyte was in hys lytell mansyon & honoured god in prayn∣ge he herde the voyce of a poore man / he
yode to se what he was / & whan he sawe hym he meruaylled / for he was as a pore man all naked ye whiche trembled for col∣de / & bare a grete crosse on his sholdres / & the sayd hermyte hym demaunded what he was / & from whens he came / he answe¦red I am come from heuen / & am Ihesu cryste the sone of mary / Then the hermy∣te sayd. O good Ihesus what doest thou here before me cursed synner / he answerd thou hast made me to come heder by thy prayers / yu haste prayed vnto me longly yt I sholde shewe vnto the what seruyce I had agreable amonge al seruyces / and I am come to shewe it vnto ye. Seest thou this grete crosse that I bere vpon my shol¦ders it is the seruyce the whiche vnto me is moost agreable yt thou and euery man ne may do / that thou bere my crosse vpon ye in remembraūce euery daye of my pas∣syon. For it is the seruyce moost agreable vnto me. &c. This exāple ought to drawe vnto vs to remembre the blyssed sauiour Ihesus yt endured to redeme vs. fyue. M.CCCC.lxxv. woundes & the dethe. Vnde vers{us}. Septuagīta quīquat{ur} centū mil∣lia quin{que}: tot fert{ur} x{pre}s pro nobis vulnera passus. &c. G. ¶Another exāple of a frere yt honou∣red the passyon of Ihesu cryste & wele ca∣me vnto hym. Cxiiii IT is wryten in the lyfe of faders yt a frere had of custome from his en¦fance to haue the passyon of Ihesu cryste & his woundes in grete reuerence & loue / And euery daye he sayde at euery of the fyue woundes Adoram{us} te christe & bene dicim{us} tibi qia {per} crucē tuā redemistri mun¦dū. Also he demaūded fiue tymes pardon in sainge as many pater nosters & in pra¦yenge Ihesus yt he wolde gyue vnto hym his loue & his drede. After Ihesu cryst ap∣pered vnto hym vysybly in lyke wyse as hymselfe telleth afterwarde & gaue vnto hym a meruaylous swetnes of euery of ye woundes. And whan he hadde tasted the swetnes the consolacyon of the worlde vn¦to him was conuerted vnto bytternes. &c A. ¶Another example that ye passyon of Ihesus moueth to haue ye vertues and to resyste agayne the deuyll. Cxv THe discyple recyteth in his promp¦tuarye & sayth yt a persone ye whi∣che thynketh on the passyon of Ihesucrist ne may be surmounted of the deuyll / but that it be with grete payne. Example of a good man yt put hym in a place secrete / & also remembred with all hi puyssaunce how Ihesu cryste was borne & conuersed in the worlde / suffred many rebukes / iniu¦ryes / betynges & the dethe for to redeme vs. And he sayd that it had more prouffy¦ted vnto hym in goodnes than all that yt he had done other tymes. Vn̄ bonauentu¦ra. Si vis homo vt de vtute ī virtutē: de gratia ī gratiam de bono ī meli{us} profitias quotidie nullo fatigat{us} īpedimēto {quam}ta po¦tes deuotione {per}curras & mediteris domi¦ni passionem. B. ¶Another example that the token of the crosse was founde in ye herte of a mar¦tyr. Cxv THe dyscyple recyteth in his promp¦tuary yt as men ledde a holy man
to be martred / he was asked of ye tyrante wherfore these crysten men & women de¦syred to receyue martyrdom with Ioye / He answerde for the token of the crosse i prynted in theyr hertes. And therfore it is no meruayll thoughe they folowe Ihesu cryst crucyfyed with Ioye. The tyrant an¦swerde. I shall proue yt whiche yu sayest of mouthe. And whan the saynt was slayne he foūde the prynte of the crosse in his h̄ert And whan the tyrant sawe that myracle he made hym to be crystened. C. ¶Another example yt a conuers had the lyfe & passyon of Ihesu cryst for a les¦son in ye table whan he dyned or ete. cxv THe dyscyple reciteth in his promp¦tuarye & sayeth yt a conuers was requyred of the pryour one daye yt he shol∣de tell what he thought so at the table by¦cause he toke no hede vnto the lesson that was redde at the table. He answerde and sayd. I haue redde a ryght good lesson at the table. Whan I begyn to ete I thynke how the sone of god was anounced of ye aungell for me & conceyued of ye holy gost in the wombe of the vyrgyn marye in en∣treatynge that in my thought I founde the fyrst lytel lefe. Afterwarde I thought how he was borne / how he was wrapped in lytell clothes & cloutes & layde vpon a lytell of hey in the crache. And how ye aū∣gelles enioyed them & sange melodyously whan thy appered vnto the shyppardes whan I haue redde this in my thought that is the seconde lefe. In this maner I renne vnto the cyrcumsycyon & comynge of the kynges / vnto the oblacion made in the temple / vnto the baptysme / vnto the fastynge / vnto the passyon / resurreccyon assencyon / vnto the sendynge of the holy ghost / & in thende on the Iugement. this is my dayly lesson & thende of my dyner. Vnto the purpose of this relygyous the whiche thought the mysteryes of god. da∣uid in psal. Beati qi scrutant{ur} testimonia eius in toto corde exquirūt eū. Et sapiens dicit eccle. xiiii. Beati qui ī sapiētia mora¦bit{ur} & qui ī iustitia meditabit{ur}: & ī sensu co∣gitabit circūspectionem dei. Et psal. dicit Bea{us} vir eui{us} ē nomē dn̄i spes ei{us}: & nō respexit ī vanitates & ī sanias falsas. Et mathei. v. Beati mūdo corde qm̄ ipsi de¦um videbunt. D. ¶Another example of a relygyous yt whiche lerned thre lettres yt whiche he re∣corded often. Cxv THe dyscyple reciteth in his promp¦tuarye & sayeth yt there were two germayns in one monasterye of the whi∣che the one was a clerke & the other laye / The clerke applyed his tyme to rede and to wryte the whiche asked one tyme hys broder laye how he wasted his tyme. The whiche answerde I haue lerned thre let∣tres on the whiche I thynke euery day / & retourne them. The fyrste is blacke. The seconde is rede. And the thyrde is whyte / Then he axed him theyr names / & he said The fyrst is of the recordacyon of my syn¦nes the whiche is so heuy & greuous that I am gretely tormented. The seconde let¦tre is the recordacyon of the precyous blo∣de of Ihesu cryste yt he hathe shed haboun¦dauntly & mercyfully by his woundes / & the dethe yt he hathe endured on ye crosse for to redeme me. The thyrde is the desy∣re of the Ioyes celestyall and of those the whiche folowe the lambe in aubes yt is of
the sayntes yt folowe Ihesu cryst. Whan the frere the whiche was clerke herde the∣se thynges he had shame / wayled & repu∣ted all his scyence as noughte. And after∣warde employed his dayes in deuocyon. E. ¶Another exāple of an abbesse ye whi¦che whan she sholde deye she caused ye pas¦syon of our lorde Ihesu cryste to be redde vnto her. Cxv. IT is wryten in the booke cesarii yt there was an abbesse loued the rule of Iustyce & of all dyscyplyne reguliere ye whiche whan she sholde deye she made ye passyon of Ihesu cryste to be redde vnto her. And whan that a man came in to ye place she sayd. In man{us} tuas dn̄e cōmē∣do spiritū meū. Incontynente she yelded vp her spyryte & deyed. And after her de∣the she appered vnto a good relygyous ye whiche axed her of her estate / & she answe¦red Incontynent that my soule departed from my body it flewe in to heuen. Also the said abbesse appered vnto another sys¦ter beyng in orayson & she axed her of her estate. She sayd in syngynge these verse of dauyd. Sicut audiuim{us} sic vidimus in ciuitate dn̄i virtutū. & she sayd nothynge more but departed before the eyen of her sayd syster. F. ¶Another example how Ihesu cryste shewed vnto a yongman his handes and his syde perced. Cxv. THe discyple recyteth in his promp¦tuarye & sayth yt a yonge man le∣cherous in cursed entencyon entred in to a wodde in the whiche were of harlottes / & the deuyll mette hym and demaunded hym whether he yode / & he tolde hym hys entencyon / vnto whom the deuyl said go before me & I shal paye the wele in tyme And as he entred more forwarde he met Ihesu cryst in habyte of a monke whiche demaūded hym in lyke wyse. Wheder g ye my sone. He answerde & sayd vnto him ye be not my fader. Vnto whome ye mon∣ke sayd. Certes thou arte my sone. He an∣swerd with indignacyon that he was not his sone. And the monke opened his haby¦te & shewed vnto hym his handes & hys syde perced / & in bledynge as men paynt the crucyfyxe. Byleuest thou nowe that I am thy fader / the whiche cryed & sayd / yu art my lorde & my god. Than Ihesu crist sayd vnto hym / goo thy wayes & confesse the. For he yt thou hast met before me is ye deuyll the whiche abydeth the to thende yt he breke thy necke. And as he yode forthe of the wodde with purpose to confesse hȳ the deuyll knewe hym not. And he axed ye deuyll whom he taryed after. The deuyll answerd / certes it is not thou. He that I tary fore was all ours. And puyssaunce hathe be gyuen vnto me vpon hym / that I myght sle hym. Thou arte another / & the yongman vnderstode the grace & mer¦cy that god had done vnto hym entred in the cloyster & confessed him / & fyned his ly¦fe in goodnes. &c. G. ¶Another example yt Ihesu cryst re∣uoked a postate for to shewe hȳ his woun¦des. Cxv. THe dyscyple recyteth in his promp¦tuary yt a yong man delycious en¦tred in to relygyon / and for the harde lyfe
the brede semed vnto hym blacke & harde & the wyne soure. And he demaunded of his prelate lycence to retorne in to ye worl¦de / vnto whom the pralate sayd. Broder ye ne maye retourne for ye be profeste in this relygyon / but haue ye affiaūce in god & requyre ye hym that ye may bere ye bur¦den with the other / & he dyde so / but after he was tempted of the deuyll on newe / he chaūged his habyte & yode in to the world And as he yode his waye Ihesus appye∣red vnto hȳ in semblaunce of a yongman and folowed hym by that waye he hasted hym in suche wyse as dyspeyred / & knew not wheder he sholde go. And Ihesus the whiche folowed hym cryed / tary me / and he ranne more strongly. And Ihesus cal∣led hym by his name and sayd vnto hym Broder tary me and I shall go with the / The yongman wrathed hym the whiche was called broder & monke & had shame & meruaylled that he called hȳ by his pro∣pre name. Than he taryed / & Ihesus as∣ked hym wheder he yode. He answered yt he had lefte his relygyon & that he sholde retourne in to the worlde. Than he lyfte vp his vestyment and his armes. And he sawe the bloode the whiche yssued oute of his syde perced & sayd vnto hym. Retour∣ne in to thy monasterye / & whan yu shalte fynde the brede to harde & the other thyn¦ges greuous touche theym with my syde perced & all shall be softe to the & good to bere. Than he retourned and lyued after∣warde holyly. Vn̄ grego. Si passio christi ad memoriam reducit{ur}: nichil est quod non equo animo tolleretur. H. ¶Another example of a thefe murde. rer yt repented hȳ made confessyon & had penaūce a pat nr̄ to say before ye crosse. cxv THe disciple recyteth in his sermōs that it is wryten of an hermyte ye whiche ledde a sharpe lyfe by longe tyme And one tyme a thefe came vnto him the whiche had dyspoyled the men by long ty¦me & had goten many theftes / he repen∣ted hym / made confessyon / but he ne wol∣de haue but shorte penaunce. And the her¦myte charged hym that all tymes that he founde ony crosse in the waye yt he sholde saye a pater noster knelyng on his knees The thefe sayd that he wolde do that pe∣naunce with good wyll. And after that he had taken his penaūce / & that he was de∣parted a lytell from the hermyte he sawe his enemyes yt sought hym of whome he had slayne the parent. Incontinent that he sawe them he toke hym to fle. And as he fledde he sawe a crosse lyfte vp in the waye. And he bowed the knees & sayd his pater noster. And how be it that he hadde ryght lytell to fle & escape the dethe. Ne∣uerthelesse he had leuer to deye than to le¦ue to do his penaunce yt was enioyned to hym. So he gaue his lyfe vnto god / and vnto hym recōmaunded his soule / & pra∣yed yt he myght haue the sayd penaūce ex∣ceptable for al his synnes. And as he was slayne of his enemyes in yt place. Than ye hermyte sawe yt the aūgelles toke ye soule of the sayd thefe & with grete Ioye they bare it in to heuen. &c. ¶Signum crucis. A. ¶Examples of the crosse / & fyrst how it was shewed to Constantyn / & reysed a deed man & heled a woman. Cxvi. IT is wryten in ye hysto. eccle / & in ye inuencyon of ye crosse yt maxence as¦sembled an hoost of the empyre of Rome
And the emperour Constantyn with hys armye came nere vnto the brydge of the water of Anubie for to fyght with ye sayd maxence. And as he fered / he lyfte vp his eyen towarde heuen & sawe the sygne of the crosse resplendysshe in semblaunce of fyre / & he sawe after the aungell that said to hym. Constantyn thou shalt vaynquys¦she by this sygne. And the nyght folowyn¦ge oure lorde appered vnto hym with the sygne yt he had sene in the skye & cōmaun¦ded hym that he sholde do make the fygu¦re of the sayd sygne & that he sholde haue ayde agaynst his enemyes. Then constan¦tyn was ioyous & assured to haue vycto∣rye / made hym to be marked in the forhe∣de with the sygne of the crosse. And made to chaunge all his baners of warre in to ye sygne of the crosse. And requyred god that he myght haue vyctorye without effusion of blode. And so was it done. For maxen∣ce cōmaunded them of his shyppes to go sawe the postes of the sayd brydge. He for¦gate the thynge that he had made to ma¦ke & ranne hastely agaynst constantyn wt fewe folke / but he cōmaunded yt the other sholde folowe hym. Then he mounted on the sayd brydge / fell in to ye water & was drowned before his hoost wtoute ony my∣ghte socoure hym. And the ylle yt he wolde haue done vnto constantyn came on him selfe. Then ye sayd constantyn was recey∣ued lorde of all / & had thus the vyctorye. After constantyn sent his moder Helene in to Iherusalem for to seke the crosse of our lorde. Whan she was gone theder she made to come all the wyse iewes of ye re∣gyon / for to enquyre of the place of calua∣rye & of the crosse of Ihesu cryste. And by¦cause yt they wolde tell nothynge / she com¦maunded yt they sholde be brente. For to a brydge they gaue a man named iudas yt in the ende shewed the place of caluarye / and made to dygge in the erthe / in ye whi∣che was founde the crosses / ye whiche we∣re borne in to the place of the cyte. And by¦cause yt he coude not chose the crsse o ihe¦sus from them of the theues / Iudas put the fyrste & the seconde vpon a deed body & it remeued not. And incontynente yt he had touched the crosse of Ihesus he rose hym vp all on lyue. ¶Another example / Men rede in the historye ecclesiastice that a woman the whiche was lady of the cite of Iherusalem was syke & as halfe deed And the bysshop of Iherusalem toke the fyrst & the seconde crosse and layde theym vpon the syke body & they prouffyted no∣thynge. And incontynente that the crosse of cryste touched her she was hole. By the¦se examples here a man may now that ye crosse of Ihesus is moche dygne yt wi∣che reyseth in suche wyse the deed and he∣leth the syke. And we shold prayse it / loue it / & honour it. For by the crosse ye deuylles ben vaynquysshed / & by the ecyous blo∣de of Ihesus the whiche was shedde on ye crosse we haue ben redemed. And therfore we sholde enioye vs to se the crosse. vn̄ ca¦nit{ur} ī vna. an̄. Nos aūt gloriari oportet ī cruce dn̄i nr̄i thū christi. &c. Also the crosse maketh ye deuylles to fere / chaseth theim awaye / it taketh awaye theyr force & set∣teth them at nought. And whan ony per∣sone is tempted of the deuyll or that he ha¦the fere or drede / or that he fynde hymself in ony daūger. &c. He sholde make the to∣ken of the crosse & call deuoutely the ayde of Ihesus & of ye vyrgyn marye & he shall haue incontynente socours / in lykewyse as men shall fyne here after by exāples Also men sholde make ye token of ye crosse whan they lye downe and ryse or whany men wolde ete or drynke / or do ony opera¦cyon. For the token of the crosse is prouf∣fytable ouerall agayn all inconuenyences
the whiche may come vnto ye body or vn∣to the soule. &c. B. ¶Another exāple how saynt Iustine resysted & had vyctorye agayne the deuyl by the token of the crosse. Cxvi IT is wryten in the legende of saȳt Iustyne that ye deuyll tempted her by many tymes to loue vnlefully a man named Cypryen. By two tymes he temp¦ted her inuysybly of loue vnlefull. And in contynent yt she perceyued the sayd temp∣tacyon she cōmaunded her vnto god de∣uoutly and made the token of the crosse / And the dyll was so aferde that he fled Also the deuyl tempted her another tyme vysybly in semblaunce of a vyrgyn / And whan she had made the token of ye crosse & blewe agaynst hym he departed & had no more puyssaunce. Also the deuyl trans¦formed hym in a yongmans lykenes and entred in to her chambre / lepte vpon her dyshonestly as she laye in bedde / & wolde haue had to doo with her. And whan she sawe that she consydered yt they were ylle spyrytes / she marked her with the crosse & the deuyll departed. &. C. ¶Another exāple of a man of warre penytent yt resysted agayne the temptaci¦ons of deuyll by makynge ye crosse. Cxvi MEn fynde by wrytynge yt after yt a man of warre had done many yl¦les & synnes / he repented hym confessed / & had in penaunce to be one nyghte in the chirche without drynke / & sholde say. My redemptour Ihesus haue mercy on me / & in that nyghte the deuylles tempted hym in guyse of marchauntes / but he ouerca∣me them with his prayer & in makynge ye crosse. Afterwarde two deuylles came vn¦to hym in semblaunce of the woman and her chylde / & tempted hym strongly / but he had the victorye by the token of ye crosse & in saynge the wordes beforsayd. Thyrd¦ly the deuylles tempted hym in guyse of a bysshop the whiche had confessed hȳ. &c And he had vyctorye as it is sayd before by the tokyn of the crosse & in saynge. My redemptour Ihesus haue mercy on me. / Lastly the deuylles in guyse of beestes bet hym & he was pacyent wtout remeuynge And after he was a good man & a holy. D. ¶Another example how the token of the crosse serued vnto a Iewe agayne the deuylles yt helde theyr chapytre. Cxvi. IT is wryten in ye dyalogue of saint Gregorye yt as a Iewe yode by the countree in defaute of hospytall yode for to lye in the temple of ye ydoles / & made ye token of the crosse. And by nyghte the de∣uylles came to holde theyr chapytre in the sayd temple. And there deuysed of the yl∣les yt they had done. And as the sayd iewe was in a corner and herde them in trem∣blynge of drede the prynce of deuylles cō∣maunded vnto the other yt they sholde go to se hym that had presumed to lye there. They yode & afterwarde sayd vnto hym Ve ve vas vacuū sed signatū. maledictū It is a vessell yt is a man voyde of vertu∣es & of goodes spyrytuel / but he hathe the token of the crosse. Than all the deuylles departed without doynge ony yll vnto ye sayd iewe / bycause he made the sygne of the crosse. &c.
E. ¶Another exāple how a man shewed at his dethe that he had receyued ye crosse and the deuyll fledde. Cxvi. THe disciple recyteth in his promp¦tuary yt a knyght a greate synner wolde haue remyssyon of his synnes / re∣ceyued the crosse. And the deuyll appered vnto hym in his sykenes & sayd vnto him thou arte myne. Vnto whom the knyght sayd / yt am I not / for I haue cōfessed me & haue receyued the crosse / the whiche he vncouered & shewed hym saynge / here is the token that I haue receyued vnto the defence of the fayth. Whan ye deuyl sawe that he vanysshed awaye. ¶Aqua benedicta. A. ¶Examples of holy water / & fyrst ex∣ample yt the deuylles ye were in the house of a syke man were chased awaye by holy water. Cxvii. THe disciple recyteth in his sermōs & sayeth yt as a man laye madde of newe a conuers was in a monastery in the artycle of dethe he sawe all the house replenysshed with deuylles as persones wt longe nebbes. And whan the sayd syke bo¦dy had sygnyfyed it vnto his gardyen he vnderstode that they were foule spyrytes he made to brynge of holy water in a ves¦sell & bespryncled all the place. And as he dyde that the syke man toke hym to crye that he sholde cast strongly / & that the de∣uylles fledde so hastely yt they stroue who sholde fyrste goo forth & that for haste one fell ouer another. Than the sayd gardyen more strongly caste the holy water. So ye sykeman was delyuered of the deuylles / the whiche wende to deceyue hym for to dampne hym. Vnto this purpose a man shold vnderstonde yt the holy water is mo¦che dygne & prouffytable. For it putteth a¦waye synnes venyelles / & chaseth awaye the deuylles & fantasyes dyabolyques / & therfore many hathe of custome to haue of holy water by theyr beddes / and also to caste holywater at theyr lyenge downe / & arysynge / & whan they ben syke to thende that they ben puryfyed / made clene & kep¦te from temptacyons & fantasyes dyabo¦lyques as it is sayd. Vnde dauyd in psal∣mo. Asperges me dn̄e ysopo & mūdabor lauabis me & su{per} niuē dealbabor. That is to saye. O thou lorde thou shalte bespryn∣kyl me with the holywater styk & I shal be made clene / thou shalt wasshe me / and I shall be more whyte than ye snowe / yet agayne sayeth dauyd. Thou hast in lyke¦wyse troubled the heedes of the dragons tho ben of the deaylles in the waters. Ite¦rū psal. Cotribuiasti capita drachonū in aquis. &c. Item it is good to sprynkyll wt holy water a woman whan she trauayl∣leth of chylde Also whan a man receyueth the holy water deuoutly it dysposeth the persones to deuocyon & to do wele. For to be short it is a grete thynge as to receyue the holy water. And those that refuse it or fle it / they ne ben good catholyques / for they done in lyke wyse as dyd ye deuylles yt fledde from the house of the syke man for the holy water. &c. B. ¶Another example how the deuyl ne myghte entre in to the mouthe of a dron∣kenman for a droppe of holy water that therin fell. Cxviii.
THe dyscyple reciteth in his promp¦tuarye & sayeth yt a dronke n man mette in his waye a demonyacle. And the sayd dronkenman sayd vnto ye deuyll en∣tre in to me & leue this man. And the said deuyl answerd. I may not / wherfore said the dronkenman. For thou haste ben thys daye in ye chirche & one droppe of holywa¦ter is fallen in thy mouthe. &c. C. ¶Another example that as a knyght bespryncled hym with holy water the de∣uyll cryed touche me not. Cxviii. ARnoldus recounteth in his boke & sayeth yt as a knyght strong in ar¦mes wolde approche vnto a place where a mayden demonyacle lay the deuyl began to crye. Here is my frende come. And as he was entred sayd. Go ye backe lette my frende approche. Thou deuyll thou arte a fole / wherfore tormentest thou this may∣de innocent / come with me vnto the tur∣neymentes. And the deuyll answerd and sayd. I shall go with the with good wyll / yf thou suffre me yt I entre in to thy body or that I be in the sadell or brydell / or in ony partye of thy body. And the knyghte had compassyon of the noble mayde / and said yf thou wylte go forth of this mayde I shall graūte the one partye of my maū¦tell by suche condycyon that thou hurt me not / & that yu shalte departe incontynente that I shall tell the. And he promysed hȳ. Than he yode forth of the mayde / & yode in to the oylet hole of the mauntell. From that houre so moche of glorye came vnto the knyght that those yt he wolde he them surmounted and wasted & those yt he wol¦de he toke. And one daye as ye knyght pra¦yed longely ye deuyll sayd vnto hym / thou murmurest to moche. And as he sprȳcled hym with holy water he sayd vnto hym / take hede yt thou touche me not. And one tyme whan the knyght yode vnto a place where a man preched of the holy crosse ye deuyl said what doest thou here. The kni∣ghte answerd I wyll leue the & serue god And ye deuyl sayd what thynge hathe dys¦pleased the in me I neuer hurte the / but I haue enryched the & thou arte become moche gloryous. And the knyght sayd de∣parte thou and come thou no more again to me I cōmaunde the in the name of ihe¦sus. Than ye deuyll lefte hym & the knight marked hym with the crosse / and serued Ihesu cryste two yeres beyonde the see / & whan he was comen agayne he made to edefye an hospytall / in the whiche he ad∣mynystred vnto syke bodyes theyr neces∣sytees & wele defyned his dayes. &c. D. ¶Another example that whan a syn∣ner obstynate had dronke of holy water / he repented hym & confessed & chaunged hym from yll vnto good. Cxviii THe dysciple reciteth in his promp¦tuarye that a knyght dyde many ylles and in thende fell seke & hys preest warned hym to confesse hym / & to receyue the sacramentes as a good catho∣lyque / and he ne myght enclyne hym ney¦ther by prayers ne by menaces. And repu¦ted his wordes vayne / & that he ne forced ne cared. And as he demaunded of water for to drynke the preest yode to blysse the water wtout that yt the seke body knewe ony thynge of it and gaue it hym to dryn∣ke. Whan he had dronke incontynente by the ayde of the holy ghost he cryed vnto ye preest in requyryng hym that he were con¦fest.
And he confessed hym purely he was admynystred & ended his dayes wele. ¶Maria. A. ¶Examples of the vyrgyn Marye / & fyrst example how the vyrgyn Marye de¦lyuered an abbot & many other from pe¦ryll of dethe for to saye this responce. Fe∣lix nam{que}. Cxvii VIncent sayeth in the .xviii. booke of the myrroure hystoryall in the lxxxix. chapitre. That an abbot with ma∣ny other were in the myddest of the see of Brytayne in so grete tempest of tyme op¦pressed that they all dyspeyred of lyfe / soo ye some called saynt Nycholas vnto theyr ayde / & the other saint Andrewe. And eue¦ry of them called the saynt yt moost famy¦lyerly he called vnto his necessyte. And whan the abbot sawe that none of theym called the blyssed vyrgyn marye moder of mercy yt hathe puyssaunce aboue ye heuen & the erthe he sayd. Brederne what do ye to call ony sayntes & leue ye moder of god yt hathe puyssaunce aboue all tho sayntes ye ye call. I saye not that ye do yll / but cal we all with one voyce the moder of mer∣cy. Than all togyders called & reclamed ye blyssed vyrgyn Marye. And the sayd ab∣bot the whiche had not ete in two dayes & in two nyghtes but one apple / & the whi∣che was at lowe that he ne myght syghe / he sange with his monkes this responce. Helix nā{que}. And ye verse Ora {pro} populo And before yt they had ended theyr songe & deuocyon / there arryued a grete lyghte in the heyghte of the maste as a tapre the whiche chased awaye all the derkenesses of the nyght & enlumyned the presence / & al the tempest so ceased at the cōmaunde¦ment of the quene of heuen & had greate transquylyte. And ryght anone after the daye clere & fayre shone / & the shyppe ap∣plyed it selfe vnto the lande wher as they entented. And so had they ayde of the vyr¦gyn Marye. By this example & by many other a man sholde knowe that all perso∣nes the whiche serue the vyrgyn marye & her equyre by deuocyon & with good her¦te / they haue ayde and socours in al neces¦sytees that they fynde themself in / be it in erthe or in the see / be it at the dethe or in the lyfe. And by that yt the abbot sayd vn∣to his compaygnons yt they sholde cal the ayde of ye vyrgyn Marye more soner than all the sayntes of paradyse / he spake it of good ryght. For she is more noble dygne / and holy of the creatures that god create euer. Vnde scryptura dicit. Sicut sol luci dior est {quam} luna: et luna {quam} syderib{us}: sic ma∣ria dignior ē creaturis oībus. She is mo∣re digne than the aungelles / for she is mo¦der of the kynge of aungelles. Vn̄. ā. Ip¦sū regē angelo{rum} sola virgo lactabat. And she ledde a lyfe aūgelyke & more then aū∣gelyke. Vnde hieronimus. In carne pret{er} carnē viuere nō t{er}rena vita ē: sed angelica Also she lyued withoute ony synne in her body corruptyble. Vn̄ cāt. iiii. Tota pul∣cra es amica mea & macule non est in te / She is more dynge than the prophetes / for they prophetysed of her. Vnde scriptu¦ra. Prophete {pre}dicauerūt christū nascitu¦rum de virgine maria. Vnde ysaye. vii. Ecce virgo cōcipiet & pariet filiū. She is more digne than the appostles / for she is moder of the kynge of the appostles /  she is theyr maystres the whiche taughte them. Quomodo cōcepit de spū sctō & pe¦perit sine dolore. Also she was more fer∣me in the fayth at the passyon than the ap¦postles. Vn̄ scriptura. Beata q̄ credidit
qm̄ {per}ficient{ur} ea q̄ dicca erāt ei a dn̄o. She is more dygne than the martyrs. For she suffred in the soule at the passyon more of dolour than all the martyrs. Vnde luce.  Et tuā ipsi{us} aīam {per}trāsibit gladius. Also she was more dygne than ye confessours for she was sanctifyed in ye wombe of her moder / & put in to the temple to serue god in the age of thre yere yt the confessours ha¦the not done. Also she is more dygne shan the women. vnde luce. i. ca. Bn̄dicta tu ī mulierib{us}. Et cant. ii. Sicut liliū īter spi∣nassic amica mea inter filias. B ¶Another example how salue regina vayleth moche to deye wele. Cxviii. THe dyscyple recyteth in his promp¦tuarye of the vyrgyn marye that as a chanoyne regulyer laboured vnto ye dethe he dredde that the whiche is writen ecclesiastices none. Nescit homo vtrū a∣more vel odio dignus sit. Albeit he dyspey¦red hym not. And the vyrgin marye appe¦red vnto hym in forme vysyble / & in swe∣te wordes sayd vnto hȳ. Drede thou not thou shalte not be dampned. But in lyke¦wyse as thou hast honoured me oftymes with this antem. Salue regina. In lyke¦wyse shalt thou be crowned by me in the realme of my sone. Whan he had recomp¦ted this thynge ioyously vnto his bredern he deyed. &c. C. ¶Another example how ye vyrgȳ ma¦rye appesed the thondres & tempestes of ye tyme for to saye salue regina. Cxviii. IT is wryten in the boke cesarii that a preest had of custome to say at al his houres this antē. Salue regina. And one tyme as he walked thorowe ye feldes & that he yode to vysyte a recluse ye whi∣che was by ye chirche grete thondres and horryble tempestes sourded vp yt he loste his force to walke. And in thende by gre∣te labour he entred in to the chirche & fell prostrate before the aulter & requyred the vyrgyn Marye to appese ye sayd tempest And there appered vnto hym a woman with vysage of a vyrgyn replenysshed wt grete beaute yt sayd vnto hym. For asmo¦che as thou sayest & syngest oftymes this antem. Salue regina mat{er} mīe. the tem∣peste shal hurte nor fere ye no more. whan she hadde spoken these wordes she vanys¦shed awaye / & he vnderstode yt it was the vyrgyn marye. Another example of salue regina wryten in the promptuary of the dyscyple. It happened one tyme yt in two townes the freres of the ordre of prechers were by nyght so tormented wt fantasyes & yllusyons dyabolyques yt it neded yt one of them muste watche and kepe by nyght those that slepte & rested. And they dydde put all theyr esperaunces in the ayde of ye vyrgyn marye / & made solemnel professy¦on after complyn in syngynge Salue re∣gyna / & incontynent all was appesed / by these examples here it behoueth to vnder¦stonde that the sayd antem pleaseth vnto our lady. Also marie is quene of heuen of the aungelles / & sayntes of paradyse of whome we synge regina celi letare. Also marye is the quene of all quenes. Also ma¦rye is quene of mercye in lyke wyse as no∣tyfyeth this antē Salue regina. Also this quene is dygne / noble / holy / blyssed / fayre pure / clene / clere / gyuyng lyght / shynyng that she surmounteth al creatures in boū¦te / / dignyte / & clarte / & therfore is she lyfte vp & set by god her sone. Vn̄. psal. Asti∣tit regina a dextris tuis ī vestitu deaura∣to
circūdata varietate / It is good to loue serue & honour this vyrgyn the whiche is soo grete a lady / for that yt she requyreth is done / & that yt she refuseth is not done Loue we than the vyrgyn Marye / serue we & honour we her / in kepynge her fees∣tes & wele shall come vnto vs. D. ¶Another example how the vyrgin Marye restored the hande of Iohan Da¦mascene yt made salue sctā parēs. Cxvii THe dyscyple reciteth in his promp¦tuarye yt at rome there was a va¦lyaūt doctour named Iohan damascene The whiche had of enmyes yt accused hȳ falsly that he had wryten with his propre¦hande of lettres agayne the empyre and romayns. Soo it happened yt he was led before the emperour / ye whiche made his hande to be cut of / whiche thynge he bare paciently. And afterwarde he considered yt our lady had none introyte propre as so¦me other saintes / & that it was not an ho¦nest thynge yt she yt was quene of heuen had not also well a propre introite as the other. Then he made salue sctā parens. & then whan he had made it he doubted lest he sholde forgete it / & incontynent called his clerke for to gyue hym his ynkorne / & remembred not yt he had his hande cutte so he reched forth the stompt for to take ye pēne / & incontynent he was heled thrugh the vyrgyn marye / & had his hande agaȳ also fayre & fresshe as euer it had ben. &c. A. ¶Another example of ye salutacyō an¦gelyke how a religious made the chaplet of the vyrgyn marye. Cxix MEn fynde by wrytynge that a re∣lygyous demaunded of his abbot how he myght do thyng that myght plea¦se vnto ye vyrgyn marye. And he gaue him to answere. Make vnto her euery da a chaplet of roses He demaūded how / he an¦swered. Saye euery daye fyfty aues a pa¦ter noster at euery tenth. Than he dydde it. And a grete tyme after he was sent for a ncessite vnto another abbaye / & passed thorowe a wodde & was taken with the∣ues in saynge his aue marye. And as the capytayne of the sayd theues behelde him he sawe a whyte doue the whiche toke of roses out of his mouthe. And demaūded hym what it was that he sayd / and from whens proceded the sayd roses. The said relygyous shewed how ye sayd abbot had instructe him to serue the vyrgyn Marye as it is sayd. And the sayd theues conuer∣ted them / restored the others goodes and were relygyous in the abbaye of the sayd monke & defyned wele theyr dayes. &c. ¶Another exāple semblable. It is wry∣ten in the promptuarye of the dyscyple yt a relygyous had of custome to make the chaplet vnto the vyrgyn marye in sayeng a hondreth tymes aue maria. &c. And as he yode by the countree whan he came vn¦to a wodde a thefe the whiche wolde slee hym sawe that a fayre chylde toke the ro∣ses in his mouthe & made of them a cha∣plet. The sayd thefe was ameruaylled to se that demaunded of ye sayd relygyous ye cause & what it was that he sayd. He sayd that he salued the vyrgyn marye in sayn∣ge aue maria. For to be short the thefe cor¦rected hȳ of his rsed lyfe. &c. ¶By the∣se examples here a man shold vnderston¦de yt aue maria the whiche is the salutacy¦on angelyke peaseth moche vnto the vyr¦gyn marye / & for as moche as it is often sayd and comune it behoueth to declare it
in ryght ample wyse. B. ¶Fyrst the aungell sayd vnto the vyr¦gyn marye. Aue. That is for to saye god the salueth. He gyueth vs example yt we sholde salue the persones whan we arry∣ue vpon them in sayng. God ye salue. god saue you / or blysse you. Maria. God ye sa∣lue marie. This name marye is interpre∣ted maris stella / sterre of the see. Of this sterre spake the prophete balaā that aid Oriet{ur} stella ex iacob. And also a sterre ap¦pered to the kynges on crystenmas daye towarde oryent that conduyted theym to Ihesus / & to the vyrgyn marye. And by this the aungell salued the vyrgyn marie in saynge vnto her aue maria. God salu∣eth the sterre of the see / fayre / clere / & shy¦nyng / For also as the maryners haue a sterre in the fyrmament moche clere and fayre & verytable that conduyteth theym by night & redresseth them whan they are wronge & ledeth theym vnto good porte. Semblably marye ye whiche is interpre∣ted sterre of y see / is she that conduyteth all the erraūtes & strayers / & ledeth them vnto the porte of salute. And for this sa∣yeth saȳt bernarde. Si īurgūt vēti tēpta¦tionū &c respice stellā voca mariā. In pe¦riculis: ī angustiis: ī reb{us} dieb{us}: mariā īuo¦ca: nō recedat ab ore: non recedat a corde: vt īpetres ei{us} auxiliū: ipsā sequēs nō deui¦as: ipsā rogās nō desperas: ipsā cogitans nō erras: ipsa tenēte nō corruis: ipsa {pro}te∣gēte ō metuis: ipsa duce nō fatigaris: ip¦sa {pro}pitia {per}uenes ad terrāviuētiū. After the wordes of the sayd saynt bernarde / in all ekenesses necessytees / & aduersytees / & in all temptacyons & daūgers what so euer they be that a man fyndeth hym in / hym behoueth to haue his recours of hert & of mouthe vnto this stere yt is marye / & a man shal haue all that yt he requyreth ¶Example of a man yt as he fel in to the see he called the vyrgyn marye the which brought hym safe vnto lande. And bycau¦se that marye socoureth in suche wyse the creatures in all necessytees call ye marye serue ye marye / honoure ye marye / kepe ye the feestes of marye & wele shal happe you. Gratia plena. The aūgell sayd vn∣to the vyrgyn marye. God the salue ful of grace. Marye was replenysshed wt grace for she was fulfylled with the holy ghost / from the wombe of her moder as sayeth the gospell. Spiritussāto replebit{ur} adhuc ex vtero matris sue / & whan she concey∣ued. Vn̄ luce. i. Spiritussctūs su{per}ueniet ī te & virt{us} altissimi obūbrabit tibi. Also she was replenysshed wt the sone of god whā she bare hym in her wombe. Also she was replenysshed wt all humylyte as it appere¦the by the answer yt she made vnto ye aun¦gell. Ecce ancilla dn̄i: fiat michi secūdum verbu tuū. Also she was replenysshed wt charyte / wt beaute / bounte / holynesse and beatytude / & without cōmyttyng ony sin Vnde cant. iiii. Tota pulcra es maria & macula non est ī te. And for asmoche as she is replenissh wt so many of goodnes¦ses / loue we marye / serue we marye / kepe we the feestes of marye / & wele shal come vnto vs. Dn̄s tecū. The aūgell sayd vn¦to the vyrgyn marye. God is with ye. god is euermore with the vyrgyn marye. He was with her in the concepcyon. He was in her in her wombe .ix. monthes. He was in her in chyldynge & nourysshyng / & ba∣re hym in to the temple / in to egypte and was obeyssaunt vnto Ioseph & vnto her as sayeth the euangelyst. Erat subditis il¦lis. Agayn ye cursed chyldren yt wyll haue domynyon aboue faders & moders. &c. / Als the vyrgyn marye was wt god in the tyme of his passyon & assencion / & sytteth by hȳ. Vn̄ psal Astitit regīa a dextris tuis in vestitu deaurato circūdata varietate /
They ben of one amyte / of one pryue coū¦sayll & sytte togyder of one Iugement & in paradyse. And yt that the vyrgyn wyl∣leth & requyreth for her seruaūtes it is do¦ne & accomplisshed. And therfore loue we marye / serue we marye / calle we marye / kepe we the feestes of marye & wele shall happe vs. Bn̄dicta tu ī muieribus. The aungell sayd vnto the vyrgyn Marye / yu arte blyssed amonges all women & aboue all women. Thou arte more blyssed than the vyrgyns / than the women maryed / & than the wedowes. Vn̄ cāt. ii. Sicut liiū int{er} spinas sic amica meaīter filias. Fyrst thou arte more blyssed & fayre than ye vyr¦gyns. For thou arte the floure of vyrgyny¦te & of maydenhede / of all purete / beaute and holynes / & the examplayre of al chas¦tyte & womanhede. And soo thou vowed vyrgynyte & kepte it in all estates / wher∣fore thou arte floure of vyrgynyte / vnto this vyrgynyte is appropryed these wor∣des. Elores mei fruct{us} honoris & hones∣tatis. yt is to say. My floures ben fruytes of honour & of honeste as the floure delys the rose / the violet / & th gelofre. The said floures haue in them foure thynges that is in the vyrgyn marye. Primo they haue beaute to beholde / odour to smell / they de¦core them yt bere them / & auaylleth vnto the medecynynge. &c. Semblably the vir¦gyn marye is the moost fayrest rose of all ye women as sayd is. Sicut liliū. Also her sone was the moost fayrest of all ye men / Vnde psal. Specios{us} forma {pre}filiis hoīm She was fayre wtoute foulenes / she dyde neuer mortall synne / nor venyell. Vn̄. cāt ii.i. Tota pulcra es amica mea & macu∣la nō ē in te. Et alibie. Pulcra facie: sed pulchrior fide. Secūdo she had ye odour of good renōmee. Vn̄. Beatā inedicent oēs generationes: & illud. Nard{us} mea dedit odorē suauitatis. &c. Tertio she decoreth them that serue her / & the place where is her remembraunce. Quarto she is of va∣lour apprecyable for to helpe in all neces∣sytees. &c. The vyrgyns the whiche kepe vyrgynyte ben of the housholde of the vyr¦gyn marye / & shall haue retrybucyon an hondreth double. And yf they corrupt vir∣gynyte they lese the sayd treasour / & shall not be of the nombre of vyrgyns. Also the vygyn marye is more fayre than the wy¦ues. For she was maryed vnto Ioseph & conceyued not of him / but of ye holy ghost luce. i. Spirit{us} sctūs su{per}ueniet ī te & virt{us} altissimi obūbrabit tibi. Also she bare the sone of god & gaue hȳ souke / & abode vyr∣gyn after chyldynge / in chyldynge / & befo¦re childynge. Virgo ante {per}tū: virgo ī {per}tū et virgo post {per}tū: virgo īuiolata {per}māisti She was the veray moder of Iheus for thre thynges. Prima bycause that ye body of our lorde toke humanyte in ye wombe of the vyrgyn marye moost pure & clene Secunda he had place & rest in her precy¦ous wombe. Tertia he had nourysshyng of her body / & by yt she is ye moder of the so¦ne of god. Also she is moder of the kynge of aungelles & sayntes of paradyse. She is moder of the kynge of kynges the whi∣che gouerneth ye heuen & the erth. Regē qi celū terrā{que} regit. She is moder of the lorde of lordes / of the uge of Iuges and mayster of all. She is moder of grace & of mercy. Vn̄. hymn{us} Maria mat{ur} gratie mat{ur} mīe. &c. She is moder of grace / for she encreaseth theym in goodnes yt are in ye estate of grace / & also vnto synners / for she hathe pite & compassyon and prayeth for them. She ydeth agayne the enmye Tu nos ab hoste {pro}tege. And also she he¦peth at the dethe. Et hora mortis suscipe. Also she is moder & nouryssher of orphe∣lyns / beggers & wedowes / & her sone nou¦ryssheth all the worlde / & therfore a man
may say that she is blyssed amonges the women maryed / & aboue all those ye whi∣che hathe wele kepte maryage. Bn̄dicta¦tu i mulierib{us}. Loue we than marye / ser¦ue marye / honour we her / kepe we her fel¦tes & all good shall come vnto vs. Also ye vyrgyn marye is more blyssed than ye we¦dowes. She was wedowe .xiiii. yere / & she gouerned her chastely & purely so that neuer man ne synned in her / neyther by sight nor otherwyse / yet was she ye moost fayre woman of ye worlde as sayd is She was so full of grace & of bounte yt the gra¦ce of her enlumyned those yt behelde her so that they had no wyll to synne nor do ylle And therfore men maye saye. Bn̄dicta¦tu ī mulierib{us} .i. int{ur} oes mulieres. Et bne¦dict{us} fruct{us} vētris tui. The fruyte of the wombe of the vyrgyn marye is right blys¦sed / for all goodnes of it is proceded. By the sone that she bare peas was made by ye inobedyence of Adam & of eue. Also by the fruyte the whiche is yssued oute of the wombe of the vyrgyn marye paradyse ha¦the be opened to all good & loyal crystyēs And the yates of helle hathe be broken & the holy soules taken out & put in to para¦dyse. Also by the greate myracles & by the grete thynges that the sone of the vyrgin sayd & dyde saynt marcelle said vnto our lorde. illud luce. xi. Beat{us} vēter qui te por¦tauit: et vbera q̄ suxisti. The wombe and pappes of the vyrgyn marye were ryght blissed / whan they had borne & gyuen sou¦ke so precyous fruyte as the sone of god / Ihesus is enterpreted sauyour & redemp¦tour of all the worlde / in lyke wyse as it is sayd / ye whiche brynge v vnto his blysse Amen. A. ¶Another example of hym yt knewe no good but aue maria. Cxx. MEn fynde by wrytynge that a mā of armes renoūced vnto all yll / & made hym relygyous of the ordre of char¦treux the whiche in his lyfe ne myght ler∣ne no good thynge but these two wordes aue maria / but he said them right deuout¦ly of herte & of mouthe togyder / & of tyme he repeted them / & so vsed his lyfe. After his departynge there prange frome hys graue a fayre flourdelys whyte. And on ye leues of ye floure was wryten in lettres of golde aue maria. The people meruayled of this thynge. For to be shorte it was foū¦de yt the sayd flouredelys proceded from his mouthe / & that it was for that that he had honoured the vyrgyn marye wt those wordes aue maria. B. ¶Another example of hym yt whiche kneled at the name of our lady. Cxx. IT is wryten yt there was a relygy∣ous yt loued soo moche the vyrgyn marye yt whan h herde her name spoken of he kneled downe / & wrote it wih gold azure or yelowe. At the laste he was seke / & another relygyous yt laye nere vnto his bedde herde on a nyghte how the vyrgyn marye wt grete lyght & company of aun∣gelles came to fetche hym & sayd vnto hȳ for as moche as thou hast wryten my na¦me / & had it in so grete reuerence I shall make thyn to be wryten in the boke of lyf & so he deyed. &c. C. ¶Another example of the moder the whihe taught vnto her chylde to salue ye vyrgyn marye. Cxx.
MEn fynde by wrytynge yt a goode moder taught wele her chylde / & lerned hym to salue the vyrgyn marye & to go euery daye on his knees to saye aue maria before her ymage that was in her chambre. The sayd chylde was so accusto¦med & loued so moche the vyrgyn marye that whan he was beten he yode to com∣playne hym to the sayd ymage / and also he bare often a party of his porcyon that he ete & put it before ye chylde of ye vyrgyn marye. And it fortuned one daye that he fell in the water before his sayd moder / & was drowned / she ranne to fetche people to drawe hym oute all dyscomforted. and whan she came agayne / she founde hym where he yode oute of the water & played hym with two apples. He was demaun∣ded how he came out / he answerd that ye vyrgyn marye yt he saluted / had drawen hym out & had gyuen hym ye two apples. D. ¶Another example how the vyrgyn marye ayded a woman to chylde in ye see of the mounte of saynt myghell. Cxx. VIncent sayth in the myrrour hys¦toryall in the fyrste partye of the eyght booke yt a woman with chylde the tyme comen for to chylde put herselfe on the waye to the moūt of saynt myghell in one of the solempnytees with dyuers per¦sones. And whan they were on ye sandes the sygnes appered that ye see came. The people had fere & toke them for to crye in¦feringe the dethe / & began for to renne to¦warde the mounte of saynt myghell. The woman with chylde myght not flee / but abode in grete fere & trauayll / & wyst not what to do saue for to call the ayde of the vyrgyn marye & saynt myghell. And gre¦te multytude of people lamented her on the ryuage of th see cryenge towarde he¦uen for the helpe of the vyrgyn marye. for to abredge the vyrgyn marye came to ye ayde of the sayd woman / couered he and was as in a sure place / & kepte her from the water in suche maner yt neuer droppe of water touched her / & also she was dely¦uered of a sone in the myddes of the see / without hauynge fere / for she was well kepte. Whan yt the see was withdrawen / the vyrgyn marye shewed her the waye / And after the sayd woman came to the ryuage with her chylde / & founde the peo¦ple to whom she recounted ye myracle. &c. E. ¶Another example of a ayner that the vyrgyn marye defended / and kepte from hauynge ylle. Cxx THe disciple recyteth in his promp¦tuarye of the vyrgyn marye that there was a paynter yt paynted in a chir∣che the ymage of the deuyl ye moost horry¦blest that he myghte / & also paynted the ymage of our lady the moost fayrest and with the fayrest colours yt he might fynde And ye deuyll hym demaūded why he ma¦de yt / and he answerde bycause it was soo as the payntynge shewed. And then the deuyll by enuye made ye tymbre to falle yt he stode on bycause he sholde fall downe / & as he began to fall the ymage of our la¦dy paynted toke him by the hande so that he myght not fall / & kepte hym frome the malyce of the duyll. And the ynners wt¦drewe them from yll doynge in beholdȳg the sayd ymages / the one horryble and ye other fayre. &.
F. ¶Another example of the good & ho∣noure yt the vyrgyn marye dydde vnto a thefe the whiche fasted the saterdayes in her honour and absteyned hym from ylle sayenge. Cxx. IT is wryten in dyalogo cesarii As men saye yt there was a thefe in a forest renōmed ryght yll for yt that he pyl∣led slewe & dyde many ylles with many compaignons. And he foūde a monke pre¦cher in the waye vnto whom he sayd that he sholde sle him yf he yode not after him And in walkynge ye sayd monke demaū∣ded hym what he was / & what operacyō he dyde. He answerde I am a thefe so gre¦tely renōmd ye whiche hathe so to name And the sayd monke sayd vnto him / thou wakest moche dredest thou not the peryll of thy soule. He answerd no / no more than a beest. And the sayd monke asked hym what had ben his lyfe / he answerd whan I was a chylde I stryued wt my felawes & after I was a thefe / & to be shorte I ne¦uer dyde no good dede / but euer dyde ylle & nowe am I the mayster of theues / and the monke sayd vnto hym. Dredyst thou the paynes of helle the whiche ben made redy for ye for thy cursed dedes / he answe∣red. Of ye soule without doubte she is lost And the monke the whiche wolde conuer∣te hym sayd vnto hym. Yf I shewe vnto the how thou shalte be saued wylte yu do it He sayd ye. And the monke counsayled hȳ that he sholde faste euery saterdaye in the honour of our lady / in doynge none ylle yt daye / & that the vyrgyn marye sholde be the meane yt he shold be saued. And ye said thefe therto consented & vowed. He kepte yt vowe & letted his felowes also to do ylle And the people that his felowes toke on that daye he delyuered them in ye honour of the vyrgyn marye. Also on ye saterday he ne armed hym ne bare staffe of defen∣ce. And on a saterdaye his enemyes foun¦de him and his felowes dysarmed for the saterdaye he was taken & neuer wolde de¦fende hym / albeit he had be more stronge Also he ne excused hȳ. Whan he was led in to the cyte and that he was knowen he was Iuged to be hanged. How be it after¦warde the Iuges were moued with pite as men byleue by the vyrgyn marye and toke theyr counsayll togyders / & wolde yt he ne sholde deye. But he said that he wol¦de nothynge soo / & that he loued better yt he sholde wepe his sȳnes here than in hell And the Iuges sayd to hym wylte thou be byhedede. He answerde & sayd I care not what ye payne be so that I deye. And they said vnto hym / wylt yu haue a preest He answerd ye ben al crysten men. I con¦fesse vnto you my synnes I ne dyd neuer no good deed. &c. but onely yt I haue fas∣ted the saterdayes there nedeth no preest Than he repented hym ryght bytterly in confessynge openly his synnes. And bare and endured the payne & dolour of the de¦the wyllyngly for his sȳnes ye whiche was vnto hym harde penaunce. To be shorte he was byheded without the cite. And the nyght folowynge the watche men wat∣chynge in the cyte sawe in the place wher he was buryed lightes celestielles / & fyue fayre matrones the whiche vnburyed hȳ the whiche set his heed vpon his body the whiche there toke agayne / & layde it ho∣nourably in a coffyn & bare it in to the cy∣te vnto the chirche dore / of the whiche ma¦trones there were foure the whiche bare the said coffyn & hadde candelles in theyr handes / & the .v. was more fayrer than ye other the whiche yode by with candelles / Whan the gardiens of the chirche sawe yt they dredde and wende it had ben a fan∣tasye
vnto whom one of them sayd. Say vnto your bysshop that he burye honoura¦bly my seruaūt in the chirche in suche pla¦ce the whiche hathe be byheded without ye cyte. And yf he were neclygent yt to do she menaceth hym. More ouer she named the vyrgyn marye. Whan the bysshop herde the sayd thynge & sawe the hede to be ta∣ken vnto ye body dredde & called ye clergy & buryed hym honourably / not as a thefe but as a martyr the whiche endured the dethe for his synnes. After that the sayd dede was knowen al the men of ye prouȳ¦ce fasted the saterdaye in the honour of ye vyrgyn marye. G. ¶Another example how a thefe behe¦ded ne myght deye wtout confessyon for yt that he had fasted the saterdayes in ye ho∣nour of ye gloryous vyrgyn marye. Cxx. IT is wryten in the promptuarye of the myracles of our lady that a the¦fe the whiche pylled a poore woman & he founde that she fasted the saterday from her enfance / & demaunded her the cause / She answerde that those the whiche fast the saterdayes in the honour of ye blyssed vyrgyn marye ne sholde deye wtoute true penaūce. And ye said thefe toke this thyn¦ge agreably & fasted them. In thende he had the heed stryken of / the whiche cryed confessyon confessyon / those ye whiche pre¦sent were meruaylled & gote him a preest for to confesse hym. After yt the heed had be put agayne vnto ye body & that he had made true confessyon he sayd. I had this gyfte of grace to confesse me by the glory¦ous vyrgyn marye for ye whiche I fasted the saterdayes. The deuylles were about me but they ne myght nothynge do vnto me for the presence of the vyrgyn Marye & ben fledde for the holy confessyon. Whā he had spoken these wordes he deyed. &c. H. ¶Another example how the vyrgyn marye ayded vnto a thefe in his dethe by¦cause he had fasted on ye saterdaye. cxx. IT is wryten in the promptuary o the dyscyple yt ther was a grete the¦fe yt neuer had done good dede / but onely that he had faste a saterday and made to synge a masse to thende yt the vyrgyn ma¦rye sholde conuerte hym before his dethe And the sayd masse & faste were so moche agreable vnto the vyrgyn mrye that she appered vnto the sayd thefe vnto whome she sayd. I haue prayed my sone Ihesu cryste for the that thou sholdest conuerte the and also repente the of thy synnes. He hathe gyuen vnto the suche grace that be¦fore thy dethe yu shalte speke fyue wordes that shall delyuer thy synnes. Afterward this thefe was taken & holden in bandes / & on the thyrde daye was ledde to be han∣ged / & in the way god gaue vnto hym gre¦te contrycyon / & in that true contrycyō he sayd ye .v. wordes folowynge. Deus {pro}pi¦tius esto michi peccatori. yt is to say. God be mercyfull vnto me synner. I. ¶Another example how a thefe han¦ged myght not deye wtout receyuynge of his ryghtes thrughe our lady. Cxx. IT is wryten in the promptuary of the myracles of oure lady / yt there was a thef yt fasted only brede and water the vygylles of the feestes of oure lady. /
And whan he yode in theft he saluted her & prayed her yt he ne sholde deye in mor∣tall synne. And it befel that he was taken and hanged / but he ne might deye by thre dayes. He called those yt whiche passed by & prayed theym that they wolde brynge a preest vnto hym / yt whiche came with the Iuge & with the people / he was vnhan∣ged / vnto whom he said yt the vyrgyn ma¦rye susteyned hym on the gybet / & so was lette go / & lyued after holyly. &c. K. ¶Another example how a thefe was brused & myght not deye without confessi¦on / for he hadde fasted the vygyles of our lady. Cxx. IT is wryten in the promptuary of the myracles of our lady yt thre bre∣dern were dysheryted of a knyght castyl∣lan. And after that they watched the wa∣yes in the nexte woddes & dyde many yl∣les. And that knyght toke two yt he made to hange. The thyrde dredde & confessed hym vnto a relygyous ye whiche warned hym to cease of doynge yll. He answerde I ne maye cease tyl that I haue stryken the knight wt swerde or arowe yt hath slaȳ my bredern. More ouer he sayd he wolde fast brede & water the foure euens of our lady / to thende he deyed not without con∣fessyon. The relygyous sayd yt it was wel done to faste / but it shold not prouffyte yf he ceased not his sȳne. He yode forth and after was taken of the knyght yt broke al his membres. And as he was ful of woū¦des he sayd he shold not deye tyll he were confessed & receyued his cretour. Than whan he had his ryghtes he deyed. &c. A. ¶Another exāple of a monke dyspen∣ser the whiche was dronke vnto whom ye enemye appered for to slee hym / And the vyrgyn marye kepte hym. Cxxi. IT is wryten in the promptuary in ye myracles of our lady yt in an ab∣baye there was a dyspenser ye loued perfy¦tely the vyrgyn marye. Soo it happened one tyme that he was so dronke yt he reled in the cloystre & ne myght fynde the way to the chirche. Than the deuyl came vnto hym in lykenes of an horryble bolle whi∣che wolde haue stryken hym with his hor¦nes / but a ryght fayre damoysell put her bytwene them holdȳge a rodde in her han¦de / & rebuked hym & put hym forth ryght strongly for that yt he wolde doo ylle vnto her seruaunt / & hym cōmaunded that he sholde go his waye. Than he departed & the vyrgyn. And the said monke put him selfe in the waye agayne for to go vnto ye chirche. And the enmye appered vnto hȳ in semblaunce of a dogge enraged yt wol¦de lepe in his face. And the fayre vyrgyn came yet agayne & put her betwene them the whiche deuyll fledde all confused / and ye monke entred in to ye monastery: Than the enmye came in semblaunce of a lyon enraged the whiche wolde deuoure hym / but ye blyssed vyrgyn forgate not her fren¦de came before that the enmye greued hȳ & stroke him harde with her rodde / & com¦maunded hym to come no more agayne. And the enmye departed all confused / & the vyrgyn toke the monke by the hande & ledde hym in to the dortour & layde him in hys bedde / & put his pelowe vnder hys heed / & made the token of the crosse vpon hym. And whan ye monke awoke he was wele. Our lady cōmaūded hym yt he shol∣de confesse him & accōplysshe his penaūce
And that afterwarde he sholde kepe him from fallynge agayne in to synne. And ye monke her demaūded what she was / she answerde I am the moder of Ihesu crist And whan he herde that he fell vnto her fete & yelded vnto her graces / & she moū∣ted in to heuen. B. ¶Another example how the vyrgyne Marye delyuered frome dampnacyon a clerke lecherous. Cxxi. THe dysciple reciteth in ye myracles of our lady yt there was a vicious clerke yt had alonely this goode dede that he sayd deuoutly the matyns of our lady And one daye as he passed thorowe a wa¦ter for to accomplysshe his lecherye / he be¦gan to saye his matyns / & whan he had sayd aue maria gratia plena / he fell in to the water in sayng dn̄s tecū / & was drow¦ned / the deuylles toke his soule / but ye vyr¦gyn Marye came to defende it / & bycause ye deuylles had dyuysyon with her for the sayd clerke they yode in Iugement before god. And oure lady sayd yt the clerke had ended his dayes in her seruyce and spake so yt Ihesus cōmaunded yt the soule shold retorne vnto the body. &c. Men fynde an¦other example semblable of a monke se∣cretayne yt was drowned in seruynge the vyrgin marie as he yode to accomplysshe his lecherye / & the vyrgyn marye delyue∣red ye soule in to ye body to amende hȳ. &c. C. ¶Another example how the vyrgyn marye & saynt peter delyuered a monke from dampnacyon. Cxxi. IT is wryten in the promptuary of the myracles of our lady that there was a relygyous in the monastery of sa∣ynt peter the whiche lyued yll / whiche to∣ke one tyme a playster medeynail for the helth of body with some freres. And after he deyed incontynent without confessyon & without the other sacraments. And as the deuylles ledde his soule in to hell saint peter had pyte of his monke / and yode to praye our lorde Ihesu cryste for his soule And our lorde sayd vnto hym how maye he be saued the whiche is deed in synne wt¦out doynge Iustyce. Whan saynt Peter herde his wordes he yode vnto the blyssed vyrgyn marye to thende yt she sholde pra∣ye for yt soule. And whan the vyrgyn ma∣rye was before her sone / he sayd / Moder what aske ye. And whā she had requyred for the soule of the sayd relygyous Ihes{us} answerde. Syth that it pleaseth you that he haue pardon I graūt for your prayers that the soule retourne vnto his body for to do penaunce yt he may be saued. Than saynt peter chased awaye the deuylles / & cōmaunded two aūgelles to bere the sou∣le in to the body / the whiche lyued wel af¦ter and recounted all the dede. D. ¶Another example of monkes yt rose & brake theyr lycence. Cxxi MEn fynde by wrytynge yt ther we∣re of monkes yt rose before daye & yode in sportynge by a ryuer syde / spekyn¦ge fables & vayn wordes. And forthwith they herde a grete tempest of ores / & the monkes demaūded what they were / whi¦che answerd we ben enemyes of hell yt be¦re ye soule of ye prouost to ye kȳge of fraūce apostate / for he was in relygyon & left it.
Than ye monkes had grete fere and sayd Vyrgyn marye praye for vs vnto your so¦ne Ihesus. And the enemyes answerd ye haue done as wyse men to cal the ayde of the vyrgyn marye. For that yt ye haue bro¦ken your lycences & are oute of your chir∣che at an houre not dewe we had put you vnto dethe & borne you with this soule he¦re in to helle yf ye had not called the ayde of the vyrgyn marye. And incontynen ye monkes retourned vnto theyr monastery And ye deuylles bare away ye said soule. &c E. ¶Another example how he the which brake the arme of the ymage of ye vyrgyn marye was strangled of the deuyll. cxxii IT is wryten in the promptuary of the myracles of oure lady yt a woman was pursewed of the∣ues / & she hydde her behynde a pyller where the ymage was of the blyssed vyrgyn marye. And one of the theues wenynge to stone ye sayd woman stroke with a stone the ymage of ye enfent of the vyrgin marie & brake it. And incon¦tynent grete haboūdaunce of blode yode ute. Of the whiche thynge all those that sawe this thȳg were a meruayled in pray¦synge god. And he that stroke that stroke was strangled of ye deuyll before al. Ano∣ther example wryten in the myracles of ye vyrgyn marye that a Iewe caste an yma¦ge of the vyrgyn marye within ye draught And forthwith he was strangled. &c. A. ¶Another example that a woman ye whiche deyed in synne was borne agayn in to her body for to do penaunce at the re¦quest of the vyrgyn marye for that that ye sayd woman had serued her. Cxxii THe disciple recyteth in his promp¦tuarye & sayeth that a woman of honest conuersacyon cōmyt a sȳne in you the / the whiche she ne durste neuer to con¦fesse / yet was she axed many tymes / but she had of custome to go as euery daye be¦fore the ymage of the vyrgyn marye and there wepe her synne vnto herselfe. And in thende she deyed so / & before yt she was buryed her spyryte came agayne vnto her body / by the meryte of the blyssed vyrgyn Marye / and after yt she had confessed her synne vnto the preest she deyed & was sa¦ued. &c. B. ¶Another example how a man shol¦de be dampned & sentencyed vnto damp¦nacyon he was delyuered at the requeste of the vyrgyn marye and borne agayne in his body. Cxxii. THe dyscyple recyteth in his promp¦tuarye yt as a man sholde be dam¦ned / ye vyrgyn marye vnto whom he had done of seruyce prayed for hym vnto god her sone that he sholde yet gyue hym lyfe for to confeffe hym. And he accorded vnto her / but he sentencyed that he sholde be. xl yeres in purgatorye for to make satysfac¦cyon of his slouth / yt is for his penaunce. C. ¶Another example how the vyrgyne marye ayded vnto a frere yt whiche was enflambed in hate agayne the procurour of the couent. Cxxii.
IT is wryten in the lyfe of faders yt there was at Rome a frere of the ordre of prechers the whiche ryght hard∣ly treated the procuroure of the couente / Whan the pryour had vnderstonde thys thynge he enioyned vnto the sayd hater to saye euery daye seuen pater nosters / ye whiche hater was more strōgly troubled & enflāmed agayne the sayd procuroure / And one daye he was seke & as deed / and he vnpuruayed of wytte / began to curse vnto his said broder & vnto his ordre. In thende he sayd as the freres were in oray¦son. Moder of god / moder of god helpe me. It semed vnto him as he recompted that he was in brennynge fyre for his ha¦te & his Ire / & said yt for the paynes intol¦lerables he had dyspeyred & blasphemed / And at the prayers of the freres & in cal∣lynge the ayde of the vyrgyn marye was restored vnto the fyrste lyfe / & in probacy¦on of trouthe he was all flayne. D. ¶Another example how the vyrgyn marye ayded in Iugement a man yt was mercyfull & voluptuous. Cxxii. THe dysciple reciteth that it is wry¦ten yt ther was a man full of mer¦cye he was rauysshed & the Iugementes were shewed vnto him. In the whiche he sawe that many were presented vnto the Iuge. And one presented the almesdedes yt he had done for the loue of god. And a∣nother the oraysons yt he had done & sayd for the loue of god. Another presented the clothes wherwith he had clothed the oo∣res. Another the werkes of mercye that he had done to the poores yt he had lodged And the said man the whiche sawe ye said thynges thoughte vnto hymselfe. Thou haste done more of the werkes of mercye than those here. Now thou shalt haue we¦le before this Iuge. So whan it came vn¦to his course the Iuge ne demauned hȳ how many werkes of mercy hast thou do¦ne / but he hym demaūded / what delyces & what voluptuosytees hast yu wtdrawen from the for the loue of me. And he helde his peas / for he had euermore lyued in de¦lyces. And the Iuge sayd vnto hym / hast thou not sene yt I haue sayd in the gospel math. vii. Arcta ē via q̄ ducit ad vitā / yt is to saye strayte is the waye yt ledeth vn∣to life / yt is vnto the realme of heuen. and incontynent the sayd man torned hȳ vn∣to the vyrgy mary / & vnto the sayntes yt he had serued moost specyall / & rquyred them yt they wolde praye for hym / & that in tyme to come he sholde amende his lyf & purposed to weyke his body in fstyn∣ges & abstynences & to serue god in tyme comynge. And it was so done. For at the prayer of the vyrgyn marye & of sayntes he came to lyfe agayne / & weyked his bo∣dy all the dayes of his lyfe & lyued in gre∣te abstynences / & was more mercyful vn¦to the poore than he ne had be & fyned his dayes in good consūmacyon. &c. E. ¶Another example of a relygyous yt whiche was in his dethe in Iugement be¦fore god. & the vyrgyn marye & the saȳtes of paradyse dyde ayde hym. Cxxii. THe disciple recyteth in his sermōs that there was a yonge frere rely¦gyous in ye realme of englond in ye coue of bery ryght deuoute the whiche relygy¦ous was seke to the dethe / & in the presen¦ce of ye suppryour & of fyue of his bredern he shytte his eyes with his hande & with
full mouthe began to laugh. Vnto whom the said suppryour said. Wherfore laugh ye / & he sayd. That oure kynge saynt Ed∣monde martyris come / & here all ye hous is replenysshed with aungelles. And he laughed agayne more ententyfly & sayd / Our lady is come salute we her. And af∣ter that that they had all sayd salue regi∣na. &c. The seke man sayd. O how agrea¦bly hathe ye vyrgyn marye taken this sa∣lutacyon & in reioysyng made laughyng After that the sayd seke frere adressed his eyen towardes the dore. And his coloure chaunged & said vnto them. Now is Ihe¦su cryste comen to iuge me. His membres were as deed / & he trembled so yt he swet out of mesure. And as he was constytute before the Iuge in all drede he sayd som∣tyme ye / naye. And somtyme he prayed ye vyrgyn marye yt she ne wolde departe frō hym / sometyme he reproued all his accu∣sers / & amonges other he began to saye. / O Ihesus gye me this lytel. Vnto whō the suppryoure sayd. What is yt dere bro∣der / these lytell synnes ben they compted amonges ye grete. And he sayd ryght gre¦uously. Alas ye. And the sayd suppryour warned hym yt he sholde not dyspeyre for our lorde is mercyfull. The sayd seke an∣swered with a Ioyous face. It is a thyn¦ge verytable yt he is full of mercye / and I yelde thankes vnto ye blyssed vyrgyn ma∣rye  vnto the sayntes the whiche assyst with her & the whiche hathe made inter∣cession faythfully for me vnto Ihesu crist And after a lytell of tyme he deyed and rested in peas. &c. ¶Innocenti▪ A. ¶Examples of people Innocentes & fyrste example. Of a chylde innocente the whiche kepte the ordre of the myneurs re∣lygyous & ne wolde touche no moneye / & deyed wele. Cxxiii IT is wryten in ye boke of hony bees that there was a childe the whiche was borne of honest parentes / whan he was fyue yere olde / & that he had sene the ordre of the freres myneurs he requyred of his parentes yt he myght receyue ye ha∣byte / & as they estymed yt his wordes we¦re childysshe / they knewe after verytably yt the chylde toke hym to kepe ye customes of the freres myneurs / for he yode barefo¦ted & gyrde wt a harde corde & kepte hym¦selfe in all maners to touche syluer or gol¦de. And in this thynge there happened a meruayllous case. For there came mar∣chauntes to lodge in his faders hous the whiche meruayled them to se suche a chyl¦de in suche habyte / & to knowe yf he tou∣ched no moneye one of them caste a peny in to the cuppe wherin they dranke secre∣tely / & with a lytell wyne gaue the cuppe vnto ye chylde to drȳke / whiche as he had dronke & sawe the peny he began to crye horrybly / & caste away the cuppe / & sayd with eyen eleuate. God all puyssaūt thou hast knowen yt I not knowen hath violed myn ordre. Afterwarde he trembled and was pale as tendynge to ye dethe. Whan his fader sawe yt he ranne for the preest yt absoyled hym / & shortly ye dolour passed / The sayd chylde on ye holy dayes gadred chyldren & taught them theyr pat{ur}noster / & aue maria. And yf he sawe in theym yt they were proude or vycyous he repreued them / in byddynge theym serue god. In the conuocacyons of this chylde the aun∣cyentes ranne with the lytell chylde / and also delyted them ryght moche in his pru¦dence and in his answers & documentes
Whan he sawe his fader yt swore or was dronke he had compassyon & in wepynge sayd vnto hym. Fader our preest sayth in the chirche yt those ye whiche do those thyn¦ges ne shall possede paradyse. And in a so¦lempnyte he repreued his moder in we∣pyng afore her pewe felawes bycause she was pompously arayed / & sayd. My mo∣der ryght dere fle ye precyous clothynges that thou deserue not the paynes eternel¦les. And without taryeng by the wordes of the chylde his moder had horrour of su¦che clothes / & wolde no more vse theym / The maners & the gestes of yt chylde she∣wed the perfeccyon of vertues / & the gra∣ce of god beynge in hym. The chylde had not yet seuen yeres accomplysshed whan he deyed. Whan dethe approched he con∣fessed hym & requyred of the preest the sa¦crament of ye aulter / but ye preest denyed it hym for his youthe. And ye chylde with grete grace of orayson stratched oute his handes vnto the heuen & sayd. My lorde Ihesu cryste thou hast knowen that my souerayne desyre is to haue ye. I haue de∣maunded the / & also I haue done that yt I sholde do. And I hope that I shal not be voyde of thy presence. These thynges spoken the chylde cherid his parentes we¦pynge yt present were & theym prouoked to lyue better. And amōges these wordes of exhortacyon / of orayson & of laudynge he yelded his spirite vnto god impolluted And incontynent the habyte of the ordre of the freres myneurs yt was caste vpon hym ne appered more / yt is they were ne∣uer more sene after. And after his dethe in his buryeng some of ye freres myneurs werē the whiche ne myght neuer say this psalme deprofūdis / albeit they forced thē and began agayne many tymes / the whi¦che gaue to vnderstonde yt that holy soule ne had indygence of orayson. After the de¦the of the chylde the fader and the moder prouffited so moche in ye example of theyr sone that they lefte al delyces of ye worlde And the fader was relygyous in ye rdre of prechers & the moder in the ordre of wo¦men. And so they entred in to relygyon & serued debonayrly. &c. Vnto the example of this innocent we sholde lyue wele to y ende that we may deye wele / he was in∣nocent yt is without synne / & without yll wyll / he taught to do the good & to flethe yll. And so sholde we do to thende that we may escape dampnacyon. For innocence & vertue kepe a man from peryl of damp¦nacyon eternell. Also god sayeth in ye gos¦pell that yf ony man kepe his cōmaunde¦ment without cōmyttynge synne yt he ne shall be dampned. Vn̄ ioh̄ .viii. Si qis ser¦monē meū seruauerit mortē nō videbit īe¦ternū. The said chylde kepte the worde of god. Than he ne ranne in to dampnacy∣on eternell. Also saȳt gregorye sayth. Nul¦la nocebit aduersitas si nulla domineī ini¦quitas. That is to saye none aduersytee shall noye the as vnto the soule yf no sȳne haue domynyon in the / noo synne ne had domynyon in the sayd innocent: ergo. &c Also the holy ysydore sayth. Nec plaga: nec mors te trebit{ur} si bene vixeris. That is to say / yt neyther ye plage / ne dethe shall fere the. Yf yu haue wele lyued. The sayd childe lyued wele without synne than the dethe ne noyed hym & by the consequent he is saued. And so shall be those the whi∣che lyued in innocence without synne. &c. B. ¶Another example of a scoler inno∣cent the whiche chased the deuyll from  mayden. Cxxiii.
THe disciple recyteth in his promp¦tuarye yt certayne relacyon was made of those the whiche were present & the whiche hadde sene yt a mayden ryght moche daunced on a sondaye with many yonge men. Whan she was wery she re∣tourned vnto the house / slepte & was pos∣seded of the deuyl. She cryed the houshol¦de arose & she was bounde for her wood¦nes. In the mornynge she was borne in¦to the oratorye founded of the vyrgyn ma¦rye where many myracles were done. as the lytel scolers apperceyued her they ran after where she was tormented. Of the whiche chyldren one of the aege of .xii. ye∣res ye whiche was mre hardy and wyse than the other began to expelle the deuyl that h sholde yssue out of the mayden. It was shewed yt the deuyll was besyde the naul. The said chylde made wt his thom¦be the sygne of the crosse vnder / & so by ly¦tell & lytell thrughe the sygne of the crosse he chaced the euyll vpwarde & made hȳ to come in to her mouthe / in ye whiche all sawe it in the guyse of a grene orchyn pyl¦led & foule. A meruayllous thynge / ye peo¦ple cryed yt he forced to reentre in agayne And the chylde opposed in makynge the sygne of the crosse / & constrayned hym to yssue wt grete vyolence. ¶Whan he was out as sayd is in lykenes of an orchyn / he toke it hardely in his ryght hande & keste it in  dytche where the rayne dyscended The whiche departed before all ye people The hande of the chylde was blacke with touhynge of the mayden / but by the was¦shynge of holy water it was made clene / ¶By this chylde innocent without sȳne that dyde this myracle is to vnderstonde that ye estate of innocencye is moche vty∣le & agreable to god / but they muste haue symplesse & wysedome as the sayd chylde had. And by that yt the mayde was a daū¦ceresse & the doughter of the deuyll for to take & deceyue soules for her beaute and by her maners / the sayd deuyll had puys∣saunce to entre in to her & tormente her / wherfore all daunceresses beware by her lest that the deuyll tormente you in helle / withouten ende. &c. C. ¶Another example that a lytel inno¦cent impetred of Ihesu cryst pardon for an apostate. Cxxiii THe disciple recyteth in his promp¦tuarye & sayth yt a lytel monke in¦nocent spake wt Ihesu cryste a lytell chyl¦de in namynge hym his lytel broder / and was before the ymage of the vyrgyn ma∣rye that helde her sone in her armes. And Ihesu cryste answered & spake to hym a¦myably as broder to broder. And an aun∣cyent monke yt had be longe in apostasye herde this thynge / supplyed the lytel mon¦ke that he wolde praye his lytell broder yt he wolde forgyue hym his synnes / and yt he wolde receyue hym to mercy. And the lytell yonge Innocent obteyned of his ly∣tell broder that requeste / & the auncyente was moche Ioyous. &c. D. ¶Another example that the orayson of chyldren innocentes auaylleth moche for the quycke & the deed. Cxxiii. THe disciple reciteth in his sermōs that it is wryten in many passa∣ges that a deuoute bysshop sawe in hys slepe a chylde fysshynge in a welle with a hoke of golde and with a lyne of syluer / and from the well drewe a fayre woman
Whan he was waked he sawe yt chylde in the chircheyarde the whiche prayed on a tombe / & he hym demaunded what he dyde there. He answerde I saye pater nos¦ter / & myserere for the soule of my moder And the holy man vnderstonde yt the sou¦le of that woman was delyuered frome purgatorye by the prayers of that chylde innocent / & that pater noster was ye hoke of golde / & miserere was ye lyne of syluer. E. ¶Another example of a chylde inno∣cent ye touched a hote hors shoe. Cxxiiii THe dysciple reciteth yt it is wryten in the boke of hony bees that ther was a chylde in the monastery of ye ordre of saynt benet Innocent & ryght symple in his yonge aege. And one tyme his ab∣bot ledde hym with him for recreacyon / & for cause to shoe his horses / the said abbot descended before the dore of a smyth / the whiche abbot meruaylled hym of the sim¦plesse of the sayd chylde y toke a hote shoe in his naked hande & lyfte it vp without brennynge hym. Then the abbot & they yt were presente were abasshed & honoured the innocence of ye sayd chylde / & that thȳ¦ge they proued often. After yt the abbot & his people were occupyed in other thyn∣ges / & the sayd chylde entred within the house. The wyfe of the smyth set hym on her knees in meruayllynge her of ye dede / & in playenge with hym. And the wyfe in¦tysed the chylde in experte of malyce / & de¦maunded hym yf he wolde haue suche a wyfe as she was / & he said ye. The which ledde hȳ hastely vnto bed as not knowin¦ge & instructe hym. He promysed to do it / After the lyenge the chylde was dyspoyl∣led of innocence / came to the forge & toke the hote shoe as he was accustomed but he was greuously brente / & yed / of whi∣che thyng the abbot was moche troubled & thought in his courage yt the soule as hurte within syth yt he was hurt without & that innocence yt had kepte hym before was no more in hym. Then the abbot led him agayne in to the abbaye / & enquyred hym dylygently for to tell the trouthe. He confessed the said dede symply. And after by grete teres trembled his dōmage & dy¦de repente hym. &c. F. ¶Another example that the deuyl vn¦knewe ye synnes of  synneres after true confessyon / and said that she was a good woman. xxiii. MEn fynde by wrytynge yt god ga∣ue dyuers goodes vnto a man & his wyfe beyng in ye cyte of ome / yt whi∣che myght haue no children / and therfore they prayed god that they myght haue so¦me / & he gaue them a sone / yt whiche was so moche beloued of the moder yt she held him often betwene her armes & slepte / & the fader of the sayd sone had a vyage to go to Iherusalem / & sayd vnto his wyfe whan he sholde departe yt she sholde do al¦messe haboundaūtly / & that she sholde ke∣pe wele theyr sone. And she layde hym wt her / & by the admonycyon of ye deuyl had his company & was wt chylde. Then she was moche angrye & fered the synne and the dyshonour of the worlde & of her hus∣bande / & by the entysemente of the deuyll yt admonesteth to do yll: qr peccatū pecca¦tū atrahit / kylled her childe whan he was borne / without that ony body knewe it sa¦ue only god. Then the deuyl wolde that ye synne were manyfest for to lese the wyfe
came vnto rome in guyse of a doctour dy¦uyne astronomyer / ye whiche deuyll tolde many th̄ges to ye romayns yt sholde hap¦pen. And amonge the other thynges said that there was in rome a wyfe yt had con¦ceyued of her sone her husband beyng out the whiche had slayne her sayde chylde / And that yf the sayd sȳne were not auen¦ged yt god sholde make the cyte perysshe & all they. Then ye romayns were moche abasshed & myghte not byleue yt the sayd woman had done the synne for her holly lyfe that she ledde & her almes / was ma∣de to come before the sayd deuyne or doc∣tour / the whiche accused her to haue done the sayd sȳne before al. The sayd woman yt had done ye sayd daye seruyce to ye vyr∣gyn marye was sodaynly prouyded of yt that she sholde answer & sayd. Syr ye ac∣cuse me of a grete thynge. And for to gy∣ue answere I demaūde thre dayes of ter¦me & I shall answer you. It was graun¦ted. And the meane whyle she yode to con¦fesse her to the pope / the whiche gaue her in penaunce to serue the vyrgyn marye / And whan it came vnto ye terme establys¦shed the said woman was presented befo¦re the senatours of Rome / & before ye said deuyll in guyse of a doctour / ye whiche se∣natours sayd vnto the deuyl in guyse of a greate doctoure. Thou haste accused this woman vnto vs to haue conceyued of her sone & to haue slayne her chylde / here she is what sayest thou. And ye deuyl answerd it is not this woman here. I neuer sayd yl of er / this here is a good woman ye whi∣che dothe many good dedes. And also she hathe in her company marye ye moder of god ye whiche maketh me to fere. And for her it behoueth me depart / for I am a de¦uyll redy to deceyue folkes. ¶Virtus. A. ¶Examples of people vertuous / and fyrst exāple of vtues of .v. bredern. cxxiiii THe dysciple recyteth in his promp¦tuarye & sayeth yt a holy abbot de∣maunded of fyue of his brederne / whiche ben ye vertues yt pleaseth you before other & how haue ye lyued syth that ye were re∣lygyous. The fyrste sayd I haue in suche wyse lyued yt I remembre euery daye my synnes with dolour of herte / & I am con∣fessed of all yt whiche I haue done to day The seconde sayd I haue deuysed all my tyme in two partyes the one to be emplo∣yed in deuocyon & oraysons / ye other in la¦bours & in seruyces of the freres. And I haue dystrybute faythfully where I haue might vnto lytel & grete. The thyrde said I am all gyuen vnto the werkes of mer∣cy & vnto compassyon / in suche wyse that I wepe with those yt wepe / & I am Ioy∣ful with them yt are Ioyous. The .iiii. said I haue euermore gone & adioyned where I was dyspreysed. And I haue in suche wyse gouerned me to thende yt I may co∣me to playne humylyte & pacyence. The v. said I haue lyued in suche maner that I neuer troubled no man & I was neuer troubled of ony. The sayd abbot requyred of god yt these thynges here were vnto hȳ reueled. And a voyce came fro heuen that sayd vnto hym. I gyue me. I suffre yt I be founde. I sell me. I suffre yt I be stolē I suffre yt I be surmoūted of man. And the abbot yet prayed god to knowe theym more euydently. Than he herde a voyce yt sayd. I gyue me vnto ye repentaūt. I suf∣fred me to be foūde in oraysons & labours I sell me vnto hym yt hathe compassyon on his neyghbours / & that enioyeth them
of theyr good & wele. I suffre yt I be sto∣len of ye humble & dyspreysed. And I suf∣fre that I be surmounted of man the whi¦che ne troubleth none and holdeth hym in peas. Than the abbot requyred to knowe whiche was ye best amonges them. Than a voyce came fro heuen ye sayd. It is he yt troubleth noo man / & is not troubled. &c. For to knowe what vertue is vnderstond the scryptures of saynt Austyn yt sayth. {quod} virt{us} ē quedā equalitas vite: vndi{que} con∣sonans rationi. That is ye vertue is an e∣qualyte of lyfe the whiche alwayes soun∣deth & conformeth vnto reason. Et crisos. dicit. {quod} virt{us} animi ē recto de deo sentire et recte īter homines agere. That is to sa¦ye / the vertue of courage is felyng of god ryghtfully / & do wel ryght amonge ye men Et hieronim{us} dicit {quod} sola apud deū liber∣tas ē non seruire peccatis: sūma apud deū nobilitas est clarere virtutib{us}. That is to saye / onely lyberte towarde god is / serue not vnto synnes / & souerayne noblesse to∣wardes god is resplendysshe by vertues / Et legit{ur} in quarto ethicorū {quod} virtuos{us} be¦ne vtit{ur} qibucū{que}. The vertuous vse well in all thynges. Et ī nono ethico{rum} dr̄ {quod} vir¦tuosorū beatissimaē vita. The lyf is right blyssed of the vertuous. Et legi. ī .ii. ethico¦rū. Virtus certior ē: et melior oī arte. Ver∣tue is more certeyne & better than all art & crafte. And one ought here to note that one sholde not be to Iuste / nor to vniuste for to fle the inconuenyentes yt therafter may folowe / but one ought to take ye mea¦ne. For it is wryten in .ii. ethico. {quod} oīs vir∣tus cōsistit ī medio: in oībus medium est laudabile. &c. B. ¶Another example that four vertues were in foure hermytes. cxxiiii. IT is wryten in the lyfe of faders ye foure hermytes wer in one house / the whiche hermytes one tyme enquyred eche other of theyr vertues & for to shewe the moost specyall. One sayd yt he was so humble yt it semed hym yt none was wors than he in all the worlde. The other sayd that he was pacyente. The thyrde sayd  he herde gladly speke of god. The fourth sayd yt he prayed gladly. And wt one assent prayed god to gyue them knowlege wh∣che was moost agreable to hȳ / & they her∣de a voyce yt sayd to them. The fyrst hath take me / the seconde holdeth me / ye thyrde byndeth me / & the fourth bereth me wher he wyll. &c. C. ¶Another example of the excercyte of fyue sreres. Cxxiiii THe dysyple recyte in his promp¦tuarye & sayth yt an abbot had .v. freres / whiche he cōmaunded to tell theyr vertues. The fyrste sayd I haue made ge¦nerall confessyon euery daye this ten yere The seconde sayd I haue studyed to haue good entencyon in orayson euery daye by xx. yeres. The thyrde sayd I haue ben me¦serycordyous asmoche as I myghte .xxx. yeres. The fourth sayd I haue troubled no persone by .xl. yeres / & haue susteyned al thynges pacyently. The .v. sayd I haue sought dyspreysynge by .l. yeres and haue founde none semblable to me in humyly∣te. Then the abbot prayed god yt he wolde shewe whiche o them were the beste. and a voyce sayd to hym. The fyrst gyueth hȳ selfe to our lorde. The seconde fȳdeth our lord. The .iii bereth our lorde. The .iiii. by∣eth our lorde. The .v. vaynquyssheth oure lorde. &c.
D. ¶Another example how a man and his wyfe wer in lyke in meryte vnto sa∣ynt pafuncius. Cxxiiii IT is wryten in the lyfe of faders yt a holy fader named pafuncius re∣quyred of god that he wolde shewe vnto hym vpon the erthe vnto whom he shold be semblable. And a voyce came vnto hȳ the whiche sayd. Knowe thou yt thou art lyke vnto the fyrste man of suche a strete nexte. Whan pafuncius herde these wor∣des he yode to knocke at ye dore of his hou¦se. And the man ranne before hym as he had of custome to receyue his gestes / and wasshed his fete & set hym to dyner. And betwene ye metes pafuncius requyred his hoost what his dedes were / what he stu∣dyed & vnto what operacyons he excersy¦sed hym in. He answerde hym of thynges humbles. For he loued better yt his goode dedes were hydde than publysshed. And the sayd pafuncius said vnto hym that it was reueled vnto hym of god yt he was dygne to be in the companye of monkes / Than his thought was yet more humble & sayd yt he ne was culpable of fewe good dedes / but syth yt the worde of god hathe be spoken vnto ye from hym a man may nothynge hyde. I shall tell than what I haue done amonge many the whiche ben in vsge. Thyrty yeres ben now accom∣plysshed yt I haue had consentemente wt my wyfe to kepe chastyte & contynence / & tha none of vs hathe had ado with other I haue had thre sones of her / & that hath because wherfore I haue knowen her to haue lygnee. I neuer cease to receyue ges¦tes / in refusynge noo body but gyuynge them theyr necessytees. I haue sytte in iu¦gement. I haue not accepted the persone of my sone agayne Iustyce. The fruytes of labours of other neuer entred in to my house. In all noyses I haue put peas / no persones toke neuer my seruaūtes in cul∣pe / nor my beestes neuer hurt the fruytes of another. I neuer defended to laboure in my felde those yt wolde sawe therin / & also I neuer toke of the better for to har∣me the worste / nor neuer suffred the riche to ouergo ye poore. I haue studyed all my lyfe yt I ne sholde wrathe no man. Yf I haue had Iugement to do yet haue I not condampned persone but I haue studied me to make peas. The instytucyon of my lyfe hathe be in these thynges by the gra∣ce & gyfte of god. Whan pafūcius hadde herde these wordes here he kissed his heed & blyssed hym. Bn̄dicat tibi dūs ex syon vt videas bona que fecisti in iherusalem Thou haste wel & conuenably done these thynges beforsayd / but there faylleth one souerayne good dede / yt is that thou leue all / & that thou folowe the true sapyence of god / the whiche thou ne mayst come to yf thou abiecte not thyselfe & deny thyself as ye gospell telleth. Nisi abneges temet ipsū et tollas crucē tuā & sequaris x{pre}m. Whan the sayd man had herde these wor¦des here without taryenge & wtout to or∣dre ony of ye thynges of his house folowed the man of god & yode with hym in to de¦serte. In the whiche he gaue vnto him ye ordre of conuersacyon spyrytuel & taught hym the excercytes of the parfyte study∣entes & he gaue hymselfe vnto the scyen∣ce secrete. &c. E. ¶Another example that a mynstrell was semblable in meryte vnto saynt pa∣funcius. Cxxiiii IT is wryten in the lyfe of faders ye one tyme saynt pafuncius requy∣red
of god that he wolde shewe him vnto whome he were semblable in the worlde. The answere was gyuen vnto hym yt he was semblable vnto a mynstrel yt sought his lyuynge in suche a towne. Than he was abasshed of the answer & in dylygen¦ce yode vnto the towne to seche the man And whan he had foūde hym he asked hȳ moche what holy thynges & relygyeuses he had done / & how he had ledde his lyfe. / He answerde yt he hadde be a man synner & of cursed lyfe. It is not longe tyme syth yt I was a thefe / & haue put me to mayn¦tene this excercitude myscheuous. & pafū¦cyus asked hym yf amonges the theftes yf he had ony good operacions. He answe¦red I ne fele me culpable of no good dede but as I was amonges the theuys there was taken a vyrgyn consecrate vnto god that my felawes wolde deflore / & I put me in the medle and toke her awaye fro them / & by nyght ledde her in to the strete of her house withoute hauynge ony atou∣chement dyshonest. And in another tyme I founde a woman of honeste forme stra¦yed in hermytage. I demaunded her fro whens / or wherfor / or how she was come in to that place. And she answerde ne de∣maunded me not I vnhappy wyfe and questyon me not of those causes / but and it please the to haue me for mayde / lede me where thou wylt. I woman peruerse & yll haue had a good husbande / the whi∣che is oftentymes beten traylled & put in torments / & is kepte in a dongeon bycau¦se of dettes yt he oweth. We haue had thre sones togyder that are also withdrawen for bycause of the sayd dette. And I right vnhappy yt am sought for to be put in sē∣blable paynes / fle frome place to place / & of pouerte & myserye am all abyden / and yet haue I ben thre dayes without etyng Whan I herde ye sayd woman I had py∣te / ledde her in to our denne & gaue her to ete / for she deed for hongre. I gaue her also thre hondreth shelȳges for to delyuer her out of payne & seruytude / her husban¦de & her sones. Whan ye said woman had the money she yode in to the cyte & dely∣uerd them from paynes. Then pafūcius sayd yt he neuer dyde suche thynges. God hathe shewed me of the that thou hast not lesse of meryte towardes hym than I & therfore dysprayse not thy soule that shal haue suche meryte. Whan the mynstrell herde these wordes of pafuncius he caste awaye his pypes & wente with hym into his hermytage / & chaunged his songe se∣culer in to spyrytuell / & excercysed hym in fastynges / oraysons / afflyccyons / & to ly∣ue straytly. And at the ende o thre yeres he yelded vp his spyryte vnto god. &c. F. Another example that a prouost & his wyf were sēblables to an hermyte. cxxiiii IT is wryten in the lyfe of faders yt an hermyte was full of grete absti¦nences so yt he ete but rotes & pouertees / made requeste to god yt it pleased hym to shewe yf there were ony man in the worl∣de that were of strayter lyf than he. Then god reueled hym yt he sholde go se the lyfe of the prouost of suche a towne. Thrmy¦te yode. And whan he approched the said towne he foūde ye prouost on a fayre hors clothe with fayre clothes / & in his compa¦ny many ryders & notable folk / so he was moche abasshed  se soo greate pompes. Tolde to ye prouost how god cōmaunded hym to se his lyfe. And the prouost badde hym go to his wyfe whiche sholde shewe hym theyr lyues. Then he yode to her the whiche shewed hym the state of the house
And she made to preprayre vnto dynere of precious metes as she had accustomed And whan they were sette at dyner men brought the fyrst metes of good vyandes before them. And incontynente that they had be set vpon the table they were borne awaye agayne wtout ony thynge etyng of chem After men brought the seconde me∣tes / & the thyrde / & euery of thyem better than other / & were borne awaye without ony thynge etynge. The hermyte seynge so good mete taken awaye fro before hȳ demaunded them / but it was tolde hym that he sholde lyue yt daye after the life of theym. And at the laste men broughte of musty brede all knawn with myse. And the wyfe of the prouost ete a lytell / & she ne ete of other / but al was gyuen & dystry¦buted vnto the poore. After whan yt euen tyde came to go to bedde ye wyfe of ye pro∣uost sayd vnto the hermyte yt they sholde goo to bedde togyder / the hermyte wolde not / but the wyfe sayd vnto hym that he shold / and that it behoued yt he sawe how they lyued. Than whan they were layde & warme the hermyte was tempted of ye synne of the flesshe to haue so fayre a wo∣man by hym & wolde haue delte with her. Than she said / vp vp ryse we & do we as we haue accustomed my husbande and I And whan they were vp they yode in to a tubbe of colde water yt was by the beddes syde. And they were there so longe yt they trembled of colde. Afterwarde they yode to bedde / & whan they were hote agayne th hermyte was tempted of lecherye / & wolde haue had her company. Than re∣tourned they agayne in to ye tubbe of col∣ water. All the nyghte ne cessed they to do so. And the hermyte seynge that sayd vnto hymselfe yt they ledde a more strayt∣ter lyfe than he ferre / & that it was reasō that they had more grete meryte than he And the prouost that was so wele clothed was also a man of good Iustyce to punys¦she the malefactours & to yelde vnto eue∣ry man that the whiche was his. &c. G. ¶Of fastynges / and abstynences of saynt Germayn. Cxxiiii. IT is wryten ye saynt germain was noble / for he was duke of Burgun∣dye / & after was bysshop. He tormented his body by .xxx. yere soo that he ne ete of brede of whete / ne yet dranke of wine but two tymes in the yere yt is to saye at crys¦tenmas & Eester. And it was medled soo moche with water yt it ne had but a lytell taste of wyne. Also in the .xxx. yeres he ne ete of pese ne of benes / ne salte for to ha∣ue sauour in his mouthe. For his refeccyō he ete fyrste of the asshes / & after of barly brede. In wynter ne yet in somer he had none other clothynge but onely the heere his robe & his rochet yt is his habite ye whi¦che he ne put of / but onely whan he gaue it vnto ony poore / or that he ne brake it. / His bedde was of asshes & besen wt heere & with a sack / he ne had neuer vnder his heed ne vnder his sholdres feder / but wa∣ylled & bare the relyques of his sayntes a¦boute his necke. He ne vngyrded hym but seldom. That yt he bare of abstynence in this present lyfe was aboue man. And af¦ter he dyde so many of myracles yt yf the merytes ne had proceded men wolde ha∣ne wende that it had be a fantasye. &c. H. ¶Of the greate austeryte of two wo∣men. Cxxiiii.
IT is wryten in ye boke of hony bees that there was a woman in ye par¦tyes of barbāce recluse in a lytell taberna¦cle yt ware nexte vnto her flesshe an hau∣bergon of mayle / & aboue the said hauber¦gon she hadde an heere made of hogges brystilles ye whiche prycked her flesshe tho¦rowe the maylles of the sayd haubergon. She laye vpon the erthe naked & among the stones / & ete thre tymes alonely in the weke. And she put of asshes in her brede and ne ete but by weyght & mesure: I. ¶Another example. Cxxiiii. THe disciple reciteth in his sermōs that a vyrgyn was in her hermy∣tage .xxxviii. yeres the whiche dwelled in a dytche & serued god deuoutely. And she neuer ete in the sayd hermytage but her¦bes fruytes & rotes / & in all that tyme she ne sawe noo man. And afterwarde two hermytes passed by her entred into ye dyt¦che there they foūde her ded & put her in sepulcre. &c. By these examples of this bo¦ke a man may knowe by experyence that it is yll taken vnto synners dysobeyssaū∣tes vnto god / & that it is wele taken vn∣to the obedyentes. And therfore thou the whiche art in this worlde lyuynge myrre thy selfe in the example of thy neyghbour & knowe thou yt it shall take ye in lyke wy¦se as it is done vnto hym yf thou dysobey vnto god. Whan thou hast sene thy neygh¦bour fall in to an ylle passage & that it is inconuenyente of body or of soule / or to fall in to helle by his foly thou sholdest ke∣pe the for to do as he dyde / or thou shlte not be wyse / but thou sholdest lerne ye ma¦ners & condycyons of those ye whiche ha∣the lyued holyly & vertuously in obeyeng vnto the cōmaūdementes of god to then¦de to go with hym in to the glorye of pa∣radyse vnto th whiche we may go cū illo qui est benedict{us} ī secula seculorū. amen. ¶Here endeth the booke intytuled the floure of the cōmaundementes of god with many examples & auctorytes ex∣trcte as wel of the holy scryptures as of other doctours & good auncyent fa∣ders the whiche is moche prouffytable & vtyle vnto all people / lately transla∣ted out of Frensshe in to Englysshe in the yeres of our lorde. M.CCCCCix. Enprynted at London in Flete strete at the sygne of the sonne by Wynkyn¦de Worde. The secōde yere of ye reygne of oure moost naturell souerayne lorde kynge Henry the eyght of that name. Fynysshed the yere of oure lorde. M.CCCCC.x. the .xiiii. daye of Septem¦bre.
wynkyn de worde printer's device of Wynkyn de Worde
