256.5 20179020 23690
A TRVE RELATION OF taking of ALBA-REGALIS, in the Ger∣man Tongue, called Sfullweissenburgh, the chiefe Cittie in Nether-Hungarie, which was taken by the Christian Armie, the Twentith of September last past. 1601. Truely Traslated out of the German Tongue. ¶ LONDON, Printed by Ralph Blower, for C. B. 1601:
¶ The cruel Actions of the Turkish Empe∣rours from time to time, against the Christians, with the winning of the great Cirtie of ALBA-REGALIS, from the Turkes, &c. CUrteous and welbeloued, before that we proceede to the Treatise of the ta∣king of this Cittie, we will first re∣hearse some particuler Actions & pro∣céedinges of Soliman ye Turkish Em∣perour, and of the scituation and im∣portance of the said Cittie. Wee do reade in the Turkish Histories, that after the decease of Selimus, the Ele∣uenth Emperour, succéeded his sonne Soliman, who in the beginning of his Raigne, shewed him-selfe to be of a very méeke and tractable Disposition, and gouerning his Em∣pire in quiet and peaceable estate, resembling a Lambe in nature, as being then but young and vn-experienced: but after that he grow to ripe yeeres, and that with th'increasing of his age, the olde Turkish Ambition and Tiranie began to créepe in his heart: his louing lambe-like Disposition was conuerted to a most furious Lion-like rage; and an vn-quen∣cheable bloud-thyrst, insomuch that all men were deceiued in their former hopes and expectations of him, for there was neuer any Turkish Emperor since the first springing of their Mahometan Religion vntil this day, that euer did soe much annoy and vex Christendome as this Soliman hath done. First in the yéere of our Sauiour Christ 1521. he  vp his forces, and besieged the Gréekish Weisseaburgh, which
in short time he tooke. Next went he to Rhodes, and there he shot downe the Walles, the Turrets and Houses: hold∣ing and continnuing his violent assaults for halfe a day to∣gther, insomuch that at one assault he lost 2000. of his men. On the other side, the Christian Knights be-haued them∣selues so valiantly that they repulsed him with small loss on their side: but at length, by reason they coulde not receiue a∣ny ayde or succour which they expected, and further by rea∣son of a great scarsitie of Men▪ Munition and Uictuals (he hauing continnued his siedge for the space of nine Moneths) they were constrained to yeelde him the Forte, togither with great guifts and presents, conditionally, they shoulde enioy their Liues and Goodes: so that euery one with his Wife, Children and goodes departed thence into Italy. Shortly after he surprised the Cittie of Mongacum. scita∣ted on the Danubie, betwéene Ofen and Gréekish Weissen∣burgh, in the yeare 1526. the 26 of August. Next hee Rapayred to Ofen, besiedging the same with a huge and in-uincible Armie, whereat the Christians who kept the same, dispayring of any Rescue or succour, rendred it vp vnto him, vpon Condition of their liues safetie; but he hauing possession therof, kept not his agréement with them, but murdred the most part of them, and made the Residue of them Captiues. After this the King FERDINANDO went into Hungarie accompanied wt CASSIMIRVS Marques of Brandenburgh, being his General vnder him. He tooke and Re-gayned ma∣ny Citties and Castles from the Turks againe, but ye Mar∣ques dyed in that iourney. When Soliman vnderstoode thereof, he Returned againe to Ofen, molesting them with a violent siedge, and lost eight assaultes, but he continuing the same still without intermi∣ssion, insomuch that the Souldiers of the Cittie being ouer∣wearied, and quite tyred, they yéelded the Cittie to the Ty∣rant againe, who most miserably murdred them all.
From thence he went to Pest, and Gran, & Reduced them all to his will, and in this his fortunat vn-controlde vaine, no Fort nor Castle was almost able to resist him. He also came vnto the Cittie of Vienna in Austria, thinking to ob∣taine the same as easily as the others, and be-gyrt the same in 16. places rounde about with a strong siedge. The Soul∣diers of the Cittie themselues fired thrée of the Subburbes, to th'end they might not aduantage the Tyrants, nor enda∣mage themselus, They also auoyded the Citty of many thou¦sandes of vn-necessarie persons, as, Spirituall men, Woo∣men and Children: whereof the woemen and Children for∣the most part of them, fel into the Bloud-houndes Clawes. In the Cittie of Vienna remayned onely 2000. menne, who making continuall sallies vpon the Enemie in their ve∣ry Camp, tooke away 8. Barrels of Powder, whibh they had laide and appointed to vndermine the Cittie, & blowing vp the Walles in many places: but perceiuing he could not preuaile, he was forced (God be praysed) with shame to de∣part thence, There was a speach giuen out of a thousand persons which the Tyrant notwithstanding should haue taken and caried out of the neighbour countrie and villages. This done, he departed towardes Constantinople, to cir∣cumcise his thrée sons, to wit, MVSTAPHA, MAHOMET and SELIM, which was done with great Triumph and so∣lempnitie. Also, in An. 1541. the saide Soliman tooke in the pro∣uince of Morea, diuers Citties belonging to the Venetians. This Soliman bring thus fully bent to spill the Christian bloud, which to do, he neyther spareth Labour nor charges, not only in Hungarie and Austria, but also resolu'de (vppon confident hope of his continuing victories, tending altogither to the vtter extirpation of the Christian Faith) to bende his course also towardes Germany, and to that end, with a huge and mightie Hoast, he tooke his iourney vp the Danubie a∣gaine
towardes Alba-Regalis, in the German Tongue cal∣led Stulweissenburgh, where he determined to make his seat in that kingdome, the same being the chiefest and principal∣lest Cittie both for strength and Riches in all Nether-Hun∣gary, wherein also heeretofore the Kinges haue kept their Courts. Likewise, if at any time, their Kinges desiring to holde their Courts in any other Cittie or Castle, and that in the same they chaunced to dye, their Bodies were alwayes conueyed thither againe, where their Funerals were in most Royal sort celebrated, and were interred in a most stately & worthy Cathedrall Church, which in former time was founded and built by Stephanus, Father vnto Emericus King of Hungary, to the Honour of the blessed Uirgin Mary: which saide Church is soe endowed with such aboundance of Treasure and Priueledges, as it is acompted farre to ex∣ceede all others neere vnto it. This Cittie is scituated on a Boggie place, seeming alto∣gither in Mens iudgments invincible, for it is fortified and begyrt with mighty strong Walles and Bulwarkes, & hath also great Subvrbs thereunto, with particuler and priuat entrances, likewise there are strong Gates which are also fortified with Bulwarks and Walles against any suddain incurtion or inuasion of the Enemy insomuch that it can not possibly be entred, neyther is there any ordinary accesse but vpon the Bankes & Walles of Earth cast vp in the Moo∣rish ground to trauel on. Moreouer, it is guarded & strength∣ned with very deepe ditches. Also through the Cittie floweth a strong running River named the Sarwits. This invincible Cittie was by composition taken by the saide Soliman the 2 of Nouember, in An. 1543. and euer since hath bin possessed by those Infidels. Also, togither with this Cittie, he tooke many other pla∣ces, and was even at the same time when Fraunois King of Fraunce would haue invaded Germany, surprising diuers Citties in the prouince of Elsash, whereof many of their Go∣uernors
met him with the keyes in their handes: whereby those Citties were not spoyld nor distroyed, by reason wher∣of, the Emperour Charles (of worthy memory) was constrai∣ned to leaue the defence of Hungary to resist the French, and besiedged the Ile of Malta: but he was forced to leaue the same to his great Dammage. Soliman likewise tooke Iula and Sigeth, wherin that most worthy Captaine, Earle Ncholas von Serin behaued him∣selfe most valiantly, but at last was with all his people most pittyfully slaughtared. The Tyrant then perceiuing that with his Tyrany, hee could no further preuaile against Christendome, hee caused his first borne sonne called Sultan Mustapha through false ac∣cusations▪ to be murdred in 1553. And after that he had long time tyranized, and grieuously molested Christendome, he ended his life at Funfkirchen in Hungarie. From the Camp at Alba-Regalis, the 17. of September. 1601. ALthough that the Subvrbes also were outward∣ly fortified with a strong Wall, and with diuers Bulwarkes as is already said, likewise guarded on th'inside with a Mighty Ditch: all this not∣withstanding (with the help of God) the Christ∣ans tooke the same by in unforce and strength, howbeit that the Turks making a mighty resistance both in shooting and in continuall casting of fire-workes troubled vs greatly, but finally, they▪ perceiuing themselus to hae the worst▪ setting the houses on fire (wth small losse on our side) they forsooke the Subvrbes, and fled into the fort or Cittie. The Christians immediatly vpon the taking thereof for∣tified the same, and brought some great pieces of Ordinance
to batter the citty withall. In the aforesaid Subvrbs were found 20. péeces of Ordi∣nance, which were al cast out of their cariages: also a great quantity of Hay, but th'other goods, were all before carried into the citty, by the Turkes. In this assault were lost 16. of our men, and some others hurt, and amongst ye rest, the L. Vabecourth, who was shot in the right foote very daungerously. Likewise, there was found great store of new grayne & Munition, and there was at that instant aboue 200. christi∣ans released. This day we began to batter the cittie with 9. pieces of Ordinance, with good hope to giue an assault vnto ye Town: Whereunto our Souldiers are very willing and forwarde, insomuch that we hope shortly of some good. Moreouer, there is good store of Bauin and Faggots pro∣uided for the filling vp of the Ditches & wayes, which were very ful of Water, and muddy withall. Notice is also giuen that the Beeg (a Turkish commaun∣der) with all his Horsemen (being 1000. fighting men) is in the cittie, and that they haue also 30. great pieces of Ordi∣nance, ready mounted in their carriages, with store of Mu∣nition and Uictuals, which Horsemen togither with the per∣iured Valachians, do dayly sally out vpon vs. From Prage the 24. of September. 1601. THis Day his Emperial Maiestie, (by his own Messenger) hath receiued newes that ye Cittie and Fort of ALBA-REGALIS (God be pray∣sed) was taken in Order and maner héereafter following. First, when our men tooke ye fore∣stréetes and Subvrbes, the L. Rues examined the prisoners and other oores Iahabitants: which place in the citiy the Turkes held for their strongest or weakest, and by their an∣swere
they gathered, the Turkes helde the Marrish side for most strongest, and as impossible for to be entred that way: Wherevpon the L. Rues without delay, sent immediatly 2. of his seruantes to espie & discouer ye same, whether it were so or no: who at their returne, confirmde the same to be true, discoursing then vnto him the scituation of the place, & that it was impossible to bring any men that way: But the L. Reus making little accompt of their speaches, followed his first determination, and presently tooke 1000. braue, stout & couragious footmen, commaunding each of them to take his faggot or Bavin vnder his Arme, and so went to the place prefixed, and as euery man passed on, according as néede re∣quired, threw down his faggot or Bavin to passe thereon o∣uer the Bogge: In which braue exployt, himsealfe with an hundred chosen men, marched foremost, to the notable ex∣ample of all Christian Generals and Leaders: my sealfe haue séene th'xperience of many valiaunt and aduenturous exploytes, but surely [my Lordes) in all my life I neuer saw the like gallant enterprise of Souldiers performed, for wée stoode almost for the space of 9. houres continually vp to the waste or middle in Water, with euery Souldiers bundle of Bavin at his backe, or vnder his Arme: but truly we found it more difficult then at first we déemed it, for whosoeuer he were that mistooke his footing, and missed of the right way, fel ouer Head and Eares into the water, and in such sort as that his fellowes were faine to help him out againe. Yet all this notwithstanding being so perillous an enterprize, the Souldiers were neuer once perceiued to abate their courage, nor to séeme vnwilling to accomplish their Resolued enter∣prize: but perceiuing me with an 100. men before, and that I fared no better then the worst of them, they with their woonted courage & forwardenes, followed all togither, and (with ye special help of God) in the Morning an houre before day, we gaue the assault vpon ye strongest place. In this en∣terprize we lost 6. men, & some 7. or 8. were drowned & smo∣thered
in the Mudde (th'almightie God graunt vs his er∣ayde and strength. Amen. When the Turkish Centinel espied vs, with a great strik∣ing and noise, seconded our Alarum, and wée also after the like sort fell vpon them, and put them to flight. Likewise, the Duke of Mercury (as he was appointed) hearing the outcryes and the noyse of the Alarums▪ assaul∣ted the Cittie in an other place, so amasing the Turks, that they could not tel which way for to turne them-selues, nor where to saue themselue, and in that sort (God be praysed) they were ouercome. All the men, women and Children, that came in the way in the first fury, were euery one put to the sworde. Thus was this invincible place woon with maine force and violent Armes, now againe reduced into the Christi∣ans power: after that it had so long time binne possessed by those Infidels, to the great preiudice and hurte of all that part of Christendome.
¶ From Vienna the 24. of September. 1601. WHen the Turkes perceiued that (by the help of God) wée had obtayned the Uictory, many of them (both men, women and Children) leaped ouer the Walles into the Bogs, thinking for to escape, but as wel those which were not drowned or smo∣thered in the mudde, as also the residue which were not then slaine in the Cittie, were all taken prisoners and brought into the Christians camp. In the Cittie was great store of powder (as some doe re∣port 30000. waight) which the Turks had dispersed in sun∣dry places and churches. But when as now our men in the assault were Running to and fro at vn-awares, or any of the Turkes witting of it, haue set the same on fire, and haue blowne vp all the houses and churches about their eares: so that it should seeme, that little more then the bare Walles are left standing. All the Riches and Treasure of the Turkes is consumed by fire, or else the poore Souldiers had gotten-good pillage, (the cittie being very Rich) but there was nothing at all sa∣ued except 300. imprisoned christians. By the fire also, we lost 300. of our men, as also many pie∣ces of Ordinance were molten. We hope very shortly to heare good newes from Canisa, Th'omnipotent God graunt his people power and strength To whom, be all praise, Honor and glory, for euer and euer. Amen.
BY Letters from Italy to London, Receiued the fower∣téenth of this present Month of Nouember, the taking of the afore-named Cittie of Canisa: togither with other places by the christian Armie. Also, that the Turkish Ar∣mie vnderstanding of the losse of Alba-Regalis comming wt a strong Hoast to surprise the same, before yt the christians shoulde fortifie it: were discomfited and put to flight, in 2. seuerall pitcht Battailes, wherein many thousands of the Turkes haue bin put to the sworde: togither with the death of two Bashas, Generals of the Armie. The truth of all, wil with the next Newes be made ma∣nifest. I beséech the Almightie God of his infinit goodnesse and mercy, to continue his lardge benefits towards vs, against the Enemies of his Fayth, To the Honor and Glory of his most holy and blessed name, and the maintenance of his most gloryous Gospel. Amen. FINIS.
