25770 99836476 753
ZACHEVS CONVERTED: OR, The Rich Publicans Repentance. Restitution. In which, the Mysteries of the Doctrine of Conversion, are sweetly laid open and ap∣plyed for the establishing of the vveakest. Also Of Riches in their getting, keeping, expending; with divers things about almes and restitution, and many other mate∣riall points and cases in∣sisted upon. By IOHN WILSON, late Preacher of Gods Word in Guilford. Printed at London by T. Cotes, for Fulke Clifion, and are to be sold at his shop upon new Fishstreete hill, 1631.
To the Reader. CHristian Rea∣der, the seri∣ous conside∣ratiō of Gods eternall love to his, in his Son Christ Iesus, to∣gether with all the bles∣sed consequents which flow from it, and are chained unto it, is able to swallow up the lar∣gest heart and deepest
thoughts, as the greatest rivers are swallowed up and lost in the Seas. For thinke but a while of the vast and wonderfull distance & difference which is be∣twixt hell and heaven, of the different conditi∣on of a soule lost and sayed, from what depth  Iphier. of misery thou art drawne, unto what height of happinesse exalted; and tell mee if thou standest not as a man astonished; thy spi∣rit failing, and thy tongue eaving to the
roofe of thy mouth, when thon findest thy selfe tied unto the Lord in more bonds, than there bee haires on thy head, or dust on which thy feete have trod. Which should mightily fire the hearts of all such as have given their names unto Christ, to fill their hands with all advantages, and to goe forth to meete all op∣portunities, for the ad∣vancement of the king∣dome of our Lord Ie∣sus Christ, which shold be more deere unto us
than all our worldly contentments a thou∣sand times; yea more deere than the best blood that warmes our hearts. And we are the rather to hasten and adde wings unto these our resolutions and en∣deavours, not onely be∣cause our dayes are short and uncertaine, and decline apace to the evening shadow; as also that the most are miserably be-nighted, and go hence fearefully guilty of neglect; of the good they might
have done or received this way. But especial∣ly in regard of the con∣dition of the places and times, where & where∣in wee live, wee finde the kingdome of hell and darknesse suffering violence; many run∣ning Quâ ex∣sation purgamus qui dbo∣li servis inoes sum, & Christo pr san∣guin pretio vi∣ce▪ noc in modicis rependi∣mus? Cypr. de oper. & Eleem os. with more than ordinary speede to de∣struction, and carrying with them as many as they can: We may ob∣serve also the scorners chaire highly exalted, the foote of pride and insolency treading up∣on the face of piety and
godlinesse, and hard and cruell speeches e∣very where uttered a∣gainst the sincerest professors of the truth; And lastly, how are many of Gods owne people growne se∣cure, remisse, and spi∣ritlesse: Many having eir desires and endea∣ours confined within a narrow compasse, rea∣ching no farther than themselves, or some few about them; many looking little further than the bounds and precin of their owne
parishes; the most little considering the straits and necessities of the times, the breaches and losses which the Church of God su∣staines, either amongst our selves, or in forraine parts. Vnto these wee may adde the desires, brea∣things, and longings of many poore hungry soules, who like the young Ravens, which are left of them which should nourish them, Iob 38. 41. doe cry unto God for meate. So that the pre∣sent
season doth seeme to cry aloud unto every one, that beares good will to Sion, * to stirre O si posse∣ exci∣tare ho∣mines & cumipsis pariter excitari, ut tales essemus amatores  per∣manentis, quale sunt ho∣mines ∣matores itae su∣ienti. Aug. de doct. Christ. up all our strength, and to put forth our selves to our uttermost, that all fit wayes bee taken, for the furtherance of the good of Gods Church and people. Amongst other means this is not of the least nor lowest consequence the printing and pub∣lishing of good and wholesome bookes, of sound and profitable Treatises Not onely
because if there were not a continuall supply of these, many would reade little; but also be∣cause that by these there might  some helpe reached for unto Quanto▪ propin∣quius si∣nemmun∣di dibo∣lus videt, tanto erudelius ersecut∣nes exer∣e, ut qui se conti∣nuò dam∣nandum consp,  socios multipli∣ce, cum quibus gehexnae ignibus addica∣tur. Isid, de sum, bon. such as are either slen∣derly provided for, or altogether destitute of preaching of the Word where they live. In re∣gard also that Sathan, in this last age of the world, knowing his time is but short, doth mightily *bestirre him∣selfe, to finde out such wayes of frau and cir∣cumvention
as may be most prevalent and sea∣sonable. What neede is there then of the la∣bours of Gods faithfull Watchmen, who stan∣ding in their Towers, discover his wiles, and affoord such reliefe as is most agreeable to the present times and di∣stresses of men? More∣over, many grow slug∣gish, drowsie, and luke∣warme: Now the words of the wise and their writings, are like goads and nailes fastned in the spirits of men,
which might quicken them up unto their du∣ties, & their lines being spiritfull and sparkling, might set their hearts a burning within them, with a holy zeale for God and his Glory. Lastly, we being fal∣len * Aden∣tius ab illis de∣fenditur esis quam a nebis op∣pgnatur. Hieron. epist. ad Theoph. * Nusquā facius profi quam n castris rebell um. Tersul. de prae∣script. ad∣vers. ae∣reticos. into those times wherein Popery increa∣seth, new errors are sprowting up, and old heresies are called up out of their graves, and represented under the deceiving showes of re∣ceived truths. Such as are on the Lords side,
may by such meanes as these discover their hy∣pocrisie, & secure those that love the truth, from their delusions. These, and such like reasons as these, have induced me (Christian Reader) to take hold of this present opportuni∣ty, and to offer unto thy view this usefull Trea∣tise of a Reverend Di∣vine now with God. A faithfull and a paine∣full labourer in the Lords Vineyard above the space of 30. yeares. A man he was one of a
thousand, an eminent light, mighty in the Scriptures, and a happy interpreter of them; of a sound judgement, so∣lide and dexterous in unfolding difficult que∣stions; besides his mo∣destie, mildnesse, and meekenesse of spirit, affablenesse in conver¦sation wherein hee ex∣celled the most. A man retired and drawne much up into himselfe, neither thinking great thoughts of himselfe, nor seeking great things for himselfe;
but seeking him, and conversing much with him that is invisible; hee attained a great measure of divine wisedome, and heaven∣ly mindednesse: So that wee that knew him looked on him, and judged much of him to bee in heaven already: Of whom it may be af∣firmed, as once of a worthy Divine of Scot∣land, that hee did even eate, and drinke, and sleepe eternall life: Whom if thou didst not know in his life
time, yet now learne to be acquainted with him in his labours; who will converse sweetly with thee in thy bo∣some, speake to thy ve∣ry heart, and counsell thee as from God. Concerning the Trea∣tise it selfe, I shall spare to speake much of it, be∣cause it is so well able to speake for it selfe, as thou findest so judge: Many choyce truths there are handled in it, many places of Scrip∣ture profitably opened, many secret pssages a∣bout
the Conversion of a sinner lively discove∣red. Thou mayest take notice also of the seve∣rall wayes of dealing, in bringing home lost creatures. Some hee draggeth as by the haire of the head painfully; o∣thers he leades as by the hand gently: of which, the subject of this book is a notable example. I had thought to have offered it unto thee by the hands of some o∣ther more eminently gifted, & better known in the Church, on
whose judgement thou mightest with more safety have reposed thy selfe; but well knowing the worth of it to bee such, as will easily dis∣cover it selfe; and by reason of my interest in the Author, and some trust reposed in me this way; I rather chose to let my meanenesse ap∣peare, than not to dis∣charge that debt of love which I owe to the me∣mory of my deceased friend. The Lord blesse these things unto thee, and
teach thee to profit; and do thou blesse God for the labours of the dead and living, and let him begge a prayer of thee, who being affecti∣onately devoted to the good of thy soule, doth rest, Thine in the Lord Iesus Christ, H. Whitfield. ly in Surry. May this 13.
The principall Contents contai∣ned in this Booke. ZAcheus his description, conversion, and occasion thereof. Fol. 1 The cause of it, and efficacy thereof. 2. & 3 Christs office in seeking and saving. 4 His sufferings and death vo∣luntary. 5 From thence wee have encou∣ragement to come unto him for salvation. 17 Wee ought to know this love of his. 19. 20 And to frame our obedience
accordingly. 21 Iericho of old cursed, yet yeelds some heires of blessing. 27 Likewise doth Bethsaida, Tyrus and Sidon, and also Samaria. 26. 27 The reason thereof. 29 It may minister comsort to those that live in barren times and places. 32 The world, Behold, implyes certainety, and matter worthy attention. 34 Which may both further our faith. 37▪ and also correct our dull negligence. 38 The naming of the person ascertaines the history. 40, 4 The mentioning of his sinne (being pardoned) is no staine unto him. 42, 43 What the Publicans were. 44 Vsuall wiyes to get great ri∣ches.
45 Some great and rich ones, chosen, called, and saved. 47 Riches, how hindrances of salvation. 48, &c Hurt in unlawfull and base keeping of riches. 54 Evill expence of riches, fur∣thers damnation. 57, &c To what end God gives ri∣ches unto men. 64 Riches further the godly in the exercise of grace. 68 Wicked men not to be prefer∣red for their wealth. 73 Zacheus his desire to see Christ, the occasion of his con∣version. 74 His desire respected and graunted. 77 God begins his good worke in small things. 78 Workes of the Spirit in mens hearts, sometimes unknowne to
them. 81, &c Wee must observe secret mo∣tions unto good. 86 Zacheus in seeking to see Christ, neglected his worldly reputation. 89 Preventing grace. 93 The effects of it. 94 Our Conversion descri∣bed by our knowledge of God, in the face of Iesus Christ. 96 Impediments and lets some∣time from others, sometime from our selves. 98, 99 Sathan a principall hin∣derer of good things. 100 When a doore is opened to doe good, there are many adver∣saries. 101, 102 Wee must not for all that thinke it strange nor be discou∣raged. 103 Gracious affections or de∣sires,
not quelled by lets. 109 The unsoundnesse of va∣nishing desires. 117 Comfort for those that pur∣sue good and holy desires. 120 The good successe of Za∣cheus his desire. 125 Comfort for those that lin∣ger after Christ in holy desires. 130 Christ bids himselfe to Za∣cheus his house. 134 God sometimes gives a∣bove our desires. 135 The use wee should make thereof. 141 The doing of Gods workes with speedinesse. 143 Incouragement for those who are weakned by Gods de∣ferring to grant their Prayers 147 God of his owne goodnesse is pleased to proceede in his fa∣vours.
156 Consolation arising there∣of, 165 Caveats to be used herein. 168, 169 Obedience in following the lively and powerfull calling of Christ. 170 It is not in man that willeth and runneth, though wee must both will and runne. 179, 181 The gracing of obedience is to bee ready and without delay. 185 Ministers duty in their hea∣vers. 191 Men must not take delayes in repentance. 194 Dangers in delaying. 198, 199 Vse thereof to young men. 201 Considerations about our cal∣ling to Christ. 213 Where Christ commeth there
is joy. 218, 219 The causes of this joy, and the benefits that come there∣withall. 222, 223 It is to their reproofe that ri∣fuse Christ offered. 228, 229 A double act of faith. 235 Against such as goe on un∣heartfully in good things. 238 239 Heavinesse and griefe blame∣able in Christians. 142, 143 Meanes to maintaine true joy in the Lord. 246, 247 Differences betwixt the joy of the godly and temporizers. 248, 249 As Zacheus received Christ into his heart and house, so ought wee to receive Christ in his members and servants. 153 Our backwardnesse to enter∣taine Christ in his members and servants, reprooved. 258. 259
Helpes to further this duty. 260, 261 We should not be curious, nor too inquisitive about those whom wee entertaine to house. 267 Murmuring springeth of mistaken grounds. 268 Good men sometimes misli∣ked for well doing. 272, 273 Herein we must content our selves with Gods approbation, though we have not mens. 275 Wee must labour not onely hat we give none offence, but also that we take none, to make us weake or goe backe. 276 Sinners who they are, and so to be accounted. 281, 282 Who are not to be holden for sinners. 290. 291 Wherein stands the dominion of sinne. 292. 293. Whether all fellowship with
stnners, be sinne in a godly man. 295. 296 Considerations to be had and used herein. 297 A wicked severity, or car∣nall bitternesse against sinners. 307, 308 True profession a testimony of stable faith and unfained re∣pentance. 309 Shame and fearefulnesse to professe, reproved. Reproofe of those that shew no proofe in their workes, of re∣pentance and faith. 319 Liberality, almes, and boun∣ty expresse and shew our love to God and men. 321 The fruits thereof. 323 Rules to be kept in giving. 331 In what cases, Wives and in∣feriors may give. 336 Rules thereof. 338
A man must begin with his owne. 343 Prophets of God to be respe∣cted in bene volence. 345 What commends almes. 351 Reproofe of the covetous and illiberall. 354 The manner of Publicans sinning in their calling. 361 Sme men come to impudency in sinning for a little advan∣tage. 363 We must not bee too hasty to credite accusations against our neighbours. 367 In true conversion wee must forsake not onely sinne in gene∣rall, but even our speciall sinnes. 370 Which should move men to examine well their conversion, whether it be true or false. 374 Those whom the divell can hold no longer in the grosse sins
of the body, he leades to Popery and superstition. 377 Repentance requires to have the man cleane from secret sins. 379 Restitution of goods evill gotten, is a fruit of Repentance. 381 Restitution what it is. 384 Men should be content with a little, so it be honest and u gaine. 387 Christ honoured Zacheus and his house with his testimo∣ny. 389 As Christ is author, so hee is witnesse of his graces in men. 390 Bellarmine confuted about the certainty of salvation. 392 Men ought to get certainty of their grace, and how it may be had. 398 Those that have not assu∣rance
of their estate in grace, must seeke and waite till God grant it. 401 Wee must take notice of the time when God doth visit us with salvation. 404 It is warrantable to keepe some dayes of speciall thank∣fullnesse to the Lord. 407 Calling to grace, what it is. 414 We ought to make our calling sure. 415 Such as know their calling must be thankfull. 419 The faithfull and godly with their housholds are saved. P. 421 Men must strive to be pla∣ced in good and godly families. P. 425 To be the childe of Abraham what. 427 The fatherhood and dignity
of Abraham. 433 One faith and way to salva∣tion. 434 We must proove our selves Children of Abraham. 437 The end of Christs comming into the world. 439 Reproofe of selfe-conceited men. 443 Our calling justifies our acti¦ons. 447 Comfort in trouble, while we walke in our calling: but daungerous to meddle out of ou callings. 453 Christ tooke all oportunities, to instruct and save sinners. 437. 438 We seeke not Christ till hee looke after us. 462. A note of Gods Children to seeke the Lord. 467 Our risings after falles, to be ascribed unto Gods mercy. 470
It should stirre up our hope, love, and care, to seeke men that are lost. 472. 473 Faith breedeth love to God and his Children. 476 The successe may provoke to the duty. 477 Christ fulfilled the Law for us. 481 With our sinnes hee tooke the full punishment due to them. 491 Christ makes intercession for us. 496 The workes, prayers and prayses of the faithfull, like sweet odours. 499 Our union with Christ. 501 Papists differ from us. 506 The Gospell what: we are commaunded to beleeve it. 509 We must be changed into the image of Christ, from glory to glory. 511
Adoption belongs to glorifi∣cation, which is by degrees. 513. 514 The regenerate respect all the commaundements given them. 519. Grace freeth the godly from the reigne of sinnes. 520 They are safely preserved. 526 By faith men recover them∣selves after fals, and get victo∣ry over Satan and sinne. 531 By faith and prayer we must prevaile in inward combats & temptations. 532. 533. 534 Wee ought to ascribe unto Christ the power and ability of our standing. 537 All other Saviours besides him, are excluded. 541 Whether heathens may bee sa∣ved by keeping the Law of na∣ture. 543.
Papisme saves none, though some amongst Papists may bee saved. 547 The matter of our salvation. 551 The forme of our justification. 555 We are bound to trust and re∣joyce in Christ alone for our whole salvation. 156. 157 To Christ alone belongs the honour of binding our conscien∣ces. 560 The condition in which Christ findes us, is, To be lost. 562 We must take notice of this our miserable condition. 567 Our love to men, specially the brethren and faithfull. 571 Reasons to induce a sinner to come (out of his misery) un∣to Christ. 572 We must abhorre Satans sug∣gestions
unto desperation. 554 A man may not despaire of the pardon of any sinne that can be repented. 578 Howsoever some are children of perdition (as we are all by nature) yet others are appointed to salvatiō by Iesus Christ. 580 The uses to be made thereof. 581 The Apostle Paule ascrihes all the good that was in him, or done by him, to Gods free grace. 583 To what uses this should serve us. 583. 584 FINIS.
ZACHEUS HIS CONVERSION. Luke 19. 1, 2, to 10. THese verses con∣taine the Story of the conversion of Za∣cheus: In which he is descri∣bed and his condition; his description is, First, by his place of abode, Iericho. Se∣condly, his office & dignitie in it, He was the cheife among the Publicans. Thirdly, his condition, He was rich. His conversion is noted of the occasion and the cause. Occasion. First, Iesus passing through Iericho to goe to Ierusalem. Secondly, his de∣sire
to see Iesus who he was, which is amplified by his endeavour to obtaine it: in which is noted what hinde∣red him, the preasse, and his low stature; and the helpe which he used. First, he ranne before. Secondly, he climed up into a Sycomore Tree to see him, being to passe that way. The cause of his conver∣sion, Christ, who called him outwardly, and inwardly, to receive him into his house, and heart; set forth by his looking up to him, calling him (by name) to come in hast downe to him, to enter∣taine him, declaring his pur∣pose to abide that day at his house. Which calling is further declared by the effi∣cacie of it in his heart, and the events following.
The efficacie; First, in his comming downe, and recei∣ving him, amplified; 1. by his readinesse, hee made haste. 2. his joy, and chere∣fulnesse, he received him joy∣fully. Secondly, in his pro∣fession to Christ of two acts, of two excellent vertues; First, of liberality, giving to the poore, inlarged by the quantitie, the halfe of his goods; Secondly, of justice in possessing men againe by restitution of that which hee had taken from them by false accusation, enlarged al∣so by the measure fourefold. Both graced with a signe of confidence and constancie, his standing forth, the events following; First, in the mul∣titude they all murmured at Christ for going in to a sin∣ner
to be his guest; Second∣ly, in Christ, who testified of Zacheus that hee also was the son of Abraham, declared by the priviledge of Abrahams Children, salvation both to him and his house, with the circumstance of time, that day; Secondly, Christ justified his fact of going to Zacheus though a sinner, by his Office in two things, 1. seeking. 2. saving: decla∣red further by the object: that which is lost applyed to Zacheus and his house, who were such before Christ sought and saved them. And Iesus entred and passed through Iericho. Iericho was in the way as Iesus was to goe to Ierusalem, to offer himselfe to the death ap∣pointed him there by his
Father, and foretold by the Prophets, which hee in the Chapters before signified to his Disciples; and in his way he meets with this opportu∣nitie at Iericho and some other before mentioned. Whence by the way, wee may observe: That the suf∣ferings, and death of Christ, obser. 1. were voluntarie, he was offe∣red because he would: it was not at the will and malice of his enemies, who yet doing what they could and what was sufficient▪ to kill, made themselves guiltie of his death. First, he could have hindered his passion, in re∣spect of the course of things, which may appeare in that they that sought to kill him, even when he provoked thē, were by his divine power
so bound, both hand and tongue, that they neither laid hands on him, nor said any thing to him, because his houre was not come, Ioh. 7. 26. 30. He escaped out of their hands, Luke 4. 29. 30. Iohn 8. 59. His words wrought so in the hearts of the officers when they were sent to fetch him, that they had no will to bring him that spake so as never man spake, Iohn 7. 45, 46. When the ure was come, and the power of darkenesse, at that word, I am hee (meaning whom they sought to take to death) they went backe∣ward, and fell to the ground, Iohn 18. 6. Hee saith to Peter that if he would bee delive∣red, hee could obtaine of his Father more than twelve
Legions of Angels: and we Mat. 26. 53. 2. King. 19. 35. reade of one Angell that in a night sote an hundred fourescore and five thou∣sands, that became dead corpses. He saith, Ioh. 10. 18. that his life was so in his own power, that none could take it from him, if hee would resist. Secondly, hee is said to powre out his soule unto death, which is more than simplie to dye; it is from his heart, and of his owne will to give himselfe to death, Isay. 53. 12. which appeares in his expression of a great desire to dye for mans salvation Luke 12. So How am I straitned, till it be accomplished! Which hee expressed also in his desire to eat the last Passover with
his Disciples before his death, Luke. 22. 15. when he was upon the Crosse, at his time, of his owne will, when hee would conserve his bodily nature no longer in vigour, he bowed his head and gave up the ghost, dyed sooner than they that were crucified with him, and so soone, as Pilate not Marke 15. 44. knowing the mysterie, mar∣veiled at it, as extraordinary; and the Centurion obser∣ing his yeelding up the ghost instantly upon a lowde cry, concluded that surely hee was the sonne of God. There was some thing di∣vine in him, for when men breath their last, commonly they utter either none or a very weake and low voyce.
Thirdly, hee died in love and obedience to his Father, laid downe his life, as he had received commandement of his Father, Iohn 10, 18. So his Father is said to deliver him to death for us all, Rom. 8, 32. First, ordaining his passion for mans salvation. Hee is said to have beene delivered by the determi∣nate counsell and foreknow∣ledge of God, Act. 2, 23. and Herod, Pilate, the gen∣tiles and people of Israel, are said to do what his hand and counsell determined before to be done, Act. 4, 28. This way, in which God declared his wisedome, to bee just in the forgiving of sinnes, Rom. 3, 25, 26. And to set forth his bountifulnesse, love and mercie to man, in appoin∣ting
a satisfier for him, was ordained before the world unto our glory, 1 Cor. 2, 7. Secondly, & though as God hee delivered himselfe to death with the same will & action with his Father, yet as man his Father inspired the willingnesse and love, of which he yeelded himselfe to leath; for it was repugnant to his naturall will, where∣by hee declared some desire to decline it, Abba, Father, Marke 14. 36. l things are possible to thee, take away this cuppe from mee. Yet submitted him∣selfe to his Fathers will ne∣verthelesse, Not what I will, but what thou wilt. God so made him for a little time inferiour to the Angels for suffering of death, Heb. 2. 9. and that the world
might see how hee loved his Father, and as hee comman∣ded him so hee did; even went to meet the Prince of Iohn 14. 30, 31. the world comming to him, having nothing in him; and in this respect hee is called Gods servant, the Chosen of God, to raise up the tribes of Iacob, to restore the pre∣served of Israel: to bee a light to the Gentiles, his sal∣vation to the end of the earth, Isaya 49. 6. In which service, hee employed him∣selfe, and tooke the forme Phil. 2. 7, 9. of a servant, assumed our na∣ture to unitie of person for the worke of the mediator∣ship, and became obedient to the death, even the death of the crosse. According to the will of his Father, fulfill∣ing the ceremoniall Law in
his sacrifice, and the morall in fulfilling all righteous∣nesse; by the which will of God wee are sanctified, through the offering of the body of Iesus Christ once for all, Heb. 10, 9, 10. Fourthly, hee died of his owne love to man, Pro. 8, 31. Whose delights were with the sonnes of men; hee gave his life for his friends in the greatnesse of his love, Iohn, 15, 13. So his love is set before the gift of him∣selfe for us, Gal. 2. 20. To wash us from our sinnes in his blood, to make us kings and Priests to our God, Revel. 1. 5. As his Father lo∣ved him, and appointed him to be the mediator, in whom whosoever were received into favour, should bee re∣ceived,
and no otherwise: so hee loved us and gave him∣selfe a ransome for us, that the Father might love us with the love wherewith he loved him, and that love also bee in us. Iohn. 17, 23, 24, 26. It was expedient that his death should bee voluntary, First, for mans justification, that as by one mans disobe¦dience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one, many might bee righteous: as wee were sin∣ners in Adam by imputation of his disobedience before wee had inherent sinne, so in Christ by faith wee might bee righteous, by imputati∣on of his obedience, before wee have inherent righte∣ousnesse: as sinne reigned un∣to
death even over thē that sinned not after the simili∣tude of Adams transgressi∣on, so grace may reigne through righteousnesse, by Iesus Christ, unto eternall life, Rom. 5, 14, 19, 21. Thus was Adam the figure of Christ. Thus was Christ Gods righteous servant in his obedience, righteous in himselfe, and the righte ousnesse of them that effe∣ctually know him, Esay 53, 11. Secondly, it was expedi ent for his sacrifice that his death should bee in obedi∣ence, not onely for innocen∣cie not to need to offer for himselfe as the priests of the Law did, Heb. 7, 26, 27. But because obedience with God is more than all burnt
offering and sacrifice; this being the obedience of such a person, being the Sonne, hee learned obedience in the things which hee suffered. The Lord of the Law wil∣lingly submitting himselfe to the Law, it did greatly please God: His sacrifice was a sweete smelling savour, Ephes. 5, 2. His father loved him because he laid downe Iohn 10. 17. his life for his sheepe, such as were given him of his Fa∣ther. Thirdly, it was meete al∣so for his victory that his death should bee in obedi∣ence and voluntary, that as death and the Divell who had the power of it, reigned by disobedience, so hee by obedience might overcome and tryumph, in his Crosse
(where hee shewed obedi∣ence) hee spoiled principa∣lities Coloss. 2. and powers, disarmed them, and made a shew of them openly, and tryumph∣ed over them; so they have no more power to accuse them that are in Christ, or to require them of Gods justice to punishment for their disobedience. Sinne is put out of authoritie, in the flesh of Christ, and the whole right of the Law full∣filled in them that walke not after the flesh, but after the spirit, Rom. 8, 3, 4. Be∣cause Christs obedience or righteousnesse which is reall and inherent in him, is so imputed to them as if they had done it themselves. Which well knowne and Vse. digested, may be a great en∣couragement
to come to Christ for salvation, seeing hee gave himselfe so wil∣lingly and with such great desire to death in obedience to his Fathers will, to save the world by him; and salva∣ton being now preached in his name, how can wee say any thing to excuse our not receiving him and life with him, hee being straitned and pained with strong desire to shed his blood for reconci∣liation betweene God and man, and he is now set forth unto us for propitiation through faith in his blood: let us abhorre flownesse of heart to beleeve in him, and with all boldnesse imbrace the benefit of Christ, Heb. 10, 22. Let him see in us the travell of his soule to his
satisfaction, Esay, 53. 11. The affluence of burdened sinners to him to finde rest for their soules, is the fruite of his passion; the satisfying of his desire in it, the pro∣spering of the good pleasure of God in his hand. Say with the Church, I am my be∣loveds, seeing his desire is towards mee, because hee hath so freely loved mee when I was wholly turned a∣way from him, and was his enemie; as in desire to save me to give himselfe for me, I resolve to yeeld up my selfe to him, Cant. 7, 10. This is the pleasure of Christ and his Church, that their bed is greene, Cant. 1, 16. that there is still an increase of faithfull ones. And this faith by which wee looke up
to Christ for salvation, is the eye which so much doth affect him, as hee is no more his owne but theirs that so beleeve in him, Cant. 4. 9. If we could weigh this well that Christ is so delighted with our faith, by which as by our eye wee behold him as sent of God to save us, how should it make us to burne in desire to have this faith more and more, which is but one though it have di∣verse degrees? Our faith in him is the end of the Gos¦pell, as the end of his passi∣on, and the end of it the sal∣vation of our soules, 1 Peter, 1, 9. Let this love of his, wher∣by 2 Vse. hee willingly met his death for our salvation, move us to labour to know
this love which passeth knowledge, Ephes. 3. 19. which as his banner is lifted up to gather his to him, al∣lured by his love, Cant. 2. 4. and admiring it, to bee mo∣ved to burne in our love to him, as the Church is said to be sicke of love, & the coales thereof to be coales of fire which hath a most vehe∣ment flame, Cant. 8, 6. So possessed of the love of Christ that wee bee wholly to him, 2 Cor. 5, 14. And so know this love not onely as our motive to love him, but our patterne to love such as hee com∣mends to our love: so is his commandement that wee love one another as he hath loved us, Iohn 13: His love to us is as his fathers to him,
purely gracious, as his father received not of him, but gave to him, so hee recei∣ved not first of us to love us for our love, but when there was nothing to incline him towards us to bee conside∣red in us, he loved us & gave us even himselfe. Thus let our love bee to others, not first because wee receive of them, but freely of goodnes put into us by the Spirit of Christ, inclined to p∣cure their good. Let it direct our obedi∣ence 3. Vse. unto God, unto Christ, that it be of a ready minde, though in difficult things, and such as our nature right∣ly would decline, yet deny∣ing our selves, we submit to him that is the Lord of our life and death, as he submit∣ted
to his Father. As Peter stretching forth his hands to bee bound and led to death by others, in respect of his naturall will, is said to bee led whither hee would not, Iohn 21. 18. yet of obedience and feare of God, choosing death for the safetie of Christs cause, to glorifie God by his confession of the truth: thus is the obedience more glorious, being perfor∣med by grace against relu∣ctation of nature: Yet where Caut. there is reluctation of cor∣rupt nature, the excellency of obedience is lesse, though grace get the victory; for to the performance of the Law it is required that a man shall not lust, have no motion bee it never so small contrary to Gods Law. The
perfection of that which is good, is when there is not so much as concupiscence of sinne in a man: if there bee never so little a motion step ping aside from the love of God, and from his obedi∣ence in love, it is evidently a breach of the Law; our Saviour had no manner of corruption in him to wrestle or strive against the will of God. And passed through Ieri behold there was a man, &c. Iericho was singularly sub∣jected to the malediction of God, so as whosoever should rebuild it (God ha∣ving Iosh. 6. 26. destroyed it) should be judged with the death of his eldest sonne in laying the
foundation, and of his youngest in his hanging up the gates of it; which curse tooke hold of one Hiel a 1 King. 16. 34. Bethelite in the dayes of A∣hab, who presuming to build it againe, was condemned of madnesse in provoking God, by the death of his progenie, his eldest sonne Abiram at his laying the foundation of it: and his youngest sonne Segub in his hanging up of the gates of it. It was the first Citty that the Israelites tooke after their passage ouer Ioden, and that by speciall miracle, in the falling downe of the walles by the blast of Rams∣hornes, and dejection of the hearts of the inhabitants: therefore as a first fruits
with the whole spoyle of it, was cōsrated to the Lord. Secondly, and the severitie used against it, might strike a terror into other Citties that would not yeeld them∣selves. Thirdly, to bee a me∣moriall of Gods power in making such a Citty for walls so defenced, by an easie and unlikelie way to bee a ruinous heape; with incou∣ragement to his people to undertake hard things at his appointment, and to ex∣cite their thankefulnesse for victory and possession of all which they obtained. That this cursed Cittie Obs. 2, yeelds some to bee heires of blessing, wee may gather, that place is no let to Gods calling, his election shall be executed in due time wher∣soever
his people bee, they bee neither all in one peo∣ple, Revel. 7, 9. nor in one place, but dispersed and scat∣tered abroad, Iohn 11, 52. but they are Gods Children by predestination to the ad∣option in Christ, and the Lord that knowes who bee his will weale them out by his calling & select them out of the world, how vile soever the place of their aboade  Bethsaida was a wick∣  and for impeniten∣cie and rebellion worse than Tyrus and Sdon which were infamous for impiety, pride, luxurie and other vices, Mat. 11, 21. Yet yeelded three to Christs kingdome, and they also Apostles. Phillip whom Christ going forth into Galilce called im∣mediatly
to follow him, is said of bee at Bethsaida, the Iohn 12. 21 Cittie of Andrew and Peter, Iohn 1, 43, 44. Samaria was justly hate∣full to the Iewes, not as Gen∣tiles and the dregges of di∣verse nations, a mungrill people onely, but for cor∣ruption of religion & impi∣ous confusion: the Children of the Captivitie having li∣bertie to build the house of God, would not admit them Ezra 4. 2, 3, 4, 5. to build with them when they offered it, because they counted them Gentiles and some Apostaticall cor∣rupters of the true religi∣on, that had nothing to doe in the worke; and they de∣clared themselves after to bee enemies hindering the worke all they could. The
woman whom Christ con∣verted Iohn 4. 9. at the Well, said, not without some insulting and contempt, The Iewes have no dealing with the Samari∣tans: and some malicious Iewes when they would bavespit fire in the face of Christ, and knew not what to say bad inough, call him in reproach as a detestable man Samaritan, Iohn 8, 48. Yet the Citty Sychar in  Country yeelded ma∣ny Iohn 4. 40. 41. beleevers to Christ, who shewed their love to him, intreating him to tarry with them, to whom hee conde∣scended for two dayes. And that one who of ten Lepers that were healed, alone re∣turned to give thankes, was a Samaritan, Luke 17, 16. Paul upon his calling to Gal. 1. 17.
Christianity and Apostle∣ship, began his worke in A∣rabia, among a savage and wilde people, living by robbing of passengers, of whom in common reason there was little hope, Ier. 3, 2. First, Gods counsell that Reason 1. hee hath taken of them can∣not bee disappointed, his decrees will bring forth; Christ will bring his, and they shall heare his vovce Iohn, 10, 16. he must reigne in the midst of his enemies, and takes away the male∣diction for sinne to make men that beleeve in him Children of blessing. It is to the glory, both of 2. the power of God in pul∣ling them (as it were) out of hell; and his goodnesse in
such an excellent and me∣morable benefit, to exalt them to such dignitie from such depth of dishonour. It may encourage the servants of God to be doing 1. Vse. his workes in any place where hee sends them, though he doe not tell them as he did Paul, what a mul∣titude hee hath of his peo∣ple Act. 18. 10. (concerning election) that hee will have called by their labours there. Yet the  of peace will finde out the sonnes of peace in what house so ever they bee, and the doctrine of peace shall bee effectuall in them by his blessing that sends them; and where it is not received yet their peace shall returne to them, the peace of a good conscience in the faithfull
performance of their dutie Luke, 10, 5, 6. It may stay prejudice, 2. whereby men forestal them∣selves against the report of good persons, and sticke to acknowledge the truth by hard conceit of the place. This prejudice of the vile∣nesse and ignoblenesse of place hindred the credit of Philips report of Christ in the heart of Nathaniel, in that hee said hee was of Na∣zareth, whence was that voice of doubt and diffi∣dence, Can there any good thing come out of Naza∣reth? Nichodemus alledg∣ing the Law in Christs de∣fence as requiring an order∣ly proceeding, is floued with Galilec in contempt of the place, it was not knowen
that ever Galilee a Prophet, and can it yeeld the Messiah? Its poore reasoning for such learned men, It is not knowne to have sent forth a Prophet, therefore it cannot for ever; thus hurtfull is pre∣judice of place. It may bee most effe∣ctuall consolation to such as God hath called in such places, that neither the sinnes of the place where they lived, nor their owne  in which they lived, could hinder the love of God to shew them mercie in calling them: if God so loved them being enemies, what shall separate them from his love beeing recon∣ciled? Rom. 5, 10. & 8. 39. They may bee assured that place shall not hinder their
acceptance in their fearing God and working righte∣ousnesse, Act. 10, 35. Yea it addes some thing to the honour of religiousnesse, that is maintained in most wicked places where Gods providence assignes to men their habitations: Revel. 2, 13. I know where thou dwellest, even where Satan hath his throne; where the governement was for the Devill, the governers car by his impulsion to idolatrie and all evill, there to keepe faith and good Conscience is praise, the goodnesse am∣plified by the infamy of the place. As on the contrary it aggavates wickednesse that it is done in a land of up∣rightnesse, Esay 26, 10. In every place and in all things,
all men should doe rightly; but among the Saints, and in a holy place where the Lords presence, majestie and high hand is manifested in a speciall sort, to doe wicked∣ly adds much to the sinfull∣nesse. And behold, &c. This Verse 2. Particle of demonstrating usually implies two things, 1. The certaintie of the matter as if our eyes saw it.  and worthy our attenti∣on: referred to the storie, it leads us to this observation, bser. 1. that the worke of God in the conversion of such a sinner is to be observed. Verily all the workes of the Lord Psal. 111 2. are great, & are to be sought out of all that have pleasure therein, are knowne of them which are delighted in the
consideration of them. Eve∣ry thing that hee hath done is beautifull and glorious, in all his workes there shi∣neth forth a marveilous brightnesse, compelling the minds of men that doe be∣hold them to give him glo∣ry and honour, that gracious and mercifull Lord hath ap∣pointed for us a solemne . memory of his benefits. They array him with beau∣tie and glory, they decke him with excellencie and sublimitie Iob. 40, 5. In crea∣tion hee is wonderfull unto astonishment, Psal. 8, 1. Psal. 139. 14. In providence past our finding out, yet every thing beautifull in his time: but when wee doe looke up∣on his worke, we do behold it only as it were a farre off,
as distance diminisheth the appearance of things, be∣cause our eyesight reacheth not so farre; which wee have experience of in the Sunne, which to us seemes as if it were not aboue two foote broad, yet they which are ac∣quainted with secrets of na∣ture, shew that it is much greater thā the whole earth. But wee should intend our ability to looke so farre into  as to magnifie them,  wee are called upon to remember this, Iob, 36, 24 25. In the worke of God be∣stowed upon sinners we are to magnifie the exceeding greatnesse of Gods power; as in raising the dead, Ephe. 1, 19: his abundant grace and love; as the Churches glorified God for Paul that
preached the faith which he had destroyed. It may be a helpe to faith, a cure of diffidence, armour against temptatiō, to behold and wisely to consider Gods great love and mercie in re∣ceiving great sinners, cause∣ing them to come to him: there may bee seene▪ that which was impossible with men to bee possible with God, and conceive hope we must by such patternes  Gods long suffering, 1 Tim. 1. 16. In such great Cures God; doth like Physicians, who to invite the diseased to come to them with hope, shew some example of their art and skill in the perfect curation of some desperate∣ly weake and sicke. So God setts such sinners in heale∣ing
of them and saving them before others to the end of the world, that be∣holding the rich grace and abounding mercie bestow∣ed upon them, they may not despaire but hope to finde like mercie, seeing possibili∣tie of Cure, notwithstanding the greatnesse and number of their sinnes with the greatest strength of corrup∣tion. David healed saith it shall embolden others to come unto God for safetie, taking the opportunity of time when he may be found Psal. 32. 6. Which may serve to Vse. correct our dullness and negligence in beholding the workes of God, and stirres us up to give our selves to observe the vertues of God
in them, as his wisedome, power, goodnesse, mercie &c. Psal. 107, 42. Let them t are of upright▪ judg∣ment behold and marke the testimonies of Gods provi∣dence, and take great plea∣sure thereof: but contrari∣wise, let all the wicked be∣ing convicted stoppe their mouth, verse, 43. Who is wise according to God, that hee may with understand∣ing observe both dili and deepely these great and excellent matters which the Lord worketh? It is a com∣plaint of the smallnesse of the number of wise men, that with earnest considera∣tion behold Gods workes, and sheweth withall that by reason of the excellencie of them a man had neede to
imploy all the power of his body and mind to the com∣prehension thereof. A man may in the con∣verted from great sinnes, see such expressions of love and thankefullnesse, such rare humilitie, such labours of Christ, that may humble him, and shame him, to see how hee is cast behinde. Seest thou this woman? Luke, 7. 44. There was a man named Zacheus. This makes for the certaintie of the story that the name of the person is set downe; it may bee also for honour, as Christ is said to call him by his name, Zache∣us come downe, for to day I must abide at thine house, hee speakes to him as fami∣liarly knowne. It is said of
Christ the good sheepheard, that hee calls his owne sheepe by name Iohn, 10. 3. which declares his particu∣lar care of them. Some hee mentions by name long be∣fore they be, that it may be knowne hee is the Lord; as hee saith to Cyrus, Esay 45, 3. So hee declared his divi∣nity in naming Iosiah long before hee was in be∣ing, to reforme religion, 1 Kings 13, 2. and to exec his judgment upon idola∣ters, promising and threat∣ning what pleaseth him, and in his owne time perform∣ing it: he calls some by name as choosing out of the num∣ber of other men, and make∣ing them eximious of his meere grace, as hee saith to Moses, Exod. 33, 12, 17. It
pleaseth him to honour some by leaving upon re∣cord their grace and the workes of it in divine storie: thus Heb. 11, 2. by saith our elders obtained a good re∣port, not onely were they approved of God but testi∣fied of in his word that they pleased him, and though this honour cannot now bee looked for, yet a blessed me∣moriall is still a reward of a fruitefull faith, Proverbs 10, 7. Their remembrance shall bee acceptable, ho∣nourable and everlasting, Psal. 112, 6. Esay, 65, 15. But Zacheus his sinne is Obiect. mentioned in his story and so of others, is not the staine of that enough to hinder the honour of his name? God forgiving their Sol.
sinnes, takes away their re∣buke; their sinnes are not mentioned with imputati∣on, their repentance and workes testifying thereof, are so considered with them that they are no more to their discredit in the hearts of good men specially, but their cōscience yeelds them approbation for their re∣pentance and fruites of it, and they are honourable Esay 43. And if it were that all mens deedes should bee knowne to every one in the day of judgement both good and evill, whether the judgement bee vocall or mentall; yet their faith and repentance being knowne with their sinnes, would speake for them to the con∣viction and confusion of un∣beleevers
and impenitent sinners. Which was the chiefe among the Publicans. Publicans were such as served the Ro∣manes, buying in great, and gathering the Emperours tribute of the Iewes subject∣ed to him: they had diverse societies, and diverse Mai∣sters over them, it seemes Zacheus was chiefe of the societie that met at Ieri∣. It is not mentioned how he came to that greatnesse, but it seemes he was of wit∣ty invention to finde out wayes to obtaine his owne ends; wise after the world, and such not straitned in their conscience, may (God permitting) raise themselves to greater dignity and e∣state
than plaine and downe right honest men: As a cage is full of birds, so are their houses full of deceit, there∣fore are they become great, Ier. 5. 27. Antiochus a vile person, when they gave him not the honour of the king∣dome, obtained it by flatte∣ries and working deceitful∣ly, became strong with a small people, to doe that which his Fathers and his Fathers Fathers had done, Dan. 11, 21, 23, 24. Frauds & illarts so succeed sometimes by the provi¦dence of God, that the god∣ly are astonished, and some of them sollicited to de∣fection, till they go into the sanctuary of God, and learne what is the end of such men that hold fast their sinne.
It is certaine that great∣nesse and goodnesse are se∣parable, iniquitie may serve a mans turne to lift him up, though it can give no firme and stable setling, Prou. 12, 3. A man cannot be stablished by iniquity. And hee was rich. The men∣tion of his riches in his calling, occasions this note, that riches hinder not from comming to Christ, when God will put forth his pow∣er to call men to him: though our Saviour saith that they are hardly saved that are rich, and with men it is impossible, easier for a Ca∣mell to goe through the eye of a needle, yet hee saith it is possible with God, conversion is a worke of his omnipotencie, Ephes.
1, 19, 20. above all facultie Disnt diites on in fa∣ crimen arre, sed in ijs qui  esciant facta∣tibu. Amb. of nature, and having such impediment of corruption and sinne as no power but almightie can remove, to which nothing can bee too hard: he can make a Cam∣mell goe through the eye of a necle, dilating the eye, or attenuating the body of the cammell. The Apostles negative, not many mighty or noble or wise after this world,  mits an affirmative, some such are called, and imply∣eth that even of the best ranke in the world some should submit them selves to Christ, 1 Cor. 1, 26. David saith, The fat of the earth shall eate and worship, as well as the leane and poore that are ready to dye, whose
life was thought past recove∣ry, Psal. 22, 29. Iames calls not onely the poore man to rejoyce in God, exalting him by his calling him to high dignity, but the rich man also whose minde the Lord makes low and hum∣ble, Iam. , 9, 10. Yet its true, that riches are by abuse through the corruption of man, occasion of damnation to many: The Luke 6. 24. woe of our Saviour to the rich, and the calling of them to weepe and howle for Iam. 5. 1. their miseries to come up∣on them, declare it. First, they become hin¦derers of their answere to God calling them. The do∣ctrine of Christ, that no Luke 16. 13. 14. man could serve God and riches, though hee said not,
no man can serve God and bee rich, yet they that heard it and were covetous, deri∣ded, shewing the common judgement of covetous per∣sons to bee against Christ therein. Let ministers studie never so painefully, preach never so diligently, exhort never so earnestly, unlesse God put forth his power, mens hearts will go after their covetousnesse, Ezech. 33, 33. Some that seeme halfe willing to accept of the gracious invitation of God, and with the rich ru∣ler, would do something to obtaine eternall life, yet have their desires to heaven overruled by the desires of the world which are strong∣er in them, Mat. 19, 16, 22. Luke, 14, 18. Mat. 22, 5.
Indeed making light of the divine calling in respect of the things present: and some having in some sort sub∣mitted themselves to the Gospell unto a kind of dis∣position towards grace, a beginning of the worke of the word in them towards conversion, by deceitfull∣nesse of riches choke all, and it never comes to any ripe∣nesse, Math. 13, 22. Secondly, some in getting  seeke death, Prou. 21, 6. Treasures gathered by a de∣ceitfull tongue, are vanitie tossed too and fro, of those that seeke death. Though death bee not the intent of the agent, it is the end of the action. When men will bee rich they make haste to it, and cannot bee innocent,
Prov. 28, 20. They fall into temptation, are overcome of it, and into a snare where∣in the Divell holds them fast, that no inferior power but the power of Almighty God can get them out. And into many not onely foolish but pernicious lusts, not on∣ly keepeing no measure in desire nor respect of their person, state and dignitie; but so mad and furious is the lust, that they rue themselves both into tem∣porall and eternall dangers, drowned in destruction and perdition 1 Tim. 6, 9. it is a mother sin the root of all e∣vill: they have swarmes of sins in them, as idolatry Eph. 5, 5. making sufficiencie of things his trust, & his joy, as the rich man that called his
soule to ease and pleasures Luke 12. 19. because hee had enough for many yeares. Iob standing upon his integritie by the grace of God, protests a∣gainst confidence in the wedge of gold, and rejoy∣cing in the greatnesse of his substance, Iob 31. 24, 25. and in serving riches as his Lord, so as God hath no ser∣vice of him: his utmost scope is riches, so it is the God he . Iames calls them ulterers, and adulteresses Iam. 4, 4. setting their love upon this world they breake covenant of wedlocke with God, and set up another in their hearts so as they have not the love of God in them 1 Iohn, 2, 21. As a wife that doth her husband some ser∣vice outwardly, but her
heart is after other lovers, so is their service to God without heart, which is exercised with covetous practises, 2 Pet. 2, 14. even Sabbath day and all, Amos 8, 5. even in Sermon times Ezech, 33, 33, they sticke not at fraud, and overreach∣ing, nor oppression, Iam. 5. 4. Hab. 2, 12: To increase that which is not theirs, and to lade themselves with thicke clay, so greedy that for a small gaine they will transgresse, Prou. 28, 21. And hire out their tongues for vile uses, even to slay soules that should not dye, and give life to soules that should not live, Ezech. 13, 19. making merchandise of the soules of men through Revel. 18. 13. covetousnesse, 2, Pet. 2. 3.
some erre from the faith, leave the right which they 1 Tim. 6. 10. 2. Pet. 2. 15. have seene, to goe astray, and pearce themselves through with many sor∣rowes, which rise from dif∣fidence and distrustfull thoughts of God, conscience of sinnes, a most unwel∣come and unsavourie fore∣tast of their punishments in hell, into which they doe plunge themselves by deceit  ages, Iude verse. 11. thus  seeke death in getting them. Thirdly, there is hurt to the possessors of riches in an unlawfull and sordid keepe∣ing of them, Eccles. 5, 13. The curse of sparing more than is meete, that is, when they spare that which they should give, either to the
poore for refreshing of their bowels, or to the prea∣chers of the Gospell, to be helpers to the truth; or to the magistrates in recom∣pence of their ministring under God for their wealth &c. is not onely poverty but that with imputation of the sinne, so as they shall have judgement mercilesse Iam. 2, because they shew∣ed no mercie. The Law stands in force against unjust persons. It is reckoned a∣mong the sinnes that made the house of Iacob to fall, their Land was full of silver and gold, and there was no end of their treasures, Esay, 2, 7. Both because they like the heathen had a dam∣nable confidence in their abundance, and such wicked
covetousnesse, as their hearts were so set upon their riches that they had no care of the poore or o∣ther good workes where∣unto they should have beene applied. Iames holds rich men in a terrible ex∣pectation of vengeance for the hording up of their ri∣ches so as they corrupt, their garments are moth-eaten, their silver and gold is can∣kered, the rust of them shall bee a witnesse against them and eate their flesh as it were fire: their consciences shall torment them with the memorie of their inhuma∣nity, in keepeing by them unprofitablie the creatures appointed by God unto mans use; and so they have heaped treasure for the last
day, provided unto the last day of their life how long soever, neither sensible of Gods providence nor of the uncertaintie of their life, they heape up wrath against the day of wrath, Iames, 5, 3. Fourthly, riches also fur∣ther the damnation of some in spending upon inordinate lusts; some in a carnall zeale spend much upon false wor∣ship and false worshippers, Ezech. 16, 17. Hos. 10, 1. Some on fleshly lust, and lifes pride, which is not one∣ly damnable but damning, when men make it the scope, and utmost end of their life. 2 Peter. 2, 13. They shall receive the reward of un∣righteousnesse, as they that count it pleasure to riot in
the day time, Sporting them∣selues with their owne decei∣vings: Counting their feli∣citie to bee in pleasures of the senses, they regard not the time and judgment af∣ter this life. As it is said of the rich man, who being dead was in hell torments, that hee in his life time had his good things, purple and fine linnen, and sumptuous fare every day. Luke, 16, 25. , remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things. The cause of his tor∣ment was not that he re∣ceived good things in his life time, for so Abraham that is brought in speaking to him, had done, but the force lyeth in the pronoune thy. Things with him the onely good, such as hee
made his full receit and whole portion, though hee were a Iew the sonne of A∣braham, had Moses and the Prophets inviting him to the studie of eternall life, he regarded it not, this con∣demnes him. The Apostle joynes these two together, whose end is damnation, whose God is their belly, Phil. 3. 19. who mind earthly things. As our Saviour concludes from the disposition and end of that rich man who put his happinesse in his a∣bundance, Luke, 12, 21. So is hee that layeth up trea∣sure for himselfe, and is not rich towards God. He trea∣sureth for himselfe who without any respect to God gets riches, as hee that said to his soule, Thou hast e∣enough
layed up for many yeares, respecting himselfe onely and staying upon his sufficiency in himselfe with∣out God: hee is rich in God, who depending on the pro∣vidence of God is given to such good workes as God prescribes, laying up a good foundation for time to come that hee may obtaine eternall life. Some abuse their wealth to pride▪ and rebellion a∣gainst God. Ier. 2, 31. Wee are Lords, wee will come no more unto thee: And to try their strength in doing hurt to men, the more in purse the greater in tryānie, boasting themselves that they can doe mischiefe, tru∣sting in the multitude of their riches, Psal. 52, 1, 7.
hyring men with feilds and 1 Sam. 22. 7. vineyards to ungodly practi∣ses, or hindering them from godly courses, and so draw to the earth such as seemed starrs in heaven, and many to winne the world loose their soules, so as there can be no redemption for them. Thus may they be called thornes because men are so hamperd in them that they cannot bee gotten out, and wicked riches are occasiō of much wickednesse; they that have them speake roughly, and are wise in their owne eyes, conceited of their owne courses too highly, but their woo is, they have re∣received their consolation. But riches of themselves, of their nature damne not; as povertie of it selfe saves
not, First, for they are the Lords, 1 Chron. 29, 11. All in the Heavens and in the earth is his, hee hath right unto and right in them, both property and possession is his. These are many times severed in men; some have right to a thing, but not possession and power over it, because kept out by a strong hand of such as covet fiolds and take them by violence, who get power over, and possession of that which they have no right to. But in God both right, title, and just possession meet, and extend unto all things be∣cause hee made all, Psal. 24, 1, 2. And it appeares when men are so gracelesse as to derive his title to others, bee they Idols or men, hee
often strips them of them, Ezech. 16, 17 &c. Hos. 2, 8, 9. And when men unjustly either by fraud or force take them from such as have them of him, he will pursue his right against the wrong doer, & take vengeance up∣on the unjust person who hath wronged not onely man but God, Prov. Secondly, It is Gods bles∣sing that makes rich, and he addes no sorrow with it, Prov. 10, 22. So farre as hee gives it, it is as if it were powred upon them while they sleepe, while Psal. 127. 2. they with rest of soule com∣mit themselves to him. He giveth power to gather ri∣ches, Deut. 8. Hee orders and disposeth of the travell of the sinner,
who gathereth and heapeth up to give to them that are Eccles. 2. 26. good before God, Iob 27, 17. Prou. 28, 8. Thirdly, God hath given grace and riches, riches as reward of the use of grace to his glory. Godlynesse hath the promise of this present life. Abraham very rich by Gods blessing, in flockes, and heards, and sil∣ver, and gold &c. Gen. 24, 35, is also the Father of the faithfull; they that dyed in faith are said to bee carried into his bosome, and to sit at table with him in the kingdome of heaven, Mat. 8, 11. Iob matchlesse for wealth and greatnesse in all the East, and for pietie in all the earth in his time, Iob 1, 3, 8. David after Gods owne
heart, and full of riches at his death, 1 Chro. 29, 28. Solomon a penman of the ho∣ly Ghost, therefore a holy man of God, 2 Peter 1, 21. a Prophet, therefore to bee seene in the Kingdome of Luke 13. 28. God with all the Prophets, excelled all the Kings of the earth as in wisedome so in riches, 2 Chro. 9, 22. Iehosa∣phat had riches in aboun∣dance, his heart also was lift 2 Chro. 17. 5. up in the wayes of the Lord to do more boldly for the puritie of Gods worship than Asa his father, though a man of a perfect heart had done before him; so a man excellently rich may also be excellently good. Fourthly, riches (though they bee no causes of hea∣ven, it is neither the lawfull
use of them, nor the end pro∣pounded to them yet) by a gracious use of them may further a mans account in good fruits and labours of love, which God will not Heb. 6. 10. forget being done in his name, Philip. 4, 17. There∣fore is our Saviours exhor∣tation, that with the riches of unrighteousnesse (so cal∣led because they passe easi∣ly from the right owners to unjust possessors, as from the Maister to the Steward, and after to the Maisters debters, both which were usurpers) wee make our selves friends for the hea∣venly life when this failes. We neede onely the friend∣ship of God in Christ; but the good workes done in God, will give friendly
Testimony to our consci∣ences that wee have not be∣leeved in vaine, our faith working by love: and shall of the free grace of God (whose gift eternall life is by Iesus Christ) bee recko∣ned unto our reward, as done to himselfe, especial∣ly when wee preferre the household of faith, and deale more plentifully with them as belonging to Christ. So the rich in this world, rich in good workes, gladly distributing doe lay up a good foundation a∣gainst the time to come; no cause of eternall life to them, which in opposition to uncertaine riches is called a good foundation, but a helpe to their assurance, and some proppe to their hope
of life, as an evidence of a true faith in Christ Iesus, the end of which is salvati∣on. Riches in a good man fur∣ther Diviia ut ∣dimenta improbi, it bi sunt ad∣jumenta virtuio. Ab. the exercise and mani∣festation of grace: The crowne of the wise is their riches, they prove an orna∣ment to the right users, get them honour in their wise disposing of them, doing many good workes by the meanes of them. Abrahams and Lots hospitalitie had not beene so famous, nor Da∣vids and his Princes offe∣ring to the building of the Temple so liberally, 1 Cron. 29, 4, 7, 8. It may be ma∣ny other could say with Da∣vid, I have set my affection to the house of my God; but coulde not by such
gifts expresse their affecti∣on, as hee did, both in that which hee dedicated of the 2 Sam. 7. 11. spoyle of the nations which hee subdued, and of his owne proper goods over & above, 1 Chron. 29, 3. The Centurions, one in build∣ing a Synagogue, th'other in giving much almes, de∣clared their pietie and Cha∣ritie: and others that have their praise in the Scrip∣tures for feeding persecu∣ted Prophets, as Obadia; for ministring to the mainte∣nance of Preachers that o∣therwise preached freely to the gentiles, and refreshed the Saints bowells, as Gaius: 3 Iohn 6, 7. this others could not shew forth so, not having such vealth, though the habituall race bee in their hearts, as
the grace of magnificence and magnanimitie, yet the want of abilitie unto their acts hinders the exercise of the habite till God give it, and then they doe great workes. Abrahams meeke and gentle mind had not ap∣peared so much in giving Lot his choise to goe to which hand hee would for peace sake, if he had not beene so rich; neither had Ios patience in great losses beene so exemplary if hee had not had great substance. Wisedome is good with an inheritance, Eccles. 7. 11. It is more to have riches with grace, than to have it with poverty: for though respect of persons is a sinne, and to esteeme men after the flesh; yet among men, the wise∣dome
of a poore man is despised, and his words are not heard, Eccles. 9. 16. Wisedome indeed makes a mans face to shine, but po∣verty as a cloud comming betweene, obscures and dar∣kens it. When a rich man speakes gracious words, which hee may more freely speake as he thinkes, he is more easily beleeved, and the things hee commands, are sooner put in execution; which ap∣pears in Iobs double con∣dition. Iob 29. 11. 22. When his glory was fresh in him, the eare that heard him blessed him, and after his words men spake not againe; they that heard were as it were altered at his words, and hung upon his talke as upon an irrevo∣cable
judgement: but be∣ing once dejected, hee was despised; and when God let loose his cord, base per∣sons let loose the bridle be∣fore him, Iob 30. 1. 11. Which may bee to stay rash censure of rich men, Vse. even because of their ri∣ches. Eccles. 10. 20. Curse not the rich in thy bedchamber: If he bee wicked, yet God may suddenly change him, and then his richs are an honour to him, and hee an ornament to them; as Ioseph of Arimathea who was an Marke 15. 43. honourable counseller, and rich, and a Disciple of Christ, Math. 27, 57. It is said of Tyr that her riches should bee; , holinesse to the Lord; Secondly, for such as dwell before the
Lord, resting upon him with sincere confidence, and ser∣ving him with pure consci∣ence; Thirdly, for food to eate sufficiently and for durable clothing, Esay 23. 18. It is indeed a greivous sinne dishonoring the most glorious Christian faith, to preferre wealth so as to set up profane men for it, & to despite & ignominiously to use poore men for their po∣verty though rich in faith. Yet when a private rich man and a poore bee both godly, the rich may bee honoured above the poore without any injury, and ought to be; and the poore is to give place to the rich as being able by Gods providence to doe some good both to him
and to many, as some image of God in his sufficiencie and liberalitie, who is set be∣fore us in the Parable of a rich man Luke, 16, 1. Verse 3. And hee sought to see Iesus who hee was. This is the occasion of Zacheus his conversion, his earnest and unconquerable desire of seeing Iesus: it is questioned whence his desire was, whe∣ther of himselfe or of the holy Ghost; of vanitie to satisfie curiositie, or serious with respect to Christ both as a great Prophet and the Saviour of the world? which may bee answered thus. First, as there may bee like words and deedes that proceed not from one and the same principle, so may there bee like desires.
Maries words and Zacharies differed not much: How shall this bee (saith she) seeing I know not a man, Whereby shall I know this? saith he, for I am an old man, and my wife well stricken in yeares: her inquiry was out of admiration, to learne, his out of unbeleefe looking to nature, hee measured the promise by common course. Abraham laught at such a promise, Sara laught also; hee out of the joy of his faith, Iohn 8, 56. She of unbeleefe, which yet shee overcame, Heb. 11, 11. Da∣vid did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, Amaziah did so like∣wise, yet not with like hear, 2 King. 14. 3. 2 Chron. 25. 2. So for de∣sires, Paul desires Salvation,
Balaam desires Salvation: Balaam of a pang of de∣spaire, Paul of love to bee with the Lord. A scorner seekes wisedome, Prou. 14, 6. a godly man seekes wise∣dome: Hee of perverse af∣fection, this of sincere inten∣tion to understand his owne way, Verse 8. That hee may possesse his owne heart, holding it firmely in the truth. Herod desires to see Christ, but of curiositie of Luke 3. 8, 9, 11. hearing and seeing some∣thing strange, to please a corrupt mind: but hee was not vouchsased either do∣ctrine or miracle, not to see a sparke of his heavenly glo¦ry; and the flesh of his mind declared it selfe in his send∣ing him to Pilate mocked
and despised. So certaine Greeks desired to see Iesus, and sought to Phillip that he would helpe them; hee ta∣king Andrew with him told Iesus. But there is no men∣tion of the Greekes made by him in his answere, but he applied himselfe to cal off his Disciples from vaine ex∣pectation of earthly glory, discoursing of his death and the fruite of it, of hating our lives in the case of confessi∣on, Iohn 12, 21 &c. Secondly, now the desire of Zacheus▪ was greatly re∣spected and succeeded unto his Salvation: though nature may incline men to novel∣ties, and to desire the sight of such of whose excellent fame wee have heard, yet the end of his desire shewes
that it was of spirituall be∣ginning, being blessed with such a change of the whole man, there began to bud some seede of Salvation in him, hee was caried with a singular affection to Christ, which was by some impulsi∣on of the holy Ghost more than common as the issue declares, the Spirit of the Father drawing him to the Sonne. And wee may observe in 1. Obs. it, that God begins his good worke in small things some∣times; hee begun the second Temple so as they that had seene the former despised it as nothing in their eyes, al∣together unlikely to come to any glorious accomplish∣ment: yet of these contēptible beginings he brought it forth
to such glory as with joyfull shout they declared their gladnesse, and with heartie wellwishings desired that as his grace not mans strength had finished it, so his favour would maintaine and defend it, Zach. 4, 6. 7, 10. The prophesie, Esay 42, 3, applied to Christ, sheweth how with wonder∣full meekenesse and tender∣nesse hee should bring for∣ward his kingdome out of small beginnings; notwith∣standing the hostile opposi∣tion of Satan and all his wicked instruments. Math. 12, 20. A bruised reede shall he not quench, till he send forth judgement unto victo∣rie. A bruised reede, what more fraile? smoking flaxe, what more easily extin∣guished,
Esay 43, 17. They are quenched as towe (saith the Prophet) speaking of the hoast of the enemies of God; he will as easily ex∣tinguish them for ever as wee quench a little towe: yet if men be not wicked, but have some beginnings of pietie in them how weake soever, he will not despise them, but cherish strengthen, and increase them with marveilous in∣ulgence and mercie: though like a reede halfe broken, and smoking weeke almost gone out for want of oyle, yet will hee attempe∣rate himselfe to their infir∣mitie, till hee kindle in them light more full, and supplie them with solide strength. This appeares in Zacheus,
and in many, the little sparkles of faith and hope in whom hee excites of his immeasurable goodnesse. Certaine workings there bee in the hearts of men that are of the efficacy of the Spirit, yet not well knowne to them to bee so. The A∣postle speaking of the Spi∣rits helpe in our infirmities Rom. 8. 26, 27. when wee know not what to pray as wee ought, saith, that hee himselfe maketh intercession for us with groanings which cannot bee uttered; not onely for that they are for a thing unutter∣able as heavenly glory, or that they cannot bee suffici∣ently spoken according to their proceeding from the holy Ghost, but because breaking into them by the
Spirits impulsion, they farre passe the capacity of our witts, and wee scarce di∣scerne what our owne hearts meane, our affections being much oppressed with dark∣nesse: they bee certaine in∣articulate groanes and breathings, which the sear∣cher of the hearts knowes with approbation to be the inspirations of his owne Spirit, disburdening us into Gods lappe or bosome. Mary the sister of Lazarus annointing Iesus his feete with precious ointment, is defended by him against the murmour and censure of Iudas at the wast, as hee called it, that she had kept it against the day of his bu∣rying. It was not lost but kept, she did that now
which she could not doe at his buriall, God so gover∣ning her mind that at this time shee should poure it upon the Lord to signifie his death and buriall to bee at hand, & so was it done for funerall service: it is not like that she had any further in∣tent than to shew her love in the honouring of Christ, and to refresh his spirits by the sweete savour of the oyntment, as it is said oynt∣ment and perfume reioyce the heart, Prov. 27, 9. but the Spirit of God impelling her heart, burning in love to Christ with desire to doe thus, foresaw further, and directed the fact to this end which Christ speakes of. So are men moved by the ho∣ly Ghost to something
with further scope than they presently understand. The Disciples of Christ, much people that were Mat. 21. come to the feast, and chil∣dren, were caried to receive Christ comming to Ierusa∣lem with the joyfull shout of a King, unwonted accla∣mations, and honour given him, in spreading their garments in the way: By some others cutting downe branches from the trees and strewing them in the way, ascribing to him kingdome & power of saving, Hosanna to the Son of David. First, pray to him for salvation, Hosanna in the highest, In part out of the words of the Psalme 118, 25. Save now. Secondly, blesse him, Bles∣sed be the King that com∣eth
in the name of the Lord. Thirdly, and his kingdome, Blessed be the kingdome of our father David, that com∣meth in the name of the Lord; with this gratulatory addition, Peace in heaven, and glory in the highest places. It angred the Phari∣ses to heare it, they disdain∣ed that hee should receive Testimonie of Children, willed him to rebuke his Disciples; hee defends both▪ the Children from Psal. 8, 2. Out of the mouthes of babes and sucklings hast thou perfected praise: & the Disciples with necessitie of their duty, which if they failed in, the stones would immediately cry out, Luke 19, 36, 40. All this by se∣cret instinct, they were ex∣cited
by internall fficacie of the Spirit, but the mea∣ning of this was unknowne to the Disciples themselves till Iesus was glorified, Iohn 12, 16. yet in due time the fruit appeared. Thus God brings on his worke. To observe secret moti∣ons 1. Vse. unto good, though you perceive not where they shall end, yet attend Gods worke out of small begin∣nings great workes are brought forth by him who passeth on and goeth by us when wee cannot finde him out, Iob 9, 11. When one that was before carelesse of Christ, heares such a de∣scription of him in which is set forth his excellencie, so as he is convinced they are the only holy happy people
that are joyned to him, that their earnest love to him is not without just cause, & so begin to inquire how hee may meete with him, where hee may seeke him; let him not despise it, let him thinke with himselfe, is not God come to mee with offer of himselfe? This light and motion seemes more than naturall; it is a good steppe towards good when men begin to inquire after the Lord Iesus, are desirous to know him, and how to have their desire satisfied, Cant. 5, 9, &. 6, 1. Desire imply∣eth some measure of know∣ledge of the worth of that which is desired, Iohn 4, 10. and love of it so knowne: where more love is there is more desire, which in a sert
makes the desiring apt and ready to the receiving of the desired, as it is (at least pro∣bably) said, That they in whom love is more full to God, shall see him more perfectly, and so bee more blessed for the faculty of seeing God; not agreeing to the created understanding according to the nature of it as it is now, but by the light of glorie, the more it par∣takes of that light the more perfectly it seeth God; and the more love a man hath, the more hee participates of that light, because there is more desire which shall bee satisfied. Love declared by obedience, hath promise of further revelation of Christ, and Communion with God, Iohn 14, 21, 23.
Zacheus of some love to Christ, as the sequele de∣clares, desiring to see him, & comming downe at his bid∣ding to receive him to his house, enjoyed him in an excellent measure of his grace Faith not being yet fra∣med Quest. in him, as it may seeme, how could there bee love in his heart to Christ, and thence desire unto him? did hee looke for more in Iesus than the outward sight of his person? Sure he looked for more, Ans. for it is not likely that hee would with neglect of his reputation (being a princi∣pall man for state and prio∣ritie in his calling) and in the sight of a great multi∣tude, climbe up like a boy
into a tree without regard of the scornes of men, one∣ly to see any Prince in the world. 2. Did Christ so re∣gard any that came meerely to see him? 3. Would hee with such speed and joy come downe and receive him to his house, and so professe workes testifying repentance to Christ, if there had not beene more than a desire of an outward sight of him? His affection to Christ in such fervencie may bee ascribed to the knowledge that hee had gotten of Christ and himselfe: of himselfe▪ to bee a great sinner, whose sinnes God would not suffer alwayes to goe unpunished; of Christ, that he was not one∣ly
a great Prophet, but the Saviour that should come into the world, the Sonne of David, exercising mer∣cie not onely in miraculous cures of the body, but in forgiving men (that had faith in him) their sinnes: with desire of remission of his owne sinnes hee sought to see him of whom hee had heard such things, not alto∣gether without some spar∣kles of grace, and seed of pietie. The Spirit of God works in us so sometimes, that we our selves seeme to bee au∣thors of the fact. Of him∣selfe it could not bee, seeing it tended unto, and ended in his blessed change from the state of sinne to the state of grace, his passing
from damnation to salvati∣on; it was some beginning of his rising out of sinne, which argueth the worke of God, in three respects. 1. In taking away the deformity of the soule by the staine of sinne, & restoring the come∣linesse and beautie of grace. 2. In setting the will ordi∣nately in subjection to God, restoring the good of nature in beginnings which sinne had corrupted and destroy∣ed, the whole nature remai∣ning inordinate thereby. 3. In taking away the guilt of sinne, whereby man was subject to eternall damnati∣on. All which and every of them is Gods worke, giving into the mind a light of grace, into the will a new quality, whereby it is
sweetly moved and readily to the obtaining of the eter∣nall good, drawing the will to him: and none but God against whom the offence is committed, can remit the guilt and punishment of sinne. There is great diffe∣rence betweene the ceasing from the act of some sinne, and rising out of sinne, which is to repaire man unto those things which hee lost by sinning.  ur  gra∣tia prae∣venem, in quan∣tum ipsā volunta∣tem facit bonam & ide prae venit, quia non est a liero arbitrio, sed infun∣ditur ab so Deo. Preventing grace is not common to all, but it is pro∣per and peculiar to the elect in whom God workes the will to spirituall and eter∣nall good; it doth not expect mans will, neither doth mans will call to it, but it prevents it by preparing it that it wills good, and helps
it being prepared that it may performe it: it was a will before, but not a good and right will. Not onely the will of man is not suf∣ficient if the grace of God bee wanting; for so it might bee said on th'other side, the grace of God sufficeth not if our will bee not, wee must give the whole to God. Preventing grace is faith Magist. sent. . 2. dist. 20. D. with love. The good will of man is prevented with that benefit of grace whereby it is freed from servitude of sinne, and prepared, and that benefit is the faith of Christ: so the will is healed, the Spirit of God being au∣thor, and so disposed that it actually wills and indevours what God commands.
Faith is in him which wil∣leth to beleeve, whose good will it prevents, not in time, but in cause and nature. There is a beginning of faith, a good thought of be∣leeving which is of God on∣ly, wee being not sufficient of our selves unto it, 2 Cor. 3, 5. Which is not meant of any thought whatsoever, but of a thought of belee∣ving or right living which affects the will. It signifi∣eth not simply to apprehend something in our mind. But with deliberate judg∣ment of reason and affection of the will about the thing apprehended, as Philip. 4. 8. If there bee any vertue, if there bee any praise, thinke on these things. Our conversion is descri∣bed
by our knowledge of God, Gal. 4, 9. and first receiving light, Heb. 10, 32. But it is such a know∣ledge of him as hee gives in the face of Iesus Christ, unto some measure of faith, drawing us to him to seeke reconciliation & remissi∣on sins, and is an effect of his knowledge of us. As the Apostle adds by way of Correction, or rather are knowen of God: if any man love God the same is knowne of him, as hee saith in another place; received of him, Rom. 14, 3. Hee is 1 Cor. 8. 3. knowne with approbation, and drawne to God. So it might bee in Zache∣us, such beginning of faith as is in a good thought, in some knowledge of God in
Christ with some love, and could not for the preasse, be∣cause hee was little of sta∣ture, Thus it falls out to men of good desires some∣time, that their hope is de∣ferred and the satisfying of their desires suspended some way or other. Mtha and Mary desired the healing of their sicke brother, to pre∣vent his death, sent to Ie∣sus about it; hee deferred their desire till he was dead, buried and stunke, that hee might worke a greater mi∣racle in raising him from death to life, for Gods glo∣ry and the confirmation of the faith of his Disciples; this may bee one stay, more glory to God, good to men, Iohn 11, 4, 15. So was Iairus his desire of the healing of
his daughter, deferred, and hee disswaded from trou∣bling Christ any further as counting it hopelesse, for now she was dead; onely Christ excites his hope of the life of his daughter, Luke 8, 42, 49, 50. Some∣times men of no ill meaning do hinder the lawfull and good desires of other a little from their present fulfilling, as the two blind men desi∣ring mercie of Christ to re∣ceive their sight, were re∣buked by the multitude that went before, because Math. 20. 30. 31. they should hold their peace. They that brought their Children to Christ with desire of his blessing, Marke 10. 3. were a little stopped by his Disciples. Sometimes a man hath impediments and
lets from himselfe, as Za∣cheus from his low stature that could not looke over the multitude that were a∣bout Christ: it may bee his faith is not such as God will have it before hee receive what hee desires, if it bee of a good thing to bee done by himselfe. When hee hath a good will and desire, the flesh hath another will a∣gainst it that hee cannot per∣forme his purpose and de¦sire til he get more strength. There is a remainder of Originall sinne that so be∣setts good men that they cannot runne the race of godlynesse as they desire, Heb. 12. 1. till they cast it away that the comfort is most in this strife to doe it, in the wil∣lingnesse of the spirit,
hindered by the flesh. Matthew, 26 Chapter, verse 4. Satan is a great hin∣derer of good desires, as the Apostle saith in his owne case, in desire to see the Thessalonans, from whom he was taken for a short time, in presence not in heart: and indevouring it with great desire. Hee would have come once againe, but Satan hindred it, 1 Thess. 2, 17, 18. How hee hindered s not expressed, whether by tempests of the aire, or by the tribulation of the per∣secuting tyrants, or lying in wait for him in the way to kill him, or by sicknesse: but it is cleare hee hindered his good desire and inde∣vour to come to them for confirmation of their faith.
Hee assirmes the decree of his will to it, and his prepa∣ration to accomplish it once and againe; and in that hee was hindred, the inward act of the will the Divell cannot discerne or hinder so, as the outward act of the body, as to preach the Gos∣pell, &c. The Divell and his angels are noted to hold in their hāds the foure winds of the earth, that the winde should not blow upon the earth or the sea or on any tree; which signifieth the preaching of the Gospell hindered by the Divels ma∣lice: So farre as God will suffer, though the preachers desire to make it abound. When a great and effe∣ctuall dore is entred, there be commonly many adver∣saries,
wicked men fight under the banner of Satan and are his instruments to hinder us when our studies and indevours tend to Gods Word. As Elimas sought to turne away the Deputie from the faith when he cal∣led for Barnabas and Saul with desire to heare the word of God; he withstood them, and Paul called him the Child of the Divell, Act. 13, 7, 8, 10: Seeing in him an open contempt of God in rising up against his word, and stopping the way to that prudent man that he should not come to the knowledge of God, when hee had sollicited his mind secretly not to rest in the deceits of that false pro∣phet. Christ inveighed a∣gainst
the Pharises for shut∣ting up the Kingdome of Heaven against men, not suffering them that were entring to goe in, Math. 23, 13. Having their foot as it were on the threshold, they turned them backe from hearing the Doctrine of Salvation, which is as the gate of Heaven. It is easier worke to hinder the rising of the building, than to de∣stroy that which is once set∣led upon the foundation. Wee are not therefore to Vse. thinke it strange, or to con∣ceive the desire to bee in vaine because it meets with lets, and is crossed at the first. In evill desires, it is good to take notice of the crossing of them, with thankes to God, and to his
instruments that hindred them, and kept us from the evill deede, as David from shedding the blood of Nabal and his household by the meanes of Abigail. 1 Sam. 25, 32, 33. Who blessed God for sending her, blessed hir aduise, and her, that kept him backe. It had beene good for Herod if hee had made such use of his disappointment of his intel∣ligence by the wise men: which hee looked for with a wicked purpose against Christ, to know where hee was, that hee might destroy him. But it is the miserie of wicked men that they impute it not to Gods pro∣vidence, but rage at the in∣struments, not willing to bee hindred. A wise man fear∣eth
and departeth from evill, but the foole rageth and is confident, Prov. 14, 16. Hee that is warie is stricken with some dread, when hee is warned, and breakes off his purpose whē hee perceives God is not pleased with it. As Isaack purposing to have blessed Es, forgetting the oracle that the elder should serve the younger, when hee per∣ceived how by divine pro∣vidence hee blessed Iacob in the steed of the elder, hee trembled very exceedingly. Confounded with the shame of his error in pur∣pose to blesse Esau, hee nei∣ther pretends ignorance, nor is angry with Iacob for deceiving him by evill acts, but acknowledging
God to bee the authour of the blessing pronounced, giveth him glory, renoun∣ceth his affection, and re∣tracts not what hee hath delivered, Gen. 27, 33. But a wicked man, what he hath once attempted though foolish, prosequutes it to the utmost that hee can, as Balaam though hee had the minde of God expresly that hee should not goe with Balaakes princes to curse his people, yet stayes not but kindled the anger of God against him, in go∣ing, and in giving wicked counsell cast himselfe away, Numb. 22, 12, 22. Though hee seemed willing to re∣turne if it displeased God, it was frivolous: Seeing if hee had feared God seri∣ously
and with pure afe∣ction, hee would have re∣nounced his expedition naughtily taken in hand, and not have made doubt of a thing manifestly witnessed: though God bid him go, he approved not his covetous heart, but derided his per∣tinacious madnesse. But where the desire is of God, though it have some lettes, it is not for that to bee re∣nounced, it is accepted where God himselfe will not have it effected by him in whom hee approves the desire. As in Davids case, purposing in his heart and desiring to build a house for God, it is commended, 1 Kings 8, 18. But the worke is reserved for Solomon his sonne. Hee considers our
mind and counsell which many times hee allowes, and inspires things of their nature good, unto which he inclines our wills, which yet hee will not have us to bring into action: because they conduce not to the or∣der of his providence which hee hath before his eyes, and will by all meanes have to stand fast. Yet are there not two wills in him, but one which hath diverse ob∣jects. Some desires hee disap∣points for a time, as Pauls to have a prosperous jour∣ny to Rome, to bestow a∣mong them some spirituall gift with fruit, Rom. 1, 11, 13. Which hee often pur∣posed and that of conscience of his duty, v. 14. yet was
let: whereby it appeares that crosse successe in exe∣cution, proves not infalli∣ble unlawfullnesse of inten∣tion. And hee ranne before, and Verse 4. climed into a Sycomore tree to see him, for hee was to passe that way. Wherefore he thus car∣nestly desired to see Christ, that hee may bee thought to have forgotten what be∣came his person, and after the manner of Children to hunt after new sights, is be∣fore declared; it shewes that his desire was setled in him unto the obtaining of it. So it is with graci∣ous 1. Obs. affections, they are not quelled by lets. They ra∣ther increase by hinderan∣ces, and grow more fervent
by opposition. Elihu held with reverence of his elders from speaking as hee de∣sired, and saw meete and needefull unto Iob, at length Iob. 32, 6. 18, 19. sheweth the force of his de∣sire, that it compelled him; his mind having beene as a caske full of new wine shut up which must needs have a vent. Such a vehement pang had hee in his mind, moved with such zeale when God toucht him, as if hee should have burst, till hee had discharged his con∣science; so earnest a will had hee to maintaine the truth. Hope differred, makes the soule sicke, Prov. 13, 12. The minde wanting the thing expected, greives that it cannot enjoy what it desires: As the Church in
her seeking Christs pre∣sence declares how strong her de sire is, that having no answere when shee called, not finding him whom shee sought, shee desires it may be told him that she is sicke of love; and this after shee met with oppositions, the watchmen finding her, who should have secured her from daungers; proved adversaries to her, yet gives she not over, but in her seek∣ing is more vehement; the sire kindled in her none can qvench, but as lime is in∣flamed by water, and streames grow more furi∣ous by obstacles, so her zeale more burning by dis∣graces in her seeking him. Cant. 5. 6, 7, 8. Ieremy when the word of the Lord
was made a reproach to him, and a derision dayly, had a thought to speake no more in his name; but his word was in his heart as a burning fire, shut up in his bones, and hee could not stay, Ier. 20. 8, 9. After all his thoughts which weake∣ned his fortitude of mind, the impulsion of the Spirit of God was so forcible in him, that hee was caried with more earnestnesse to proceede in the course of his office whereunto God called him. Bartimaeus desiring mer∣cie of Christ for restoring his sight, being rebuked by some that went before that hee might hold his peace and not offend Christ with clamorous importunitie,
like a provident begger, as having farre more high matters to handle than at∣tend a beggar asking a common almes, as they it seemes thought of him; hee was the more stirred and cryed so much the more, Thou Sonne of David have mercie on me, Luke 18, 39. Or as Marke hath it; he cry∣ed the more a great deale, Marke▪ 10. 8. Paul pulled away untimely (in respect of his worke) from among the Thessalonians, inforceth himselfe more abundantly to see their face with great 1 Thess. 2. 17. & 3. 10, 11. desire, and beggs earnestly, exceedingly, night and day, that God himselfe even our Father, and our Lord Iesus Christ, would direct his way unto them, to adde that
which was lacking in their faith. David mocked by Mi∣chal in his piety, a King, and a Prophet of God, adornes his defence, that it was be∣fore the Lord, and was mag∣nificently both to bee thought and spoken of; and professeth yet to play be∣fore the Lord, and to bee more vile, and to bee base in his owne sight, 2 Sam. 6, 21, 22. And the same holy man showes how his grace not onely maintained it selfe against opposition: when the wicked by bands and troopes spoyled him, made a prey of him, hee held fast Gods doctrine and could not bee drawne from the o∣bedience of truth, but more, his devotion was such
as hee resolued to rise at midnight to serve him with prayse of righteous judge∣ments. Psal. 119, 61, 62▪ And when wicked men de∣stroyed his law, overthrew the doctrine, hee loved it so much the more as more pre∣cious than the most fine gold, verse 126. 127. It is thus in sinfull nature that the lust increaseth by opposition. The Sodo∣mites by Lots exhortation to desist from their wicked enterprize, confirme their resolution to do worse, and that to him, Gen. 19. 9, Hee came in to sojourne (say they) and he will needs bee a Iudge. The Priests at Pilats motion to release unto them Christ Iesus, cryed out the more, Let him bee crucified, Math,
27. 23. Sinne becomes out of measure sinfull by the Commandement, Rom. 7. 13. working death by that which is good. So in grace, it not onely holds in opposition, but is more intensive, for the Spi∣rit of God, the author of the goodnesse of the will, helps it, and strengthens it to pro∣duce the good worke where unto hee hath inclined it, that it overcomes impedi∣ments. The calling of the elect, is the revealing of the arme of God, the putting forth of the exceeding greatnes of his power; they become like firebrands that will not be blowne out with the winde as candles, but kindled more; as if fire in the water, should not onely
not goe out quenched, but still burne up higher and higher. Which serves to discover 1. Vse. the unsoundnesse of vanish¦ing desires, which are quel∣led with every little crosse or impediment and difficul∣tie: yea somtimes when they be not reall but imagi∣ned; as Solomon writes of the slothfull man as faining dan∣gers, he saith, A Lyon is with∣out, I shall bee slaine in the streets. Though hee speake not such words, yet he hin∣ders himselfe from that which he should doe, by ca∣sting dangers, imagining lets, having alwayes one ex∣cuse or other, that though hee wish and desire all the day, yet his hands will fall to no worke. His way is as a
hedge of thornes, Prov. 15. 19. his feares and griefes pricke and stay him like thornes and bryars. The desires and goodnes of the temporary beleevers are two wayes faulty, by hypocrisie, it is but see∣ming to have, Luke 8. 18. and by vanishing away, Hos. 6. 4. Your goodnesse is as a mor∣ning Cloud, and as the early dew it goeth away. As in much heat sometime the morning Clouds give the husbandman hope of raine; but the Sunne rising they are dissolued or dissipated and frustrate his expectati∣on: so in some pang they shew some probabilities of returning, but their lusts waxing hot the hope is cut off. And as the morning dew
seemes to moisten the earth but is consumed away by the sunne; so their shewes of piety, frequenting the as∣semblies, instituting pub∣like prayers, &c. passe a∣way without effect. As the rush growes not long without mire, nor the flag without water, morish herbes that have their nou∣rishment from it, though greene and not cut downe, wither before any other: So are the path's of all that forget God, and the hypo¦crites hope shall perish. They have not their sappe from Christ, and what freshnesse so ever they shew, it must needes wither; and that discovers that they were not rooted in God, who maintaines the lot of
his people against all that fights against it, the fruition of the grace hee hath given them shall remaine safe un∣to them. It may bee for consolati∣on vse 2 to such as hold still their desire to good, and follow after it, though they bee differred, and increase in earnestnesse, as hunger and thirst after righteousnesse: they are such as a man may alledge to God, Psa. 119, 20. My soule breaketh for the longing that it hath unto thy judgments at all times. 40. Behold I have longed for thy precepts. Hee offers his desires to bee looked upon. As Esay 26, 8. The desire of our soule is to thy name, and to the remembrance of thee. 9. With my soule have I
desired thee in the night, yea with my spirit within mee will I seeke thee early. It is an argument of a well set and disposed heart when a man dare present it to the Lord, that hee may looke upon the intentions and de∣sires of it. Desires without grace to confirme them and keepe them in vigor, are but as a false conception, which eva∣nisheth and commeth not to the birth. But such as be deepely rooted, not light motions, but make the heart breake to see how we can not do as wee desire in Gods matters; and this per∣manent, it is of grace. I o∣pened my mouth, and panted, because I loved thy commande∣ments. This propension of
the soule, and vehement in∣tension of spirit, where the soule vehemently longs to feele that power and com∣fort which it knowes to bee in the word, knowledge of the good constantly hol∣ding the desire to it, is that which God lookes for; the opening of our mouth wide as a man weari∣ed in travaile, opens his mouth to take breath and swallow up the aire. As it is of corruption reigning, that a man is rest∣lesse in his desire of sinning, Prov. 4, 16. And it is ab∣homination to him to de∣part from it, Prov. 13, 19. It is deadly greife to bee hindred and pulled from sinfull delights, yea to thinke that hee shall not
accomplish his wicked de∣sire; so it is of grace reigning that a man cannot rest till hee accomplish his desire of good, his will is converted to it. It is the note of the godly that they follow after righteousnesse, upon their knowledge of it. Esay, 51, 1 7. It containes the studie of their mindes, and indevours of their will with constant desire till they obtaine, which is not in this life: as lovers that have set their affection on any, most studi∣ously follow to obtaine them, and they rest not but in fruition thereof. Affections setled on su∣pernaturall objects agree∣able to the qualitie thereof, argue spirituall and super∣naturall being. This proofe
the Apostle would take of the resurrection of the soule the first resurrection, rising with Christ, seeking and setting the affections on things that are above, thin∣king and desiring, and fol∣lowing things concerning another life; spiritual things, spiritually discerned and affected, and godlinesse as it is of God, and conformes us to him. That we are in this world (concerning begin∣nings) as he is, and the king∣dome of heaven for his pre∣sence, to dwell with the Lord, to be where Christ is, to behold his glory, and to be perfectly guided by his Spirit. Our conversion begins in Gods worke in us, infusing grace by way of seed, 1 Iohn
3, 9. Which manifests it selfe by new disposition and inclination in us, that our desiring spirituall things a∣greable to their nature, is an action of that life of God begun. The will first suffers Gods worke upon it, and then acts, aspires to conver∣sion, constantly desires it: Inclines us still to seeke God, Ier. 31, 19. In which God confirmes it; he pre∣pares the heart, and inclines his eare, Psal. 10, 17. And when Iesus came Vers. 5. to the place, hee looked up and said unto him, &c. Here is the successe of the desire of Zaccheus in that which hee desired, and in that which he (it may be) thought not of, Christs looking up, speaking to him
by his name, offering him∣selfe to be his guest, such is the benignitie & goodnesse of Christ: whence observe, 1. Obs. that seeking Christ, and good things in him by spiri∣tuall motion, shall not bee in vaine. Good desires may be deferred but not denied al∣wayes, the expectation of the poore shall not perish Psal. 9. 18. for ever; though wee have not our desires so soone as wee conceive them, yet if we cast not away our confi∣dence, but wait and seeke still, our hope shall not fru∣strate us. The desire of the Prov. 10. 24, 28. righteous shall bee granted him, and his hope shall bee gladnesse, his desire is onely good, obtaineth that which is good and onely that. The Lord is good, First, actually,
out of his owne favour and goodnesse hee doth good, to them that wait for him, to the soule that seeketh him, Lament. 3, 25. God hath not said in vaine to the house of Israel, seeke yee me. Therefore hath hee not Esay 45. 19. spoken it in secret, nor in a darke place of the earth, as the prophets of the hea∣then gods, who spake uncer∣tainly and so obscurely and Esay 8. out of darke dennes: but goodnesse and truth con∣curre in him, goodnesse in inviting us to seeke him as willing to bee found, and truth in not deceiving and frustrating our hope when wee do come to him: there∣fore shall wee not faile to finde him because hee will give us to seeke him and
search for him with all our heart. Ier. 29. 13. God hath made himselfe a debtor by his promise to them that seeke him, that hee will come to them and raine righteousnesse upon them, Hos. 10. 12. Vnder righteousnesse we may com∣prehend all kinde of good∣nesse which hee will give from heaven, not sparingly but largely; therefore hee calls it rayning righteous∣nesse, not only that whereby he justifieth us in Christ, receiving us into fauour, and regenerateth us, rendering unto man his righteousnesse, Iob 33, 29: But the perfor∣mance of all promises in due time concerning the present life, or that which is to come. Hee called Bartimeus
crying to him, and gave his sight as he desired. The wo∣man secretly seeking vertue from him to the healing of her issue of bloud, found it in her selfe. All that would make use of Christ found him reedie to their good if they sought him aright, God is faithfull and of ne∣ver failing compassions, in the experience of his ser∣vants they are new every morning, Lam. 3, 23. Hee Esay. 6. 4. 5. both meetes with testimo∣nies of deare love, such as he seeth coming towards him to seeke his presence, as the father of the prodigall met him with wonderfull ex∣pressions of a fathers affecti∣on in the happie returne of a sonne that seemed to bee lost; and also calls them to Esay 65. 1.
behold him, and to seeke him that had no thought of it, who so prevented with his grace, upon his call, de∣sire and seeke him, seeking finde, him and finding him enjoy him unto salvation with eternall glory. Which serves abundant∣ly for consolation to such as Vse. linger after Christ and his grace in holy desires; their hearts God hath touched, and they follow him as given of God to save them, they shall be satisfied. When men have a right estimation of Christ, that they preferre him before all things in the world; as hee knowes their love, he so esteemes it, and will give himselfe to be en∣joyed of them, that they shall (as it were) lye in his
armes, and sweetly rest with him in gracious imbrace∣ments: as the Church sicke of love, as it were swound∣ing by vehemencie of hir desire to Christ, calling to the Pastors of the Church to refresh her spirits with the meanes that they have in trust, to convey by them spirituall things into her soule; findes her selfe on the sudden upheld by Christ, imploying both his hands for her reliefe and streng. thening. No sooner calling but he heares and answeres, and come to her helpe and comfort so willingly as no∣thing can stay his pace to∣wards her; he skips by the mountaines and leapes by the hills; neither her greater sinnes, nor lesser infirmities,
can stay him, nor humane power can hinder his accesse with celeritie. Cant. 2, 5, 6, 8. In his speede hee is like a Roe or young Hart; she seeth him as at the dore be∣hind the wall, yet not fully expressing and exhibiting himselfe in his presence to her, but he lookes forth at a window, and shewes him∣selfe through the grates or lattesse; she beholds him but imperfectly, yet with cer∣taintie, and with significa∣tion of favour. But to them that desire to see him in heaven, not satis∣fied with the sight of him as it is now by faith, he will give them in due time their desire, they shall see him as hee is. They shall be where he is and behold his glory;
the shadowes shall flee a∣way; whatsoever hinders the full content in the sight of him, as ignorance, unbe∣leefe, trouble of conscience, outward tribulations, the day starre shall arise in their hearts, and the day breake, the time of th'other world beginning at our death, and more fully at our resurrecti∣on: the morning of that day which shall never give place to night, when the righte∣ous shall have dominion over the wicked, and shall be ever with the Lord: when they shall no more neede the light of Prophets or Apostles, but by himselfe shall they see God, giving a divine light into their un∣derstanding whereby they know as they are knowen.
Yea and in the meane time they shall have a more Iohn 14. 2. pure and explicate know∣ledge of the mysteries of Christ; he will reveale him∣selfe to them that love him, Rom. 8. 26, 27. and their requests of heart framed by the spirit in them with unexpressible groan∣ings, God will not frustrate: the inspirations of his owne spirit please him, for they are according to his will; the spirit makes them to pray as they ought which of them∣selves they cannot, he helpes their infirmities. Zccheus, make haste, and come downe, for to day  must abide at thine house. This is singular grace and favour, that the Lord of his owne accord bids him∣selfe to his house, who it is
like durst not presume to re∣quest him, though willing to entertaine him: this is a∣bove that he desired, thus he vouchsafed to honour him, whom hee had by his Spirit secretly working, drawen to him. In which we may ob∣serve 2. Obs. that God is pleased to give above our desires many times when wee offer our selves to him. Whereof we have many examples. Thus happy was Zaccheus in his indevour to see Christ; hee seeth him, hee heares him calling him by his name as if hee were familiarly knowen, and receiveth him to his house, and to abide there, and all of his owne ac∣cord; notable humanity of the Son of God, to come to him whm the common
sort did hate, and that unre∣quested. Abrahams request to God was that Ishmael mighty live before him, and that would content him; having a sonne borne to him hee subsists in him, though God promised him another sonne by Sara his wise, it may seeme it was more than he durst hope for, though hee reject not Gods favour in the promise of a new seede, but if it please him to extend his li∣beralitie no further but to conserve the life of Ishmael which he hath given, he de∣sires no further. Concerning Ishmael God heares him, and grants him not onely life, but multiplication of seede to make him a great nation, and his children to
be of great place, twelue Princes he should beget. Yet would he extend his good∣nes to him further; as he pro∣mised, Sara shall beare him a son indeed, and with him & his seede he would stablish Gen. 17. 18. 19, 20, 21. his everlasting couenant. Iacob in his journey to Padan Aram desired of God provision but necessary, and protection in his way with a safe returne to his fathers house; which he had, and a∣bove his desire, God made him two bands, Gen. 28. 20. Gen. 32. 10. 21. David asked life, God gave him long life, even for ever and ever, Psal. 21. 4. Not onely heard him when fearefull of death by the malice of his enemies hee prayed against it, but grant∣ed him over, and above to
live till he was full of dayes, nor that onely but successi∣on in his posteritie unto eternitie of his kingdome, which was accomplished in Christ, who was made of the seed of David according to the flesh, as God pro∣mised him by Nathan: which mercie David admiring prayeth that as the Lord had said so he would doe, that with his blessing it would please him to blesse his house to continue for ever before him, 2 Sam. 7. Solomon asking an under∣standing heart to judge Gods people, to discerne betweene good and bad, not onely obtaines it, but in an excellencie to bee singular in it, so as none had before nor after him. And besides
that which hee asked not, riches and honour, so as there should not bee any of the Kings like unto him all his dayes. 1 King. 3. 9, 12, 13. The sicke of the palsie sought his health of Christ, which he received and unto that the forgivenesse of his sinnes, Math. 9, 2, 6, 7. The ruler sought to Iohn 4. 47. Christ for his sonnes life, and hee had it, and with it faith in his owne and his household hearts, whereby they addicted themselves to 53. him as his Disciples, under the hope of eternall life. The theefe upon the Crosse prayed Christ to remem∣ber him in his Kingdome; hee was heard, and by a se∣rious asseveration secured, that that very day he should
passe from the miserie of the crosse to the felicitie of pa∣radise, and there have fel∣lowship with him in eter∣nall glorie. Luke 23, 42, 43. He is the Father of mer∣cies, 2 Cor. 1, 3. As a most kind Father hee powres out manifold gifts and benefits upon men, of his meere mercie, and imparts unto them, not light and slender, but strong and abundant consolation, that are his freinds, as the God of all consolation. He that is Lord over all is rich unto all that call upon him, Rom. 10, 12. Not onely abounding with riches, but powring out plentifully unto those that depend upon him, hee gives to all men liberally and up∣braideth not, Iam. 1, 5.
He gives even to wicked men (that set their faces a∣gainst heaven) more than heart could wish, Psal. 73, 7. That their prosperous successe exceeds the con∣ceivings of their mind, as if nets were laid to catch for them while they sleepe. His faithfull are more re∣garded than infidels. In our glorifying of God 1. Vse. therefore wee are to say with the Apostle, Now unto him that is able to doe ex∣ceeding abundantly above all that we aske or thinke, according to the power that worketh in us, as wee find by experience in our selves, be glory in the Church by Christ Iesus, throughout all ages, world without end, Amen.
From hence reprove faithlesse feare, damping hope, upon conceit, partly of our unworthinesse, partly of the greatnesse of the things we aske, too great for such as wee be. Wee must not measure Gods wayes by mans, whose wayes are as farre above ours as the heavens are the earth. Esay 55, 9. And yet even men give according to their greatnesse, and con∣sider what is fit for them to give rather than what is fit for the other to receive. We may aske what God seeth meet for his glory to give, and not onely what we feele ourselves to need, but what our Father seeth that we need, Math. 6, 8: with∣out doubt or feare, commen∣ding
our selves to his love and wisedome. And this the Lord our maker requireth of us, that we commend the care of our necessities to his faith and providence in termes of greatest incou∣ragement, Esay 45, 11. Aske me of things to come con∣cerning my sonnes, and con∣cerning the worke of my hands command ye me. Make haste, &c. Whether hee would have his prompt mind knowen, & the gift of faith to appeare with speed, or hast his owne worke the time being come. Observe, 2. Obser. that when the time determi∣ned with the Lord for the manifesting of his goodnes to his people is come, he is willing to doe it speedily. When the people with ear∣nest
desire to heare the word followed Christ, to attend upon the opportunitie hee Marl. 3. 20, 21. left his meate and went to teaching, and incurred a∣mong his kindred a suspiciō of madnesse. Though God deferre his elect that cry un∣to him night and day, yet when their time is come that hee should judge for them, he will avenge them speedily, Luke, 18, 7, 8. Speedily in respect of the wicked, who are suddenly destroyed while they had no such thought and feared no∣thing yet, though God suffer them with long patience: As the Israelites were brought out of Egypt with a strong hand, and their op∣pressers overwhelmed, the same day that God had pro¦mised,
Exod. 12, 41. When the houre was come that was appointed for the death of Christ, how doth hee hasten to it, as is to bee ga∣thered by his speech to Iudas with the soppe, disco∣vering him to bee the tray∣tor: That which thou dost do quickly, meaning the be∣traying of him into the hands of wicked men, which hee was with full purpose rowling in his mind. Till then hee over-ruled the Divell to whom hee now permitted him and left him to his owne malice. As if he should say, hasten thy selfe to the treason which irrevo∣cably thou art set to doe, and thine owne destruction, seeing thou wilt needs pe∣rish; & me to the worke that
I am to finish by my death, which for mans redemption & salvatiō I so greatly desire He is good and doth good, his owne goodnesse moves him, Psal. 119, 68. The good pleasure of his goodnesse is that which im∣pells him, 2 Thess. 1, 11. The propense and pleasing incli∣nation of his will to the good of men, his selfe-pro∣pension to diffuse his bene∣fits, is the fountaine of all that good wee receive, and it is the spirituall ground∣worke of our prayers. He delights in exercising loving kindnesse, Ier. 9, 24. And mercie pleaseth him, Mich. 7, 18. He will waite that he may bee gracious unto his people, he will bee exalted that hee may have mercie
upon them, which turnes unto the highnesse of his name, and greatnesse of his glory; he is a God of judge∣ment, in all things propense unto moderation conveni∣ent for their salvation, Esay 30, 18. Which may serve to incou∣rage Vses. the weake, whose faith is sometimes shaken by mis∣interpreting Gods deferring to heare their prayers, as if it were a deniall, or that hee regarded not their state, which the Lord is pleased to take notice of, and to give helpe against. Esay 49. 15, 16, 17. But Sion said, the Lord hath for saken me, and my Lord hath forgotten me. Vn∣to which he answeres, three things for incouragement, First, that hee neither hath
nor will, nor can forsake and forget her. Which he illu∣strates by comparing and preferring his compassion towards them, to the com∣passion of a mother to the Sonne of her wombe. It is given to the mother com∣monly to love more tender∣ly than the father, therefore he compares his love with the mothers love, and not simply her love to the sonne of her wombe, but that suckes her breasts, towards whom, a mothers affection is not overcome with labour or any kind of molestation, but with unremitted care she indures to give it sucke, to nourish it and foster it. And scarse is it to be expres∣sed how she is affected with the smiles, or afflicted with
the cries of it, specially be∣ing pressed with any danger: Whereby Solomon found out in his wisedome, the true mother of the child, chal∣lenged by two women, when the true mother heard of the dividing of it betweene them, her bowels yerned, & were hot upon her sonne: and would in no wise have it slaine, 1 King. 3. 25. 26. Againe, if the soule in temptation, except against this comfort and say: Ex∣perience shewes that some mothers doe loose naturall affection and regard not the children of their wombe, no not then when they are not long from their birth: God answers to that, though created nature may defect, and turne monstrous, yet the
supreame and uncreated na∣ture is so perfect that it can∣not change. And that is the first thing, which may specially comfort Godly, tender mothers in such temptation about Gods leaving his care of them. If their affection bee such to their children, can Gods be lesse to them? They cannot forget nor forsake theirs, & will they thinke that their affection is not equalled by God, yea overmatched and exceeded, being infinite? Secondly, a second thing is, that God will not forget his for this reason; hee will have them ever in his sight, as graven upon the palmes of his hands, as things in ac∣count, and precious are minded. As the gold finer
sits by the fire into which he hath put his gold to melt, to take it out in due time, and Iob 23. 10. his eye is still upon it, hee neglects it not, Malach. 3, 3. God withdrawes not his Iob 36. 7. eyes from the righteous. Thirdly, a third thing for their answere is, that the time of their reliefe being come, their comfort shall be hasted in the departing of the instruments of affliction, in the coming of such as shall build them up, with new ac∣cesse of members of the Church, multiplication of Gods people, that the joy shall exceed your sorrowes. It may silence such god∣lesse Vse 2. persons as would de∣stroy the faith of Gods pro∣mises in the hearts of his people, by his deferring so
long the fulfilling of them. First, they misaccount time, 2 Pet. 3. 8. it is not long that God de∣ferres, compared with eter∣nitie following: one day and a thousand yeares are alike, and differ not concerning that which belongs to pro∣portion of infinite time; both in comparison of eter∣nitie, is but as a point of time in comparison of time. The eternitie of God coexisteth indivisibily with any durati∣on, and with the least part thereof, even a moment. The parts of our duration which are passed, or which shall passe away, either have beene or shall bee, but are not: Gods eternitie is an in∣terminable, whole, and per∣fect possession of his life to∣gether. All things that have
being may be said to coexist with God in eternity or eter∣nity with thē by objective, though not any reall ex∣istence, as the objects of the knowledg, & power of God. Knowne unto God are all his workes from the be∣ginning of the world, Act. 15, 18. By his eternall coun∣sell he disposed all things in the best sort, and from eter∣nitie there is with him the best reason of his counsels and doings. He needes not time to discusse causes, to inquire after iniquities, and search out sinnes; for his dayes are not as the dayes of man, or his yeares as mans dayes, distributed into spaces of dayes and yeares, his life is not as mans. Secondly, they falsly accuse
God of slacknesse, as it is a∣mong men counted a fault, which is a deferring of any thing beyond the due time appointed. God hath times and seasons in his owne power, so as opportunitie shall not slide away from him, his promise which is for an appointed time, shall surely come and not tary, at the end shall speake and not lye: Hab. 2, 3. Thirdly, let it provoke us to bee followers of God in this: as he slackes not to doe good to his people in fit time, so let us observe op∣portunities and seasons of doing good, and not let them slip, Eccles. 11, 6, but sow our seed in the morning, and not let our hand rest in the evening; and worke the
workes of him that sent us, while it is day, Iohn 9, 4. Waiting for occasions, as Abraham in his tent doore, being given to hospitalitie, who spying three men as he thought comming in the way, ranne to meete them and to invite them: a proofe of sound love to shew kind∣nesse to unknowne men, of whom he neither had nor hoped for exchange of good turnes. Integritie being more then, hospitality might be used with lesse daunger than now in so great persidi∣ousnesse of men. Grace makes a man pompt, and readie to gracious acts. The liberall man deviseth liberall things (contrary to the churle) and by liberall things shall be established,
Esay, 32, 8. To day I must abide at thy house. He had taken up his heart, and now proceeds to take up his house for his lodging: Thus of his owne goodnesse God is pleased to follow his owne favours, as . Obs. the Princes of this world sometimes do to their favo∣rites till they make them great, but there is a wide difference. Yet in both freely, and because they have set their hearts upon them for good, they wil honour them: God will perfect his good worke which he once begins in his toward their salvation and fulfill all the good plea∣sure of his goodnesse in them, as the Prophet saith, The Lord will perfect that which concerneth mee. He
will proceede to declare that hee hath care of my salvation, and what hee hath begun he will through even unto the last act. Men by in∣constancie caried another way, what they unadvisedly entred upon, with levitie they relinquish: or are con∣streined by infirmitie to omitte, what above their strength they attempted. But no such thing can be fall God, whose gifts and cal∣ling are without repen∣tance; hee neither fainteth, Esay 40. 28. nor is weary, hee cannot change his nature nor put of his goodnesse wherewith he is indued: hee will not fru∣strate our hope in the mid∣dle of our course, but they that wait upon him shall re∣new 31. their strength. As hee
redeemeth our life from death, so he Crownes us Psa. 103. 4. with loving knindnesse and tender mercies, and satisfi∣eth his people with his goodnesse, Ierem. 31, 14. Hee causeth their light to spring out in the darkenesse, and their darknesse, by in∣creased light to bee as the noone day; he droppes in his love by degrees till he make their peace full. He circum∣ciseth our hearts to love and desire him, and rewards that love which is his owne worke, with new proofe of his love: I love them that love me, and they that seeke me ear∣ly shall finde me, Proverbs 8. 17. His reloving is, that hee gives himselfe to be enjoyed of them which with love do seeke him, to whom wise∣dome
is consubstantiall: or in communicating testimo∣nies of good will, as im∣puting or rendering unto them righteousnesse, be∣ing favourable to them, shewing them his face, un∣to their joy; powring forth his Spirit more plentifully upon them, leading them more perfectly in the wayes of his commandements. Increase of grace is given to them that rightly use the first grace by way of re∣ward, Psal. 84, 11. To them that walke uprightly God giveth grace. His beneficence flowes out day∣ly unto them, having im∣braced them with his fa∣vour, hee ceaseth not to in∣rich them with his gifts. To you that heare, shall more
be given, Marke 4, 24. He gives them grace more plentifully that receive with profit the word which hee sends unto them; having his words, and keepeth them, beleeving them, and submitting the minde and the heart to them, medi∣tating and transferring them to use, liberally com∣municating them to the benefit of others; not ha∣ving the treasure of heaven∣ly wisedome negligently, as the unprofitable servant had his Talent, but with diligence to good use, they shall have more committed to their trust; for hee that is faithfull in that which is least, is faithfull also in much, Luke 16, 10. He that loveth Christ and keepeth
his Cōmandements, though 1 Iohn 4. 7. that love bee of God, shall bee loved of his Father, and hee will love him, and will manifest himselfe to him, and they will come to him, and make their abode with him. The love which he promiseth, is not that wherewith hee begins to love us, but of which hee begins to reward us with new accesse of his grace, and within graving the Testi∣mony of his Fatherly love in our hearts. The love of the Trinitie towards us is eternal, and explicated by e∣very difference of time. Iohn 3, 16. God so loved Past. the world, that hee gave his onely begotten Sonne; Iohn 16, 27. The Father himselfe loveth you, because Present.
you have loved mee, Iohn 14, 21: Hee that loveth me shall Future. beloved of my Father. Shall perceive the grace of God to reside in him, which shall be increased in new gifts: I will blesse him, with in∣crease of his knowledge of me, to find in me more and more the comfort of his happinesse, and matter of his love to mee, that by his owne delight and desire hee shall bee tyed to me, hee shall come neerer and neer∣er to me, and rejoyce in the sweetnesse of my familiari∣tie: and wee will come to him, unto an increase of union, and make him shine and send forth beames of heavenly righteousnesse, which the world will they nill they, shall take notice of;
and we will make our abode with him; not tarry with him a little time and then depart from him, but for ever he shall have our pre∣sence, here and in heaven, thus good is the Lord. Hee knowes us, hee makes us to know him; hee loveth us, hee makes us to love him; hee covenants with us, hee makes us to covenant with him; takes pleasure in us, and makes us take pleasure in him; hee liveth in us and maketh us live in him: hee walkes and talkes with us, and wee walke and talke with him, & all of his owne good will to sill us with his fullnesse. This proceeding from his beginning to the con∣summation of our salvation,
is grounded and assured up∣on his faithfullnesse, 1 Cor. 1, 9. 1 Thess. 5. 24. Two blessings are specially pro∣mised to them whom God hath called to the fellow∣ship of his Sonne; one con∣firmation unto the end, or as, 2 Thess. 3, 3, preserva∣tion from evill, unmoveably to persist in goodnesse not∣withstanding temptation,  Iohn 5. 28. that the evill one touch them not, v. 23, with any deadly wound. For hee is in them who hath over∣come the divell, the world, sinne and death, greater than he that is in the world, 1 Iohn 4, 4. Hee shall not 1. Cor. 10. 13. touch them with a qualita∣tive touch, to alter their qualitie from good to evill, that they should lose their
gracious disposition, and prove perverse. The other blessing is the fulfilling of their sanctifica∣tion to the blamelesnesse of their whole spirit, soule and body. Because hee is faithfull in his promises, and constant in his gifts, 1 Thess. 5, 23, 24. Which is for abundant Vse. consolation to them whom he hath drawne of his ever∣lasting love, Ier. 31. 1. Ha∣ving loved his owne that were in the world, he loved them unto the end, Iohn 13, 1. Having found grace in his sight that hee selects them from the world, they shall have given them grace upon grace, till they be fil∣led with all the fullnesse of God. The Church is com∣mended
of her spirituall ornaments under termes of rowes of Iewels upon her cheekes, and Chaines of gold about her necke: and withall is promised that the whole Trinitie shal give her further increase of holi∣nesse, and all rich graces, that nothing shall bee wanting to her comelinesse meete for so great a spouse, but her spirituall glory in all parts and numbers shall bee perfected, in simi∣litude, borders of gold with studdes of silver. God is in Cant 1. 10, 11. covenant with the people whom hee once receives, to rejoyce over them, and ne∣ver to turne from after them to do them good; to be an everlasting Father, following them with per∣petuall
favour and liberall blessings, Ier. 32, 40, 41. It is one chiefe use of bene∣fits received, by experience to confirme our hope to finde God as we have found him in present, and in future necessites. Christ remem∣bers his Disciples of the miraculous feeding the five thousand with five loaves, the foure thousand with seaven loaves, and a great deale left: to cure their difference, or weak∣nesse of faith about provi∣sion for bread, Math. 16, 8, 9, 10. David from former ex∣perience Psal. 23. 1, 2, 6. of Gods care of him, concludes in hope thus: Surely goodnesse shall follow me, and mercie, all the dayes of my life. And I will
dwell in the house of the Lord for ever. The Apostle teacheth this, Rom. 5. 10. If when we were enemies we were recon∣ciled by the death of his Sonne; much more being reconciled, wee shall bee saved by his life. I was delivered out of the mouth of the Lyon, and the 2 Tm. 4 17. 18. Lord shall deliver mee from every evill worke, and will pre∣serve me to his heavenly king∣dome. But take heed of wrong∣ing Caution. him in his love, not rendring according to the benefit, as Hezekiah is some∣ting blotted with it in his Chronicle, and David repro∣ved for it; yet with decla∣ring the readinesse of God to proceed in blessing his, with more and greater bles∣sings,
2 Sam. 12, 8. If that had beene too little, I would moreover have given un∣to thee such and such things. 2. Pray the Lord to rejoyce in his works, Psal. 104, 31. In which our state is foun∣ded, as that speach of Iob implies, Thou wilt have a desire to the worke of thine owne hands, Iob. 14, 15. For this David prayeth, Psal. 138, 8, Forsake not the worke of thine owne hands. Cry with the Church for new inspirations of Gods Spirit to increase of plea∣sant fruits, to invite Christ to his garden replenished with chiefe spices; and hee will accept of such invita∣tion, and declare his good acceptance of such enter∣tainment,
and call you in due time to come to him out of the miseries of this troublesome world, when hee shall satisfye all your desires, according to that loving call, Come with me from Lebanon (my spouse) with me from Lebanon. Cant. 4. 8. Verse 6. And hee made haste, and came downe, and received him joyfully. In this acheus shewes the effect of his calling: Obe∣dience, in hastie comming downe, and in joyfull re∣ceiving of Christ. Where∣in we may observe that the Word of Christ in calling men to him, is lively and of an attractive force, making the will to answere and assent to his calling: There is an infallibilitie of the
effect, whose cause is not the studie of the Disciple but the excellencie of the maister, Psal. 18, 44. At the hearing of the eare they shall obey me. Esay 52, 15. The King shall shut their mouthes at him, for that which they had not heard shall they consider. Vnderstanding that the counsell of God is to save the world by Iesus Christ, they shall without gainsaying submit them∣selves unto him for their salvation. As it was in cal∣ling his Disciples, not one∣ly poore fishermen, Simon and Andrew, Iames and Iohn, forsooke their nets and fol∣lowed him, but Matthew a rich man foosooke a gaine∣full trade, and betooke him selfe to him; which was nei∣ther
levitie or stoliditie, so soone to be moved away from their former conditi∣on and course of life. But divine force making his word effectuall to that for which hee spake it. That thereby they might consi∣der that their preaching of the Gospell should not be a dead sound, but with spirit and power, for obedience of faith. Hee so perswa∣deth or allureth Iapheth that he joynes himselfe to Shems tents; sweetly reduceth the Gentiles to the Churches societie, as the very station of felicitie, Genesis 9, 27. Whom hee calls to be of his household, he causeth to come, and joyne them∣selves to him and his peo∣ple, to the satisfying of them
with the good things of his house, Psal. 65, 4. Hee breakes them off from the wilde stalke, and ingraffts them into the true vine. They are the called of Iesus Christ, Rom. 1, 6: That is, partakers of him by their calling. The Father teach∣eth them inwardly with their outward hearing, so as hee that hath heard and learned of the Father, com∣meth unto Christ, the Fa∣ther drawes him, Iohn 6. 44, 45. Which conteines illu∣mination of the mind, a good dscerning of the things of God, and forming of the will to the obedience of Christ. The dead heare the voyce of the Sonne of God, and they which heare it live, Iohn 5; 25. In which
is implied a double grace in the secret vertue and power of the word. First, That the dead should heare, which is beside nature. Se∣condly, bee called againe to life from which they were fallen. To heare is to be∣leeve and assent with the heart, Iohn 10, 16. Other sheepe I have which are not of this fold; them also I must bring, and they shall heare my voyce. They shall beleeve with the heart unto an in∣generation of a new princi∣ple of spirituall life, and excitation to elicite acts of this life. It is not alwayes, or in all persons that this word of Caution. Esay 42. 10. Act. 18. 6. Christ is thus effectuall; some open the eare but heare not: some when they
heare, resist and blaspheme, hate him, and increase their sinne, Iohn 15, 22. So as he is to their ruine, Luke 2, 34. He is a stone to stumble at, a rocke of offence to them that are disobedient, 1 Pet. 2, 8. Whereunto also they were appointed. But in them whom hee calls of his purpose, it is thus effectuall, so as it is re∣fused of no hard heart, be∣cause he softens it: hee takes away the stony heart, and gives them an heart of flesh; to whom all things worke together for good, whom hee calls so as hee justifieth and glorifieth them: Rom. 8, 28, 30. According to his election of them, the election obtaine it, Rom. 11, 7. Gods purpose is his will
predestinating men to life. So then, when men are moved but ineffectually by Vse. 2. the word of Christ, when they shew some signes of flexiblenesse upon making meanes to them, but persist not in a tractable spirit, they seeme to come part of the way by some worke of con∣science within them, but are soone drawne backe againe: the revocation of Satan be∣ing more effectuall with them, than the vocation of God, it is a signe that they are not called yet according to God purpose but with a more common calling, that is accompanied with that grace which proceeds from election; otherwise their calling would make them blessed men, Revel. 19, 9.
Blessed are they that are called to the mariage Sup∣per of the Lambe; for confir∣mation of their hope there∣in, it is commanded to bee underwritten, These are the true sayings of God. 2 The efficacie of grace depends not on the will of man, but Gods will, ma∣king his words that hee speakes, spirit and life, give∣ing his Spirit with the word so as it is quickening. 2 Cor. 3, 6: The letter killeth, but the Spirit giveth life. The letter is dead and in∣effectuall in it selfe, not gi∣ving any power to fulfill it, and so it kills as it accuseth men of guiltinesse of un∣righteousnesse, and con∣demnes them. The Spirit by the Word
begets▪ faith in the hearts of the elect, whereby they possesse Christ to justifica∣tion of life, and regenerati∣on, and cheerefull obedi∣ence unto the doctrine de∣livered. The Apostle in∣stanceth in the conversion of the, Corinthians, which in an elegant metaphore hee compares to a letter of commendation of his Mi∣nisterie, in which hee notes the subject in which that worke is received, their harts▪ a. the adjunct adherēt, the Churches acknowledg∣ing it, seene and read of all men. 3. the principall effi∣cient cause, Christ with his Spirit. 4. the instrument, himselfe. 2, Cox, 3, 3. Yee are manifestly declared to bee the Epistle of Christ,
ministred by us, written not with inke, but with the Spirit of the living God; not in tables of stone, but in fleshy tables of the heart. The whole effect is ascribed to the Spirit of Christ, ac∣cording to the covenant, I will make you a new heart, and a new spirit will I put within you; and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh, and I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walke in my statutes, Ezech. 36, 26, 27. If it depended on the will of man to make the grace effectuall or ineffectuall, it would follow; that I owe to God no more in my conver∣sion and obedience to his
word than the prayse of a power to convert, but to my selfe the prayse that I actually doe convert and o∣bey. So when the Apostle saith, It is not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of God which sheweth mercie; with the like supplement the speach might be converted, it is not of God shewing mercie, that is, altogether, but of mans internall act of wil∣ling, and externall of run∣ning, conversing with studie and diligence. Which must needs offend godly eares. So when hee saith, who made thee to differ from an other man? It might bee answered, mine owne will; another man had as much given him of God as I, equall
helpe of grace; but hee would not bring his abilitie into act, which I did. But this excludes all boasting, that the will and the deed is onely and wholy of God, who hath wrought all our workes in us. Grace is opposed to the fault in us, which is both ac∣tuall and habituall deformi∣tie in the will; therefore is grace both habite and act in the will: it ministreth spiri∣tuall vertue, it giveth an effectiue principle of super∣naturall operation. In summe, if efficacie of grace depend on mans will, then there is no other effica∣cie of the grace of God in the faithfull to well doing, than there is of a temptati∣on of the Divell in sinners to
evill doing, if as the efficacie of the temptation depends rather of the will of the sinner than of the Divell temping, so efficacie of grace rather on the will of the well doer than of God exci∣ting to good. Which is a∣gainst the glory of his grace, which is to bee maintained in all the good hee workes in us or by us. That which I am, saith the Apostle, I am by the grace of God; I la∣boured more abundantly than they all, yet not I, but the grace of God which was in me, 1 Cor. 15. 10. Hee meanes not to give only part or the principall part to the grace of God, and to take the rest to himselfe onely helped by grace: but by correction gives the whole
effect to grace, having made himselfe improperly the au∣thor of the worke. What good soever wee doe, it is by the direction and impul∣sion of the holy Ghost: wee speake, but when it is god∣ly, it is the Spirit of the Fa∣ther Mat. 10. 20. which speaketh in us. Wee pray, but praying as wee ought, it is the worke of the Spirit making re∣quests for us according to the will of God. We worke good willingly and gladly, but it is God which work∣eth in us both to will and to 2 Thess. 1. 11. doe, and fulfills in us the worke of faith with power. Not onely the degree and quantitie of it to bee more, which is the worke of Gods power, but all actions of all vertues which it workes by
love; our indevours are none unto good if God ex∣cite them not, even when wee are in grace. Hee put the care of the Corinthians in the heart of Titus, and made him accept the exhor∣tation, to finish among them the same grace which hee had begun in them, a∣bout their ministration to the Saints, 2 Cor. 8, 6, 16, 17. And being excited, are in vaine unlesse God assist and confirme the will to produce the act; it is Gods unspeakeable gift, and thankes for ever bee given unto him, 2 Cor. 9, 15. It cannot bee explicated in words according to the dig∣nitie of it. And hee made haste and came downe. This is the gra∣cing
of obedience, that it is Veu o∣bediens moram scit, n  , oculos parat vi∣sui, cor ussioi, ures ∣ditui, ma∣ operi eitiner, & sese totum re colligit i∣s   ussionem Domini imple. Bernar. 3. Gen. 17. readie and without delay: thus is the obedience of the faithfull commended, as Abrahams, in leaving his owne Countrie at Gods cal∣ling, readily following him, though hee knew not whi∣ther he went, without seru∣pulous inquisition, no place yet designed him, not knowing so much as where to lodge at night, Heb. 11, 8: In circumcising his fa∣mily all the males the same day that God commaund∣ed him, though they were many: In his early rising to goe where God appointed him to sacrifice his sonne Isaack. First, against the use of the faithfull who had learned to sacrifice cattell not men, this was unwont∣ted.
Secondly, against na∣ture, to kill his owne Child, his onely begotten sonne: for though Ishmael was also his sonne, yet First, hee was abdicated out of the fami∣ly of Abraham by divine commandement, and so in a sort none of his child, but as it were dead in account. Secondly, hee was not by her who in full right, was his wife, but by his maide abondwoman, who though she be called his wife, yet improperly, that hee was but his base borne sonne, not in lawfull copulation. Third∣ly, against the Comman∣dement written in his heart. Thou shalt not kill. Fourth∣ly against the promise, Gen. 21, 12. In Isaack shall thy seed be called; the posteritie
propagated by Isaack onely to be reckoned for the seed, in which hee would per∣forme the promises▪ made to him; which circumstance might directly fight against faith, whereby hee beleeved to receive the blessing in the life of Isaack. All which notwithstanding, he obeyed spedily, Gen. 21, 3. Abra∣ham rose up early in the same morning, &c. Hee was not long in resolving, neither desired respite, but present∣ly addresseth himselfe to this worke. Ioseph warned in a dreame to go into Egypt▪ with Iesus and his mother, to disap∣point Herods bloudy pur∣pose Mat. 2. 14. to take away his life; hee tooke them by night & departed into Egypt. Paul
when God called him to preach the Gospell among the heathen, immediately, he consulted not with flesh and bloud, but resting in Gods authority hee buck∣led himselfe to the worke, Gal. 1, 16. And when hee knew certainly that, God called him into Macedonia to preach the Gospell, he forthwith prepared to goe, Act. 16, 10. The Iailor when God converted him, tooke Paul and Sylas into his house and washed their wounds, and set meate be∣fore them the same houre of the night, and was bap∣tised straightway, with all that were in his house, verse 33. It is required in every duty, that it be done with
forwardnesse: Our preach∣ing 1 Tim. 3. 2. requires a double apt∣nesse, one for conveying itly unto the understanding of others, the knowledge which God hath given unto us; a grace & faculty of com∣municating our doctrine with apt expression for in∣struction and edification of others. Secondly, a willing propension, to take all op∣portunities: Meeknesse and long suffering, devouring indignities so long as there may be hope, 2 Tim. 2, 24. 25. Bth wayes doctrine, 1, Pet. 5, 2. Hearing requires draw∣ing neere to it, Eccles. 5, 1. Swiftnesse to heare, Iames 1, 19. Desire to heare, 1 Pet. 2, 2. In giving almes readie to distribute, willing
to communicate, 1 Tim. 6, 18. Not differring the poore of their desires; Iob 31, 16. not bidding them come againe to morrow, if wee have it now to give them, Prov. 3. 28. In be∣leeving in Christ, God re∣quires the present time, now therefore bee wise, kisse the Sonne least hee bee angrie, Psal. 2, 10. In re∣pentance: Now therefore saith the Lord, turne ye un∣to mee, Ioel 2, 20. First seeke the kingdome of God and his righteousnesse, Math. 6, 33. Now con∣sider this ye that forget God, Psal. 50, 22. As saith the holy Ghost, which is added, for more reverence and quicker yeelding to the exhortation, To day if ye
will heare his voyce, har∣den not your hearts; Heb. 3, 7. Ministers are to remem∣ber their hearers of this du∣tie, to bee readie to every good worke, Titus 3, 1: Be∣ing made meete for their Lords use, by sanctification, and prepared to every good worke, they should have pro∣pension of will and a readie mind to doe good things to Gods glory, to be presidents of good works continually given thereunto. The wri∣ting of the law in their heart, is a delivering of them into the forme of the doctrine, bringing the com∣mandement and their heart together, they agree present∣ly with pleasure and delight Psal. 40, 8.
This readinesse argues reverence of the Comman∣dement and of Gods autho∣ritie, as obedience is set forth by fearing the com∣mandement, Prov. 13, 13. Ezra▪ 10, 3. The feare of God is as the root, and the keeping of the Commande∣ments as the fruit, Eccles. 12, 13. The more reve∣rence, the readier obedi∣ence, Heb. 11, 7. It glorifieth the word of the Lord, shewing it is live∣ly and mighty by the Spirit going with it, Act. 13, 48. As when Christ comman∣ding the divell to goe forth of the possessed, hee went out; the people amazed at it, spake among themselves saying, What a word is this: what new doctrine is this?
they referre the glory to the doctrine in the powerfull effect of it, they saw some∣thing in it more than hu∣mane, so call it new. Thus when the Lord commands an adusterer to be chaste, and a drunkard to bee sober, a niggard to be liberall, the profane to be holy; and it is as he commands forthwith: it is the glory of his word, causing that to stand sorth which was not. As the king∣dome of the Messiah is pro∣phecied of, the eyes of the blind shall bee opened, and the eares of the deafe shall bee unstopped, then shall the lame man leape as an Hart, and the tongue of the dumbe sing, Esay 35, 5, 6: And a high way shall bee there, and a way, and it
shall be called the way of holinesse. The uncleane shall not passe, over it, but it shall bee for those: the wayfaring men, though fooles shall not erre therein, v. 8. For xhortation to sinners, to be abrupt in their Vse. 1. repentance and not to take dayes for returning; fooles to forsake their way readily, to walke in the way of un∣derstanding: they have made haste to sinne, good reason they should hast to come to the Lord for life and godli∣nesse, and all that perteines thereunto. David profes∣seth that upon considerati∣on of his wayes hee turned his feet unto Gods testimo∣nies, he made haste, and de∣laied not to keepe his Com∣mandements.
His subjoy∣ning a negation of the con∣trary, answerable to that which he affirmed, notes his earnestnesse overcomming all impediments and diffi∣culties, true zeale burning up his corruptions. 1. A man must either turne to God, or bee turned into hell; if hee repent no hee perisheth, and his tor∣ment shall bee answerable to his sinnes, the impenitent are said to treasure up wrath against the day of wrath, Rom. 2, 5. So the fire will burne sorer, as it is said of the hypocrites in heart. They increase or heape up wrath, because they cry not when God blinds them, Iob 36. 13. Sin∣ning of maliciousnes & roo∣ted
stubbornesse, they doe as it were kindle the fire more and more, which shall burne them; as the fire will bee hotter by heaping on more wood, so by adding sinne to sinne and binding them together, they aug∣ment the curse which shall consume them. God saith enough to in∣terrupt their presumption, if they had any heart; as that hee will not be mercifull to them, his anger and jealosie shall smoke against them, and separate them unto evill, according to all the curses of the covenant, Deut. 29. 19, 20, 21. That hee will set their sinnes in order before their eyes, Psal. 50, 21. These things hast thou done. These things thou
hast not done, Math, 25. Both sinnes of omission, duties not perfourmed, and of commission, evill workes, they shall (will they, nill they) reade the catalogue of them in a distinct order, and in the full pitch and de∣gree of evill, and perceive by experience that the Lord hath not forgotten any of their workes, Amos 8, 7. They are sealed up a∣mong his treasures, Deut. 32, 34: Which hee will in due time bring to light. Hee propounds himselfe to them as a God of anger, at whose presence the earth is burnt up, the hills melt, the mountaines quake, that there is no standing before his indignation, Nahum, 1, 2. &c. Can thine heart in∣dure,
or thy hand be strong in the day that I have to deale with thee? Hee takes upon him in their punishment to be as some wilde beast, Ly∣on or Beare robbed of her whelpes, tearing in peices, without any possibilitie of deliverance, Psal. 50. 22. Hos. 13, 8. 2. Speedie repentance hath more certaintie: First, because hee that deferres knows not whether his soule shall not bee required be∣fore the next day, Luke 12, 20. Iames 4, 14. Boast not thy selfe of to morrow, thou knowest not what a day may bring forth, Prov. 27, 1. There is no altering of a mans state when hee is dead, hee receives the pro∣per things of his body, ac∣cording
to that which hee hath done in the body, 2 Cor. 5, 10. The night com∣meth when none can worke, Iohn, 9, 4. The sentence of the judge is unalterable, the doore once shut there is no opening of it. And if a man live long, it is not cer∣taine that God will not re∣ject him for receiving the gracious offer of reconcili∣ation in vaine; The branch that brings not fruit in the vine is cut off, Iohn 15, 2. He is in danger of the curse as the ground that drinks in the raine that often falls up∣on it, and brings forth thornes and briers, Heb. 6, 8. It falles out in the just judgement of God, that they who would not repent and beleeve, afterwards cannot,
not onely by naturall inabi∣litie, but by spirituall plague of blinding and hardening, Iohn 12: and tradition to Satan, Their Sunne goeth downe at noone, the houre of vengeance is come. 2. If it be long differred till a mans death bed; it will bee some doubt whether it bee not extorted, and of meere selfe love, and onely to serve a mans owne turne; it will want time to try the truth by the perseverance of it. But when a man time∣ly and speedily upon the dis∣covering of his sinne, or un∣derstanding his dutie yeelds up himselfe to God, when temptation, and opportuni∣tie, and abilitie to sinne and all concurres; it is likely that his repentance and obe∣dience
is of conscience to∣wards God, for the loth∣somenesse of sinne, and the love of the purenesse of Gods Law, which is in his owne heart made certaine by the time remaining in his life, which hee spends in the doing of Gods will; whereas some repent their repentance and returne with the dogge to his vomit, a foole to his folly, the divell re-enters and strengthens himselfe in his possession. It may be an exhortation Vse. 2. to young men, to take the yoke of God upon them in their youth whensoever God will bee pleased to call upon them, not to delay, but in haste to Gods service follow him. Who can tell whether God will call a∣gaine?
and should it not seeme enough in our eyes, that God whose enemies wee are by nature, whom wee provoke by sinfull deedes so greatly, should once call us from hell to heaven, from a state of wrath to a state of friend∣ship and tender love, to the adoption of sonnes, heires of God, and coheires with Christ? Is it meete to deli∣berate and take time to an∣swer such a gracious calling? Bartimes▪ being told that Christ called him, threw away his cloke, arose and came to him. Marke 10. 50. Cornelius. commanded to send sor Peter to the end hee might heare of him words whereby hee and his house should bee saved; at the de∣pernure
of the Angell that brought the message, sent to Ioppa for him, Act. 10, 7, 8. We count it unreason∣able in a man whom wee have moved in matter of his owne great good, that hee neglects it, and are rea∣dy to resolve that he shall never be moved in it more for us. It is good (saith Ieremie) that a man beare the yoke in his youth; Lam. 3; 27. That corrupt nature be cor∣rected betimes before sinne grow strong by habite▪ and it is a great benefite to bee accustomed to good from his youth; it will both con¦tinue, and bee more easie in his age having beene con∣tinually exercised in it, Prov. 22, 6. It will make
his old age comfortable and full of blessing: He that ga∣thers in summer is a child of wisedome, Prov. 10, 5. He hath made his provisi∣on in the fit season & shall be wise in his latter end. It is a great ease in age to bee free from the heart bitings that are in remembrance of the unprofitablenesse, or rebel∣lions of the youth. Iob com∣plaines that God makes him to possesse the sinnes of his youth, Iob 13, 26. Sinnes pardoned and not re∣membered any more with God, may returne with fearefull vision, and make a man forget a while what he hath received from God, in apprehensions of his, maiestie and holinesse, or in times of great afflictions,
or after falls into some fowle sinne that brings o∣thers to remembrance. Psal. 25, 7. Remember not the sinnes of my youth, nor my transgressions (saith David) with some conscience of guiltinesse though heee had received forgivenesse; hee doth not therefore mention the sinnes, which hee com∣mitted when hee was a young man, as not being couscious to himselfe of any new fault, but with this con∣sideration that hee began not now of late to sinne, but long agoe even from his youth hee had heaped sinne upon sinne, and so is bound in a greater guiltinesse. Youth is an age of lusts, the affections are then most boyling: to Timothee a god∣ly
young man doth Paul give warning of the lusts of youth to avoid them, 2 Tim. 2, 22. Solomon notes youth of rebellion in sinne, as if whatsoever bee said to the contrarie, the young man will sowe his wilde oates; Walke in the wayes of his owne heart, and sight of his eyes: against which hee op∣poseth the remembrance of the judgement to come when all must be accounted for unto God, even every moment of time, how it hath beene spent, every idle word: and the condition of the judge considered, to bee bowed no way from right judgement, not by feare of any, for hee is Al∣mighty; nor by mercie for hee is most just; not by er∣ror,
for hee is most wise: and the many witnesses thought fellowes in sinne, the con∣science of the sinner opened as a booke wherein all hath beene written which hath beene dono. The divells which have prevailed in temptation, and then accuse, requiring them of the justice of God unto punish∣ment: the judge himselfe opening his booke of eter∣nall memorie, reciting all thoughts and indevors, and by a divine force re∣ducing unto every mans memorie his workes, so with marveilous celeritie, all and singular bee judged at once and together; and then the stabilitie of the sentence not to bee revoked for the evidence of the fact, and the
efficacie of the judge, with the diffidence of all helpe. There is no power of resis¦ting, no place of repenting, no time of defending, no fa¦cultie of flying, no possibi∣litie of hiding, no securitie of appearing, no utilitie of satisfaction. That mans nature in youth doth cast up the greatest froth, and then lusts bee most violent, it may ap∣peare in that David shew∣ing the power of the word for the ordering of a mans wayes, instanceth in that age as needing the greatest power and strongest bridle: the excellency of the word is it that can frame even a young man to Gods liking in his waies, if hee take heed unto it.
It is a great honour to be religious from ones youth. Obadiahs praise stood in it, that hee feared God great∣ly, and from his youth, I King 18, 3, 12. Samuel, Iosi∣ah, Timothee, have their honour in the Scripture in this, that they did timely take the yoke of Gods do∣ctrine upon them and con∣tinued therein. Age is a Crowne of glory when it is found in the way of righte∣ousnesse, Prov. 16, 31. specially when it is given for a reward of timely and constant obedience: having laid the foundation of a du∣rable estimation when they were young; whereas a sinner of an hundred yeares old shall dye accursed, Esay 65, 20. And his bones are
full of the sinne of his youth, and they shall lye downe with him in the dust, Iob 20, 11. They have beene soked, and steeped in naughtinesse so as they never turne backe againe to take hold of the way of life, and dye ex∣ecrable. The resemblance may bee thus, As some fil∣thy disease and rottennesse eates into the inward mar∣row of the bones, that there remaines nothing sound in the man: so the sinne that a man doth in his youth, so pierceth into, and settles in his soule, that hee is alto∣gether filthy, and the guilti∣nesse of his evill led life, like a venomed arrow or a deadly dart in his consci∣ence, and torments him in and after his death with
other horrible punishments that in the vengeance of God follow his evill deeds. The glory of young men is their strength, though sometime they want that wisedome which old men helped by experience, yet have they courage of mind and strength of body to doe acts of great fame and re∣nowne to put things in ex∣ecution. But in this is the excellencie of their strength that when corruption hath the strength of their natu¦rall faculties, and the Divell applieth his strength to their corruption, by the power of grace in them they overcome their sinfull flesh, and the divells suggestion. 1 Iohn 2; 14. I write to you young men, because ye are
strong, and the word of God abideth in you, and ye have overcome the wicked one by the ingraffed word: they abide in the keeping of GODS Commandements with notable victories over themselves and the Di∣vell, by Christ that loveth them. The acts of vertue in that age are more excellent in that they have the strength of body and spirit, full of spirits, and full of Spirit. As in E whose youth made stay for his turne to speake after his elders, yet in his time with wonderfull force of Spirit impelled, he speakes so as the elder men hold their peace in feare, Iob. 32, 15, 18. It may call us to consider∣ration Vse.
how the Lord hath beene with his word in cal∣ling us, to make us pre∣sently cast away every weight, to remove all barres, and set our soules open for all sinnes to goe out, and Christ to come in and possesse and rule us as his will is. If wee finde it so, to magnifie him in the efficacie of his grace, and to comfort our soules that the Lord hath toucht our hearts, that we goe willing∣ly after him, and flee as doves to their windowes, and flow as waters to their place. If wee sticke still, consi∣der what it is that may cause the with-holding of the grace that makes men rea∣die even to admiration. As
when Eliah had cast his mantle upon Elisha when he was plowing, who ranne after him to desire him to suffer him to kisse his father and his mother, and hee would follow him, askes what hee hath done to him, 1 King 19, 19, 20. A wonder to see such a sudden com∣mutation in Elisha that by such a touch hee was mo∣ved straight way to follow him, that he durst not with out his leave returne to bid his friends awell. If any man thinke that repentance is accepted at any time, and so never bee troubled that the calling yet workes not effectually on him; the theife on the crosse found mercie to repent, and to bee received into heaven with
Christ that very day: let him consider that it was one of the wonders at Christs death, witnessing against his enemies that hee was approved of God: Why should it give hope to such as wilfully deferre their re∣pentance that it may be or∣dinarie? Who will looke for an Asse to speake to the reproofe of their maisters madnesse, because Balaams Asse did so to him once? Inqui ther these thoughts o ntance▪ bee any better than carnall. To serve a mans turne of God, is not to bee evill because God is good, and to abuse his mercifull nature. If re∣pentance were certaine, yet it is nothing to have beene all a mans time or the most
part of it unprofitable, and barren, as dead while hee liveth? Is it no griefe to a man that thinkes to bee glo∣rified of God, that hee hath in this life brought no glo∣rie to God? though the thing is true indeed, God hath assured it, that in the day that a wicked man turneth from his wickednesse hee shall not fall thereby, but hee shall save his soule alive. Some I grant are not so readie in  the com∣mandement given unto them as others, but Christ suffers them not to delay to their destruction. There was a man whom Christ called to follow him, who intrea∣ted to stay with his father till hee were dead, whom he would not suffer to doe so,
but to attend upon the quickening of dead soules in preaching the Gospell. And it cannot bee denied but the best men have their lets; originall Corruption so besetts us that wee can∣not as wee would runne the race set before us: worldly ease, pleasure, Profits, will hold us downe as burdens upon us. But if wee out∣wrestle the temptations, cast away every waight, wee shall doe  purposing if God  to runne after him; when hee makes our hearts larger. But to bee▪ so long in de∣liberating, that the worst motion carrieth men away, and they hold sinne against the light of their mind, and strengthen their resolution
to withstand persuasions to conversion is full of daun∣ger: open therefore whilest Christ knocks, least hee cease and goe away in dis∣pleasure, and locke up your heart so as it shall not bee opened. And received him joyfully. Vpon the apprehension of the good will of Christ in offering himselfe to abide at his house, (a sweet alle∣gory of Christs habitation in the hea of the faith∣full) hee▪  full of joy, with all his heart glad of such a guest. Whence wee may gather, that faith re∣ceiving Christ brings divine consolation with it, where Christ comes there is joy. So in the prophecie of his comming, Zach. 9, 9: and
in the accomplishment, Luke 19, 37. The whole multitude began to reioyce and to prayse God with a lowd voyce. When the people in Samaria gave heede to Philip preaching Christ un∣to them, there was great joy in that Citie, which was the fruit of their faith; as of the Eunuchs, who went on his way rejoycing, Act. 8, 8, 39: And the Iay∣lers who rejoyced, belee∣ving in Go▪ ct. 16, 34. Peter joy th faith as the fruit of it, joy unspeake∣able; either because the matter of it is such and so great as passeth facultie of humane speech to expresse it, not possible for man to utter, 2 Cor. 12, 4. Or for the greatnesse of the con∣tentment,
so as no words can declare it to another what hee feeles within, as he said before, Wherein ye greatly rejoyce. The stran∣ger medles not with his joy; and full of glorie, no afflicti∣on can destroy it, nothing can frustrate it: it ends not in shame as reprobates joy, it is stable and solide, and is a certaine participation of the Lords joy which shall bee in the state of glory, 1 Pet. 1, 6, 8▪ All facultie failes for the commendati∣on of it, and it selfe is the fruit of the Spirit of glory which failes not, but is ever∣lasting joy, gloriously gi∣ven of Christ. It is one of the marks of a Christian, to put his whole confidence for fulnesse of felicitie in
Christ alone, so as to re∣joyce in him, rejoycing in nothing but in his crosse, Gal. 6, 14. In which is the fullnesse of our redempti∣on. Philip 3, 3. Wee which rejoyce in Christ Iesus, and put no confidence in the flesh, ascribe our whole salvation and whatsoever goodgift of vertue or pietie, whatsoever a Christian as such rightly glorieth in, un∣to his onely merit. Both just and great cause of joy there is in their eceiving of Christ; Abraham that saw his day but a farre off yet rejoyced to see it, Iohn 8, 56. And all the faithfull before his comming made him their consolation, Luke 2, 25. First, the incomparable
excellencie in himselfe is cause of great joy to them that receive him, hee is from heaven and above all, such a bridegroome is wor∣thily the joy of the bride, Iohn 3, 29, 31. As his ex∣cellencie above all other makes him desired being knowne, it drawes hearts to him, when the Church de∣scribed him, and concludes her description thus: Hee is altogether lovely, adorning her description with a re∣doubled exclamation to the daughters of Ierusalem: This is my beloved, and this is my freind. They not onely justifie her passions of love for him, but are themselves in love with him, and in∣quire after him, with her to joyne themselves to him;
so holds it them to him with delight, who have him, counting him their full fe∣licitie. Wee will rejoyce and bee glad in thee, wee will remember thy love more than wine. Nothing is there in the world that seemes not vile to them in comparison of him, Canticles 1, 4. 2. The benefits which they receive with Christ are all matters of great joy. They have him as the first effect of their election, the gift of the love of God wherewith hee loved them from the beginning: of this they have abundantly to rejoyce that their names are written in heaven, Luke 10, 20. Secondly, the reconcilia∣tion and peace which they
have with God. So as hee is now their God, and all his attributes for their bene∣fit, that they have all parts and numbers of felicitie having him, and which is Rom. 5. 11. the highest degree of all glorying, they glorie in God. Thirdly, having Christ, they have an everlasting righteousnesse, the righte∣ousnesse of God, who being favourable unto man, will render unto him his righte∣ousnesse, and grant him to bee arraied in fine innen, cleane and white, for the fine linnen is the righteous∣nesse of Saints. Revel. 19, 8: Thus is the bride made readie to meet her beloved, unto the solemnitie of their mariage, and most joyfull
imbracements. Fourthly, they receive Ioh. 1, 12. dignitie to bee the sonnes of God, a benefit eviden∣cing the love of God be∣yond all that our thoughts are able to comprehend; therefore the Apostle pro∣pounds it with admiration: Behold what manner of love, the Father hath bestowed upon us, that wee should bee called the Sonnes of God. 1 Iohn 3, 1. Behold, sometime im plieth experiment with pleasure, with joyfullnesse and alacritie of mind, it calls upon us to apply our mind to waigh and looke duely into the greatnesse of the benefit, that being per∣pensive wee might come to a right prizing and valuati∣on of the blessings it con∣taines,
to conceive some singular sweetnesse of Gods favour, affected therewith unto rejoycing, wee may study to walke worthy of God. They have the nature of God, borne nor of blood nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God, Iohn 1, 13. They have accesse to God, a singular priviledge, adduction into his presence by one Spirit; Ephes. 2, 18▪ Who makes requests for them according to the will of God, Rom. 8, 27. The sonnes of God are led by the Spirit of God, who workes their workes in them, and produceth their pleasant fruits, exci∣ting and confirming their
will for good; quickening, and comforting them, pre∣serving and increasing the life of God in them, causing strength to grow in their soules to victory over the world, their standing in grace after all assaults; and so is the Spirit of glory re∣sting upon them, 1 Pet. 4: The earnest of salvation with eternall glory. They have interest in God for his speciall providence, as David claimes, I am thine save mee, Psalme 119, 94. The Church, Esay 63, 16. Doubtlesse thou art our Father, thou O Lord art our Father. 19. Wee are thine. So his eye is over them, Psal. 33, 18. Hee withdraw es not his eyes from them, Iob 36, 7. Hee that toucheth them toucheth the ap∣ple
of his eye; he loveth them with the same love wherewith hee loveth his owne Sonne Iesus Christ, Iohn 17, 26. They have their right un∣to and dominion over all things restored; all is theirs with Christ, whom God hath appointed heire of all things, and they coheires, to inherit all things with him, Rom. 8, 17. 1 Cor. 3, 22. Revel. 21, 7. This is no small part of the joy of their faith, that whether they bee things present or things to come, all are theirs. Seeing Christ received by faith brings such matter Vse. of joy, it is to their reproofe who have him and his bles∣sing constantly offered, yet receive him not. 1, It is in∣dignitie offered to Christ,
whom they refuse. 2. It is the wronging of their owne soules, Prov. 8, 36. Hee that sinneth against me, wron∣geth his owne soule; all they that hate mee, love death. Infidelitie is two wayes considered, First of mere negation, as in them who never heard of Christ, called infidels, of not having the faith, which is a punishment rather than a sinne. Such are damned for their sinnes, because no sinne can be par∣doned but by faith in Christ; but not for not be∣leeving in him of whom they have not heard, Iohn 15, 22. Rom. 10, 14. Of contrarietie of faith, when men reject Christ, will not receive him, the
will standing in opposition to the hindering of the mindes assent to the truth, resisting both interior in∣stinct and exterior prea∣ching, whereby Christ with his saving power is offered: This hath the reason of sinne and condemnes men, makes them guiltie of the body and 1 Cor. 11. blood of Christ, in an un∣worthy rejecting of him. Iohn 1, 11. Hee came unto his owne, and his owne re∣ceived him not, Iohn 5, 40. Ye will not come to mee that ye might have life. 43. I am come in my Fathers name, and ye receive mee not. Some profanely set light by him and his grace, as Esa despised his birthright in comparison of a morsell of meat, Heb. 12, 16. And
they that were called to the marriage Supper of the kings sonne, set light by it, for their worldly advan∣tages, Luke 14, 18: with one consent making excuse: and when they feare that his presence will bee any losse in their temporall state, they wilfully reject him, as the Gadarens for the losse of their hoggs, and shew a notable unthankefullnesse, offering vile indignitie to Christ, in preferring and redeeming base things with a wilfull losse of him and his salvation. So they wrong their own soules, as the rich man that had his whole and full por∣tion in good things in his life time, and cast away his soule, Luke 16, 25. Some
love darkenesse so as the light is hatefull to them, be∣cause it discovers the evill of their works, which they are not willing to accuse themselves of, and come to the soveraigne remedie of their soules to bee healed. This is condemnation, the jst cause of their perishing; not that they are in darke∣nesse, ignorant of the way of salvation, nor that they are in sinnes, for Christ helps both; hee is the light of the world, that whoso∣ever beleeveth in him shall not walke in darknesse, but shall have the light of life; and hee came into the world to save sinners. But that the light being come into the world, they love darke∣nesse rather than light, and
the cause is that their deeds bee evill. They have an evill conscience and will not bee cured, they worthily perish without pitty: the love of their vices keepes them from imbracing the fountaine of vertue. They are withheld by a most wicked cause from yeilding themselves to so gracious a remedie: As they justly are damned, that had the truth which saveth, but lo∣ved it not, having pleasure in unrighteousnesse, 2 Thess 2, 10, 1. In not receiving Christ they are greivous unto God, who hath given this record of his Sonne, that hee hath given eternall life unto the world, and that life is in his Sonne: and whosoever hath
his Sonne hath life. They that receive not Christ up∣on this record of God, give no credit to him & so blas∣pheame him to bee a lyer, 1 Iohn 5, 10: Fearing least they should bee deceived in resting upon his promise. To derogate faith from the Gospell in which Gods truth and faithfullnesse is chiefly set forth, when men spoyle him of the honour of his truth, what leave they remaining to him? Light of nature teacheth that God is the prime veritie, truth it selfe, and so is to be beleeved in whatsoever hee avou∣cheth to bee true; whatso∣ever hee testifieth of his Sonne, all that have notice of it are bound to credit. God hath testified that Obiect.
Christ is the life of the world, that there is not sal∣vation in any other: this re∣cord I am bound to beleeve with an historicall faith; but where hath hee said that he is my life? that requires an inward testimonie, which till I have received, I seeme not to wrong God. I must first have his record, before I be guiltie of not receiving it. There is a double act of Answer. faith, direct, which is my receiving Christ that I may bee saved, committing my soule to him to deliver mee from death and to restore mee to my lost happinesse, which is called faith of ad∣herence. This I am bound unto by the exterior record which in the Gospell God
hath given of his Sonne: and the Apostle to incite men to faith, takes his ar∣gument from the dishonour which is done to God in not resting on his record, to the receiving of his Sonne unto life. The holy Ghost convin∣ceth the world of sinne in the ministerie of the Gos∣pell, because they beleeve not in Christ, Iohn 16, 9. Not onely that all the world out of Christ are in their sinnes, but that this is a sinne (which they had not before they heard him preached to bee the Saviour of the word) that they beleeve not in him for justification from their sinnes, Iohn, 15, 22. There is also an act reflexe, which is called faith of evi∣dence,
which is, to bee assu∣red of my salvation upon the inward testimonie of God in my selfe, the evi∣dence of his grace in me; that I doe indeed beleeve and am converted from sinne to holinesse; that I have the witnesse of the water and blood in mee, of regenera∣tion and justification by Christ: wee know that wee have passed from death to life, because wee love the bretheren, 1 Iohn 3, 14. I have written these things to you that beleeve on the name of the Sonne of God, that yee may know that yee have eter∣nall life, 1 Iohn, 5, 13. The first act of faith is without experience before it, but the word which wee have received as the word
of God, workes in us that be∣leeve, and so wee have ex∣perience, to an increase of our faith. It is to their reproofe that though they subject their hearts to the Comman∣dement of hearing Christ, and beleeving in him, and labour to worke the worke of God in beleeving in him whom hee hath sent; yet sensible of their unbeleeve, and fearing least it may hin∣der the good which they de∣sire, do goe on uncheareful∣ly. They consider not, that God requires their joy in the knowledge of him to be the Lord which exerciseth loving kindness in the earth and doth therein delight, Ier. 9, 24. And how mer∣cie
pleaseth him where men Mich. 7, 24. Esay 30, 18. will give place to it, waiting that hee may have mercie on them, his pleasure being in them that wait on his mercie, Psal. 147, 11. And how hee cherisheth the least beginnings of faith when it is as a smoaking flaxe, or bruised reed, Math. 12, 20. & how readily Christ appre∣hends us when wee though weakly lay hold on him. They observe not the change wrought in them, and the spirituallnesse of their actions now in com∣parison of that they were before they received this seed which God giveth life unto. The new creature is but as an infant in them, in the understanding of this, and the great consequence
of it in the evidencing of Christ in them, otherwise it is joyfull. They marke not how that little faith is militant, and gives not quiet setling to unbeleefe in the heart, but dislikes and mournes for it, when the ar∣guments and appearances against their faith are such as they can scarce cleare and answere. But joy is sowen for the upright in heart: the mourners in Syon shall bee comforted. Onely let such as seeke the Lord bee exhorted to rejoyce, Psal. 105, 3. Be joy∣full all yee that are upright in heart, Psal. 32, 11. Taste the sweetnesse of the Gospell, the savour of it is quic∣kening, 2 Cor. 2, 14, 16. To rejoyce in Christ is a
dutie, Philip. 4. It is also a promise, Iohn 16; 24. It is the end of the Gospell that in the blessed fellowship with the Father and his Sonne Iesus Christ, and all the faithfull, our joy might bee full, 1 Iohn 1, 3, 4. The Apostles care was even in the greatest persecutions to finish his course with joy, Act. 20, 24. Intimating that no heavinesse should hinder the chearefull li∣ving, and dying to the Lord, of them who have consecrated themselves to him. The beleevers are said to walke in the consola∣tion of the holy Ghost, Act. 9, 31. It is their priviledge above the world that they have in Christs stead the Spirit to bee their comfor∣ter,
Iohn 14, 16▪ 17. They have the Father, the God of all consolation, who hath given us that beleeve ever∣lasting consolation, 2 Cor. 1. 3, with good hope by grace, 2 Thess. 2. 16. And the Sonne they have, whose consolations are answerable to their tribulations for him 2 Cor. 1. 5. Heavinesse may bee ir∣regular even in godly men subiect to passions: our Sa∣viour reproves his Disciples for suffering sorrow to fill their hearts for that which if they had well considered it, should have beene their joy, Iohn 16, 6, 7. He bla∣med something the sorrow of his mother when she found him not in the com∣pany, because ignorantly,
and ere she was aware, she set her selfe against God, Knew yee not that I must goe about my Fathers busi∣nesse? It may bee disagreeing with the season, which in the occasions it offerres calls to joy, Neh. 8, 9, 11, 12. It may bee blameable that it is not governed by judgement; the thought of foolishnesse is sinne, and that foolishnesse that comes out of our heart desiles us, Marke 7. 22. Greefe and thought taking is reproved from the unprofitablenesse of it. It belongs to prudence to order the affections so as they stirre not without good reason. It may bee blameable for
the hurt of it to the body; a merry heart doth good like a medicine, but a broken spirit drieth up the bones. An heavie heart drawes backe the spirits, and con∣sumes the moisture: and to the soule, heavinesse in the heart of a man makes it stoope, depresseth it as it were out of his place, Prov. 12, 25. By the sorrow of the heart the spirit is bro∣ken, Prov. 5. 13, A man enjoyes not himselfe, the spirits are so dulled as a man hath not perfect use of his senses. Christs Disciples failed of their duty about in∣quiring of the state of Christ foretelling his departing from them, None of you as∣keth me whither I goe, but sorrow hath filled your
hearts, Iohn 16. when Moses brought a comfortable message to the people of Israel, concerning their de∣liverance, they hearkened not to him for anguish of spirit, Exod. 6, 9. It is requi∣red in Gods service, that as it is with reverence in re∣spect of Gods majestie, so with rejoycing in his favour, it is with more strength of spirit: The joy of the Lord is your strength, Neh. 8, 10. Recollect the heart there∣fore to it selfe from the evils that provoke it to passion, reproch it for offering indig∣nitie to Christ in such de∣jection; Why art thou cast downe O my soule: why art thou disquieted within me? O trust in God, I shall yet give him thankes for the
helpe of his countenance; ould not our whole life be the keeping of a feast to the Lord in sinceritie and truth in remembrance of that great deliverance by Christ our passover sacrificed for us? 1 Cor. 5, 7, 8. To exhort them that have received Christ with joy, to maintaine their joy. The cause remaines still, and it is a note of the house of Christ to hold fast the confi∣dence and rejoycing of the hope firme unto the end, Hebrwes 3, 6. God hath gi∣ven everlasting consolation through grace, and the Commaundement is, Re∣joyce in the Lord alwayes. 1. Digest well the pro∣mises, they quicken. 2. For∣get not the consolation,
whether against miserable or sinfull infirmities. 3. Re∣member the words of Christ spoken to this very purpose, that his joy might remaine in us, Iohn 15, 11. 4. Draw waters with joy out of the wells of salvation, constantly exercising faith in Christ; and draw benefits out of him as a never failing fountaine, with such refre∣shings as the thirstie receive water. 5. Take heed to the conscience that it bee not offended with sinne fighting against the light and peace of it: wounded it inter∣rupts the joy, but kept cleane, it is a continuall seast. For warning to such as Vse 4. receive the word of Christ with joy. To take heed of
deceit, least the cause of their Ioy bee not Christ re∣ceived, but some phantasti∣call apprehension. As some receive Christ and perceive not with joy that they have recceived him. As a sicke man receives nourishment by his meat, but feeles it no by reason of his malady; so some that taste the word to be good, receive not Christ: the Gospell hath a sweete savour, but it is with the perishing of some that re∣gard not to receive the good of the Gospell. The joy of Christ recei∣ved, and the ioy of the tem∣porizer differ in kind: That is, the ioy of the Lord it comes from heaven, wrought by the holy Ghost Nehem. 8, 10, Rom. 14▪ 17.
1▪ Thess. 1, 6. As God is love, so is hee ioy, ioying in himselfe, the Father ioy∣ing in his Sonne, Prov. 8, 30. The godly nature being communicated to them that receive Christ, they have this godly ioy, the holy Ghost sanctifying and go∣verning their ioy: the ioy of the temporizer, is carnall, of his owne moving, not by the Spirit: hee hath ot the new creation, it is therefore but a fruit of the flesh, which may appeare in their destitution of grace in other things, which shewes them to bee naturall not ha∣ving the Spirit. They differ in the matter or object of the ioy. The true receiver of Christ, ioyes in him and the bene∣fits
by him, as hee knowes he hath them present or in hope. Philip. 3, 3. We re∣ioyce in Christ Iesus, Philip, 2, 1. If there bee any con∣solation in Christ: consola∣tion of being in Christ. My beloved is mine and I am his, that is the ioy. They reioyce that by Christ Gods love is turned toward them, and that God is theirs: they glory in God, Psalme 44, 8. Rom. 5, 11. They delight themselves in him as their full felicitie, it is the true sauce that gives a good taste to the benefits which God bestowes upon them, which they take as so many records of their salva∣tion, testimonies that the Lord is their God, which is their exceeding ioy, Psal.
43, 4. In whom they incou∣rage themselves in all dis∣tresses, 1 Sam. 30, 6. The ioy of the tempori∣zer is partly of his new knowledge of the great things of the Gospell, or conceit of libertie from the fearefull effect of sinne, of selfelove desiring not to pe∣rish, but to dye the death of the righteous. The sa∣vour of the Gospell is sweet to him, and delights him; but he is never perfumed as the faithfull that come out of the world unto Christ, as with mirrhe and incense, and all the powders of the Merchant; which ascends like pillars of smoke, Cant. 3, 6. They differ in effects, the faithfull reioycing in
Christ, whom they receive of God as the gift of his love unto them unto salvation, love him againe for his love, 1 Iohn. 4, 19. And receiving him as the pledge of all pro∣mises in whom they have their certaine fulfilling, they trust in GOD, their faith and their hope is in him, 1. Pet. 1. 21. and reioycing in him as their redeemer, that gave himselfe for them, they are so wholy possessed of his love, that they live no more to themselves, but to him, 2, Cor▪ 5. 14. As the Apostle saith, To me, to live is Christ, Philip. 1. 21. The joy of the temporizer ei∣ther turnes to pride, loose∣nesse or some perverse ef∣fect. And received him ioyfully,
As he received Christ into his heart, so into his house with chearfullnesse; which may bee for our instruction, to receive Christ in his members and in his servants willingly and gladly, loving Christ in straungers, speci∣ally being such for religion, wee must use hospitalitie towards them without grudging, 1 Pet. 4, 9. The Apostle requires that Christians bee given to hos∣pitalitie, that they follow it, Rom. 12, 13. Which re∣quires studie and diligence in exercising it. Heb. 13, 2, in saying, Be not forgetfull to lodge strangers, it im∣plies a mindfullnesse of the dutie, so as not to become more remisse in the accusto∣ming a mans selfe to it.
1. Though this be some∣times a part of magnificence and is the worke of rich men, yet it is most a fruit of love, and mercie, which is to bee done with cheerefull∣nesse, Rom. 12, 8. 2. Christ is received in the least of his brethren, and counts it done to him, Math. 25, 35. I was a stranger, and yee tooke mee in, verse 40. In as much as yee did to one of the least of these my brethren ye have done it to me. 3. Cheerefullnesse in their intertainement rejoy∣ceth their hearts, quiets their affections. Philem. 7. The bowels of the Saints are re∣freshed by the brother, when they are in feare ei∣ther to want or to bee cast upon unbeleevers, or sadly
suspect they shall bee coun∣ted a burden, and find such fellowshipe of the Spirit, such compassion and mer∣cie: the comfort of the love they perceive, and voluntary subjection to the Gospell of God doth refresh them greatly, which love they make knowen before the Churches, 3 Iohn, 6. As he that eates the meat of him that hath an evill eye, though hee bid him eate and drinke yet because his heart is not with him, hath no pleasure in his sweet morsels, but is more greived at his chur∣lishnesse than comforted with his provision. God rewards this cheere∣full harbouring of his ser∣vants in this world and that which is to come; as Abra∣ham,
Lot, the widow of Sa∣rephath, 1 King. 17, 16, 23. The Shunamite. 2 King. 4, Thus hee promiseth, if thou bring the poore that are cast out, into thine house, the glory of the Lord shall bee thy reward: to bring them in is more than to take them in upon intreatie, Esay, 58, 7. The smallest gift given of love, a cuppe of water, of cold water to the least of those that belong to Christ, to a Disciple, in that name, shall bee rewarded, Marke 9, 41. Which is not sim∣ply affirmed but with an asseveration for more assu∣rance: and this excellent ver∣tue of hospitalitie hath greater promises according to the qualitie of persons,
which in Christian love re∣ceived, are intreated re∣spectively for their calling and cause for which they are strangers. There being danger in receiving them that are cast out for religion as if they were rebels, Act. 17, 6, 7, it is likely the greater daunger may bee in receiving the teachers; ther∣fore our Saviour gives the greater incouragement, say∣ing, hee that receiveth a Pro∣phet in the name of a Pro∣phet, shall have a Prophets reward: to receive him in the name of a Prophet is to receive him as a Prophet and because hee is one, so honouring Christ in his ser∣vants, and specially in them that are specially neere him in place and imployed a∣bout
his kingdome, not only shall hee receive a Prophets reward actively, that which the Prophet gives, as the knowledge of the truth, the opening of secrets of Gods kingdome; but passively, the reward which God gives with respect to the dignitie of the person on whom the benefit is conferred: or as a furtherer of the Prophets worke, a helpe to the truth which hee preacheth, giving such reward as hee gives the Prophet: as if hee had the office of the Prophet and executed it, as 1 Sam. 30. 24: As his part is that go∣eth downe to the battell, so shall his part bee that tari∣eth by the stuffe. It serves to reprove the hartlesnesse of Christians to Vse.
to this duty of receiving CHRIST to their hou∣ses, in such as perteine to him; some as above other men they exclude them from their love, so from their dwelling, no lovers at all of them that are good; some of feare to bee persecuted with them, be∣cause iniquitie shall abound Ma. 24, 12. the love of many shall waxe cold: so held with corrupt selfe love that they dare not helpe Christians in their trouble least they should be counted like them, this is in a degree to forsake the cause of Christ, and to bee ashamed of him. They had neede bee prayed for, as the Apostle forsaken in his first answering at Rome prayeth for them that failed him, 2 Tim. 4, 16.
God preserveth some in safetie when others are in trouble, that the one may succour the other. Pov, 24, 12. If thou say, behold, we knew not of it, shall not hee who pondereth the hearts understand it, and hee who preserveth thy soule doth not he know it? &c. To move to this dutie, it may helpe that wee have examples commended of the practise of it, Gaius the hoste of Paul, and of the whole Church, Rom. 16, 23. This is a singular com∣mendation that he received Christians comming from every place, to his house and table. Phebe he gives a great prayse of for her hospitali∣tie to him and many other, and in thankefullnesse re∣quires
the Saints at Rome to assist her in whatsoever bu∣sinesse she hath neede of them, as a thing becom∣ming them, Rom. 16, 2. It is the praise of Lidia that she constrained Paul and Si∣las to tarry in her house, and of the Iailour that setting aside the feare of the gover∣ners, he brought them into his house and washt their wounds and set meat before them, Act. 16, 15, 34. And of that old Disciple Mnasn whose love unto this worke to lodge Christs servants was still fresh, Act. 21, 16. 2. Our houses with our selves and all that wee have wee owe to the Lord, there∣fore should they bee open to him, it was enough to say, The Lord hath neede,
Luke 19, 31. If in his, hee need our house, how can we deny him? let him have it with all willingnesse. We know not what may come to passe in the earth, Eccles. 11, 2. The wise man reasoneth for giving to the poore thus: give a portion to seven and also to eight, for thou knowest not what evill shall bee upon the earth. Give liberally, give to many: it is said of the just hee disperceth abroad, and is as hee that soweth, that casteth his seed at his right hand, and at his left; the rea∣son, the uncertaintie of things, death may come and then the seed time is past, a man cannot helpe whom he would: or it may be he that is able now may want, and
hee that wants now may bee able to helpe him that in his need hath beene helpe∣full to him. God ordereth it so that hee that watereth shall have raine, and with what measure men mete unto others it shall be mea∣sured unto them againe, Luk. 6. 38. Wee have heere no stable or fixed seate, wee are or should bee prepared to leave our houses and all wee have in case of confessi∣on, therefore to receive the have alreadie done it. It is perpetuall infamie to Direphes that himselfe re∣ceived not the brethren, and more, that hee suffered not those that would. It must bee true hospitalitie, not to keepe open house with a
table plentifull furnished for any how vile so ever, which is expreslie forbid¦den, 2 Iohn 10. If there come any to you, and bring not this Doctrine, receive him not in∣to your house, neither bid him God speed. Not heresies one∣ly but heretickes that spread their heresies are to bee re∣jected; we must have no fellowship with their un∣fruitfull workes of darke∣nesse, not onely not invite them, but if they offer them∣selves decline them: Depart from the foolish man in Rom. 16. 17. whom thou perceivest not the lips of knowledge: heare no more the instruction that causeth to erre from the words of knowledge. We must put a difference indeed betweene an hereticke con∣vinced,
that sinnes being con∣demned of himselfe, and one that yet may bee wonne. But receive none such to house in favour of his here∣sie: That is to bee partaker of his evill deedes; nor con∣verse with him, salute him not, with danger of being seduced: evill words, or evill conversings corrupt good maners, 1 Cor. 15, 33. Or with scandall to the weake. But if hee be in extreame want, wee must consider that hee ceaseth not to bee our neighbour, therfore we may for his releife receive him to house, or exercise other workes of mercie to him, taking heede still of sinne, of appearance of sinne, and of the daunger of it. Wee must abhorre to bee
partakers of his evill deede, in doing any thing to further false doctrine, or hinder the doctrine of Christ. Bid him, not God speed, may seeme to bee against civilitie, but it is a discoun∣tenancing of false doctrine, as the Prophet did the Ido∣latrie of Iehoram, of whom he saith, he would not have looked toward him; and a preserving of a mans selfe. For salutation may breed familiar speaking together, and that may prove conta∣gious, and bidding him God speed, implieth a well wish∣ing to him in his businesse, and so consent and coope∣ration in some sort; and so indaungering as to fellow∣ship in sinne, so in his pu∣nishment: As hee that re∣ceives
a true preacher of Christ in that name, fur∣thers his good worke, and is partaker of his reward. Not that such diligent choise should bee made of them wee receive to house, that none but true, godly, good Christians should bee received. There is certaine reward to them that receive a righteous man in the name of a righteous man: so though hee bee an hypo∣crite yea a reprobate, if hee come in the name of a Dis∣ciple of Christ and in that name be loved and enter∣tained. We are to doe good unto all, even men that are evill, are to bee allured by benefits, and recalled to a better course. The office of hospitality is not fulfilled
in communicating our meate, drinke, house, and things pertaining to the re∣freshing of the body, but in mutuall edification, sweete words, that it may bee un∣derstood that the benefi∣cence is done to the honour of Christ. v. 7. And when they saw it, they all murmured, saying, that hee was gone to bee gest with a man that is a sinner. This is the event which this worke of so great mer∣cy and love had among the multitude, they murmured, inlarged by the universali∣tie, they did all so, declared by the cause a mistaken ground, that it agreeth not with holinesse for an holy man to bee upon any occasi∣on, a guest to a sinner. An
other mistaking there was, that counted Zacheus a sin∣ner, who was now returned to innocencie. To murmure is so to dis∣semble the voice, as also to let loose the bridle to a petu∣lant tongue, to oppose ones selfe to some body, yet not openly to set upon him, but to condemne secretly what the murmurer reproves not to his face, commonly whom hee bites with a poyson-full tongue: or it is an inordi∣nate affection, arising of impatience in adversities, or of an evill interpretation of other mens workes or deeds. This is the event of well doing, of good actions; in some, they are grudged at, meete with evill constructi∣ons,
are evill thought of, and evill spoken of. This e∣vent befell the actions of him who did all things well, and nothing amisse. Luke 5, 30. Why doe ye ate and drinke with Publicans and Sinners? Math. 9, 1. Why eateth your Maister with Pub∣licans and Sinners? It carried a shew of ingenuitie and sim∣plicitie, but with a heart of gall against Christ, condem∣ning his doing as unworthy of his person and office. Luke 15, 2. When the Publicans and Sinners came to heare him, the Pharises and Scribes mur∣mured saying: This man re∣ceiveth sinners, and eateth with them. Malicious hypo∣crites misliked and spae e∣vill of what Christ spake or did, how true and profita∣ble
soever. He kept com∣pany with them to leade them from their sinnes to righteousnesse, and it was so plaine that it could not bee denied; but being envious they misconstrued and mis∣liked that which was well done. Simon the Pharisee though no proud contem∣ner of Christ, nor sworne and violent enemy to his doctrine, yet ignorant of the office of Christ that hee was sent with the grace of reconciliation to save that which is lost, hee is offend∣ed that a sinner is gently re∣ceived, who in his opinion was to be expulsed the com∣panie; and thinketh in him∣selfe that Christ is not so much as a Prophet, because he knew not (as he thought)
what manner of woman it was. To suffer as evill doers even for workes of grace, is incident to gracious men, 2 Tim. 1, 12. Davids enemies were moved against him because hee followed good∣nesse: onely hurt him for that cause that hee would live godly, Psal. 38, 20. His benefits towards them could not overcome their malice, but they requited him with injurie. The A∣postle puts the case: Who is hee that will harme you, if yee bee followers of that which is good? 1 Pet. 3, 13. Hee that studies beneficence and be∣stowes himselfe in deme∣riting others, one would thinke should soen iron minds, and Experience
teacheth that they that go∣verne their tongue, love peace, hurt none, but apply themselves to doe good to all as they can, are lesse ob∣noxious to the injuries of wicked men: but when the quarrell is religion, then hu∣manitie is laid aside, & they that will live according to the doctrin of Christ godly, shal suffer for righteousnes. Not onely evill men that are murmurers of destinate malice, but even good men of some weaknesse either in judgement, as they of the circumcision that contended with Peter about his carying the Gospell to the Gentiles, and eating with them; or of some envy may mislike some good actions, as Iosuah misliked and would have
had it forbidden that Eldd and Medad prophecied in the Host, Numb. 11, 28, 29. It may bee that some man of an evill mind may grudge at a good worke under a faire pretence, and deceive some well meaning men and leade them into some mur∣muring. As is thought of Iudas, out of covetousnesse grudging at the cost in the oyntment powred upon Christ, as wast, which might have helped many poore people if it had beene fold and given to them; that o∣thers of the Disciples were so drawen to mislike it and murmure, Marke 14, 4, 5. Math. 26, with Iohn 12, 5, 8. Some murmurers are said to speake evill of things they know not, a madde bold∣nesse
not fearing to con∣demne things that exceed their capacitie: It is of pro∣stitute ignorance arising of an evill disposition to shew some pride and petulancie, to speake evill of things they understand not, assenting to the conclusion without knowledge of the true cause. In doing our dutie wee Vse. must be content with Gods approbation, it is enough that we are allowed of God though wee desire also to manifest our selves in the consciences of men: our re∣solution must bee to shew our selves the servants of Christ in good and in evill report; when men speake well of us, and when they dispraise us, wee have one
Lord to whom wee stand or fall; if we doe of faith what wee doe particular and vni∣versall, we please God, and have a good conscience, and the fruit of our righteous∣nesse is peace, the effect thereof quietnesse and assu∣rance for ever, Esay 32, 17. Neither shunne nor cease to doe good though men of ignorance or ill affection be offended. We must labour to bee without offence, not onely to give none, but to take none to make us weake, fall, or goe backe. Two things helpe to this, light, and love, He that loveth his brother a∣bideth in the light, and there is none occasion of stumbling in him, 1 Iohn, 2, 10. To love ones brother is to bee of a
mind well affected towards him, shewing it in benevo∣lence, and beneficence, ac∣cording to his power, and that for Christs sake, which ariseth of the light of faith. In whose mind the true light (Christ apprehended by faith) doth shine: the Law concerning brotherly love is written in his heart by the Spirit, which is a testimonie not onely of his being but a∣biding in the light, perse∣vering in it. And this light and knowledge of Gods Commandements so guides him, that hee goeth on his journey to heaven which he hath undertaken with expe∣dition, without offence or hinderance: and love in his heart carries him with re∣spect to the whole law, that
the Apostle saith, hee that loveth another hath fulfilled the Law, whatsoever Com∣mandemēt there is, it is com∣prehended in this saying, namely: Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thy selfe. Love worketh no ill to his neigh∣bour, Rom. 13, 8, 9, 10. Cha∣ritie behaves not it selfe un∣seemely, seeketh not her owne, thinketh not evill, &c. 1 Cor. 13, 5. And it is to bee observed that hee doth not say, there is no scandall to him, but there is no scandall in him. Though many scandalls are offered of the world to him that loves his brother: none peirceth into his mind, or is so in his mind whereby hee is hindred from leading his life freindly and peaceably
with his neighbour. Hee so farre offends not, and is not offended as hee hath light abiding in him and walkes in it: but because hee is but in part taken out of the darkenesse, and his love is not perfect; there∣fore in respect of the re∣mainder of ignorance and selfelove unsanctified, hee offends and takes offence, stumbles in many things: but as his knowledge increaseth and his holy love, so hee is more pure and without of∣fence: for which the Apostle praied for the Philippians, that their love might a∣bound still more and more in knowledge and in all judgement, that they might bee sincere and without of∣fence till the day of Christ;
that they might hold on a constant course in their pu∣rifie without stumbling: this is one great part of their felicitie that love Gods Law; nothing shall offend them, Psal. 119, 165. Most great tranquilitie, and true securitie. That he was gone to be a guest with one that is a sinner. This is that which offends them, his fellowship with a sinner. It is to bee inquired 1. who is a sinner or in their account such. 2. whether it bee a sinne to have fellow∣ship with them? A sinner in their account was one of prostituted wic∣kednesse, living, and taken in notorious and manifest sinnes, for which they were excommunicate out of the
Synagogue; and the Scrip∣ture saith some thing to this purpose: in degrees of sinnes it seemes more to bee a sin∣ner than to bee ungodly, 1 Tim. 1, 9. 1 Pet. 4, 18. Where shall the ungodly and the sinner appeare? Psal. 1, 1. Blessed is the man that hath not walked in the coun∣sell of the ungodly, nor stood in the way of sinners; of the Sodomits it is said they were sinners before the Lord ex∣ceedingly, Gen. 13, 13. They feared not in the sight of the Lord and before his face to designe any wickednesse though never so vile; there∣fore they that sinne with impudencie are said to de∣clare their sinnes like Sodome Esay 3, 9. So they began to bee cal∣led
sinners which fell, not of ignorance or weakenesse, but did evill of destinate malice, without all reve∣rence of God. 2. Who of∣fended not in some lesser er∣ror or fault, but lived in hai∣nous wickednesses. 3. Who fell not once into such sinne, but by frequent acts acqui∣red an habite, exercised in evill, it was as their certaine kind of life. 4. When they committed their sinnes not in secret, but so manifestly and notoriously as men of ordinarie honestie abhorred them. Hence by little and little followed that Pharisaicall persuasion, that they which were not desiled with such notorious sinnes, were just even in the sight of God;
of which men Christ saith, he came not to call the righte∣ous, Math. 9, 13. Such as in a loftie and proud mind with trust of carnall workes, thought themselves righte∣ous, and despised others, Luke 18, 9. And so was there a dis∣tinction of hypocrite and sinner; the hypocrite having some seeming righteous∣nesse, precious with men, but so desiled with a filthy heart, that GOD who knowes it abhorres it, Luke 16, 15. But a sinner taken gene∣rally is every one that is not in Christ. So as hee is still guiltie in his conscience, his sinnes are imputed and are upon his owne score, as his debts not discharged,
There is sinne remaining and sinne removed or tran∣sient. Iohn 9. 41. It is remaining when men do not come to Christ. The Spirit convinceth the world of sinne because they beleeve not in him; that they are yet in their sinnes, be∣cause that which unites men to Chrst, faith in him they have not, and so remaining devided and separate from him, sinne reignes in them. Iohn 16. 9. Sinne transient not onely in respect of act, but concerning guilt and punishment is, when men know their sinne, and betake themselves to Christ that they may be justified in him, they have forgivenesse of all trespasses, so as they are not the faults and sinnes of that man, God hath received in
Christ a full satisfaction, and counts himselfe to have no wrong by him, puts away his anger and loves him freely. He is the Lambe of God that takes away the sinnes of the world, Iohn 1, 29. Whatsoever alienated God from man hee takes away by the Sacrifice of his death. A sinner is he who is not sanctified; a Saint and a sin∣ner stand in opposition, a good man and a sinner, Eccles. 9, 2. a sinner is but flesh, Gen. 6, 3. Iohn 3, 6. And in the flesh there dwel∣leth no good thing, they that are in the flesh cannot please God: nature is wholy corrupted, so as men are by nature children of wrath; not by nature created in the
first man, but as hee corrup∣ted it and is now conceived in the carnall generation, in our first birth wee bring with us such a nature as is altogether sinne, Psal. 51, 5. I sinne did my mother warme me. But hee is no sinner which is borne anew, though hee have sinne in him, hee is just and good, compared with them that are in the flesh; and by inchoation hee is a new creature; old things are passed away, hee hath the godly nature, the seed of God abides in him: hee is in the number of Saints to whom the kingdome of God is given, whose king is the Lord, Revel, 15, 3, Thou king of Saints. A sinner is he that cōmits
sinnes ungodly, such are cal∣led ungodly sinners, Iude 15. To commit sinnes un∣godly is not to commit sinne of infirmitie, which befalles the Saints on earth, in whose hearts is Gods Law: but either deceived by ig∣norance, or when the temp∣tation is so strong that the will is over-caried, and the affection in the corruption of it violent against their re∣generate will and affection, they doe that which they would not, but hate. But it is to sin out of the full maliciousnes of the wil; the heart destitute of al god∣ly feare to sin, the hart works iniquitie, Esay 32, 6. As it was in Iudas his sin so com∣mitted as could not agree to any that had his heart in∣dued
with heavenly grace, there fore hee is excepted in the testimonie that Christ gives of cleanesse to his Di∣sciples: You are cleane but not all, for hee knew who should betray him. Peter Christ knew would deny him three times, yet hee is pronounced cleane: Hee wrought no such thing in his heart, his purpose and love to Christ was against it; and so in the rest of the Disciples that were to fly from him and leave him a∣lone, they were over-taken with temptation, the cor∣rupt feare of man prevailing against the feare of God, which was true but weake in them. To him our Saviour say∣ing, That which thou doest,
doe quickly, discovered the studie and meditation of a persidious minde, most in∣tensively rowling and la∣bouring of a wicked treason against his good Lord, Iohn 13, 27. Hee sinnes ungodly that neither doth good nor loves it, hath no heart to internall pietie and justice; loves sinne when hee forbeares to doe it: is alienated from righteousnesse, is the servant of sinne, Rom. 6, 20, And of corruption, 2 Pet. 2, 19. Addicting himselfe to sin, making it his Lord, sub∣jecting himselfe with all his heart, to fulfill the lusts of it, yeilding his members as servants to uncleanesse and to iniquitie, unto iniquitie, to doe the workes of un∣righteousnesse.
Hee is not a sinner that purgeth himselfe in a studie of puritie, 1 Iohn 3, 3. It is opposed to the committing of sinne, v. 4. That effectu∣ally resists sinne with a dou∣ble warre, defensive to pre∣serue himselfe from the hurt of it, 1 Iohn 5, 18: And in∣vasive to overthrow the kingdome of it altogether and bring it to nothing, that the body of sinne may bee destroyed: that walke not af∣ter the flesh but after the Spirit. Every mans life is a certaine way, unto which is fixed a certaine scope and end; when all things are of the flesh & are referred to the flesh, the flesh the rule & scope of life with those things that belong to it. One
may bee said to walke after the flesh, though he do some things by occasion wch seeme to pertaine to the Spirit. But in whose mind and intention the Spirit hath vi∣gor, that this purpose and course or institution of life depends thereupon, he may bee said to walke after the Spirit, though sometimes some things are incident which seeme to resemble the disposition of the flesh rather than of the Spirit; yea sometime the flesh appeare more than the Spirit, when the mind in a kind of gene∣rall motion of the true faith ends unto God, in particu∣lar causes there is somewhat which hinders the light of it, and hee too much more than is meete is indulgent
to his affections, and addic∣ted to his owne witte, 1 or. 3, 3. It is one thing to walke in sinne, it is another to fall into sinne, when his walke is in the light of knowledge and faith; as it is one thing to fall into the mire, another to through ones selfe into it and with pleasure to wallow in it: in that there is a hard necessitie of sinning through frailtie, in this there is a cer∣taine and destinate will. The dominion of sinne stands in assent and workes, but then the assent is not onely antecedent but con∣sequent; the worke not bro∣ken off but continued, where consent is given by infirmity, which repentance forthwith breakes off: sinne
reignes not, when that which is done is by and by condemned, and that it may bee done no more, suit is made with godly prayer; and the mind called to rea∣son hates it selfe and its deed, greatly desiring to bee unburdened of the burden of infirmitie. The reigne of sinne is which addicts the whole man unto the service of it. But where the Spirit of God workes and succeeds, not alwayes to the preven∣ting of sinne that it bee not done, yet to saving repen∣tance after it is done, makes to profit still more to a will of not sinning: not excu∣sing a mans selfe that hee sinneth with the flesh not with the spirit, but greatly
accusing himselfe, & lamen∣ting that the flesh is not sub∣ject to the spirit. Not by compulsion of judgement, which may bee in sinners who see better things and approve them; the Divell himselfe is not ignorant that vertue is better than vice, yet loves vice more than vertue; but where it is of propension, of will and stu∣die to bee better. Not the horror of punishment but the loathing of sinne which is not their pleasure but their burden, there sinne hath no dominion though in the conflict a man carie away sore wounds. To the second, their quar∣rell, because hee went to be a guest with a sinner: whe∣ther all fellowship with sin∣nors Q.
bee sinne to a godly man? It is not sinne absolutely A. for a godly man to have fel∣lowship with sinners: by the example of our Saviour who resorted to the feasts and dinners of sinners, to take opportunitie of converting or convincing them; as when hee called Matthew, and hee made a great feast for him, hee refused not the fellow∣ship of Publicanes at table, Luke 5, 29. So when Simon the Pharisee bid him to din∣ner, desired him that hee would eate with him, hee went into his house and sate downe to meate, Luke 7, 36. Hee went into the house of one of the chiefe Pharisees to eat bread on the Sabboth day, Luke 14, 1. This was
the wonderfull love and hu∣manitie of Christ, that though they were the ene∣mies of the truth, yet to the end that hee might winne them, he thus condescends toe taking all occasion to blesse and do good. The Apostle leaves it free to a Christian to goe to an infidels house to feast if hee bee called and invited of him, 1 Cor. 10. 27. The fellowship of the table is a simbole of love and friend∣ship, and conserves huma∣nitie: onely hee makes it so one of those things that are lawfull, as it is by circum∣stances to be deliberated of for expedience and edifica∣tion; whether it bee safer to avoid daunger and scan∣dall, to tary at home; or whe∣ther
there may not be hoped for some fruit of going, and that without offence. 1. There must bee con∣sideration of the partie, whe∣ther hee be well grounded in knowledge, confirmed in faith and godlinesse, or ig∣norant and weake: if they be strong and able to maintaine the doctrine of truth and convince the falsehood, and they bee left free without being compelled to any of their unlawfull wayes, they may use the fellowship of sinners. 2. They must looke to their motive or impulsive cause, that it be love to their salvation and Christs king∣dome, and to their end which is the same in forbea∣ring their societie, and their
using of it that they may come to repentance. 3. They must teach those sinners with whom they are so conversant, and bee wor∣king upon them for faith in Christ Iesus and repentance towards God, not leaving off so long as they have fellow∣ship with them. Our Savi∣our enjoyned one whom he had cast many Devills out of (though hee prayed him that hee might be with him) to goe home to his freinds and tell them how great things the Lord had done for him, &c. And hee did it with fruit, all men did marvaile not with such an admiration as useth to hold some, of things which they approve not, but admi∣ration with prayse; and it is
likely either a fruit of faith or some beginning of it, he published the name of Iesus, the Gospel concerning him, and that confirmed by such a miracle in himselfe, which was the wonderfull mercie of God that being so unworthily rejected of the Gadarens, though he for∣sooke them himselfe accor∣ding to their desert, yet hee sent them one more accep∣table than himselfe among them, who prevailed with such an ungodly people. All men have not one houre appointed them to beleeve, some fruit comes at length. 4. It is most convenient that they shew themselves freindly, gentle, loving, well deserving of them with whom they so converse; it
much availes to receive the truth when it is persuaded hee loves. And therefore they must not have their conversation with them for their owne gaine and pro∣fit: but with respect meer∣ly of winning them to Christ. When it appeares there is no hope of that, if they shew themselves obsti∣nate in their evill, and give just cause of despaire of their amendment, then wee are to forsake them and have no fellowship with them further than necessitie of life enforceth, either if they bee extreme sicke and can∣not be helped but by our travaile, or if wee our selves were in such necessitie as we were not able to get things needfull for our sustentati∣on
by any other meanes than among them: also for buying & selling things ne∣cessarie for life, in such things as civill states and conditions do require. 5. During their conversing with sinners they must have a great care of their life that it to bee holy and just, prac∣tising such vertues as in their light are commendable, Philip. 4, 8. It is said of the Christian wife that she may winne an infidell husband by her conversation. They hold out the word of life Phil. 2. 15, 16. and shine in the beames of Gods holinesse, as lights in the world, in the midst of a crooked and perverse Nati∣on, blamelesse and harme∣lesse, sincere and as the Sonnes of God, without re∣buke.
And they must have no fellowship with their un∣fruitfull workes of darke∣nesse, Eph. 5, 11. Seeing they are light in the Lord, it is not meet either for them or him in whom they are made light, to communicate in the workes of darkenesse, ei∣ther in deed or word or heart. 2 Cor. 6, 14. What fellowship hath righteous∣nesse with unrighteousuesse, what communion hath light with darkenesse? v. 17. Wherefore come out from among them and be yee separate, saith the Lord, and touch not the uncleane thing, and I will receive you. Against this communi∣cating in evill David pray∣eth, Psal. 141, 4. Incline not my heart to any evill
thing, to practise wicked workes with men that worke iniquitie; let mee not eate of their delicates, nei∣ther by feare of daunger overcome, nor by their de∣licates entised, let mee doe any thing that may offend thee. Such fellowship is forbidden whereby wee are infected, or the wicked con∣firmed in their wickednesse, the weake offended, or the name of God blasphemed. To the first, Prov. 13, 20. He that keepeth company with fooles, shall be broken or shall be the worse: evill communicati∣ons corrupt good manners, 1 Cor. 15, 33. To the second: That when they would have red Babel, and she would ot be cured, they must for∣sake her. An Hereticke after
once or twice admonition, sufficiently convicted, a∣void: a brother abiding ob∣stinate and and impenitent after all meanes of cure, count as the Iewes counted the heathens and Publicans, but that as a medicine to one in whom it may bee sup∣posed there is life; that they may have their flesh that so did oppresse the spirituall life, destroyed, that the spirit may bee saved, that they may learne not to doe such things. It is a reall rebuke, with such a one, no, not to eat, 1 Cor. 5, 11. This is the judging of them that are within, not despising them but providing for our owne health and salvation: a little leaven leaveneth the whole lumpe. To the third the
Apostle requires charitie in the use of our libertie, and that all bee to edification. Weake brethren may bee persuaded that it is lawfull for thē to do the same thing, to use familiaritie with the wicked, whereby they come either to bee abated in their zeale, or corrupted in their minde or life; consideration must bee had of them. To the fourth our rule is, Let all bee done to the glory of God, 1 Cor. 10, 31. If by our conversing with the wicked, the glory of God be not advanced but indan∣gered, the Gospell evill spo∣ken of, wee must abstaine. But where these daungers are not, it is good. And the worke of a mans wisedome, the fruit of the righteous
and a chiefe fruit, to winne soules, as the fruit of the tree of life was the chiefe of all the fruit of the garden. It is true, a vile person is to bee contemned, Psal. 15, 4. The wicked is abomination to the just, Prov. 29, 27. But a difference must be put be∣tweene the sinne and the person, the warre must bee with their sinne: their per∣sons capable of salvation must be loved, as that which is of God in them; onely that hated which is of the Divell, which God hates, their sinne. David professing his not sitting with vaine persons, not going in with dissemblers, notes his free∣dome from participation of their counsell, and societie of their workes, such fellow∣ship
hee abhorred, against which hee opposeth his wal∣king in the truth, setting Gods goodnesse before him, living in the faith of God, and committing all e∣vents to his providence. There is a severitie a∣gainst sinners that is of false righteousnesse, not zeale but carnall bitternesse, wher∣by hypocrites looke at o∣thers sinnes not to amend them, not declaring Gods wayes unto them that they might be converted to him, but to condemne them, as so many maisters; yet are they not washed from their filthinesse: They receive not those whom God hath received, that have repen∣ted their sinnes, and are re∣turned to righteousnesse;
as this multitude condem∣ned Zaccheus as a sinner, who had obtained mercie to be∣leeve in Christ, and gave notable testimonie of true conversion. Simon condem∣ned Mary whose defence Christ tooke upon him. The elder brother of the prodi∣gall, envied the favour shewed to his brother re∣turned, and notwithstan∣ding his repentance still re∣procheth him with forgiven sinnes: but Christians must bee gentle, shewing all Tit. 3. 2, 3. meekenesse to all men; that which they are, wee were. The love and mercie which made us that which wee were not, may make them that which yet they are not. A man of estimation for true wisedome, must shew
out of a good conversation his workes in meekenesse of wisedome, Iam. 3, 13. Verse 8. Zaccheus stood and said unto the Lord, Behold Lord, the halfe of my goods I give to the poore, and if I have taken any thing from any man by false accustion, I restore him foureold. This profession made to the Lord (which honour Zaccheus gives to Christ, be∣hold Lord) and before them which were present, not hindered by the mur∣muring multitude, is a testi∣mony of the stable fath and unfained repentance of Zac∣cheus, as our Saviour infer∣reth from it in the next verse. He professeth workes contrarie to his former course of life, faith working
by love carieth him in thank∣fullnesse for the love and mercie which hee hath re∣ceived, to give one halfe of hs goods to the poore. And not onely forsakes his fraud and oppression, but promiseth satisfaction for the wrong hee hath done, and that abundantly foure fold. From whence we may gather that the inward Change in the soule will shew forth it selfe in word and deed; faith and repen∣tance though inward graces, yet declare themselves in such fruits as beare witnesse of them. A good man out of the good treasure of his heart brings forth good things. Mat. 12, 35. A the man is so doth hee devise, speake, and worke: having recei∣ved
a new forme as I may say, he worketh according to that forme; the Spirit that hee hath received im∣pells him, and is in him so as it flowes forth as rivers of water, Iohn 7, 38, 39, From the habits of grace and in∣terior acts proceede exteri∣or workes, the righteous∣nesse inherent declares it selfe in working righteous∣nesse, 1 Iohn 3, 7. For good speech, Salomom saith that the words of the pure are Prov. 15. 26. pleasant words, both accep∣table to the Lord as a cleane sacrifice, and profitable to the hearers, ministring grace to them. The tongue of the just is as choice silver, pure and precious and iniching many, Prov. 10, 20. They have springs of wholesome
words within them, the law of God is in their heart, and thence their mouth speakes wisedome, and their tongue talkes of judgement; their heart teacheth their mouth, and addeth learning to their lipps, Prov. 16. 23. That their lippes droppe honey combes, honey and milke is under their tongue, Cant. 4, 11. Sweete words, whole∣some and nourishing, their lipps feede many, Prov. 10, 21. Their wholesome tongue is a tree of life, Prov. 15. which both giveth and in∣creaseth Spirituall life: the faith in their heart, in love to God and men, to bring glory to God, and to edifie men, opens their mouthes in confession, Rom. 10, 10. 2 Cor. 4, 13. Though in some
for a time, humane feare prevailes so, and the love of their credit with the side they tooke part with before, that they declare not them∣selves presently, till grace get the victorie: As in Ni∣codemus, Ioseph of Arimathea; and as some conceive of those rulers that beleeved in Christ, but for feare of the censure of casting out of the Synagogue did not con∣fesse him, Iohn 12, 42. And as their speech so their deeds declare their inward grace, they are lively bran∣ches of the true vine, and there is a blessing in them; they bring forth fruit meete for the branches of such a vine by the sappe of grace and life which Christ putts into them, Iohn 15, 5. As
they are resembled by trees planted by the rivers of wa∣ter, they bring forth fruit as trees of righteousnesse, the planting of the Lord that hee may bee glorified, Psal. 1, 3. Ier. 17, 8. And as they are considered in their mariage to Christ by his vertue, they bring forth fruit unto God, Rom. 7, 4. They are created unto good workes, sanctified and pre∣pared, they are apted & made meet for the Lords use, and doe workes of honour in the great house of the Lord whereby they declare them∣selves to be vessells of ho∣nour. Christ compares his Church, in the severall members of it (which hee calls the Churches plants) to an Orchard of Pomegra∣nates
and pleasant fruits with all the chiefe spices, Cant. 4, 13, 14. The Church tells Christ, that at their gates are all manner of plea∣sant fruites new and old which she hath laid up for him, Cant. 7, 13. The wise∣dome from above is full of good fruits, Iam. 317. It is an effectuall wisedome, not suffering them to be unfruit∣full in the knowledge of Christ: They shew their grace in the negative com∣maundement and in the po∣sitive; in the negative, sinne no more: as by Gods mer∣cie and truth their iniquitie is purged, so by the feare of the Lord they depart from evill, Pov. 16, 6. Their love in the Lord stirres up an ha∣tred of evill in them, as it
is foule and vile, against the holinesse of the Law of God which is their delight, their Rom. 7, 15, 22. hope of their similitude to Christ makes them purge themselves and studie puri∣tie; and to keepe their evi∣dence faire whereby they have some assurance of Sal∣vation, they buffet their bo∣die and bring it in subjecti∣on, 1 Cor. 9, 27. For the positive Commandement, they are noted of this, they follow after righteousnesse, Esay 51, 1. and out of disposition and inclination to good, they are said to devise good, Prov. 14, 22. As the liberall Esay 32. 8. man deviseth liberal things. The Law is not onely in their mindes but in their wills, and their will not al∣together ineffectuall; God
that gives to will gives also to doe of his good pleasure, that as the Apostle speakes of Demetrius, they have a good report of the truth it selfe, 3 Iohn 12. The evi∣dence of the thing it selfe testifies the workeing of righteousnesse so as is wor∣thy praise amongst men. It serves to reprove that Vse. shame and fearefullnesse whereby we shunne to be knowne to be that towards God which we are indeede. Zaccheus professed before the Lord that hee was now another man; though Ni∣codemus and Ioseph of Arima∣thea secreted their grace for feare of the Iewes the great enemies of Christ, yet they grew bold and shewed their love to Christ in an hono¦rable
buriall of his dead body. It is prophecied of the converted in Egypt that they should speake the lan∣guage Esay 19, 19. of Canaan, professe their change from serving Idoles to serve the living and true God, and set up an altar to the Lord in the midst of the land of Egypt, imbrace his doctrine and worship him after his will: and more generally in the kingdome of Christ it is said of them on whom God powres out his Spirit, that they shal say I am the Lords, call themselves by the name of Iacob, and subscribe with their hearts unto the Lord, Esay 44, 5. Wee must pray for the Spirit of power, of love and a sound minde, which God gives, 2 Tim. 1, 7.
2. It convinceth them of vanitie in their profession of faith and repentance, that shew no proofe thereof in workes. Iames writes against such a barren profession: as words make not a liberall man, neither can they make a faithfull man: faith if it have no workes is dead be∣ing alone, Iames 2, 17. Workes are the breath of faith, which testifie of the life of it. The faith which joynes us to God, 1 Thess. 1, 3. by Christ is an effec∣tuall faith, it is working by love, Gal. 5, 6. And they are joyned together, faith in the Lord Iesus, and love to the Saints, which shewes it selfe in workes and la∣bours. Paul▪ prayed for Philemon,
that the communication of his faith, may become effec∣tuall: though faith have her seate in the heart, yet by fruits through love it is communicated to others. The communicating of his faith is meant of the offices which faith commands, as of benignitie to the needie and afflicted Saints, that by such communicating of it selfe it might increase or be made more evident, and e∣very good grace in him and his may bee knowne and ac∣knowledged; that by expe∣rience men may see how rich they are in Christ, the vertue of the Spirit so be∣wraying it selfe in his dwel∣ling in them. Behold Lord, the halfe of my goods I give to the poore:
His love is bountifull, gi∣ving halfe hee hath to the needy. This is one way to ex∣presse and exercise love to∣wards God and men, libe∣ralitie, benevolence, almes deeds to the poore, having received mercie moving to shew mercie: This specially is the repentance of cove∣tousnesse, to turne liberall and mercifull. Therefore our Saviour saith to the Scribes and Pharises; But rather give almes of such things as you have, and all things shall bee cleane unto you, Luk. 11; 41. It is op∣posed to their ravening, and extortion and briberie, evill wayes to fill their plat∣ters with: this giving of their owne is a witnesse of the in∣ward
repentance, being an act of Charitie it argueth faith in Christ and remis∣sion of sinnes. Generally, that which is required of a man is his goodnesse, Prov. 19. 22. His beneficence specially be∣comes him, to bind many to him with benefits. It should bee his studie as to live religiously towards God, so in doing good unto men, and then may he seeme to have attained the end of his condition, when hee is as a God to man, when hee profits him. It is one proper∣tie of a good man, that hee is mercifull and his light shines in darkenesse, Psal. 112, 4. His prosperitie which in the Scripture is often noted by light, doth so
abound, that hee doth graci∣ously▪ and mercifully and righteously powre out of his blessings unto these that are in darkenesse, that are pressed with calamities. It is much to Gods ho∣nour, Prov. 14, 31. As hee that oppresseth the poore eproveth him that made him, so hee that sheweth mercie to him honoureth him; doing good to the ser∣vants that are in miserie, ee declares how hee esteemes and loves their heavenly Lord. Hee chooseth to bee honoured and served by mercie and kindnesse shew∣ed to his, and reckons it done to him. He that gives to the poore lends to the Lord, that bestoweth it freely, respecting his wants
that is needy with a mer∣cifull, pitifull, and bounti∣full heart for the Lords sake, hee honours him, and God counts it as if hee were gra∣tified and had a good turne done to him. It not onely releiveth the poores necessitie, but also abundantly causeth many to give thankes to God: a grace administred to the glorie of the Lord, 2 Cor. 8, 10. The Christians that re∣ceive it, glorifie God for their professed subjection to the Gospell of Christ, that in Christs name doe so li∣berally distribute unto them, 2 Cor. 9, 12, 13. It were sufficient to move to it, that it is an odour of a sweete smell, a sacrifice ac∣ceptable and well pleasing
to God, Philip. 4, 18. Heb. 13, 16. But as a thing accep∣ted of God, when it is done to his name, a worke of love, it hath present fruit, and future reward, so that hee that hath mercie on the poore happy is he, Prov. 14, 21. Hee that hath a bountifull eye shall be bles∣sed: for hee giveth of his bread to the poore. For temporall reward: There is that scattereth and is more increased Prov. 11, 24. The liberall foule shall bee made fatte, and hee that watereth shalbe watered also himselfe. Springs and wells though they bee much drawen, yet they abound with water. The liberall person shall stand by his li∣beralitie, Esay 32, 8. Hee
that giveth to the poore shall not lacke, Prov. 28, 27. The Lord will recompence him what he hath laid out, Prov. 19, 17. Hee that mi∣nistreth seed to the sower shall minister bread for their food, and multiply their seed sowen, and in∣crease the fruits of their righteousnesse, 2 Cor. 9, 10. The God of those poore ser∣vants of his shall supplie all their need, Philip. 4, 19. 2. In spirituall graces God many times rewards this mercie and liberalitie, Luke 16, 11, 12. If yee have not beene faithfull in the un∣righteous Mammon, who will commit to your trust the true riches: If yee have not beene faithfull in that which is ano∣ther mans, who will give you
that which is your owne? On the contrary, it appeares that they that dwell in heaven and free and at libertie, count nothing of this world theirs, but as stewards to the Lord faithfully dispence their goods according to his mind, shall bee blessed, and trusted with spirituall riches true treasure, his owne because the fruition is ever∣lasting. Cornelius his almes with his prayers came up, for a memoriall before the Lord, his reward was to have Christ revealed unto him by Peter; whom when he heard, the holy Ghost fell upon him, Act. 10. Men get assurance of a gracious e∣state, for ministring to the Saints of love, is opposed to that from which reprobates
fall, Heb. 6, 9, 10. 1 King. 18, 13, Obadiah alledged to Eliah as proofe of his true feare of God, that hee pre∣served the persecuted Pro∣phets, and fed them with bread and water. If we love the brethren in deede and truth, wee know that we are of the truth, 1 Iohn 3, 19. It furthers our assurance of e∣ternall life. The mercifull are blessed for they shall finde mercie, Math. 5, 7. Mercie rejoyceth against condemnation, Iam. 2, 13. A godly man moved with compassion, with respect to Gods Commaundement, lifts up his head, and over∣comes the feare of being condemned in judgement, because God hath put this grace of mercie in his heart
whereby hee is carried both in softnesse to his brethren, not hard and rough to them; and to releeve those that stand in need of his helpe, the ground is Gods promise to the mercifull. The Apo∣stle calls it laying up a good foundation against the time to come, that we may inhe∣rit eternall life, 1 Tim. 6, 19. Three things are impli∣ed. 1. That there is eternall life to be obtained. 2. That the foundation of eternitie is to bee laide heere. 3. That the state of the next life follows the state of this, as the upper building fol∣lowes the foundation. Christ is the onely foundation, but good workes are by Gods promise as testimonies of our being in Christ, a streng∣thening
to our hope. God hath promised reward in heaven to them that shew mercie to his poore; he that is mercifull rewardeth his owne soule, Prov. 11, 17. It is to make freinds for ano∣ther world, that may receive us at our death into ever∣lasting habitations, Luke 16, 9. The good will give freindly testimonie to the conscience that such have not beleeved in vaine, and God counting done to him∣selfe, crownes the worke: Christ promiseth a Pro∣phets reward to him that receives a Prophet, a righte∣ous mans reward to him that receives him in the name of a righteous man, and him his reward that receives and refresheth as hee may,
though but with a cuppe of cold water in that name that hee belongs to Christ, a Di∣sciple, Math. 10, 41. The Apostle puts a case Object. of giving all a mans goods to the poore, and it shall prosit him nothing. The Apostle gives the Answ. reason, because it is not in him an act of love, hee hath no love. A man living in reigning sinne destitute of grace, can looke for no re∣ward, hee is in the flesh, and cannot please God. Other rules there bee to bee observed in giving, as Est modus in dando, quid, ur, cui, quo∣modo, quando. a just possession as in the ex∣ample of Zacheus, his ill got∣ten goods hee restored, and gave halfe his owne. Prov. 5, 16. Let thy fountaines flow forth, and the rives of
waters in the streets. Not onely take part of thy goods thy selfe, but distribute them liberally to those that want. The Apostle requires of him that stole to steale no more: but to labour with his hands the things that are good, that of his honest labour he may have to give him that wants, Ephes. 4, 28. Hee that hath this worlds goods (saith the Apostle Iohn) and sees his brother have need, and shutts up his compassion from him, how dwelleth the love of God in him? So the goods must lawfully bee possessed, and it must be an act of love to God and to our brethren, 1 Iohn 3, 17. The goods that are unlawfully with∣held from the owner, must bee restored, as followes
in the text. There be three sorts of ill gotten goods. 1. When the injustice is onely his that hath gotten them, as in op∣pressing, usurie, theft, rapine, defrauding, over-reaching, &c. when the right and do∣minion is not transferred from the owner; of such, men may not give almes, but restore them as an act of justice in putting a man in possession of his owne. When by diligent inquisi∣tion it appeares that neither the parties wronged, nor any of their kindred is alive; it must bee given to the maintenance of the Mini∣sterie and Gods worship, or to the use of the poore, such as are in Gods steed, Numb. 5, 8.
2. Sometimes the in∣justice is in both, that he that hath acquired the goods cannot retaine them, they are gotten against justice, nor hee of whom they have beene gotten can require them, hee gave them against justice, as in bribes to per∣vert judgement or such cases as this, almes is to bee given. 3. Something is unlaw∣fully gotten where the ac∣quisition it selfe is not sim∣ply unlawfull, but that is un∣lawfull by which it is ac∣quired, as when a woman hires out her selfe to bee a whore and takes the wages of a harlot, she comes by Gods mercie to repentance, and would shew mercie as she hath received mercie,
she gives of that which was her reward unto the poore, it is not unlawfull. The Law forbad to bring for offerings in any vow the price of an whore, Deut. 23, 18. Hee would have the sanctitie of his house and altar held in high reverence, and not pol∣luted wish any impure ob∣lation. Hee forbad also to bring the price of a dogge, in any vow, as an impure creature and abject and vile; but the service of the tabernacle is ceased, the ce∣remoniall worship is at an end. This is mercie to the poore, to whom if for Gods sake a man give the price of his dogge hee of∣fends not, it is of his owne he gives. 2. Wee must consider a
just right to give, either con∣cerning dominion, or dis∣pensation by consent of him that hath the dominion, ei∣ther open, or secret, gene∣rall or particular: thus wives, Children, servants, as they have the dispensation com∣mitted to them, may give of his goods that hath the do∣minion. Or if they bee allowed a certaine summe for other use absolutely, as the wife for necessaries, the sonne to maintaine himselfe at the Vniversitie or otherwise, a servant for his charge in a journey, sparing something of this absolute allowance they may as of their owne give of it to the poore. It is said of diverse godly women that followed Christ
that they ministred to him of their substance; it was theirs, Luke 8, 3. In a case of preservation of the owner and the familie, it may bee lawfull for the wife to give of the common goods with∣out the owners knowledge, privity or consent, as in the ct of Abigail, 1 m. 25, 18. Though her fact was something extraordina∣rie, as specially stirred up of God to it: yet the ground holds, that goods preserve life, and the common goods bee for the common good of the familie, where the father of the familie is un∣fit or negligent to that hee should do, the wife as joy∣ned with him in governe∣ment is the next to looke to it.
When the wife or a Child hath a stocke, and hath consent of the superior to imploy it for their owne benefit (except hee fall into such want as requires their helpe) they may give of it to the poore, it is their owne. In the case of extreame want, when life is in daun∣ger, it is lawfull for the wife to give of the common goods to preserve life, with∣out tarying for the consent of him that hath the domi∣nion; in such a case some judge that in the law of na∣ture there is a communitie of goods. A Second rule. Ordinate discretion, when a man by true discre∣tion proceeds in a right or∣der
of giving. Psal. 112, 5, A good man will order his affaires by discretion. Some there is that is destroyed for lacke of judgement, though hee have a good stocke and fruitfull ground, yet wasts all and comes behind hand by indiscretion, not ordering things aright. Herein a man is to con∣sider his abilitie to give, not to ease others and burthen himselfe, 2 Cor. 8, 12. Hee must keepe his cisterne and his well to drinke of him∣selfe, and disperse his foun∣taines abroad, Prov. 5, 15, 16. The Disciples every man according to his ability determined to send releefe to the brethren that dwelt in Iudea, Act. 11, 29. He must consider what is
fit for him his familie and so provide, 1 Tim. 5, 8, not onely for necessitie of na∣ture, but decencie of state: and thinke of time to come, what charge in just probabi∣litie hee may have, and lay up for them, so covetous∣nesse determine not the measure. A man may possesse a∣bundance, if God give it, and lay up for occasionall uses, for Church and com∣mon wealth. Prov. 21, 20. There is a treasure to bee desired, and oyle in the dwelling or storehouse of the wise, but a foolish man devoureth it. Prov. 24, 3, 4. By wisedome an house is builded, and by understanding it is established: and by know∣ledge the chambers, or inward
roomes shall bee filled with all precious and pleasant riches. Prov. 13, 22. A good man leaveth an inheritance to his Childrens Children. Hee must measure his gift as according to his abi∣litie, so according to their need to whom hee gives: as it is common. Then hee may give according to the dignitie of his proper state, and not give so much as to hinder it, laying apart something as God hath blessed him for the use of the poore, 1 Cor. 16, 2. In extraordinary want, then give more than ordinary, even so farre liberalitie is to bee extended as to the dimi∣nishing of the patrimonie: as our Saviour saith, Sell that which yee have, and give
almes, Luke 12, 33. Mea∣ning of their abundance, as they practised, Act. 2, 45, and 4, 39. Among whom there is speciall mention made of Ioses who by the Apostles was surnamed Bar∣nabas, the sonne of Conso∣lation, because hee so com∣forted the Saints bowels, Act. 4, 36. Or it may, being a Levite, that hee was indued with a speciall facultie. There is common neede or want, great want when though they live and draw breath yet are in grievous want of necessaries: And there is extreame want when a man hath not to preserve his life; here specially must we if wee cannot otherwise, give of the stocke it selfe. They that are before spo∣ken
of, are not supposed to sell all their lands and houses, but as there was need. A man must begin with his owne: if the parents bee in povertie, or the Grand∣father or Grandmother, and the children and nephewes bee of abilitie, they must learne first to shew pietie at home and to requite their parents, which is good and acceptable before God, 1 Tim. 5, 4. Our Saviour blames the Pharisees much, that by their tradition they had rejected the Com∣maundement of God, of honouring father and mo∣ther, which hee drawes to the releeving of them in their wants, Marke 7, 9, 10, 12. Ye suffer him no more
to doe ought for his father or his mother. And this is to bee exten∣ded to all of his blood, though there bee others that bee better than they, yet are wee to preferre them in observation and preser∣vation: if the abilitie will ex∣tend to more, then exer∣cise▪ beneficence towards neighbours, such are of us. The Saints are to bee pre∣ferred besore sinners: as wee can wee must doe good un∣to all, but specially to the household of faith, al 6, 10. Though every man that needs our helpe bee our neighbour whom God of∣fers to▪ us by his providence, Luke 10, 36, 37, yet spe∣cially to the faily of God, the faithfull, Saints by cal∣ling,
Psal. 16, 2, 3. Because of the spirituall nativitie, they are begotten of God, 1 Iohn 5, 1. They are the members and brethren of Christ, Math. 25, 44. God loves them above other men, Deut. 33, 3. Yea hee loved the people; all his Saints are in thy hand. Psal. 73, 1. He is good to them that are of a pure heart. Prophets that bring the doctrine of faith (other things being alike,) are to have the specialtie of our 1▪ Thess. 5. 13. benevolence and benefi∣cence for their worke sake, their place in Gods house so neere to him; and to bee pre∣ferred before ordinarie Di∣sciples; thus for the order of charitie: to which we must adde this, wee are to pre∣ferre
in our giving such as have beene in our need be∣neficiall unto us. The A∣postle, saith that our abun∣dance should supply the present wants of the faith∣full, that their abundance (things chaunging) may supply our wants: as Solo∣mon saith, thou knowest not what evill shall be upon the earth; it may bee thy case to want, and his whom thou hast relieved to bee of abili∣litie to releive thee, Eccles. 11, 2. A Third rule. There must bee sincere intention in giving, that wee doe nothing of ambition, but purely respect God to please him, and count it e∣nough that wee have him the witnes of our heart: this
is set out by a metaphoricall speech: Let not thy left hand know what thy right hand doth; do it so upright∣ly, as if the left hand (which is joyned in the worke many times with the right) had eyes and could see, wee should hide from it what we doe. It is not blamed that our almes bee seene, but that wee would have them knowne, no nor to will to have them knowne, if it bee not for getting mans praise; if it be willing for Gods glo∣ry, it is that which Christ willeth, Math. 5, 16. That men may see your good workes, and gloxifie your Father which is in heaven: That they may esteeme ye heavenly doctrin, be converted to the faith, & prayse the Lord? Otherwise
a man must take no notice what hee hath given, how much, to whom, how of∣ten, lest hee be lifted up in pride and preferre himselfe to other men. The Apostle gives the rule, Rom. 12, 8. Hee that giveth, let him do it with simplicitie, with in∣genuitie, like a faithfull man, as Paul saith of Phile∣mon: It must bee done to Christ in his, to the name of God, Heb. 6. 10. A Fourth rule. A right principle it re∣quires, it must bee out of compassion, and that not na∣turall but sanctified by the holy Ghost; an act of super∣naturall love, moved by the love of God to us: the love of Christ possessing us. 1 Iohn 3, 17. Who so hath this
worlds goods, and seeth his bro∣ther have need, and shuts up his compassion from him, how dwelleth the love of God in him? There is no benefi∣cence pleaseth God but that which proceeds from compassion, or bowels of mercie, and that also from the love of Christ who laid downe his life for us; that in case we should lay downe our life for our brethren to declare our love, how much more impart of our substance to his need? Though in giving wee al∣wayes consider not this, yet it must bee an act of that grace of liberalitie whereby wee are so disposed, and Esay 32. 8. inclined to this as wee de∣vise of liberall things. So wee are commaun∣ded
to powre out our soules to the hungrie, Esay 58. A Fift rule. It must bee done in faith, both that the worke of this kind is such as pleaseth God, Heb. 13, 16. It is gi∣ven as a motive, for with such sacrifices God is well pleased. 2. And that God accepts our persons, and will receive an offering at our hands, 1 Pet. 2, 5, Revel. 8, 4. And of the promise that wee shall not lose our reward, Heb. 11, 6. He that comes to God must beleeve that God is a rewarder of all that seeke him diligently. A Sixt rule. That it bee done in humi∣litie, to the glory of the Lord, honouring him with our substance, acknowledg∣ing
him to bee the owner of all that we have, 1 Chron. 29, 9. Thankefull to him that hee hath made us gi∣vers, which is a more bles∣sed thing than to receive: and for that hee gives us an heart to be willing, praying to keepe it in our hearts, that of our selves are soone wea∣ry of welldoing. Que. What specially commends almes? If the question bee what specially commends almes, it may bee answered, it is commended in diverse con∣siderations, other things being agreeable: Bountie when a man giveth more large almes (halfe my goods) this is commended in Dorcas fullnesse of good workes and almes deed, Acts 9, 36,
39. The widowes shewed forth the coates and gar∣ments that she had made while she was with them. Act. 10. 2. Cornelius is pray∣sed for his much almes to the people. A second thing that com∣mends almes is the grace of the person; it is joyned with the almes of Cornelius in his commendation, that hee was a devout man, one that feared God with all his household, that prayed God continually, and fasted: in summe that hee excelled in vertues. The Macedonians are commended as for their liberalitie and that rich out of extreame povertie, so for the abounding of their joy in much afflictions, and for giving themselves to God
and the Apostles by the will of God, 2 Cor. 8. Notes of pietie exceeding the Apo∣stles expectation. Hee lookt for such an affection as is common to Christians, they went beyond it. Without this grace of the person, quantitie commends little before God, hee may bee nothing profited if hee give all away. A third thing commen∣ding almes is promptnesse and feruour of actuall will, as the widdow is praysed in offering her two mites; all her living, before them that offered more for proportion Arithemeticall than she, but in proportion Geome∣tricall offered more than they, because all she had, willing if she had beene as
able to have offered more than they offered. And this in comparison with the other two seemes to com∣mend the almes for great∣nesse. Thus the willingnesse of the Macedonians is made exemplary in the forward∣nesse of their will: I speake because of the forwardnesse of others. If there bee first a willing mind, God loveth a cherefull giver. Liberali∣tas non cumul patrimonij, sed largitatis affectu definitur. Amb de viduis. Which reproves the co∣vetous and illiberall, that Vse. give not of their goods to the poore. 1. They obtaine a name of niggard even from Gods people, they want both their good opini∣on and their good report,
Esay▪ 32, 34. Gods people be∣ing taught of God shall with simplicitie and plainenesse speake that they truly under∣stand, they no more speake honourably of the wicked man in his wicked way; they shall call things as they bee, a niggard shall no more bee called liberall. 2. They have a sinne sticking to them which is reckoned among the sinnes of unrighteousnesse, where∣with they were filled whom God gave up to a repro∣bate sense, Rom. 1, 30. Mercilesse, one of Sodoms sinnes, Ezek. 16. 3. They are under a feare∣full sentence for diverse judgements. 1. Comming to povertie, Prover. 11. 24. He that spares more than is
meet, surely commeth to povertie. 2. In his distresse to have hearts shut against him, that hee shall find lit∣tle or no helpe: let none have pittie on him, on his father∣lesse Children, because hee remembred not to shew mercie, Pal. 109, 12, 16. With what measure yee mete shall men mete to you againe, Luke 6, 38. Solomon exhorts to liberalitie because wee know not what evill may fall out upon the earth, Eccles. 11, 2. If wee come into distresse, others may bee hard to us as wee have beene. God payeth men home many times in the like as they have done to others, as in other things, Iob. 31, 9, 10. Eccles. 7, 23, 24. Prov. 24, 10, 11, 12.
4. His prayer unto God when hee rieth, shall not be heard, Pro. 21, 13. Whereby it appeares that its no cer∣taine signe neither of a good life nor of a good death that a man calls upon God, un∣lesse hee calls upon God at all times, and his prayer have the companie of true vertues. 5. In few words hee shall have many curses, Prov. 28, 27. And that wofull one at last to have judgement without mercie, Iam. 2, 13. Whereas none can stand in judgement without mercie, mercy tryumpheth. To propound woe to them Vs 2. that not only releive not, but oppresse the poore▪ The Lord hath a controversie with the land, because there
is no mercy in it, Hos. 4. but specially when it is as So∣lomon speakes of the mer∣cies of the wicked, that they be cruell, Prov. 12, 10. Amos 2, 6, 7. For three transgressions of Israel and for foure, I will not turne to it, because they sold the righteous for silver, and the poore for shooes; they gape over the head of the poore in the dust of the earth. They lye downe up∣on cloathes laid to pledge by every altar, Amos 5, 11. And ye take from them burdens of wheat, 12. I know your manifold trans∣gressions and your mightie sins; ye afflict the just, ye take rewards, and oppresse the poore in the gate; One pu∣nishment among the rest is
for this and other sinnes, mortalitie, that but the tenth part shall scape. v. 3. The Citie which went forth by a thousand shall leave an hundred, and that which went forth by an hundreth shall leave ten to the house of Israel. So Amos 6, 9. Because they pamper them∣selves excessively, and none is sorie for the afflictions of Ioseph: If there remaine ten men in one house, they shall dye, and scarce any bee left to burie the dead, but some shall burne them to ashes within the house to carrie them out more easily, v. 10. Amos 8, 3. There shall bee many dead bodyes, they shall cast them forth with sylence: The cause v. 4, 5, 7.
It may be for exhortation for them that neither op∣presse Vse 3. nor make the eyes of the poore to faile, but re∣leive them, to looke to the Rules in their giving, that they give not of unjust pos∣sessions; God hates briberie for a burnt offering, Esay▪ 61. God reproves wicked men for offering him a part of their robberies and oppressi∣ons, thinking that therefore hee will dispence with them: hee that judgeth them that share with theeves whether private men, as Proverb. or Iudges, Esay▪ 1, Proverb. 1. 23, will not himselfe in∣dure to bee made a parta∣ker of their iniquitie: And so for the rule of discretion and▪ sincere intention, &c. Here may bee placed that
which is before, what is it of which almes are specially commended? And if I have defrauded any man by forged cavillation, or false accusation. In this is noted the manner of the sin∣ning which publicans used in their calling, in recei∣ving tribute: which was, to pretend in their preying upon the people, and their thefts, the commoditie of the common wealth; and if any opposed them in their defrauding and rapine, then would they impudently ac∣cuse them of wrong to themselves and the com∣mon wealth. So when the Publicans comming to Iohns Baptisme, asked him what they should doe; hee an∣swers, require no more than
that which is appointed un∣to you; implying that the sin of their calling was to re∣quire more, and calumniate such as refused: The word , If I have plaied the sycophant, is thought by some to bee borrowed from the Athenians, among whom hee was called syco phant that told of them that had brought Figgs out of other Countries as Attica; because the Figtree was a∣mong them in great ac∣count, and it was forbidden to bring Figges from other places. Hereupon they be∣gan to be called sycophants, that for a little mony did draw men before judge∣ment seates for small cause, and sometimes for no cause but pretended, falsely accu∣sing
the innocent. So Scapu∣la on the wood . Others thinke it to have be∣gunne, by the meanes of a Grecians servant, who ha∣ving brought Figgs into his house, one of his servants eat them up, and the master missing them inquired who had them; hee that was guil∣tie accused his fellow that was innocent: to finde it out hee made both drinke luke warme water and vomit, and so the guile and false accu∣sation of that guiltie person was discovered; from thence deceivers and false accusers were called Sycophants. From whence wee may see unto what impudencie in sinning for a little advan∣tage some men come to de∣fraud & to lye and to be false
accusers of men against knowledge and conscience; it is noted by Salomon that some will make it but a jest to bee false witnesses to face out a matter impudently, knowing that they lye false∣ly. Prov. 19, 28, A wicked witnesse mockes at judge∣ment, making no more ac∣count of right and truth, of Magistrates placed for justice, or of God himselfe punishing false witnesses, than they doe of things to bee laught at. Iesabell makes no question but to finde with ease witnesses that will impudently lye against the very life of Naboth for a re∣ward, 1 Kings 21. And go∣vernours knowing the fraud and falsehood, to receive the testimony of such rakehells
and proceed to sentencing of innocent Naboth to death, and so sent word to Iesa∣bel what successe her plot had, tryumphing in their thoughts after their sinnefull gratifying of a wicked wo∣man, that the villanie was so freely carried. The high Priests knew wel how to get men falsly to accuse our Sa∣viour with a wet finger, they would not sticke at it to set their tongues to sale for a price: to helpe their friends, and benefit them∣selves. Salomon speakes of riches gotten by a deceitfull tongue, Prov. 21, 6. This gaine by deceit and lyes is to a naughtie heart won∣derfull pleasant, Prov. 10, 17. The more unlawfull
the better liked. It is as na∣turall to men to lye and de∣ceive, as for nettles to grow with sowing or setting. All men are lyers, Psal. 116, Rom. 3. Dauid was much troubled with cruell wit∣nesses that charged him fals∣ly. Let it admonish men to nourish tendernesse of cōsci∣ence, shame and bashfull∣nesse to sinne: take heede of impudencie, outfacing, out∣looking conscience, that secretly bites and barkes when they resolve to sinne. 2. Take heed of inordinate desire of gaine, it will make a man transgresse in great matters for a little and base price, Prov. 28, 21. Ezech. 13, 18, For handfulls of barly and peices of bread, to slay soules that should not
dye, and give life to soules that should not live. Hate such gaine as brings the curse into the house with it; it is vanitie tossed to and fro of them that seeke death, Prov. 21, 6. Take hed of getting by false ac∣cusation, by playing the Sy∣cophant. That charge which Iohn Baptist gave to the souldiers, give to your selve; Accuse no manfalsely, Luke 3, 14. It is set downe among the sinne of the latter time proceeding from selfelove, false accusing, 2 Tim. 3, 3. false accusers. Seing there be such as will accuse others falsely, and as Salomon faith, inventeth slaunder, it must warne us not to be hastie to credit ac∣cusations against any of our
neighbours, but shut our eares to Sycophants, turne them away with a frowning countenance, Prov. 25, 23. that hee may learne not willingly to speake that which hee perceives is not willingly heard. It is one note of a Citizen of the holy Citie, not to take up an evill report against his neigh∣bour; not onely not devise it nor to vtter it, but not to give eare to it. Specially let magistrates take heed that they bee not abused by Sycophants, to trouble in∣nocent men. Putiphar was abused by his wife so, and put his faithfull servant Io∣seph in prison: David false∣ly accused to Saul, was per∣secuted by him. 1 Sam. 24, 10, Wherefore givest thou
eare to mens words that say, behold David seeketh evill against thee? David him∣selfe though hee had vowed otherwise in the generall, Psal. 101, 5, against such persons as privilie slander their neighbour, yet hee har∣kened to that pickthanke Sheba, gave away Mephibo∣sheths lands to him,  Sam. 16, 4. Not but it may be law∣full in cases to receive infor∣mations against offenders. 1. When it may profit them unto reclaiming and amend∣ment, 2. When it is expe∣dient for him that heares, to bee told when there is daun∣ger of injurie. Gedaliah was to blame not to make use of that intimation of Ishmaels purpose to kill him. 3. Ne∣cessarie for him that speakes
when silence would make him accessarie to the thing concealed, ro. 29, 24, He that heareth cursing and de∣clares it not, Leuit. 5, 1. I restore, if I haue taken any thing from any man. Hee forsakes his speciall sinne upon conversion; so is it in repentance, that as ge∣norally there is a turning a∣way from all sinne: the will that was turned away from God and his Law, Rom. 8, 7, is now turned againe thereunto. So from the speciall sinne, whether the sinne of a mans calling as it is here, or some other that reignes in the soule above other. As the Pharisees great sinne was rapine and covetousnesse, and our Sa∣viour exhorting them to re∣pentance,
bids them sell that which they have and give almes, which should testi∣fie their conversion: Give almes of that you have, and all shall bee cleane to you. Not that almes is infallibly a signe of grace, but repen∣ting and being changed from covetousnesse to libe∣ralitie, they would bee tur∣ned also from all other sinnes in will, if they considered the daunger of that sinne: and seeing the remedy in Christ to beleeve in him unto forgivenesse, the Spirit of Christ would purifie their hearts by faith, and all should bee cleane to them. Shewing mercie in due or∣der, first to their owne soules in beleeving in the Lord Ie∣sus, and repenting towards
God their sinnes, and so pro¦ceeding to bee mercifull to others in releeving them with their goods, they be∣came cleane and all cleane to them, Luke 11, 41. The worke of the Spirit is first in killing the root of every sinne, that nature cor∣rupt hath not that force un∣to any knowne sinne that it had: and giveth new na∣ture and holy disposition to all righteousnesse and incli∣nation to Gods Law. But in speciall it breakes the pow∣er of the maister sinne, as it is in renewed repentance, one speciall sinne is forsaken and men dwell upon the un∣doing of it: yet it renewes the repentance of other sinnes. So in repentance  S 1. imtiall when a man first setts
his feete into Gods way, some one sinne that he hath beene specially a slave to. 1. Which hee hath specially lusted after. 2. Whereby hee hath beene specially foyled. 3. Which God setts specially on his conscience, upon which his thoughts specially attended: for which hee specially hath striven, as Herod strive for incest, adding to other, and above all, putting Iohn in prison for reproving him for it; it lay upon his conscience above other sinnes, as that speech full of feare testifi∣eth, This is Iohn whom I have beheaded. Hee that is entred into his rest hath ceased from his owne workes as God did from his, Heb. 4, 10. Hee
that hath suffered in the flesh ceaseth from sinne, 1 Pet. 4, 1, 2: To live no more after the lusts of men but after the will of God. There is such repugnancie betweene our lusts and Gods will, Gods governing of us by his word and Spirit, and our arnall dispositions and af∣fects, that hee workes not in us but in our rest, and cea∣sing from sinne: and this from the example and vir∣tue of Christ. It may move men to ex∣amination of their conver∣sion, Vse. whether as all sinne so specially they are turned a∣gainst their speciall sinne. If as for all, even sinne of nature, Psal. 51, they in pentientiall exercise are humbled for their most
reigning and raging sinne: thus we finde some of Gods Servants to have some one thing trouble them above all the rest. As Pauls blas∣phemie and persecution of the Church. 2. If old customed sinnes plead and prevaile nnto some acts, whether the hatred, greife, strife with care bee not more stirred; whether pray∣ers for confirming grace bee not earnest specially against it. Whether in matter of rejoycing it doe not make a man see specially and con∣fesse his unworthinesse of any good from God. The act of the speciall Quest. sinne is ceased, is that e∣nough to proue conversion, and that a man may con∣clude I am the Child of Abraham?
There may be a change∣ing of a mans wayes, that is Ans. but to change with the De∣vils chaunging of his temp∣tations, and that either when hee perceives a mans conscience holds him speci∣ally against some speciall sin, which it may be some sickenesse or other affliction hath made him vow against: or his constitution or age, according to which men are subject to sinne in some par∣ticular more than another, fitts not for the former sinne. So a man may leave one master sinne, and take ano∣ther to serve in speciall manner, as to forsake sinnes of spirit, as error, and to bee held of sinnes of the flesh. 2 Pet. 2, 18. In speaking swel∣ling words of vanitie, they
beguile with wantonnesse through the lusts of the flesh, such as were cleane escaped from them that are wrapt in error. And so on the other side, such as the Divell cannot hold longer under the grosse sinnes of the body, hee leads them in superstitions and great sinnes of the mind, 2 Tim. Thus is poperie the Divells advantage by Gods just judgement, to make it the refuge of the unconsciōable, specially monied men that can buy the abundance of other mens merits to supply their wants, and serve the Pope, as Luther professed he did of a kind of conscience, such as he made to himselfe by the Divels motion. 2. There may be an ex∣ternall
reformation in many things, the acts of sinne cease for a time, corruption dri∣ven up into corner, but yet possesseth the soule and holds the man still in his un∣cleanesse: his will is not con∣verted unto God. Good∣nesse is rather of the will than act, and so actions ge∣nerally. Davids will to build Gods house was ac∣cepted, Herods will to kill Christ made him a murde∣rer, though he did not in act follow his will to execution. Luk. 13, Herod will kill thee. He cannot, A prophet can∣not perish out of Ierusalem. Zaccheus his will was turned so as to suspect where hee knew not hee had sinned, with order for satis∣faction; repentance will not
suffer unknowne sinne, but desires to have the man cleane from secret sinnes. The harlot is delivered of her great belly, the act is ceased; the whorehunter breakes off, the filthy lucre, unhonest gaine is in the chest, the treasures of wic∣kednesse in the house of the wicked, and the act of unjust getting is ceased: the drun∣kennesse of the drunkard is slept out, hee for shame ceaseth to doe as hee hath done, and so of other sin∣ners. Sinne remaines, and hath an existence till the will bee turned to all the Law of God; and the sinner remaines separated from God as well after the act as in the act: af∣ter sin there remains a staine, which is not onely a defa∣cing
of former beautie of the soule, but an actuall or∣dination to sinne, and dis∣abilitie to that which is good and pure. The will is quiet and rests in separation from God even after the act ceased, and is still in sinne. Sinne is in one either by act or guilt▪ action, either in∣ward or outward, inward in the will, guilt remaines though the deed cease, till the will bee on Gods side: as legally he that toucht any thing uncleane he was un∣cleane till hee was washt, not onely in the act of touching but after. So in sinne the soule remaines un∣cleane as it was in the act, it is as farre from God by dissimilitude which is in life and cleannesse of it, as it was
in the act, Lomb. Sent. lib. 4. dist. 18, lit. 1. I restore. Restitution of goods evill gotten is a fruit of true repentance, com∣maunded, Numb. 5, 6, 7, 8, either to the partie, his kin∣dred, or if none of them can be found, to the Priest. Lv. 5, 15, 16. If any man trans∣gresse through ignorance by taking away things con∣secrated to the Lord, hee shall restore that wherein hee hath offended, and shall put the fist part more there∣to, and give it to the Priest, &c. As in tithes, offerings, vowes: when a man by flat∣tering himselfe becomes ig∣norant of his dutie, it is put as a condition without which the wrong is not for∣given: but restitution made,
and repentance testified in walking in all the statutes of life, without committing iniquitie, life is assured. Michah when hee heard his mothers curse against him that had stollen her eleven hundred shekles of silver, consesseth his theft and restores the silver; His fingers were false, but his heart was tender: conscience will hold some from facing sinne, whom it restraines not from committing it, Iudges 17. Samuel offereth resti∣tution to any that charge him to have taken bribes of them, to hire him to doe ju∣stice. 1 Sam. 12, 3. Behold here I am; Beare record of mee before the Lord, and before his Annointed, whose oxe, whose asse have I taken,
whom have I wronged? or whom have I hurt? or of whose hand have I received any bribe to blind mine eyes therewith, and I will re∣store it you? The Prophets cry out against the keeping of goods gotten by rapine and fraud in mens houses. Ier. 5, 27, As a cage is full of birds, so is their house full of deceit, that is, of prey gotten by ill meanes, where∣by they are become great and waxen rich. Michah. 6, 10. Are yet the treasures of wickednesse in the house of the wicked? How can your sinnes bee pardoned when you repent not, but keepe still your evill gotten goods, treasures heaped up by wickednesse? whereas the law commaunds restitu∣tion
of such to the ow∣ners. Restitution is an act of speciall justice, whereby a man is possessed of that  is his owne. When the A∣postle Rom. 13. saith owe nothing to any man but love, he intends that wee should give to eve∣ry man his due. A man that Vse 1. knoweth this doctrine of restitution, and against his light and conscience keeps goods wrongfully, cannot justifie his repentance, either in the sight of God or his owne soule: unlesse he have spent all and cannot make restitution, then his will and love of the dutie will be ac∣cepted. 2 Cor. 8, If there be first a willing minde it is accepted according to that a man hath. God re∣quireth
not of him that is willing, what hee hath not. Master Bradford that holy man and martire, hearing a Sermon of Master Lati∣mers wherein restitution was urged, was strucke in the heart for one dash of a pen which hee had made with∣out the knowledge of his Master, and could never bee quiet till by the advice of Master Latimer restitution was made: for which he did willingly forgoe all the pri∣vate and certaine patrimony which hee had on earth. The sinne is not remitted unlesse the value taken away bee re∣stored: repentance is but fained. Levit. 6, 5, God re∣quired that in that day in which a man sought the for∣givenesse of with-holding
from a man, that which was his or, robbed of him, hee should restore it. Id as though hee sought not re∣conciliation with God, yet when his conscience was opened to see his sinne in the uglinesse of it, abhorred the unjust gaine of his sinne, and carried it backe to the Priests of whom hee had it, and whether they would or no, left it among them. The theeft remaines so long as the unjust gaine is kept wil∣lingly, and no thiefe enters into the kingdome of God. As it was with Iudas, so proves it many times with other men, their covetous∣nesse doth them no good; they desire that which when they have, their conscience dare not use; there is more
desolation than consolation in it. What if restitution im∣ply Quest. some worldly daunger or disgrace? That which was unjustly Ans. taken may bee sent by ano∣ther, and his name concea∣led; hee that is of a faithfull heart concealeth secrets. It may bee for exhortati∣on, Vse 2. to move men to bee con∣tent with honest and just gaine, though they grow not so rich as others, that are not so straightened in their conscience. A little with the feare of the Lord is bet∣ter than great treasure, and trouble therewith, Prov. 15, 16. It is both more profit∣ble, for their riches are pre∣cious, Prov. 12, 27. A little boxe full of pearles is more
precious than a house full of straw. God blesseth it, and Deut. 28. makes it serve for use more, hee maintaines it, and so it is more stable, Psal. 37, 16, 17, Prov. 16. 8. Fourefold. The quantitie of fourefold declares his just will: The law required not in all cases so much. Exod 22, 3, Hee should make full restitution, Levit. 5, v. 4. If the theeft bee found with him alone, hee shall restore the double, in a matter of trespasse or any lost thing which another man chal∣lengeth to be his, whom the judges condemne hee shall pay the double to his neigh∣bour. That judiciall law binds us but onely concer∣ning equitie, and sometimes it may bee needfull to re∣store
not onely the princi∣pall but something for the dammage, in wanting his owne while it was in our hands. There must be a will of doing him right that hee bee no looser by us; or if it bee judged, wee are to re∣store as the judge giveth sentence, unlesse the party will remit. Then Iesus said to him: This day is saluation, &c. Christ honoured this Publican both with his pre∣sence at his house as his guest, and with his testimo∣ny of his gracious estate, that hee was the Child of Abraham, and so the blessing of Abraham was come upon him, salvation came to his house that day. Christ giveth testimony
of the grace which hee workes in men. As hee is the author, so is a witnesse of it to him in whom it is; hee testified of the Centuri∣on that his faith was not onely true but matchlesse even in Israel, Math. 8, 10. Of the palsey mans faith and theires that brought him, Math. 9, 2. Of the Cananitish womans faith and degree, Math. 15. 28. Of the womans saith healed of her issue of blood by touching the hemme of his garment, Marke 5, 34. Of Mary hee witnessed both faith and much love, Luke 7, 47, 48, 50. Hee testified after his Ascension by the gifts of the holy Ghost given to them that beleved in him, that their faith was
not vaine in him. As hee spake by his mouth, Marke 16, 17, so hee performed by his power. Act. 10, 44. When they beleeved, God knowing their hearts bare them witnesse, in giving un∣to them the holy Ghost as hee did unto us, Acts. 15, 7, 8. Gal. 3, 2, Hee testi∣fieth of mens faith ordina∣rily to the end of the world by the Spirit of adoption: giving the Godly nature, dwelling in the beleever, and testifying of his pre∣sence by gracious operati∣ons, whereby he knowes that hee is the Child of God, Rom. 8. 16▪ Sealed to the day of redemption, Ephes. 1, 13, 14. and 4. 30. The ef∣fect of which testimony is to free the soule from feare,
and freely to call God Fa∣ther, Rom. 8, 15, 16. To know that wee are in Christ, and Christ in us, Iohn 14, 20. Which may convince the Papists of false doctrine in teaching that a man by ordinarie way cannot bee infallibly certaine of his be∣ing in grace. Is not the testi∣mony of Iesus sufficient to bee rested upon? Bellarmine hath foure po∣sitions concerning this point all false. 1. That such infallible certaintie of our standing in grace or of our being righteous, cannot bee had. 2. That no man is bound to have it if it might bee had. 3. That it is not expedient that ordinarily it bee had, 4. That it is not in deed had but of a few, un∣to
whom God in a speciall sort reveales their justifica∣tion, Bell. de justif. l. 3, c. 8. 1. The reasoning out of Object. which a man concludes the certaintie of his owne ju∣stice is this. The word of God witnesseth that all which are truely converted and seriously repent their sinnes, obtaine grace. But my true conversion is evi∣dent to mee, and my re∣pentance; therefore I know with certaintie of faith that I have found favour and grace. The assumption, faith Bel∣lermine, is not onely false but impossible, unlesse revela∣tion bee present. That which God pro∣miseth Sol. may bee had, for he
is true and cannot lye; but hee promiseth this certain∣tie of our grace. Iohn 14, 20, Yee shall know that you are in mee and I in you. Bellar∣mine putts it off with this an∣swere, that wee shall know that Christ is the head of the Church, and so Christ is in his Church, and the Church in Christ. But the scope is consolation to par∣ticular soules that beleeve in Christ, but see him not because hee is in heaven. What comfort to me that I know Christ to bee the head of the whole Church? doe not the Divels know that? what peculiar favour is this that even reprobates partake? Revel. 2, 17, I will give him a white stone, and a new name in it, that
none know but hee that re∣ceives it. Ergo hee knowes it. 2. That which God gi∣veth ordinarily to beleevers may bee had: But hee gi∣veth this certaintie of their standing in grace. Rom. 5, 5. He shedds his love abroad in their hearts by the holy Ghost▪ they feele it with certaintie and truely ac∣knowledge it, Rom, 8, 16. Gal. 4. 6, God certifieth or maketh their hearts cer∣taine of their grace, even because they are in grace: So certaine that they are made holylie secure from that which they feared by the spirit of bondage. And they make their hearts quiet before God, and have bold∣nesse before him, certaine
of his favour to heare their prayers, 1 Iohn 3, 19, 21. Bellarmine objects; though Object. by the Spirit moving us wee pray, and call God Father, yet wee are not infallibly certaine that it is the Spirit, but by conjectures which may deceive us. The use of witnesses a∣mong men is to end the con∣trouersie Sol. by their testimo∣nie; and shall God give testi∣mony to lesse purpose than mans? Christ saith of his, that though the world know not the Spirit, yet they know him because hee dwells in them. Bellarmine. There is no Object. more implied but that they are certaine, that if they know God by faith, they know not but by his ayd.
It is given as a reason why Sol. they know him, because he dwells in them. They are sure it is the Spirit of truth, by his sensible operation in them; therefore they feele such holy force in them as they are sure they are not deceived in their perswasion of the Spirit of truth given unto them. 3. That which God com∣maunds us to have may bee had; by their owne confessi∣on, his commaundemens are made possibile by his Spirit. We say so for some measure, though not for perfection, Ezech. 36. 27. The ministerie of the Gos∣pel is a ministery of the Spi∣rit, 2 Cor. 3. In some degree inabling us to that which is commanded, 2 Tim. 1, 7.
but God hath commaunded us to make our calling and election certaine, 2 Pet. 1, 10. Ergo to prove our selves whether wee bee meete to receive the Lords Supper, which cannot bee without 1 Cor. 11. certaintie of our grace. 2 Cor. 13, 5, Prove your selves whether you bee in the faith; know ye not your owne selves that Iesus Christ is in you? 2. A man is bound to get certainetie of his grace, knowing it may bee had, 1. By necessitie of precept. Heb. 6, 11. Shew the same diligence to the full assu∣rance of hope unto the end. Heb. 10, 19, 22, Seing wee may bee bold to enter into the holy place, let us draw neere with full assurance of
faith, in a true heart: let us keepe the profession of our hope without wavering, for hee is faithfull that hath promised. 2. By evident re∣proofe of doubt and feare disquieting the heart. Esay 51, 12, Who art thou that thou shouldest feare, &c. Marke 4, 40. 3 It where great injurie to God, a hate∣full unthankefullnesse, to be carelesse of receiving such mercie or stirring up our selves to get it, when wee know God giveth it, Esay 56, 2. 1 Iohn 5, 9, 10. Iohn 14, 11, Beleeve mee, at least beleeve mee for the worke sake. I am bound to beleeve God testifying to my heart that I am in grace, and to rest in his testimony, not to neg∣lect it.
I am more bound when by his workes hee proves his authoritie to com∣maund me. My sinne is greater if I doe not. Iohn 15, Else they should not have had sinne. Workes within are great witnesses. 3. It is expedient, it is of great profit to a man to know that hee is in grace, 1. To justifie the ministerie under which hee hath got∣ten life, 2 Cor. 3, 2. & 2 Cor. 5, 11, and 13, 5. 2 To worke love to God, for love knowne, 1 Iohn 4, 10, 16. 3. To doe God free service without servile feare as our dutie is: Psal. 2. With feare that hath rejoycing in assu∣rance of his favour, and so without feare, Luke 1, 74. For inforcements (by
love) to give our selves to God, Rom. 6. Rom. 12, 1. To dye to our selves, 2 Cor. 5. Gal. 6. whereby I am crucifi∣ed to the world, and the world to me: By Christ. 4. For sufferings for Christ, knowing what his sufferings for us hath made us to bee possessed or in hope of, after wee suffered a little, Rom. 5. Heb. 10, 34. 5. For putting on graces meet for such as are so much above others bound to God, and therefore to doe as becomes them. Exhor∣tations have their ground from hence, that they are and know themselves to bee in such a state, Coloss. 3, 12. 1 Thess. 5, 8. 4. It is granted to most of them that are in grace (to
all before their spirit bee called for to returne to him that gave it) to know that they shall bee saved. The sending of the Angels to bring them to heaven, im∣plies some certificate of it from God to their soules: as at Christs comming the just know their sentence and are filled with joy at the immediate signes of the judges comming before they heare it. Iohn writes generally signes to know that wee have eternall life, 1 Iohn 5. It may provoke such as Vse. know not yet their gracious estate, to seeke and wait till God come to them and ma∣nifest himselfe, as Christs promise is to them that love him, Iohn 14, 21. God de∣nying
this knowledge, sup∣plyeth it by giving other grace for good to his, though hee shew himselfe an enemie, to trust in him a∣gainst sense, to give him glory of truth in that hee hath said and done. He brings forth the grace of esteeming and desiring the knowledge of his love by deferring the sense of it. This day. Who knowes what a day may bring forth? Conversion though an ad∣mirable worke, a supernatu∣rall change, yet is it quick∣ly done when God will put forth his power unto it. This day. As Christ our Saviour bare witnesse of the grace of Zacheus, and the day in which hee received it, so wee are in a speciall
sort, as wee can take notice to Gods prayse, both of our grace and the time when it pleased God to come to us with salvation, or any spe∣ciall good. God appointed dayes of remembrance of his benefits three times in a yeare: which hee called his feasts, Levit. 23. He is pleased to make some dayes memorable by soe speciall worke in them: That they are singularly dayes that the Lord hath made; as in the creation God would have his workes distinctly set downe, upon such a day such things made that wee might more dis∣tinctly meditate them to his glory, Gen. 1. So he would set certaine dayes to the de∣livering or conferring some
speciall good upon his Church, and keepe his day without fayling, and such a day was to bee remembred for ever, Exod. 12, 41, 42. and 13, 3, 9. Psal. 118, 24. The day in which God set David in his kingdome, and delivered his Church, hee calls a day that the Lord hath made, wherein they will rejoyce and bee glad. The scripture makes menti∣on of evill dayes and good dayes, evill when the Divell in a speciall sort is per∣mitted & ordered to tempt Gods servants, either with inward or outward darting at them to wound them, if hee can to kill them flesh and soule. Daungerous and fearefull to the weake ser∣vant of God, but hee armed
with the whole armour of God, and resisting in the Lords might, standing with victory, it is a day to bee re∣membred, as that Father confesseth there was oppor∣tunitie, there wanted temp∣tation; there was temptati¦on, there wanted opportuni∣tie; there was both oppor∣tunitie and temptation, and the Lord delivered mee. Such dayes are to bee re∣membred to Gods prayse. There be dayes set by the e∣nemies of Gods Church, sometime to destroy and root it out that their names be no more in remembrance the Lord discovers their lot and their plot, and turnes all upon their owne head that the net hath catcht themselves, they fall into
the pit they digged, the wicked is snared in the worke of his owne hands, the followeth Higgaion, Selah. A double noting, Psal, 9. as greately to bee meditated. As in that particular be∣tweene Haman the Iewes ad∣versarie, and Mrdechai and the people, the day deter∣mined for their destroying utterly, was turned unto a day of their deliverance, and destruction of their ad∣versaries by that God who turnes kings hearts which way he will, as men turne the course of rivers and streames, Ester 8. 17. It may warrant and in∣courage Vse 1. unto the keeping of some dayes in a speciall thankefullnesse to the Lord
for some speciall benefits re∣ceived thereon. As Herod kept his birth day without Marke 6. blame but by the abuse: They kept the feast of the dedication of the Temple, at which our Saviour was, as it seemes, Iohn 10, 22, 23. with approbation. The Sab∣both wee keepe, seemeth therefore to bee chaunged from that seventh which was for remembrance of finish∣ing Gods worke increation, to our seventh in remem∣brance of restoring of all things by Iesus Christ, and is therefore called the Lords day, Revel. 1. Not onely as author of our keeping that day, but referred to the re∣membrance of his worke. Mordecai by decree esta∣blished the keeping of the
memorie of the Iewes deli∣verance every yeare two set dayes together, the 14, and 15. of the Moneth Adar, ster 9, 21, 22. If dayes of deliverance and birth and benefits, speci∣ally concerning our tempo∣rall, life bee so warrantably observed and remembred, then dayes of our spirituall & eternal deliverāce & new birth unto a life that lasts for ever, much more. Alwayes ought wee to be thankefull, but specially remembring the day in which salvation came to us; if men and wo∣men keepe their wedding day yearely, why not the day of their espousing to Christ? The Apostle reproves Object. such observation of dayes
as in themselves more holy or by institution under the Law, than other dayes: And so to observe dayes either by the Churches precept, or by voluntary taking up to observe, is reproveable: for though in respect of institu∣tion and use the Saboth is more holy than other dayes, yet not in the nature of the day, for then it could not have beene chaunged. As the water in baptisme by in∣stitution and use is holyer than other water, so the bread and wine in the Sacra∣ment, but not by any inhe∣rent holinesse. 2. He condemnes the keep∣ing of such daies above other Coloss. 2, 16. as worship of God, of neces∣sitie in conscience, as if the not keeping bound to sinne.
When none but God can give such Lawes as the breach of them blots the conscience: where is no Law is no trasgression, where the Church and governers ap∣point, or men take them up to observe, they bind but as historicall helps, and are free without scandal & contempt. 3. Hee finds fault with the keeping of them as a∣gainst faith, shaddowes of Christ and his benefits for which they were instituted, Coloss. 2, 16. Christ being come as the body of those shadowes, the shadowes must cease: But to keepe dayes in memory of bene∣fits past, and to stirre up to duties thereby for time to come, is not against reli∣gion.
It reproves such as forget both benefits and dayes Vse. wherein the Lord wrought them for them. Psal. 78, 42; They remembred not his hand nor the day where∣in hee delivered them from the enemy: wee are so apt to forget benefits that wee had neede use al lawfull helps to put us in mind of them: con∣sider the charge, Deut. 8, 10. 11: and David charg∣ing his memory, Psal. 103, 1. Is salvation come: The day of calling and salvation is one, the same day that a man is called hee is saved. 2 Cor. 6, 2: Behold, this is the accepted time, behold this is the day of salvation: the day of acceptation in Christ is the day of salvati∣on
to him that is so accep∣ted. Adoption compre∣hends all our blessing, even the glory of the life to come. Rom. 8, We wait for the adoption; the redemp∣tion of our bodyes. But in our calling, receiving Christ we receive this dignitie of adoption, Iohn 1, 12. Cal∣ling is the revealing of Gods grace and his will to save us by Christ Iesus in our minds and heart, so as we consent to God calling, and follow after him for that life in his Sonne and cleave to him for it. Comming to Christ and receiving of Christ are coup∣led together, and the con∣trary not comming, not ha∣ving life, but abiding in death, 1 Iohn 5, 12. Iohn 5, 40.
Calling is Gods worke, in∣abling a man to performe the condition of the cove∣nant, which is to beleeve in Christ, and so makes par∣taker of Christ that hee is of his body, partaker of the promise & an inheriter also, Ephes. 2, 6. Hee that be∣leeveth hath everlasting life, is passed from death to life, Iohn 5, 24. Calling ef∣fectuall is the first revelati∣on of predestination to life, accompanied with justifica∣tion, and glorification, Rom. 8, 30. Iustification is unto life, Rom. 5, 18. Regenera∣tion is Glorification or Sal∣vation begunne. Titus 3, 5, 7. He saved us and called us, 2 Tim. 1, 9. Hee saved us calling us; wee are called to his kingdome and glory,
1 Thess. 2, 12. To obtaine salvation or the glory of our Lord Iesus Christ, 2 Thess. 2, 13, 14. To high things, Phil. 3. The calling is therefore called heavenly Heb. 3, 1. Not onely as from heaven, but unto heaven. Come up hither, and then they ascend in the sight of others, Revel. 11. Wee are called in hope of heaven, Coloss. 1, 4, 5. And by hope we are saved, Rom. 8, 24. If calling and saving in Vse. respect of beginning and certaine accomplishment, bee contemporarie, then bee exhorted to make your cal∣ling sure, that you may be sure of your salvation with it, 2▪ Pet 1, 10. Try your selves by these signes. 1. An eccho like answering to the Lord
revealing his grace and will to save you by Christ, Psal. 27, 6, 7. Hos. 2. ult. Zach, 13, 9. Esay 44, 5. God speakes first in the heart; then the heart answers a∣gaine to the Lord, and a man is readie to underwrite to the Lord; if hee say thou art mine, I have given my Sonne for thee as proofe of it: The heart will say, I am thine, with admiration of thy love receive I thy Sonne given to mee. This will further by strife against unbeleefe, and the love of God, and a carefull applying of our soules as gi∣ven to God to doe his wil, appeare, though wee yet feele not our faith. Vnbe∣leefe and other sinnes have no quiet setling, no domini∣on
over us; wee labour to cast them out, and linger after the Lord, as having our hearts toucht by him, to receive him as our King to save us, as they followed Saul whose hearts the Lord had toucht, 1 Sam. 10, 26. As Elisha at plough, after Eliah had cast his mantle upon him, as a signe of Gods calling him to be a Prophet, could not but follow, and durst not so much as goe home without his leave. 2. A standing up from the world, unto new workes whereunto. God called us, wee forsake the worlds fashion and manner of life, wee can bee no longer of one mind and heart with them. Be they Heretickes, civill men without religion
or professing religion with∣out power; God in calling selects us from the world, we cannot count them our deare companions, our hearts and wayes do so dis∣agree, that we are abomina∣tion or matter of pittie one to another. We are as, first fruits to God. 3. A Spirit sitting us for that unto which wee bee called, by which wee savour things of the spirit, aspire to heavenly righteousnesse, not satisfyed with measure but to bee filled with the full∣nes of God, & following ap∣prehend that for which wee are apprehended, wee me∣ditate now high things, a crowne, a kingdome, hea∣venly inheritance; lower things are too meane to hold us to them.
Bee thankefull you that Vse z. know your calling, 1 Tim. 1. I thanke him. The promise is to them that the Lord calls, bee they neere or farre off; Act. 2, 39. That when you heare the promises, you ought to prayse the Lord, that made you true heires of them, that you may say Salvation belongs to me for the promise belongs to mee in that I am called. Prayse God for the fellowship with Christ Iesus his Sonne to that hee hath called you, 1 Cor. 1. 8. This calling is a speciall character of Gods love, the first speciall evi∣dence of it. Worldlings falsly conclude speciall love from common blessings, a∣gainst which Solomon oppo∣seth, Eccles. 9, 1. And our
Saviour, Math. 5, 44. And the Rhemists note is good there, that outward prosperi∣tie is certaine either of a better man or better religi∣on; but effectuall calling is an infallible evidence of Gods love from election to salvation. Bee studiously thankfull for this which the Apostle puts the Romans in mind, that among the Gen¦tiles to whom hee was an Apostle, they also were the called of Iesus Christ, though by nature Gentiles, sinners vile, yet by cal∣ling highly advanced to the dignitie of Gods Chil∣dren. Rom. 1, 6. Worke out your salvati∣on, Vse 3. follow till ye apprehend it, bee diligent in adding graces, follow hard towards
the marke for the price of the high calling of God in Christ Iesus, Phil. 3, 12. 1 Tim. 6, 12. Nothing can give us more courage to strive to eternall life, to fight for it, than this that we know God hath called us to ob∣taine it, for wee gather from thence that our labour shall not bee in vaine, but God will bee with us and prosper us, reach us his hand. To this house. Gods mer∣cie is such, that calling the Master of the family, the household have salvation come neere to them. Luke 10, 5, 6. Into what house soever ye come, say peace to this house; if the Sonne of peace bee there, your peace shall rest on him. The sonne
of peace one that favours the Gospell of peace, or is wor∣thy of the prosperitie wish∣ed to the house; as Math. 10, 11. Inquire who is wor∣thy in it, and there abide: not yt there is inherent dig∣nitie in any man living, but the elect in Christ are coun∣ted worthy. Thus gets hee the blessing into his house not onely for himselfe but to his; thus many times God joynes the household in faith with the householder, Iohn 4, 53. Act. 10, 2, and 16, 15, 33, 34. Acts 18, 8. The Apostle Paul speakes of Baptising not onely some particulers as Crispus and Gaius, but the household of Stephanas, 1 Cor. 1. 14. 16. He saluteth Philemon and the Church in his house, Philem.
verse 1, 2. So Aquila and Priscilla with the Church in their house, Rom. 16, 3, 5. And sends salutations from them to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 16, 19. Aquila and Priscilla with the Church that is in their house salute you greatly in the Lord; the Church understand their household whether godly children, servants, kinsfolks, which living together in one house do together worship the Lord, and privately ex∣ercise all offices of pietie, that it may well bee called a private Church. God blesseth the inde∣vours of the Master of the family, that they submit at last to outward duties, as Abraham found all his males subject to Gods commande∣ment
that day in which God commaunded it. It may bee, they are not alwayes internally and from their hearts obedient. Cin was for outward sacrifice subject and conformed as Abel was: so Cham, for forme of religion as Shem and Ia∣pet. It seemes neither Lot in Sodom, nor Noc had their servants in obedience to God, because Noc had none in the Arke, nor Lot brought any out of Sodom, yet it is like they had servants, at least, Genes. 19. The husband may beleeve and the wife remaine an infidell, the wife may beleeve and the hus∣band continue in insidelitie, yet there is hope which must move indevour to winne the contrary minded,
1 Cor. 7, 16. 1 Pet. 3, 2. Let us exhort men to strive Vse to place themselves in fami∣lies, where the Master is the Sonne of peace: it may be better for body and soule, the household partaking in the blessing of peace with him. As they that live in a visible Church, though yet they bee not sound at heart, yet for the time partake of diverse blessings for the faithfuls sake among whom they live. Yet it is not safe to trust in being in such places for fellowship of persons, unlesse they bee in fellowship of faith; two in a house shall be devided, yea two in a bed, one taken and another left. Every man must live by his owne faith.
It is daungerous to bee willingly under a wicked governer, or one of his house; for as the creature is subject to vanitie for the sinne of man, Rom. 8. And the creatures except the fishes perished in the flood with man that by his sinne abused them, Gen. 6. So it is not safe being a wicked mans beast, Exod. Yet there may be Christi∣ans in a family where the familie is not Christs, Paul Rom. 16, 10. salutes them of Aristobulus, but not him as it seemes, as remainiug still in infidelitie: and they which are called in the household under an infi∣dell husband or Master, are not easily to forsake their place, but to honour their Master in the superioritie in
which Gods providence hath placed him over them, 1 Tim. 6. There were Saints in Neroes house. 2. Let beleeving gover∣ners of families set them∣selves with hope about the reducing of them that bee under thē to the Lord, God does much for their sakes specially toward such as be∣long to Gods Election in his house, 1 Iohn 5, 16. The co∣venant of God includes his with him, 1 Cor. 7. In so much as he also is become the Child of Abraham. To be the Child of Abraham is to bee freely elected, Rom. 9, 8. To walke in the steps of the faith of Abraham, Rom. 4, 12. To do the workes of Abraham, Iohn 8, 39. Whereof is rightly col∣lected
the expectation of salvation, Rom. 8 29. That Salvation and be∣ing the Child of Abraham Obser. put one the other; none but the Child of Abraham saved, none the Child of Abraham but is saved. The blessing that commeth upon men in Christ is called the blessing of Abraham, Gal. 3, 14. The promise is made to Abraham and his seed, Gal. 3, 16. He saith not seeds, as speaking of many, but seed, as spea∣king of one which is Christ. The blessing of Abraham is righteousnesse, & everlasting life, which proceeds of the redemption by Christ from the curse of the Law, he be∣ing made a curse for us. So as now malediction, sinne, hell, have no authoritie
over us; Christ redeemed us and for us bare the curse due to all our sinnes. Christ is the storehouse of the blessing of Abraham, the promise of which bles∣sing was made to Abraham and his seed, that is Christ Heavenly blessednesse in the blessed seed. And all both Iewes and Gentiles by faith implanted into him and be∣comming one with him, are the seed, Gal. 3, 29, and heires of all the promised bles∣sings. Abraham is called the fa∣ther of all that beleeve, ei∣ther Iewes or Gentiles, Rom. 4, 11, 12. Faith was im∣puted to him when hee was uncircumcised for righte∣ousnesse, and after hee was justified hee received the
signe of circumcision as the seale of the righteousnesse of the faith which hee had when hee was uncircumci∣sed, that hee should bee the father of all them that be∣leeve, not being circumci∣sed, that righteousnesse might bee imputed to them also: and the father of the circumcision, not unto them onely which are of the cir∣cumcision, but unto them also that walke in the stepps of the faith, of our father▪ Abraham, which hee had when hee was uncircumci∣sed, verse 16, 17. All the seed have the promise assu∣red according to grace, not onely the Iewes that are of the Law, but the Gentiles that are of the faith of Abra∣ham the father of us all, ac∣cording
to the Oracle, A father of many nations have I madethee. He is the fa∣ther of all the faithfull, not effectually to beget them and to worke their faith and conversion, so God onely is their Father begetting them by his Spirit. But analogically and by proportion, that as fathers doe transmit to their natu∣rall Children inheritance, and other rights of theirs; so hee for the grace of the co∣venant given to him, should as a father transmit to the beleevers the righte∣ousnesse and blessednesse promised and given to him. That which is proper to Christ is spoken of him. In him shall all the Nati∣ons of the earth bee blessed
Gen. 18, 18. In thy seed (that is, Christ, as Paul inter∣prets) shall all the Nations of the earth bee blessed; Gen. 22, 18. So he is called the heire of the world, Rom. 4, 13. Act. 7: Of Canaan a type of heaven, and as the best part of the earth, as a type of the whole world to bee possessed of Abraham and his seed, specially the head of that seede Christ. This inheritance of heaven and earth he receiveth from God through the righteous∣nesse of faith, and transmitts it to all his Children in all the Nations of the earth, that is, such as beleeve unto righteousnesse, and so are adopted Children and heires of heaven and earth, Psal. 37, 20. 1 Cor. 3, 21. So in
death the faithfull were ga∣thered into the bosome of Abraham their father, and sitte with him in the king∣dome of heaven the Church gathered out of the univer∣sall, as his Children for num∣ber, like the starres of hea∣ven. In this is set forth the Vse. dignitie and felicitie of A∣braham, in his paternitie, that all the Nations of the world beleeving should bee his Children: whereby ap∣peares that all have not e∣quall honour and felicitie, that have saith equally pre∣cious. Abraham and all the faithfull are equally just by imputation of the righte∣ousnesse of Christ unto them. But they are not in this honour with him to
have the place of pater∣nitie to all the faithfull. The Pope usurpes, in cal∣ling himselfe the head of all the faithfull: it was never given him of God, it is his miserie that so many flatter him in his unjust usurpati∣on. It implyeth that there is Vse 2. but one faith and way of sal∣vation under the Law and Gospell, Heb. 13, 8. Acts 15, 11. Heb. 6, 12, and 11. By faith they obteined testi∣monie yt they were righteous: and stand as so many wit∣nesses, that onely by beleving in Christ, resting the soule wholy on his obedience for our whole felicitie, is the way to life from that pro∣mise, The seede of the wo∣man shall breake the Ser∣pents
head. By what faith Abraham was saved, his seed are saved. There is one saith both for that which is beleeved, common faith once given to Saints, Titus 1, 4. Iude. v. 3. And in re∣spect of that kind of faith by which wee doe beleeve, though for number there bee so many faiths as there bee beleevers, yet for kind Abrahams faith and all that have savingly beleived, is one and the same for ever; not in degree, his measure was strength in faith, most beleevers now are weake in faith. Papists are to prove their right in claiming to be chil∣dren of Abraham, seing they have not nor teach (twice damnable teaching, contrary
to the faith of Abraham) ap∣plying Christ the blessed seed to himselfe, laughing in joy of his felicitie, of which his Sonne was called Isaack; and Christ in whom hee beleeved, testifyeth that hee saw his day with rejoy∣cing, though a farre off, yet with gladnesse, in respect of his owne salvation in him. To that purpose Christ ur∣geth his example to the Iewes that would not be∣leeve their owne salvation in him: you will not come to mee that you might have life, Iohn 5. They make two other claimes to heaven, merit of person, in Chil∣dren, or such as newly con∣verted are taken away by death, that working is pre∣vented; and merit of workes,
both concurring augments (they say) glory, and the lat∣ter confirmes the former that it is not lost: a straunge voyce not heard of Gods people, that will not go after a straunger because they know not his voyce. They blaspheame imputed righ∣teousnesse. It followes, that to have Vse 3. comfortable assurance of salvation, we must prove our slves Children of Abraham; that proved the other is sure: that is, 1. By being of faith, to rest on Christs merit inhe∣rent in his owne person, without any worke done out of grace, or in grace, of ours, trusted in as any part of cause to salvation. As God preached the Gospell to
Abraham and hee beleeved, Gal. 3, 7, 8, 9. Rom. 4, 1, 2, 5. To be borne by vertue of the promise as Isaack, Gal. 4. Rom. 9. 2 By being in Christ by faith, Gal. 3, 29. If yee be Christs, then are ye Abrahams seed and heires by promise. Which is to bee knowne by having the Spirit of Christ in us, to doe the workes of Abraham, Iohn 8. 39. Michah 2, 7. Iames 2, 22. By the illumination of the Spirit, annointing and hea∣ling our minds to discerne difference of things true or false good or evill, 1 Iohn 2, 20, 27. To preserve us from evill wayes and evill men, Prov. 2. 2, By regenera∣tion in giving and increasing the godly nature. 3. By go∣verning or leading, Rom. 8,
14. 4 By consolation, Iohn 14. The comforter. 5 By con∣firmation, giving a constan∣cie in the worke of righte∣ousnesse, to worke righte∣ousnesse at all times, Ps. 106. Verse 10. The Sonne of man is come, to seeke and save that which was lost. This is a defence of the action of Christ in his going in to Zacheus: hee came for lost sinners, Zaccheus and his household are such. Ergo he offends not, he doth nothing against his office in going in to him. Though wee may not Obser. for a passive scandall, (which is, 1. By ignorance of some, 2. By malice in others) for∣beare the duties enjoyned us by the Lord, as appeareth, Math. 15:
Yet as occasion is, wee are to give a reason of our doing, in generall for hol∣ding and professing truth contrary to the worlds opi∣nion; as why wee are not as the Pagans, as the Iewes, as the Papists, as prophane men in the number of them that are in profession of true religion. 1 Pet. 3, 15, Bee readie to give a reason of the hope that is in you. Our Saviour submitts himselfe to this order, Mat. 9, 11, 12. Why eates your Master with Publicans and Sners? his defence is, it is the calling of Phisitians, to be with the sicke that have neede of him. 2. Mercie is preferred to Sacrifice. 3. I am come to call sinners to re∣pentance, verse 13. So Luke
15, By three parables hee justifieth his mercie to sin∣ners, by their diligence that seeke things lost which they would recover, and that graduallie, 1. The woman her groat lost out of ten, the sheepeheard his sheepe out of an hundred: the father and the fathers joyfull re∣ceiving of a dead and lost sonne. His answere and defence of the womans fact that so shed precious ointment upon him, which might have beene▪ usefull to the poore, and on him seemed to be waste: 1. She hath wrought a good worke upon me. 2. The poore yee shall have alwayes with you, mee ye shall not have alwayes. 3. She did it to burie me.
Of his and his Disciples not fasting, hee gives an∣swer to them that take ex∣ception. 1. The state suits not to the exercise, it is a time of rejoycing as in a mariage feast. 2. The ex∣ercise is such as exceeds their strength. As old gar∣ments cannot abide the strength of new cloth sowed to them, as old bottels can∣not hold out to the strength of new wine, it falls out to the worse, Matthew 9. 14. 17. Of his admitting of Mary to touch him in that manner as she did, seeing she had the account of a notorious sin∣ners, 1. she loved much, her many sinnes were forgiven; she shewed more devotion than hee that found fault
with her, Luke 7. Our dutie is not onely Reason. to please God manifesting our selves to him, but to manifest our selves to the consciences of men, 2 Cor. 5, 11. 2. The just defence ei∣ther giveth satisfaction to them that are offended of ignorance and weakenesse by a preposterous zeale, as Peters defence of his go∣ing to Cornelius, Act. 11, 18. Or shames the malicious adversaries, Luke 13, 17. And getts glory to God, Marke 2, 10, 12, 13. For reproofe of such as Vse. standing upon their owne judgement, or their owne greatnesse, are so carelesse in hearing that men are of∣fended at their doings, as
that they contemne them and respect not their satis∣faction; if either of these might have dispensed in this case, Christ above all might have stood upon them. He that calls himselfe, and is called by flatterrers Christs vicar, is neither like Christ or Peter. Hee is of another spirit. If hee draw thousands to hell no man must say what doost thou. Hee must be judge of all, and judged of none. Yet they grant now that hee may bee reproved by inferiours, so it bee with reverence, and in modestie. Bellarmine de conci∣liorum authorit, lib, 2, c, 19. Licet nim eum servata re∣verentia admonere & modestè corripere. So the Rhemists annot. on Galat. 2, 11. The
inferior though not of office and iurisdiction, yet by the law of brotherly love, and fraternall correption, may reprehend his superior: If it be a good Priest, or any vertuous person, hee may admonish the Pope of his faults, and he ought to take it in good part when it comes of zeale and love, as from Cyprian, Hierome, Au∣gustine, Barnard: but if it be from Wickleife, Luther, Cal∣vin, Beza, that do it of ma∣lice; hee is not to bee repre∣hended, but take their ray∣lings patiently: but our Savi∣our reprehended as malici∣ous adversaries, as the Phari∣rises were, yet giveth a rea∣son of his fact which they re∣prehended. It is one thing of which
Iob protesteth his integrity, that hee did not contemne the judgement of his servant nor of his maide when they did contend with him, I 31, 13. Because fellow crea∣tures, and to be judged im∣partiall, if inferiours may re∣prove their superiours with some preface of honour, with submission & acknow∣ledgement of their place & dignitie above thē, other∣wise shutting up their mou∣thes, if respect of Gods ho∣nour & their brethrens edifi∣cation did not constraine them: it may bee well yeilded to an inferiour to satisfye in a matter at which hee is offended, specially if the offence be of ignorance and infirmitie. For the Sonne of man is
come to seeke and save &c. Our Saviour defending his going in to the house of Za∣cheus, by the end of his com∣ming into the world, of his calling to the mediatorship betweene God and man: It may teach us that our cal∣ling, binding us to the things we do, justifies our actions done by that obligation, and may answere for us against them that accuse us. Thus Moses accused for taking too much upon him, abusing the people, making him∣selfe Lord and ruler over them, hee cleares himselfe by the Lords testimony of calling him and Aron to be aboue the Congregation of the Lord, Numb. 16. Esay calling for diligent attention to his prophecie
of the deliverance of the Israelites from the captivitie of Babilon, and of the evill that should come upon the Caldeans, such none of their diviners nor gods could foretell: and the man that God had loved, so as to choose him to the king∣dom for this worke, hee justifieth his requiring of such attention, because hee speakes not of himselfe, but the Lord and his spirit sent him, Isay 48, 16. God sent him, and inspired him by his Spirit to speake such things so as they might rest in them. Ieremie quarrel∣led about his prophecie a∣gainst Iersalem and the Temple: and threatened with death for it by the Priests, and the Prophets,
giveth this for his defence, The Lord hath sent mee to Prophecie against this house and against this Cittie, all the things they had heard, Ier. 26, 12, 15. Vpon which by the meanes of Ahikam, hee was not put to death. Though the con∣tention was great by rea∣son of the malice of the Priests and false Prophets, yet that godly man sloutly maintained the cause of God and forsooke it not till hee had delivered him: it is said therefore that the hand of Ahikam, that is, his great helpe was with Ieremie that they should not give him into the hands of the people to put him to death, v. 24. Amos complained of to
the king for speaking words that the land could not beare, and flatteringly per∣swaded to goe to Iudah and prophecie, but not at Bethel because the Kings chappell and the Court was there, answers for himselfe, that the Lord sent him to pro∣phecie to his people Israel, when hee was no Prophet nor Prophets sonne, but an heardman and a gatherer of wild Figges: and therefore addeth a speciall Prophecie against Amaziah that oppo∣sed him. 1. Concerning his wife, to bee a whore in the Citie. 2. His sonnes and daughters to dye by the sword. 3. His lands to be devided by line. 4. And himselfe to dye in a pollu∣ted land, Amos 7, 10, 17.
Paul cryed out on for his profession and defence of Christian Religion, ju∣stifieth and defendeth his cause by declaring Gods ex∣traordinary calling of him to the faith, when he went earnestly on in a cleane con∣trary way, Act, 22, 1. &c, Act. 26. 1, 9. &c. All men should rest in Gods authoritie, hee giveth and appointeth us our cal∣lings, and commandeth us to walke in them; hee giveth all the skill and abilitie that any man hath for his calling, 1 Cor. 7, 17. Therefore when wee accommodate our acti∣ons to the rule of our cal∣ling, and with diligence per∣forme the offices that by vertue thereof wee owe to any man; any man that judg∣eth
it meete to obey God, and walke with him, may easily excuse us, and satis∣fie themselves. It may admonish men to keepe themselves within Vse. 1. the compasse and limits of their calling, either generall or personall and particular, Rom. 12, 4, 6, 8. That it may bee said it appertaines unto us, Luke 12, 14. Man who made me a judg or a di∣vider over you? Lest wee in curre blame of curiositie. Iohn 21, 22, What is that to thee? Of busy bodies in o∣ther mens matters, 1 Thess. 4, 11. 1 Tim 5, 13. 1 Pet. 4, 15. Or into daunger out of which we hardly can tel how to deliver our selves, Prov. 26, 17. If wee walke in our cal∣ling
and trouble befall us, yet our conscience will comfort us. But if medling out of our calling wee meete with knockes, we have the blame laid upon us even by our consciences, and by men of common light. Wee have no assurance to bee in safe∣tie. 2 Sam. 6, 7, Vzzah was smitten of God in such a case even with death, and many of Bethhemesh, even 50000. and 70. Because they looked into the Arke, 1 Sam. 6, 19. Which was not lawfull but for Aron and his sonnes, who must appoint others what to doe, Numb. 4, 19. 20. Vzziah smote hee with leprosie for medling with the Priests of∣fice, 2 Chron. 26, 16, 18.
It perteineth not to thee Vzziah to burne Incense &c. Thou shalt have no honour of the Lord God. While he was wroth with the Priests, the Leprosie rose in his forehead, and hee re∣mained a leper, and dwelt in his house apart unto the day of his death. The sonnes of Sceva who tooke upon them to adjure evill spirits by naming over them that had them the name of the Lord Iesus, were forced to flee away naked & wounded, with this rebuke from the evill spirit by the man: Iesus I acknowledge, and Paul I know, but who are you. The man was car∣ried by the Divell in him (by Gods permission) to use such strength, as seaven
young men were overcome to their great shame & hurt; and it fell out to much ad∣vantage of the Gospell as appeares in the chapter. The Sonne of man. 9. Why so called? Dverse judge diversly. Some, that hee would bee so called that he might shew that hee was that Messiah which the Pro∣phets foretold should take the nature of man, whom Daniel called the Sonne of man, Dan. 7, 13. Theodoret in Dan. 7. Others that it is as if hee called himselfe the Sonne of Adam, as drawing his kinde from Adam by the virgin, not having any man to his father, Nazianzen. Others to declare the great benefit of his incarnation for us. Aug de consens. Euang. l.
2. c. 1. Commendans nobis quid misericorditer dignatus sit esse pro nobis. Or because hee was also the Sonne of God, hee would hereby dis∣tinguish the natures one from another. Others, to signifie that hee was indeed See ∣donat. i Mat. 8; 20. as hee shewed conversing among men verie man, 9. Why Ezechiel onely (in par∣ticular) in the old, and Christ in the new testament bee so called. Come. What. The com∣ming is thus, sent of the Fa∣thers love to be the media∣tour, to reconcile God and man, he tooke mans nature into unitie of person of the Sonne of God, to performe the office of the mediatour to bring man againe to God.
To seeke. This is the first end of Christs comming to seeke that which is lost, Ezech. 34, 11, 12, 16. Hee justifieth his compassion and humanitie to Publicans and Sinners by the practise of men, that having an hundred sheepe, leave all to seeke one that is lost, wandered from the flocke; and a wo∣man seeking one goat, with diligence, though she have nine left: And the joy of a father, at the returne and finding of his lost sonne Luke 15. This seeking for lost soules, is truly noted in Christs going about all their Cities and townes, preaching and teaching the Gospell of the kingdome, Math. 9, 35. In taking opportunities
as they fell out, to informe men in the truth, not con∣temning the vilest, as the woman of Samaria that li∣ved a whore, with one that was not her husband his Di∣sciples marveiled at it, whe∣ther at his humilitie therein as some thinke, or by reason of the basenesse of the wo∣man which was blameable, considering themselves from what and whereunto his favour had taken and ex∣alted them: but by occasion hee makes his end knowne. That is, out of great desire, and great sweetnesse and de∣light, to take all opportuni∣ties of conversion of men, and that by two similitudes, one by their desiring him to take meat, to which he an∣swers, he hath meate alrea∣die
that they knew not of, and declares what he meant: they not understanding, in∣quire about some bringing him meat, stil minding meat for his body wc they saw to bee needefull for strength to goe on with his worke; hee declares, it is the oppor∣tunitie present of doing his Fathers will. And the sauce to that meat is gathering of the scattered Children of God. Hee waited for the issue of his conference with the woman, in her bringing of the Samaritans, which was, they beleeved, in a dou∣ble degree, by her report, to teachables, by their hea∣ring him, to setlednesse. The other similitude is from harvest, that (some∣thing obscured by some in∣terpreters)
yet tends to the same thing. Some as if it were proverbially, (you) that is, it is usually said) there are foure monthes to the harvest, as if haste needed not: otherwise why doth our Lord say, you say, yet foure monthes to the harvest; Here present occasion re∣quires diligence, the regions are white unto the harvest, yet that seemes more to bee his meaning, as harvest ad∣mits not stay, but when it is ripe put in the sickle, in another sense, but agreeing, about ripenesse, and then putting in the sickle. He is said to see men be∣fore hee call them, as hee saw Matthew, at the receit of custome, Math. 9, 9. Na∣thaniel under the Figtree
before Philip spake a word to him of Christ, Iohn 1. 48. His seeing in this kind is not occasionall, but of pur∣pose, seeking the particulars of the election. You have not chosen me: But I have chosen you, &c. Iohn 15. He seekes the elect, by the scriptures, by his ministers, by inter∣nall motion, either of An¦gels or immediate of the Spirit, by benefits, long suf∣fering, by rebuke. By cor∣rections: so he sought Ma∣nasseh. So the prodigall is no∣ted to bee brought home. Thus Iob 33, He openeth the eare by corrections, thus he seekes men unto conversion, the cōverted to repentance. Because he is sent to this; That nothing given him should be lost.
To admonish us of our na∣turall state, to take true no∣tice of it. Wee though ex∣tremely miserable, were not carried with any care of our owne freedome, wee sought not God, Psal. 14, 2. Wee went astray every one, after his owne way, Esay 53, 6. We have turned every one to his owne way: of this more, in that, hee came to the lost. Wee sought not Christ till hee lookt after us to re∣cover us from our state of losse, Esay 65, 1. We thought not of returning to God so much as by dreame. Wee are therefore to give all the prayse of our illumination to see our miserie and re∣medy of it; and of the incli∣nation of our wills to desire
to bee healed, unto the Lord preventing us with his grace. We were as the clay in the potters hands, and could do nothing, no not will any thing▪ about our for∣ming and fashioning; no more in our regeneration than in our creation. Our hearts naturally are stony, having no aptnesse to be formed, rebellious, hard, till God chaunge them and make the stone flesh: that we have now inclination to hea∣venly things, things spiritual, it is a supernaturall change in the will, that inclined us on∣ly to things of the flesh. In∣clination to things of the Spirit, is the worke of Gods grace: who sought us and changed us into new crea∣tures, as if a stone or Lead
should have an inclination to fly upward. Wee were dead, there∣fore could no more seeke our owne quickning than a dead body can seeke restitu∣tion to life. This is in a sort confessed of the learned Pa∣pists: That a man without the worke of Gods Spirit, cannot do or will any thing in these things that belong to Pietie and Saluation, not any way by the strength of nature prepare himselfe to receive grace. Therefore when a man hath a will to beleeve, to be converted, to bee healed in Soule, to bee free from re∣bellious motions that come from the carnall part, to serue God without let, with∣out contrary▪ lusts from the
will of the flesh, it is a plaine signe of Gods grace in him: we do indeed feele our dis∣position and desire to be∣leeve and bee converted be∣fore wee know that wee be converted. Yet the will is healed in order of nature before it desire freedome from spirituall bondage. It is the comfort of a rege∣nerate man that hee would doe good, Rom. 7. Some na∣turall or morrall good a man without grace may will, but not spirituall to bee agreeable to the spirituall∣nesse of the Law. Though a man cannot follow the guidance of the spirit with∣out feeling and hindrance of the flesh, yet there bee a lusting of the Spirit against the desires of the flesh, hin∣dring
the fulfilling of them, the man is in grace. Luther when hee was a Monke, vexed with these thoughts, this or that sinne thou hast committed; thou art infect∣ed with envie, impatience, and such other sinnes; all thy good workes are unpro∣fitable; confesseth if hee had understood that place of Saint Paul, the flesh lusteth against the spirit, &c. Hee should have sayd as he did after hee received light. Martino, thou shalt not ut∣terly▪ . . bee without sinne, for thou hast flesh, thou shalt therefore feele the battle. Despaire not, but resist strongly, fulfill not the lust of the flesh, and thus doing thou art not under the Law.
It is the note of Gods Children, that they seeke the Lord, and feeling such indevoure in themselves, they may, they must re∣joyce, Psal. 105, 3. Let the heart of them that seeke the Lord rejoyce. The Papists betweene those workes which wee do by naturall strength, and those that wee do by grace infused and inherent in us, teach a third kind of workes which neither come from any power of ours meerely, nor yet from any superna∣turall grace in us inherent, but by externall aide of the Spirit by which they seeke their justification. They put erroniously faith and love actually to goe before justi∣fication, which are together
with it for time, and love is from Gods love, made knowne in some sort to us. If God should lift us up to love him before hee justi∣fie us, hee should by making us love him, prepare us to be loved of him; whereas Iohn saith not that wee lo∣ved him, but that hee loved us first. Wee do long after rather than feele our justifi∣cation, desire but scarce per∣ceive, unto rest of soule, grace to dwell in us mani∣festly. Sometime wee are in feare, sometime beleeve and hope, and are in repentant sorrow, by which wee are led to the more manifest perceiving of that which is wrought in us, and to a fur∣ther measure of peace which we do desire, Lam. 3, 21.
Though the will carried up to Godward, imbracing him, and drawing to him as unto the chiefe good, his fa∣vour, his countenance above all earthly things: Vniting a mans selfe to him by a fer∣vent act of his will, his will beginning to bee made one with Gods will, resolved and desiring to do it without partialitie or reservation: be a true note of a gracious estate. Yet there is a con∣viction of judgement, by which a man seeth what is meete for him to doe, as to arise out of his sinne, and with force of his conscience hee purposeth; it may bee voweth against some parti∣culars; but his will is not renewed, and so hee hath no spirituall inclination to the
good he seeth; or aversion from the sinne he is convin∣ced of; it is therefore but temporarie, it fadeth away like the morning dew. It may move us likewise Vse. 2 to ascribe our rising from our falls to his seeking of us, who otherwise do so dote upon the temptation as that wee have no minde to seeke God to pull us out. Spiritus gratiae in eo qui recepit semper est in eo qui recepit, sed non perpetno operans, Cant. 5. Which may appeare in David, in Solomon, in Peter who repented not till Christ looked backe upon him, and it was not without some in∣ward worke in his heart. Vt quis possit a peccato re∣surgere, requiritur gratia ex∣citans quae non semper adest,
gratiam excitantem non semper haberi experientia ipsa testatur. Bell. de gratia & lib. arbitr. l. 2, c. 7. Sometime there is a will of rising out of falls but not power, as Psal. 119, 176. I have gone astray like a lost sheepe, O seeke thy servant, for I do not not forget thy word. Ambros: Quaere me, quid ego te requiro, quaere me, inveni me, suscipe me, pora me, poes invenire quae  requiris: dignare suscipere, quae inve∣reris: impone humeris quae susceperis: non est tibi pium onus fastidio, non tibi oneri est vectum justitia, veni ergo Do∣mine, quia etsi erravi, tamen mandata tua non sum oblitus, spem medicinae reservo, &c. Admonet nos deus facere quod possimus & petere quod non
possumus. Aug. de natura & gratia. Quando homo non potest si vult, propter voluntatem im∣possibilitas non imputatur: si autem non vult propter impos∣sibilitatem, voluntas non excu∣satur. To stirre up to seeke him with hope, now found of Vse. 3. Christ, who sought them when they asked not after him. If hee sought us when we neither knew him nor sought him: as Iohn 4, If thou hadst knowne &c. Now wee seeke him, wee may bee bold, we shall not seeke him in vaine, he is good to the soule that seekes him, Lam. 3, 25. I haue not said in vaine to the house of Iacob, Secke ye me. Ye shall seeke me and find me, because ye shall seeke me with all your hearts,
Ier. 29, 11, 13. If when we were enemies, Christ recon∣ciled us to God, much more being reconciled shall hee save us from wrath. He gi∣veth by his Spirit to us to seeke by requests of God such things as wee need, for which same hee in heaven makes intercession for us. To stirre up our love and Vse 4. care in seekeing men that are lost or fallen, in com∣mon dutie of charitie, or speciall charge and office. The first implied in that speech, Cant. 8, 8, 9, 10. The Church of the Iewes speakes to Christ for the Gentiles yet uncalled, who destitute of the word and ministery, not having th true doctrine whereby to nourish others, as a virgin
that hath no brests, not yet mariageable, so unfit yet to receive Christ, desiring that they may be brought to the acknowledgement of Christ, askes what shall bee done for them in that day of their calling to him, when there shall bee treatie of their mariage to him. The Church joynes her selfe to Christ in this care of doing something for the calling of the Gentiles, because though the power be his, and he be the author of all heavenly blessings, yet hee useth the faithfull in this worke as his instruments. The answere of Christ implieth his good liking of that care for the Gentiles calling according to the Prophecies: If she be a wall,
if she be constant and con∣tinue firme in expectation of her promises and the pro∣fession of that truth which shall bee revealed, wee will build upon her a silver pal∣lace, wee will build upon him a silver pallace, beauti∣fie and strengthen her with further grace, make her a costly pallace fit to enter∣taine my spirit; and if shee be a dore, we will keepe her in with boordes of Cedar: if she give free passage and good entrance to my word and grace, wee will make her sure and safe from cor∣ruption, and reserve her to immortalitie. Christ joynes the Church still with him in this as an instrument vo∣luntary. Ezech 18. Returne and cause one another to
returne. Hos. 6. Come let us returne to the Lord. Zach. 8, 21. They that dwell in one Cittie shall goo to ano∣ther, saying, Vp, let us goe and pray before the Lord of hosts and seeke him, I will go also: like that Esay 2, 2, 3. Come, & let us goe up to the Mountaine of the Lord, &c. Ioshua 22, 19. If the land of your possession be uncleane, come over unto the Land of the possession of the Lord, where the Lords tabernacle dwelleth, and take possessi∣on among us, but rebell not against the Lord, &c. This is the nature of faith to breed love to God and those that belong to him, even such as they never saw, that were long before them and shall be long after them.
This love brings forth de∣sire and endevour to pro∣cure their salvation. Wee pray, thy kingdome come, our indevour must proue the truth of our de∣sire. The successe may pro∣voke to the duty, Psal. 51. I will teach thy wayes to the wicked, and sinners shall be converted to thee: a man shall have joy of the an∣swere of his lippes, Prov. 15, 23. It is to such a fruit as a righteous man hath not a greater. Prou. 11, 30. Let him know it, hee saveth a soule from death, and cove∣reth a multitude of sinnes. Iam. 5. Seeke them then by pray∣er, stand before God and speake good for them; wee
love little, if wee will not speake a good word for a man. The feareful condition of the world is noted, in that, Christ loved them not so much as to pray for their salvation, Iohn 17. Thus Paul sought Israel of God: Christ those that crucified him of ignorance. 2. By teaching and ad∣monishing them of the error of their way, Ezra 7, 25. 3. By doing good unto them and conversing ho∣nestly and with winning be∣haviour before them. Wai∣ting for God to succeede all. If we must do thus of chari∣tie, whē we also have charge to do so, publike or private, how should wee not apply our selves to seeke mens
soules wherewith wee are charged? how shall wee free our selves from guiltinesse of their blood that perish without our indevour to save them? When a man hath done that which apper∣tained to him, and they will not returne but dye, hee hath delivered his owne soule. How woefull is their case that seeke not to recover the fallen, but draw them into sinne? And to save. Consider wee the action to save, 2. The propertie hee hath in it, hee came to it as appointed of his Father; The state of the persons to whom he per∣formes this, lost. To save: hee was appoin∣ted, Esay 49, 6, He is called the Salvation of God; mine
eyes have seene thy Salvati∣on; Luke 2. Hee hath his name Iesus of that: Hee Mat. 1. 21. shall save his people from their sinnes; he saith of him∣selfe that hee came to save mens lives, not to destroy them, Luke 9, 56. Not to condemne the world, but to save the world, Iohn 12. Hee came to save sinners, 1 Tim. 1, 15. God hath lift him up to bee a Prince and a Sa∣viour, Act. 5, 31. Q. How doth he save us? A. By his merit and spirit; merit of his life, and of his death, fulfilling the Law for us, expiating all our sinnes by the Sacrifice of himselfe, making intercession for us. Not onely was hee with∣out sinne, as Iohn 8, 46. 2. Cor. 5, 21. 1 Pet. 2, 22, 23. Heb.
4, 5. That hee needed not to offer as the high Priests under the Law for his owne sinnes, Heb. 7, 27. Neither did he fulfill the Law perfectly, onely for himselfe, and so is called that holy thing in respect of nature, sanctified from the conception, Luke 1. The holy Child, Act. 2, 27. Holy one, Act. 13, 35. And the just, 3, 14. But hee fulfilled the Law for us: as many as hee came to save, Rom. 8; 3, 4. Rom. 10, 4. As Adams disobedience, is imputed to all his progenie, so the obedience of Christ is to all that are in him as their roote. Rom. 5, 19. As by one mans disobedience ma∣ny were made sinners: So by the obedience of one,
many are made righteous. We may be said in a sort to be justified by the righte∣ousnesse of the Law, but inherent in Christ, impu∣ted to us. Iustification by faith im∣ports two things, the not imputing of sinne, imputa∣tion of righteousnesse, which is called the righte∣ousnesse of God, not onely by Gods appointing it, or by his accepting it, but by his working of it in Christ, his obedience being the perfect, full, entire obedi∣ence of his person, God and man, not onely of his nature humane to bee a holy and a just mn, whence it com∣meth to bee meritorious. The Apostle teaching that wee are justified by faith,
saith that in so teaching he e∣stablisheth the Law. Even by that Doctrin because the righteousnesse which it re∣quires for matter, is perfor∣med by Christ, and offered to God as our righteous∣nesse, and imputed of God to us: it requiring unto life, do this, man by faith findes it in Christ. If it be thought absurd that wee are justifi∣ed and made righteous by legall righteousnesse, it may be answered, that legall and evangelicall righteousnesse do not differ in matter, but in the efficient and manner. The Law required it of our owne performance, the Gos∣pell teaching it to bee suf∣ficient that it is performed by Christ for us, and appre∣hended of us by faith.
Daniel 9, 24. The bene∣fits of Christ are noted to be two. One in respect of sinne and evill: 2. In respect, of righteousnesse. The first in 3. Degrees, 1. Confirma∣tion of the godly against defection, to finish the trans∣gression. Cohibendo defectio∣nem illam, continebit & con∣firmabit bonos ne deficiant a Deo. 2. To seale up, or to make an end of sinnes. To cover sinnes, so as God will not behold them. Hee sees none in Iacob, Numb. 23. To make reconciliation for in∣iquitie, to give a full satis∣faction, and to put away wrath. That God shall free∣ly love us and graciously re∣ceiveus. 1. Reprimitur regnas peccatum, sordes, vestigia reli∣qua teguntur. Quoad reatum
prorsus auseruntur. The se∣cond benefit is the righteous¦nesse of Gods people for e∣ver: everlasting righteous∣nesse. Ea loco peccati abo∣liti succedens, fide primum ap∣prehenditur a nobis, ac deinde imputatur nobis a deo pro justi∣tianostra. Gal. 4, 4. Christ is said to bee made under the Law: legi autem factus est obnoxius, quia cum liber esset, sponte sua, in nostri gratiam, eus jugum subijt, omnemque justiti∣am accuratissimè adimplevit. Christus ergo filius Dei, qui immunis iure suisset ab omni subjectione, legi fuit subiectus, cur? nostro nomine, ut libertatē nobis acquireret; quemadmo∣dum enim qui liber erat, cap∣tivum se vadem constituendo, redimit: & induendo vin∣cula,
alteri exuit, ita Christus, legi servandae obnoxius esse voluit, ut nobis immunitatem acquireret, alioqui frustra igum legis subijsset, nam sua certe causa non fecit: non ita exempti ut nullam amplius obedientiam debeamus, &c. Although he bee Lord of the Law, and therefore the Law hath no authoritie or power over him, for hee is the Sonne of God; but of his owne accord hee made him∣selfe subject to the Law, and in perfect innocencie, suffered all tyrannie: hee did not onely live civilly under the Law, but suffered the terrors, so as no man upon earth ever felt the like. Primum magna legis san¦ctitas, quod nihil in ea manda∣tum cui deus ipse in carne ma∣nifestatus
non velit esse confor∣mis. Deinde quamuis filius sit dominus Sabbathi (atque ita totius legis) tamen ad per∣fectam & internam & exter∣ternam obedientiam qualem lex requirebat, se obligat. And this may not seeme strange that hee which is Lord of the Law, should be subject to the Law: for he must bee considered as our pledge and suretie, repre∣senting the persons of all the elect, and so is subject not by nature but by volun∣tarie abasement, by condi∣tion of will. That accor∣ding to the tenour of the law wee might have right to life, do all these things and live. As Christ was borne of a woman not for his owne
sake, but ours, so was hee made under the Law. As hee became a servant for our sake, so in that respect hee became under the Law of a servant, and his subjecti∣on to the Law was a part of his humiliation, Phil. 2. Hee yeilded himselfe also to those Lawes that were prescribed to Gods people by occasion of sinne, in con∣forming whereunto they professed themselves sin∣ners. Hee was circumcised, Luke 2, 21. Offered, v. 24. performed other ceremo∣niall observances, Iohn 7, 2 10. Was baptised, Math. 3. received the Sacrament of his owne body and blood; and all that hee might ful∣fill all righteousnesse, Math. 3, 10. By which wee are led
into the next point, expia¦ting all our sinnes. Vnto which he did not onely take our nature and miserable infirmitie, and was content to abase himselfe in this life to indure sundry yeares, many indignities and con∣tumelies, but with it hee tooke our sinnes upon him. Not the punishment onely as a sacrifice for sinne, to give satisfaction, but became a sinner, not by nature or any act of his, who knew no sinne but by imputation, translating the sinnes of the Elect from them to him, according to his Fathers counsell, and his owne un∣dertaking: he having no sinne of his owne hee could not as man be bound to these kinds of Lawes prescribed to
Gods people by occasion of sinne, in conforming where∣unto they professed them∣selves sinners; which Christ conforming himselfe unto, did professe himselfe also to bee, and the chiefe, though not by inherence (hee was without sinne) yet by Gods laying the sinnes of the Elect upon him, and his taking them upon himselfe, so as the guilt of them was upon him, and did bind to satis∣faction, as a suretie that takes the debt upon him, that was not his before, is bound, as Paul to Philemon▪ for the debt of Onesimus. That he stood guiltie of our sinnes, appeares in the type, the scape goate, Levit. 16, 21, 22. So in the prophecie, Esay 53, 6. God hath laid up∣on
him the inquities of us all, 11. He shall beare their iniquities; 12, He bare the sinnes of many, 2 Cor. 5, 21. He made him to be sinne, &c. Sinne here is to be under∣stood Object. of the sacrifice or punishment of sinne. Not onely so, but Christus Sol. quasi peccator occisus est ut peccatores justificarentur. Amb. He suffered as a sinner that sinners might bee justified: hee tooke our sinnes in his body to the tree, that wee dying to sinne, might live to God, 1 Pet. 2, 24. 3. With our sinnes hee, tooke the full punishment due to them, to satisfie Gods justice, and to reconcile God and man, that God might be just in forgivenesse of sinnes. Rom. 3. He gave himselfe a ran∣son,
a full price, answerable to all that punishment which our sinnes came unto. Both in soule and body, 1 Tim. 2, 6. Hee himselfe, gave himselfe whole, a full and equall price for us. Hee is called a suretie of a better Testament, Heb. 7, 22. Sureties are to deliver them for whom they be∣come sureties, by payment of the whole debt, as it is required. If it bee goods, take his bed from under him, Prov. 22. 27. Philem. v. 18, 19. If it be libertie, the suretie becomes bond∣man for him whom hee freeth, Gen. 44, 33. Life for life, 1 King. 20, 39, 40, 42. So Christ becoming our suretie must give body for body, and soule for
soule, in stead of our bodies and soules: hee suffered for sinnes, the just for the unjust, that which the unjust should have suffered. Hee redeemed us, becom∣ming a curse for us. Christ saveth by his in∣tercession; we shall bee sa∣ved by his life in glory, Rom. 5, 10. He is able to save perfectly, or unto the end, such as come unto God by him, seeing hee liveth e∣ver to make intercession for them, Heb. 7, 25. The life and kingdome, and glory of Christ are destinated to this end as their scope, the salva∣tion of the beleevers; not onely by his kingly power but by execution of his preistly office in glory, ma∣king requests for us: thus the
Apostle comforts the Elect of God, beleeving in Christ, Rom. 8, 33. 34. Against feare of condemnation, yea of accusation, to secure them of salvation. And to lay the comfort downe in the best force of it, where∣as the direct opposition is of accusation, and Christs patronage or intercession; of condemnation and Gods justification: but hee makes a traiection, willing to fence Gods Children from the toppe to the bottome, and to arme them with such con∣fidence as may chase away to the furthest, anxieties & feares. Hee gathers more emphatically (that they are not obnoxious to any accu∣sation of guiltinesse that may hurt them before God)
by Gods justifying of them: then by Christs intercession, for the way to judgement is shut up aforehand, when the judge hath pronounced them just and guiltlesse, clearing them from all faults that any would lay to their charge. And so in the se∣cond opposition. It is not to bee feared that they should bee condemned for whom Christ by his death hath sa∣tisfyed divine justice and ex∣piated their sinnes, to pre∣vent that judgement of God, and by his intercession not onely abolished death, but brings their sinnes to bee forgotten, so as never to come into account. How doth Christ make intercession now for us, be∣ing in heavenly glory? in his
humiliation hee prayed for us, Iohn 17, 20. For all which shall beleeve in him through the word of the A∣postles; doth he so now? Being our high Priest, it is his office still to pray for us, as it were by name, where∣of the high Priest under the Law was a type, who going in to the most holy place, had by appointment, the names of the Children of Israel, in the names of the tribes (un∣der the heads were all contained:) So answering to the type, Christ is entred into the true holy place, in∣to the very heavens, within the veile, Heb. 6, 20, and 9, 24. Not in his owne name onely, but in the name of every particular belee∣ver. Exod. 28, 12, Hee
shall beare the names of the Children of Israel before the Lord upon his shoulders for a remembrance, that hee might remember them to Godward: and for this there were two Onix stones set and imbossed in gold, and in either stone sixe names gra∣ven, according to the names of the Children of Israel. He had also in his Brest▪ plate foure rowes of stones, three in every row with the names of the twelue tribes, to beare them upon his heart when hee goeth into the holy place. I doe not say I will pray Object. for you. Christs intercession, con∣sidered Sol. whether as vocall. The praying of Christ in heaven may bee understood
this presenting his humane nature assumed unto unitie of person with the Sonne of God, unto his father for that end to save his. A body hast thou ordained me; By Heb. 9, 24. the which will we are saved, by the offering of the body of Christ. 2. Setting his merit of obedience to the Law, and crosse in the sight of God, for remembring him of them, whom hee hath re∣conciled. Though God suf∣fers not oblivion of those whom he hath justifyed, yet thus Christ mediates for them still by presenting to God his sacrifice, his obedi∣ence for them, with the ever∣lasting vigor and merit of it, 1 Iohn 2, 2. 3. As God declaring his
will, as man desiring of God, that as his sacrifice is of a sweete savour, so they that beleeve in him may be such, by the merit of it in his ac∣ceptance he delightes in them, his love and pleasure is in them. 4. And as the incense and sweete perfume ascended and gave a sweete smell, so the workes and specially the prayers and prayses of the faithfull, through the odour of his sacrifice and the inter∣cession of Christ, are sweete to God. Thy voice is sweete Cant. 4. How much better is the savour of thine oynt∣ments than all spices? Thy lipps droppe honie combes, and thy plants are as an Or∣chard of Pomegranets and sweete fruites, and with
all the cheife spices in them∣selves they are not so sweet: but in Christ who obtaines by his intecession pardon of the corrupt mixture, as the high Priest, having on his forehead a plate of pure gold with this graven in it, Holinesse to the Lord, that hee might beare the iniqui∣tie of the offerings which the Children of Israel should offer in all their holy offerings, to make them ac∣ceptable before the Lord, Exod. 28, 36. 38. 2. As Christ saveth by his merit, so hee saveth by his Spirit, and efficacie, ap∣plication of his merit. It is required that unto the en∣joying of benefits purchased by Christ, we bee first par∣takers of and possessed of
himselfe. Here is the com∣fort of a soule that the testi∣monie of God is within it, so as it can truly say, my be∣loved is mine. We must bee in Christ before hee bee to us that which hee is made of God, 1 Cor. 1, 30. Hee is the Saviour of his body, Ephes. 5: As the woman is first possessed of the person of her husband, and thereby becometh partaker of his dignitie and riches. The pro∣mise of blessednesse is made to Abrahams seed, not seedes: That is Christ, Gal. 3, 16. We must be parts of Christ as the seed, before wee bee blessed v. 29. Vnto this ion with Christ, there bee certaine joynts and bands, Coloss. 2, 19. As the members of the
body are tyed to the head. These bands by which the Elect are tyed to Christ, are the Spirit and faith. Chil∣dren that cannot actually beleeve, are united to him as to their head by an un∣speakeable way, by his Spirit; so as they are of his body, of his flesh, and bones, one spirit with him, Ephes. 5, 30. 1 Cor. 12, 13. They that are of yeares, and capable of faith are knit unto him by the Spirit and faith. To both Christ is given of God. Who is the gif of God in two respects. 1. As hee was sent into the world to worke our redemption: so God loved the world, that hee gave his Sonne, Iohn 3. and Rom. 8. Hee gave him
for us all to death. Secondly, particularly unto union with us, that is, in our calling: by the first our redemption was wrought, by the second wee enjoy him and all things with him, Rom. 8, 32. And this gift of Christ is the cause why God first (be∣fore wee seeke it) giveth us faith. By his merit, and on his behalfe, it is given us to beleeve in him, as also to suffer for his name, Philip. 1. And because we cannot beleeve unlesse wee be cho∣sen to it, faith is of Gods Elect; the Election being in Christ. For execution of the decree, saith is given to them that are given him, as the hand to take hold of him, as the mouth to take him in to dwell in us for life and
nourishment: faith is not of all; onely his sheepe beleeve in him, Iohn 10. And in Gods gracious acceptance of our faith, not for the grace it selfe, it is in this life imperfect; but as it is rela∣tive, so faith is imputed for righteousnesse, and righteousnesse is imputed without workes, Rom. 4, 5, 9, 11. Imputation, is three fold. 1. Acceptation of a thing as sufficient, though insufficient in it selfe: so some falsely define our justifyca∣tion to be nothing else, but Gods gracious acceptation of our faith in Christ, though in it selfe unperfect, for our perfect righteousnesse. It is certaine God receives no righteousnesse from us, unto our justification in
whole or in part, but giveth righteousnesse unto us, and imputes it for our owne, as if wee had wrought it our selves. 2. For accounting that righteousnesse which in it selfe is perfect, and recko∣ning it to us as ours, though not done by us. 3. When the righteous∣nesse so perfect in it selfe wrought by Christ, not by us, is so reckoned ours, as if wee had done it our selves, one shall say, Surely in the Lord, I have righteousnesse, &c. It is questioned betweene us and the Papists, not whe∣ther by faith: but by what faith wee are saved. By faith ye are saved, is the ex∣presse word of God, Eph. 2.
Iustification is unto life, Rom. 5. Therefore that faith which justifieth, is lively, dead faith doth not justi∣fie. They professe to differ from us in the question of faith: In the object, subject, act. The object they make to bee onely the whole word of God. Which wee deny not, but ths faith the Divels have, which giveth no peace but leaveth them trem∣bling at their owne damna∣tion, which is set downe in the word of God. 1. The object of faith is the whole truth propounded in the Scriptures, called faith of the truth. King Agrippa beleevest thou the Scriptures? I know thou beleevest.
That Christ is. He that commeth to God, must be∣leeve that God is, so that Christ is. The Iewes be∣leeve not this, but count that Iesus the Sonne of Ma∣ry, who is the Christ of God, to have beene a de∣ceiver, and looke for the Messiah to come. The things spoken of Christ in the Scriptures: all that Iohn spake of this man was true, Iohn 10. The Turkes beleeve that Christ is and that hee was for his time a great Prophet, but not all things the which Christ hath spoken, written of him. Iohn 14. Beleeve me, that I am in the Father, and the Father in me. To rest, and stay on Christ for the benefits
brought by him. This is the faith that is given on the behalfe of Christ. The faith of Gods Elect peculi∣ar to the sheepe of Christ, it is called receiving of Christ, Iohn 1, 12. We teach that the proper object of justifying faith is Christ: with promise of mercie in him, as forgivenesse of sinnes, reconciliation, &c. Gal. 2, 16. Even wee I say have beleeved in Christ that wee might bee justified by the faith of Christ: that, say the Papists, is as by a dispo∣sition to justification, but that is false; for that putts a space betweene justificati∣on and faith, but they are together in time, contem∣porarie; every one assoone as hee beleeves is just.
Paul opposing in the point of justification, beleeving and doing, faith and worke, therefore it doth justifie not as it is a worke, but as an instrument to receive Christ, and in him righte∣ousnesse unto justification of life, imputation of righte∣ousnesse without workes. The Israelites stung of fierie Serpents were cured with∣out doing any thing but looking upon the brasen Serpent; and so with faith of the promise of God were healed: so we fixing our eye of faith upon Christ, and the promise of speciall mer∣cie in him are justified, and saved, Iohn 3, 16. We are commaunded to beleeve the Gospell; the Gospell is the tydings of
good things that betyde us in Christ, as forgivenesse of sinnes, the favour of God, restoring to heaven; adopti∣on to be the children and heires of God, and these without our labour or workes, onely of the free grace of God. Theophylact, Math. Evangelium secundum Matthaeum. Evangelium de eo quòd nunciet nobis res pros∣pras & bene se habentes. Eoc est, bona: nempe remissionem peccatorum: justitiam, reditum in coelos, adoptionem in filios dei: nunciat autem quod facile et gratis haec accepimus, neque nostro labore assequnti sumus hac ona, neque ex nostris acce∣perimus bonis operibus, sed gra¦tia et misericordia dei talia bona consiquutisumus. Thus the object of faith is
the speciall mercie of God to me in Christ, in whom I receive these good things. 2. Christ saves that which was lost, by Sanctification of the Spirit: unto this they were Elected in Christ, Eph. 1, 4. 2 Thess. 2, 13, 14. 1 Pet. 1, 2. And this is glo∣rifycation, and salvation be∣gunne; whom hee justified, them hee glorified. 2 Cor. 3, 18. Wee all behold as in a mirror the glory of the Lord with open face, and are transformed into that image from glory to glory as by the Spirit of the Lord. The Apostle notes three things, great benefits, which all we the whole body of beleevers do receive by the Gospell, as the Spirit makes it quic∣kening to us. 1. The revela∣tion
of God, 2 Cor. 4, 6. The light of the knowledge of the glorie of God. 2. Transformation into the image of God, by glorious sanctification, whereby they become like unto God the Spirit of glorie which is the Spirit of God, resteth upon you, 1 Pet. 4, 14. Called peculiarly the glory, Esay 4, 2, 3, 5. Vpon all the glory shall be a defence: set forth in earthly similitudes, Psal. 45, 9. A vesture of gold, Esay 54, 11, 12, 13. v. 8. Iuory palaces, beautie for Christ to be pleased and de∣lighted in, ornament much set by of God, 1 Pet. 3. God is infinitely glorious in holi∣nesse, they are partakers of his nature, by Christ, not essentially as the naturall
sonne, but by similitude, 2 Pet. 1, 4. Adoption giveth them the dignitie of the Children of God, heires with Christ. Adoption belongs to glori∣fication, Christ giveth the glory that his Father gave him, Iohn 17. Vnto them the effectuall knowledge of Christ reneweth a man ac∣cording to the image of God in the truth of holinesse and righteousnesse, so as he is the glory of God, as hee is his image. Some excelling in holinesse, are in a speciall sort called the glory of Christ, 2 Cor. 8, 23. In whose persons the glory of Christ shines forth as in some image. 3. There is a proceeding in this glorification from
one degree of glory to ano∣ther, which in respect of the soule, is made perfect in death, 12, 23. This increase in glory is set forth by out∣ward things, Cant. 1. 8. When the Churches spiri∣tuall ornament is set forth by rowes of stones and chaines of gold, she is pro∣mised to be made still more glorious, v. 10. Wee will make thee borders of gold with studds of silver. Rich∣ly decked alreadie, shee shall bee more glorious by the holy Trinitie, till she attaine the perfection of glory. In regeneration wee live in the Spirit that life which Gal. 5. is eternall, 1 Iohn 3, 15. So as never to dye, Iohn 11, 26. We are partakers of the first resurrection, raised to a glo∣rious
and immortall life, the life by Iesus manifest in our mortall flesh, 2 Cor. 4. Which life Christ came for, that wee might have it, and that wee might have it more abundantly; Iohn 10, 10. Wee are saved by the renewing of the holy Ghost. The exercise of this sancti∣fication is partly in repen∣tance, which is unto Salva∣tion; as Christ came to save sinners, so to call sinners to repentance. Repentance and life are coupled together, Act 11. Whom God would not have perish, hee will have come to repentance, 2 Pet. 3, 9. Seeing whom Christ sa∣veth Vse. hee sanctifieth, it should move us to examine our selves about sanctifica∣tion,
which is salvatiō or glo rification begun. It is of that necessitie that al the unsancti∣fied are excluded, Math. 18, 3. Iohn 3, 3, 5. Heb. 12, 14, Revel. 21, 27. The in∣heritance is appropriated unto Saints, the Scripture thrusts it into their bosome, and pinnes it as it were on their sleeves, Act. 20, 32, and 26, 18. Eph. 1, 18 Coloss. 1, 12. There is no sanctification singular, but in union with Christ: Who as the head giveth life, and influence of grace onely to his body, Eph. 1; 22. Heb. 2, 11. Titus 3, 6. Whatsoever civill ver∣tues a man have, as the yongman that Christ looked upon and loved. What temporary reformation, or
common sanctification so called, in respect of some materialls or dispositions, not brought forward to sanctification singular, be∣ing not by spirituall union with Christ, is no degree of Salvation. Therefore to know true sactification con sider the singularitie of it. Math. 5, 20. Except your righteousnesse exceed, &c. 47. What singular thing do you? 48. Yee shall therefore be per∣fect as your heavenly Father is perfect. By imitation of God suffer not this one ver∣tue of loving your enemies to be wanting in you. This perfection is the singularitie of sanctification. Not that any man attaines to ab∣solute perfection in this life, Philip. 3. I am not al∣readie
perfect. Wee have sinne, wee doe sinne all in many things; but there is in the sanctified, a perfection of sinceritie, their heart is good and honest, which God calls perfect, 2 Chron. 15, 17. The heart is whole with God not devided, spoken in comparison of hypocrites, whose heart is not whole, Psal. 78, with the Lord: they are double minded, Iam. 1 and 4. They are true in their heart, have their conversation in simplicitie and godly purenesse. 2. Perfection of integri∣tie; they have the seedes of all vertues in them though yet they are not growne up. They have the perfect nature of Christians though they be but babes in Christ, 1
Cor. 3. They have a new man in them. Newnesse of Spirit in which they serve God, Rom. 7. The spirit, soule, and body, sanctified in measure. They respect all the com∣maundements given to them, Psal. 119: Towards all persons, God, their neighbour, themselves. They have compleatnesse in their actions, they have the needfull parts of a good worke, and right matter, a right principle out of which they worke, saith purifying the heart, working by love; a right end Gods glory, the edification of men, &c, They hold on, and contend towards perfection in de∣grees, Iob. 17. It is not thus with the Hi∣pocrites.
2. Consider their diffe∣rence in sinning; the Godly sinne not, they cannot sinne, 1 Iohn 3, 9. Grace freeth them from the reigne of sinne that they serve it not; it giveth an inclination and disposition to the will that it resists the will of the flesh as contrary: so in their sin∣ning, they are rather pati∣ents than agents: they worke none iniquitie. Rom. 7. Leads mee captive to the Law of sinne. It is not then I that doe it, but sinne dwelling in mee, which appeareth in their striving, mourning, complaining of sinne in them, purging or purifying of themselves constantly, desirous to be freed utterly from sinne. Temptation is▪ said to
take them, 1 Cor. 10, 13. And to be but humane, not sought out of affection, but taking advantage of humane infirmitie. Humanum quid∣dam non nihil ipsos esse passos dicit. Galat. 6, 1. If a man be preoccupate in any offence. Ex subito motu passionis, igno∣rantia seu infirmitate. Hee speakes of sins into which a man falls not wilfully or of set purpose, but of infir∣mitie, beguiled by the Devill or the flesh, the deceitfull∣nesse of sinne, like men to sinne, is of two sorts, by sur∣reption, or disease. By constitution, and ha∣bite, which bring forth acti∣ons corrupting, loosing that common Sanctification which they had, by their common calling into out
ward covenant with God, and became holy in professi∣on before others that were not so called. Which ag∣gravates their sinne above theirs that were never called by Gods Name. Deut. 32. Three things Moses chargeth them with, 1. Corrupting themselves, 2. Contracting spotte, 3. Habite or con∣stitution, perversenesse, sin∣ning of full will, froward∣nesse: wicked men are noted of their frowardnesse, they sinne of full enmitie and ma¦liciousnesse of will. Consider, a kind of force in the Spirit sanctifying to do knowne good: The Spirit within me compels me, Iob 32. Ier. 20. It was as fire shut up in my bones, I was weary
with forbearing, I could not stay. Downe goeth the power of the flesh, the dore is open for Christ to come in, and the grace within will not bee shut up, but breakes forth unto the workes of righteousnesse. 2 Cor. 5. The love of Christ constrai∣neth us. For we thus judge, &c. Psal. 116. What shall I render? All his benefits are upon me. Psal. 56, 12. Thinke upon me O God. As wickednesse procee∣deth from the wicked, so righteousnesse from the righteous; such are noted of the working of righteous∣nesse, it will declare it selfe in a mans life if hee have any sanctification in him. f wee live in the Spirit let us walke in the Spirit, Gal. 5.
2. Let such as the Lord hath sanctified rejoyce and bee thankefull: they are en∣tered already on some part of salvation, which assures them fullnesse from Gods faithfullnesse. 3. Christ saves by his Spirit in leading, preserving the sanctified unto salvation: hee keepes them, that they cannot loose it. Deut. 33, 3. All thy Saints are in thy hands. This effect of Gods speciall love to his Saints, distinguished from hypo∣crites by this worke of grace, they are his Disciples, and humbly and attentively heare his words, notes that after God hath received people into favour he takes them into sure custodie for Salvation; they are all in his
hands, and who can pull them out? none, as Christ saith, Iohn 10. I will give them Eternall life, no man shall pull them out of my hands. 1 Sam. 2, 9. Hee keepeth the feete of his Saincts, Prov. 2. 7, 8. He is a shield to them that walke uprightly, and hee pre∣serveth the wayes of his Saints. Hee watcheth over them to keepe them from sinne as well as from any o∣ther danger: he doth not so keepe alwayes as not to bee tempted, no nor that they should not fall into tempta∣tion, but either he preserves them from temptation, when they have opportunity; or if there bee temptation, that they shall want oppor∣tunitie, or if there bee both
opportunitie and temptati∣on, hee so shines into their minds by divine, and bowes their hearts to his com∣maundement, that they stand; or if they fall, hee re∣scues them from the pow∣er and guiltinesse of their sinne and from the rage of the Divell, that the evill shal not fasten upon them to de∣stroy their grace or deprive them of salvation. 1 Cor. 10, 13. That they may bee able to beare it. 2 Cor. 12, 7. His grace shall bee suffici∣ent for them, 1 Iohn 5, 18. They are said to bee reser∣ved to Iesus Christ, Iud. 2. Being called and sanctified they are kept as a speciall portion, treasure, & possessi∣on unto Iesus Christ the true heire of the world: con∣served
in Christ, because our safetie is not in our hands, either our deliver∣ance from evill or perseve ring in good, but our King, the author and finisher of our faith, Christ Iesus given us of God the Father, to whom is given all power in heaven and in earth, and all iudgement, Math. 28. Iohn 5. keeps in the purchased salva∣tion, most powerfully, and loseth not one of them whom his Father gave him, Iohn 6. It lyeth on Gods faith∣fullnesse to keepe them from evill, 2 Thess. 3, 3. To con∣firme, and perfect them, God hath promised it, Ier. 32. 40. Ezech. 36. 27. Christ hath prayed for it, Luke 22, 32. Iohn 17. 11. Holy Father
keepe them in thy name. I pray not that thou take them out of the world, but that thou keepe them from evill: hereof the Spirit works perswasion, as in ul, Rom. 8. 2 Tim. 4, 18. Hee will deliver mee from every e∣vill worke, and preserve mee to his heavenly kingdome: the weake in faith shall bee established, because God is able to make them stand, Rom. 14. This abilitie is used unto faith to keepe it that it faile not, that the worke of faith may be fulfilled with power as the Apostle prayeth, 2. Thess. 1. And by faith wee stand, 2 Cor. 1, 24. This is the ef∣fect and nature of faith to make us stand. It keepes us,
as a towne is kept from ene∣mies by garison lying in it. 1 Pet. 1, 5, Which are kept by the power of God through faith. It is victori∣ous; it overcomes the world. 1 Iohn 5, 4. This is the victo∣ry which hath overcome the world, even our faith: to note the certaintie of the victorie it is delivered, not in the pre∣sent nor future tense, you doe or shall overcome, but in the preterperfect tense, you have overcome. 1 Iohn 4, 4. Little Children yee are of God, and have over∣come them. It is said to quench the fierie darts of the Divell, Ephes. 6, 16. Though his darts be not onely sharpe and peircing, but also fierie, faith shall both blunt them and extinguish them. Hee
seemeth to allude to the an∣cient custome among soul∣diers poysoning their darts and cast them at the enemie, who wounded with them were so inflamed as to bee hardly cured: so the tempta∣tions of the Divell as fire inflame the heart, but faith beates them backe, and quencheth them: wee are commanded to resist the ames 4, 7. Divell and he will flie from us. That is our incourage∣ment to resist him stedfast in the faith, 1 Pet. 5, 9. imply∣ing that in a stedfast faith, there is strength to overcōe him, Rvel. 12, 11. Because faith possesseth us of Christ,  keeps us in the possession thereof, it rests upon God by  ans of Iesus Christ, so  baie and do things
impossible to nature▪ If thou casst beleeve all thing are possible. Gods people have prevailed by faith with Christ, to put forth his power to their cure of di∣seases incureable to man. and unto their obtaining of great blessings, above the course of nature, as appeares, Heb. 11, 11, 33, 34, 35, &c. And doing things above all naturall strength. When the faithfull have beene overthrowne by Sa∣tan in sinne, by faith they have obtained strength to recover themselves, and gotten victorie over Satan and sinne, have overcome their owne guiltinesse and feare of Gods deserved wrath, so that their sinnes have beene so farre from
separating their hearts from Christ, that they have drawne neerer to him, Cant. 7. 10, 11, 12. As in David Psal▪ 73: Peter; they perceive that their sinnes have not removed Gods favour from them. Gods Children when they are compelled to wrestle with God himselfe as with their enemie, yet stand fast by faith and say, as Iob. 13, 15. Though hee stay me yet I will trust in him; the power of God is exceeding great in beleevers, in so much that they are stronger than the Divell himselfe, than all powers and principalities of darke∣nesse, Math. 16. Ephes. 6. They are insuperable, in∣vincible, more than conquer∣ours.
It is called the good fight of faith, not onely be∣cause it is for a good cause, and from a good author, but it hath a good issue. It is victorious. What Angells by na¦ture could not do in heaven, nor Adam in Paradise, a poore weake servant of Christ is made able to do by him that loved him, the weakenesse of God is stron∣ger than men and Angels. Faith is mightie by the word of God, which is migh∣tie in operation, Heb. 4. 12. The power of God to salva∣tion, Rom. 1. graffed in us is able to save our Soules, Iam. 1. By this young men re∣dresse their wayes and over∣come the wicked one, 1 Iohn 2. 14. It is prevailes by love
which is strong as death, which overcommeth all. And by prayer is this continuance in goodnesse unto the end obtained; as we are taught by our Saviour in the petition, Leade us not into temptation, but deliver us from evill▪ Math. 6. watch and pray, least ye enter into temptation, Math. 26. Christ giveth his Spirit to make requests for the Saints according to the will of God, and what hee in hea∣ven intercedes for, they by his Spirit request of God in his name, and it is given them abundantly. Christ tells his Disciples that they had as∣ked Iohn 16. nothing in his Name, but requires them to bee more in their requests, assu∣ring them they shall receive
vnto the fulnesse of their joy. Hee knew the necessity and the utilitie of prayer, and how slow and dull the Di∣sciples were to it: then when hee was with them they had such satisfaction in his pre∣sence; he excites them ther∣fore to this duty. They & the godly did pray in the name of the Mssiah, for the Spirit indited or dictated no other prayer than in the name of the mediator: but they as∣ked obscurely, as the know∣ledge of Christ was then but obscure; and ordinarily they did aske nothing so as after Christs manifestation and more plentifull giving of the Spirit. Satis nta est sermonis forma, qua fieri ali∣quid tum demum dicitur, quando magis t evidentius
fit, quam antea fiebat aut quando aliquo novo modo inci∣pit fieri sicut dominus loquitur Ioh. 16. Maiore fiducia, ex multo clariore agniione. Frequen∣tius atque ardentius orabant, quam antehac, dam ad huc rudes, et ex corporali prasen∣tia Christi securiores erant. Ac longiores in precibus. They sinne that teach that Vs. Christ gives life, justice to some, that extinguish it, fall from it: They are of two sorts, some teach and some hold that reprobates have true justice. From which they fall totallie and finally, that a man may bee the Child of God, yet not inherite. It is for consolation to the beleevers, such as God
hath brought to Christ: his power is ingaged for their continuing in grace unto salvation; not onely that they cannot loose grace finally, but that they shall at no time by any power of hell have grace so shaken out of them as that there should not be left that which accompanies Salvation. Get of God, pray for his Vse. 3. glorious power, strive to feele it. Ascribe to Christ the power of standing stedfast in grace. The Sonne of man is come to seeke and save &c. The proprietie of this worke of saving the lost, is in Christ, not communicated to any other, Revel. 7, 10. This may appeare in Gods
appointing him and sen∣ding him to save those that hee did appoint and give to him, that hee might give them eternall life. Hee is Gods Elect for that purpose Esay 42. His servant on whom he will stay, or whom hee will establish. This his enemies confessed to bee true of the Messiah. Luke 23, 45. Let him save himselfe if hee bee that Christ the chosen of God. The Father is said to seale him to this Iohn 6, 27. Wherein is de∣clared his authoritie from the Father to give the food that lasts to eternall life: this way God ordained before the world to our glory, 1 Cor. 2. He hath predesti∣nated him, 1 Pet. 1. raised up for us, Luke 1. 69. prepared, Luke 2, 30.
2. In his sufficiencie for this worke, Esay 63, 1. suf∣ficient to save, or almighty to save. I speake in righte∣ousnesse and am sufficient to save: this is in fullnesse of grace and truth, Iohn 1. Be∣ing very God, v. 14. The fullnesse of the Godhead dwelling in him bodily, Coloss. 2, 9. So as wee are compleate in him, v. 10. That beleevers need nothing out of Christ unto their justification and Salvation, they have fullnesse in him, and need nothing out of him to peice up their felicitie, he is able to save perfectly such as come unto God by him Heb. 7, 25. He is made unto us of God wisedome, righteous∣nesse, Sanctification and re∣demption, that they which re∣joyce
might rejoyce in th Lord. Coloss. 3, 11. Christ is all and in all things. All-suf∣ficient to true happinesse. It pleased the Father that in him all fullnesse should dwell. What wee can de∣sire for our perfection, or God require for his satis∣faction, it is full in Christ. Hee is said to bee not onely a Saviour but the salvation of God, ascribing all that be∣longs to salvation unto him, Esay 49, 6, Luke 1, 69, and 2 30. In whole and in part. The author of eternall Sal∣vation, Heb. 5, 9. And the finisher of it, Heb. 12, 2. If any other cause of salvati∣on be added, it must bee to supply the want of the suffi∣ciencie of Christ for this, which is blaspheie to ∣firme.
All other Saviours in whole or in part besides him, are excluded, Esay 43, 11. I even I am the Lord, and besides mee there is no Saviour: as there is but one God, so is there but one Sa∣viour; who can bee a Savi∣our that is not God? Esay 63, 3. Christ in his answere to the 2. Question of the Church, Wherefore is thine apparrell red, and thy garments like him that treadeth in the wine presse? takes it wholy to him selfe to deliver the Church like a mighty conqueror from all her enemies. I have trodden the wine-presse alone, and of all people there was none with mee, &c. The Church nor any member of it could do any thing to their owne
Salvation and deliverance from their enemies; but Christ did it alone, and so mightily that none of the Churches enemies could withstand him: I will tread downe the people in my wrath, and make them drun∣ken in mine indignation, and will bring downe their strength to the earth, Luke 1, 71. He condemned sinne in his flesh, hee cancelleth the Law, Coloss. 2, 14. And taketh it out of the way, nayling it to his crosse. Hee tryumphed over the Divell and all the hellish principa∣lities, Coloss. 2, 15. 1 Cor. 15, 24. Heb. 2, 14. And de∣stroyed death for ever, did abolish it, Hos. 19, 14. 1 Cor. 15, 55. He is the way, the truth
and the life, so as there is no other way to come to the Father but by him, Iohn 14. There is not salvation in any other, neither is any other name under heaven given among men, by which they must bee saved, Act. 4, 12. By himselfe hee purged our sinnes, Heb 1, 3. It serveth for confuing of Vse 1. that opinion mr full of pittie than truth, that hea thens may be saved by kee∣ping the Law of nature our of the acknowledgement of the true God. It appeares that all the light of the hea∣thens whereby they know God in some sort and put a Rom. 1. 20. difference betweene honest and unhonest things, their naturall conscience accu∣sing, Rom. 2. 15. excusing, according
to their judgement in parti∣culars, will not be to save them, but to leave them without excuse. Vt constricti convictique teneantur pro∣prie damnationis, q. d. eos ne mutire quidem ausuros ad de∣sensionem suam. Tremel. Not onely noting the consecuti∣on, but why God would have that light to shine in darkenesse that men should have nothing to pretend. Ber. Vt nullam possint adserre de∣fensionem in iudicium Dei, quin iure sint dānabiles, Calv. God left not himselfe with∣out a witnesse, yet suffered the gentiles to walke in their owne wayes, Act. 14. Wincked and regarded not those times of ignorance. But now Christ is revealed, calls all men unto repe∣tance
every where, Actes. 17. The heathens are in the prayers of the Church left comparatively to the wrath of God, as a people not so much as in outward cove∣nant with God, Ier. 10, 25. Powre out thy wrath upon the heathen that have not knowne thee, upon the fami∣lies that call not upon thy name, Psal. 79, 6, 7. The Prophet gathers by that, that God calls them not to bee of his household but letts them remaine strangers, that they are under his wrath, and so desires him to put a dif¦ference betweene his owne people and them that wor∣ship him not. The heathen are said to bee without God and without hope, Ephes. 2,
Not under mercie, 1 Pet. 2, 10. They are children of wrath by nature, Ephes. 2. And the of God wrath a∣bides upon them, Iohn 3, 36. They live under the cove∣nant of workes, and so under the curse for breaches of the Law. Wee may gather hence the wofull condition of the Iewes, that have stumbled at the stumbling stone, they are enemies for the Gospell sake, because they refuse Christ Iesus, Rom. 11. They dye in their sinnes, Iohn 8. without pitty and mercie. And so of the Turkes, of Hos. 2, 4. whom wee cannot conceive better than a company of damnable creatures, for any thing wee know, left to pe∣rish everlastingly; they wai∣ting
on lying vanities for∣sake their owne mercie, they worship they know not what, millions of men going to hell in death, be∣cause not receiving Christ the onely Saviour, the Sal∣vation of God. In a word in no religion but the Christi∣an, in no Christian religion but the reformed is salvati∣on to be found. Papisme saves none though some among Papists may bee saved, Bulling. in Apoc. 7, 10, Such as hold the foundation and over∣turne it not. 2. Such as erre of simplicitie, not of special vengeance for not lo∣ving the truth. 3. Such as are from their hearts obedi∣ent to the truth they see, and are desirous to understand:
teachable, ready to imbrace the truth in Christ Iesus be∣ing revealed, unfeinedly re∣penting their unknowne errors. But otherwise as papisme is that Apostasie spoken of by Paul, the head of which defection is the man of sinne; it saves none, it leades into perdition, the head of that apostasie is called the child of perdition. And it is a deceiveable unrighteousnesse among such as perish, their damna∣tion, who in the just judge∣mēt of God are delivered up to beleeve such lyes, because they received not the love of the truth that they might be saved, 2 Thess. 2. Papisme overthroweth the fundamentall doctrine
of Christian religion, there∣fore it saveth not. 1. In the point of justification. Whit∣tak. de ecclesia, Q. 6. Pag. 459. They have not that way of justification which the Lord hath set downe in his word. They erre in the efficient, matter and forme: And as there being one way to a Citty, they that have not that way cannot come into the Citty, so there being but one way for justifying of a sinner, if they have not that, they are not justified, and so not saved. Iustification is before glorification, Rom. 8, 30. For the efficient cause the Scriptures put God, of his love, grace, and mercie, Iohn 3, 16. It is God that justifi∣eth, Rom. 3. 24. Titus 2, 11.
Ephes. 2, 4, 5. The Papists teach that God justifieth, but inclined and commo∣ved thereunto by workes of preparation done by us, merit of congruitie. 2. The Scripture ascribes the efficacie of grace unto our calling and justification, to God determinating the will by infusion of grace to will conversion which it wil∣led not before. The Papists denie physi∣call determination and af∣firme that God onely by morall perswasion excites the will and giveth sufficient grace to convert, but leaves it in the power of the will to choose or to put away and make ineffectuall that grace: In quo insignem dei gratiae iniuriam faciunt et unium
nostrae salutis principiu ol∣lunt. Whittak. Concerning the matter of our justification, the scrip∣ture puts onely the obedi∣ence of Christ unto the death, Rom. 5, 19. Rom. 8, 3, 4. The obedience of the Law and the obedience of the crosse, Rom. 10, 4. for full satisfaction and righteous∣nesse. The Papists though they grant Christ to bee in himselfe most just, and that hee fulfilled the Law, and satisfied God most perfect∣ly: yet they deny this obe∣dience to bee our justice. They teach besides Christs satisfaction, other satisfacti∣on, either in their owne per∣sons by penall workes, or by indulgence, a remitting thereof for the satisfaction
of others, made theirs by bargaine and sale. The foun∣dation of which indulgence they make the treasure of the Church, of the superfluous workes and satisfactions of the Saints. They for this con∣sider in the workes of the just a double valour, one of merit which they say cannot bee applyed to another, a second, of satisfaction which is in some more than they need for themselves, either having no actuall sinne, as they say of the Virgin Mary, and as some of them count piously beleeved that she had not originall sinne, yet suffered much for God. Luk. 2. A sword also shall pierce thine heart. Iohn Baptist fil∣led with the Spirit from the womb and lived innocently,
yet put himselfe to great an∣steritie of life, under hard pennance. They suppose that such need not for their owne satisfaction, therefore as superfluous to him, it is laid up in the treasurie of the Church for such as want where with to satisfie God for their veniall sinnes, and the temporall punishment of mortall sinnes. Thus they adde to Christ, helps to save from sinne and punish∣ment, on false ground. . There is no more reason why one mans satisfaction may with God pay another mans debt, than his merit of workes procure for another man reward; neither of them can properly be found in any sinfull man as every mere man is. 2. It is blas∣phemie
to say, that godly mens sufferings are superflu∣ous, more than their sinnes require. They have their fruit, 1. In righteousnesse, 2. In glory, Heb. 12. Rom. 8, 18. 2 Cor. 4. 1 Cor. 15, ult. It were against justice in God. The best cannot an∣swere one of a thousand. All whatsoever they can do or suffer for God accor∣ding to his will, is their duty, Luke 17. And therefore can neither merit reward nor satisfie debt, much lesse bee superfluous and aboue that they need for their owne use, Math. 25, 9. Virtus proximi mei vix sufficiet illi ad defensionem, tantum abest ut et mihi. Theophylact. 2. They make the mat∣ter of positive righteous∣nesse
wherein wee stand just before God, to bee inherent in our persons, which be∣cause it is ever imperfect in this life and not without mixture of sinne, never sa∣tisfying the Law: we are ne∣cessarily under the curse if we trust to it to save us, Gal. 3, 10. Gal. 5, 4. Ye are abo∣lished from Christ whoso∣ever will bee justified by the Law, &c. The forme of justificati∣on the Scripture puts in Gods gracious imputation of the obedience of Christ to us upon our faith in him, Rom. 4, 5, 9, 23. So faith is said to bee imputed to righte∣ousnesse, righteousnesse im∣puted without workes, 2 Cor. 5, 19, 21. The scripture putts our justification in not
imputing our sinnes. Papists make the infusion of righteousnesse the forme of justification, and merit of person, and workes by Gods commutative justice; deri∣ding the true faith as a phan∣tasticall apprehension, impu∣ted justice, a new no justice, or a putative justice. 2. The Papists hold not Christ the head, because they make other mediators, as Angels and Saints, which they trust in and worship, Coloss. 2, 18, 19. 3 They have another Priesthood than Christs, and another sa∣crifice propitiatorie and im∣petratorie. Seeing salvation of the Vse. lost is onely the worke of Christ, done by himselfe, wee are bound to trust and
rejoyce in him alone for our whole salvation. Gal. 6, 14, God forbid I should rejoyce in any thing save in the crosse of our Lord Iesus Christ. The word, save, is exceptive, hee will glory in that, and exclusive, in nothing else. Christ cru cified is the treasure of the Coloss. 2. Church for all spirituall blessings, of all wisedome and knowledge, of the love and favour of God, Ephes. 1; 6: Of honour and holiness; hee hath made us kings and Priests to our God, Apac. 1, 6; of libertie, Luke 1, 74, Iohn 8; 32, 36. Of pleasures and comfort, wee are compleate in him. Philip. 3, 3: Wee re∣joyce in Christ Iesus, and put no confidence in the flesh that is, in any created thing
out of Christ. But rest in him alone for our whole felicitie with confident glorying. The evidence of the truth of this is, that hereby the world is crucified to us, and wee to the world; by the world understanding that which is opposed to the kingdome of Christ and the new creature, for which new creature in us, the world cannot but hate us: By the power of the Spirit dead to the world. Phil. 3, We wor∣ship God in the spirit, our spirit sanctified and gover∣ned by the Spirit of Christ, with internall and exter∣nall actions after his word. Let it move us to love him Vse 3. with our whole heart, that by himselfe purged our sinnes, saved us being lost,
and no other with him: thinke it not enough to mag∣nifie him above other be∣loveds, but omnifie him not onely as a friend, a child, a wife, our life, but united all, more than all these. He did in his love that passeth knowledge, all that purcha∣sed thy happinesse, hee suf∣fered all, finished all for thee. Let this bee seene in our not induring of such teach∣ers and doctrine as obscure this love of Christ, joyning helpes with him for our sal∣vation: Philip▪ 3, 2, As ene∣mies of the crosse of Christ, v. 18. It is noted that the faithfull stand on Christs Rev. 17. 14. side for him. 2, In our due esteeming of the sincere mi∣nisters of Christ, that teach
him faithfully as the onely redeemer, not onely from greater but from all lesser sinnes. Ye received me as an Angell of God, as Christ Iesus; if need had beene, yee would have pluckt out your owne eyes, Gal. 4: Have them in singular love for their worke, 1 Thess. 5. It is their great praise to seeke the things of Christ. 3. In our valewing and respect of men, of Christ in them, 2 Cor. 5, 16, wee know no man after the flesh. Whatsoever wee do in word or deede, do all in the name of Vse 4. Christ, Coloss. 3, Philip. 1. To me to live is Christ. 1. Give him the honour of binding our consciences by his Commandements, and no earthly creature; as
Lord of Lords, and King of Kings. Traditious not af¦ter Christ are in that name blamed, that they are after the commaundements and doctrines of men, not after Christ, Coloss. 2, 8, 22: Not imposed or warranted by Christ, not ascribing all to Christ, as the Prophet, Priest, or King of the Church. 2. Doe all by his vertue: fruits of righteousnesse are by him, Philip. 1, 11. Our sufficiencie for doing or suf∣fering is by his grace and power, Rom. 8, 37. Philip 4, 13. I am able to do all things by the helpe of Christ which strengtheneth me. All vertues are but na∣turall qualities, dead shapes if they bee not done in and
by his grace, hee must bee the root, they must favor of his sappe, or they have no∣thing to make them truely good. 3. In his mediation seeke acceptance in all with assu∣rance. Spirituall sacrifices acceptable by Iesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2, 5▪ 4. All to his glory, it is some mens prayse they are the glory of Christ, 2 Cor. 8, 23, Paul was all in his desire to magnifie Christ, whether by life or death. That which was lost. This is the condition in which Christ finds them whom he comes unto to seeke them and save, they were lost. The Iewes Gods owne con∣federate people, Children of the kingdome, and con∣cerning
externall adoption, heires of life, yet are called lost sheepe, Math. 10, 6. Goe yee rather to the lost sheepe of the house of Israel, Math. 15, 24. I am not sent but to the lost sheepe of the house of Israel; If they were lost, then the Gentiles without God, without Christ, without hope. Math. 18, 11, The Sonne of man is come to save that which was lost. 1. We were lost in Adam, wee in him made a defecti∣on from God by hearkening and consenting to the Divels suggestion out of unbeleefe, nnthankefullnesse, ambition: Ayming at a higher state than that which God made man in; wee lost both holi∣nesse, and happinesse, inno∣cencie and life, and so by na∣ture
are children of wrath, Ephes. 2. Death went over all inasmuch as all had sinned; by the offence of one the fault came upon all men unto condemnati¦on, Rom. 5, 12, 18. The Di∣vell is therefore sayd to bee a murderer from the begin∣ning, Iohn 8, 44. 2. There is no power in our nature to recover our selves from this losse and de∣struction into which wee are plunged, nor in any creature. We were of no strength, Rom. 5. 3. We left to that way of our selves, lose our selves more & more, Esay 53, 6. That if Christ did not seeke us and save us, wee should perish for ever without regard, Iob 4, 20, and dye before wee were so wise as to thinke
with any fruit of death, v. 21. Holden in the cords of our owne sinne, goe astray through our great folly, and dye for lacke of instruction, Prov. 5, 22, 23. And this aggravated by the time of our going astray from the wombe, Psal. 58, 3. The wic∣ked are strangers from the wombe, from the belly they erre & speake lyes: so remel∣lius reades that, Psal. 119, 67▪ Quum nondum loquerer ego errabam: declaring that wee are sinners from the wombe. I have called thee a transgressor from the wombe, Esay 48, 8. For I knew thou wouldst grie∣vously transgresse. Wee erre (as is said of Egypt) they have caused E∣gypt to erre in every worke
thereof: in things that wee do not, yet should doe; in things that wee doe, and should not doe. Deceived Titus 3, 3, either by that great deceiver the Divell, 1 Tim. 2, 14. The woman was deceived and was in the transgression, 2, Tim. 2, 26. Revel. 20, 8. And shall goe out to deceive the people which are in the foure quar∣ters of the earth. 10. The Divell that deceived them was cast into a lake of fire and brimstone. Or by instru∣ments of his that are first deceived and then deceive others, 2 Tim. 3, 13. Or by our owne heart, Ier. 17, 9. Sinfull wayes are from a naughtic heart, concupi∣scence drawing away and intising: carnall reasons, vaine
excuses, deceiveable hopes; our hearts joyne themselves to swarmes of temptations and lusts, so sinne deceives us and kills us. Sometimes God in a fearefull kind of justice sends efficacie of error, and so causeth us to erre from his wayes, Esay 19, 14. The Lord hath mingled among them the spirit of errors. Esay 63, 17. Because wee delighted to wander and would not refraine our feet, therefore will the Lord have no delight in us, but remem∣ber our sinnes, Ieremie 14, 10. To take notice of this Vse 1. miserable condition of na∣ture, considering our selves whether as yet wee have ob∣teined mercie unto delive∣rance,
or remaine yet in this fearefull and wofull state of men lost: living se∣parated from God the foun∣taine of life. 1. Whether whatsoever weakenesse in judgement or affection bee in us, yet wee be teachable or tractable. Or whether we refuse it and hate it as evill because wee place our felicitie in our sinnes, and hate to be ad∣vised & reclamed. Prov. 10, 17. He that regardeth in∣struction is in the way of life, but hee that refuseth correction goeth out of the way: hee that is found, out of habituall disposition fol∣loweth on to know the Lord Hos. 8, 3. 2 Whether we have our hearts drawne away con∣stantly
from all inward at∣tendance on God in his wor∣ship publike or private, Ier. 12, 2. Esay 29, 13, Ezech. 33. 31: Or we delight to draw ecre to God, wee worship him in spirit, our soule san∣ctified, and governed by Gods Spirit; we worship him with our trust because he hath revealed himselfe reconciled in Christ; with our faith and hope in him by the meanes of Christ Iesus, with a reverence of his pre∣cepts, promises, threatnings, least we should sinne against them, walke unworthy of them, and incurre Gods dis∣pleasure, whose wrath is pacified towards us in Christ: with heartie prayer accepted in his Beloved, brought into his presence as
lovely and desireable. Christ that would not pray for the world, whom hee purposed not to give himselfe for to save them, will not give his Spirit into the hearts of any such to make requests unto God for them. 3. Whether wee seeke delight in all our temptati∣ons, afflictions, infirmities against all curse of the Law and dangers of judgement, to shelter our selves under Christ and taste such sweet∣nesse of his fruites, that wee are so taken up with him as to write of him, to speake of him, to exalt him as the on∣ly stay of soules, for salvati∣on, is our contentment; and wee cannot beare them that trouble mens consciences by adding any thing as cause
of salvation with him, as be∣fore Cant. 2 Esay 28. Gal. Or seeke wee other shelter, make wee falshood our re∣fuge and lye hid under va∣nitie, and tast nothing but earthly things? Finding no savour in the fruit of Christ or things of the Spirit? 4. Is our love to men (in Christ) and specially to those in whom the life of Christ is, the brethren? We follow with brotherly kind∣nesse such as preach him, and professe him as before? Or are wicked men, swine and wilde beasts our dearest and most delightfull com∣panions, & that also with∣willing neglect and shunning the societie of such as have the vertue of Christ in them? This being the case of all
that Christ saves, that they are lost, it sets out the riches Vse of the free grace of God as the cause of the happinesse of the elect, and also serves greatly to incourage men that feele themselves lost to trust in Christ, that came not to save the righteous, but to call sinners to re∣pentance. Bee informed of the arguments that may in∣duce a sinner (that he might be helped out of his mise∣rie) to come to Christ. 1. Before God require any service of us, hee would have us beleeve that in Christ hee is our God and Father. This hee prefaceth before the Cōmandements, I am the Lord thy God. And in the prayer delive∣red by our Saviour wee are
taught in praying to be per∣swaded of his Fatherly good will to us, and this of his owne mercie and truth, not in respect of any thing had or hoped for in us; or else were grace no grace, Rom. 11. You that feele that you are lost in your selves, give the first service to God, obey him in comming to Christ, receiving him as the gift of free and eternall love. This is the worke of God, the chiefe that hee commaunds, to beleeve in him whom hee hath sent to seeke and save that which was lost. If the Divell would have us do as the servants of Iairus, Marke 5, 35, give our selves for lost without hope of recovering, as they say concerning his daughter
about whose cure hee came to Christ; Thy daughter is dead, why diseasest thou the Maister any fur∣ther? So hee suggest, thy soule is dead, lost. Abhorre the suggestion of ceasing to rest upon him for cure, as if thy cause were hopelesse: consider, Christ incourageth him against their discou∣ragement, and deferres not; assoone as hee heard the word spoken, hee said to the ruler of the Synagogue, Bee not afraid, onely beleeve, and she shall bee saved, Luke 8, 50. Death it selfe shall give place to the higher power of Christ, hee is the life and quickeneth whom hee will. Faith in him for power & good will to save us from perdition, to bee a
remedie against all evills that undoe our soules, is the onely instrument. Christ calls therefore for this con∣fident dependance on him how desperate soever our case may seeme to our selves or others; beleeve one∣ly, there wants nothing else on our part for our cure. Be confident my sonne, thy sinnes bee forgiven thee. As Satan labours to loosen our faith, so wee must bee dili∣gent to fasten it, by thinking on the promises free and certaine by the merit of Christs blood; the goodnesse and faithfullnesse of God in his oath, Heb. 6. Christ hath this peculiar above all the Priests of the Law, hee is made Priest by an oath, Psal. 110, 4. To declare the im∣mutabilitie
of Gods coun∣sell to forgive all their sinnes whom hee invites to him, having appointed with an oath a patrone for them which shall by his sacrifice and intercession get them fa∣vour with him. They that shut the gate of hope against themselves, what else doe they than accuse God of ly∣ing yea for swearing? Who∣soever is weary and laden with a heavie sense of his sinnes and guiltinesse, wher∣by he even faints with feare of damnation, despairing of himselfe, hee is called of Christ to come to him; which is a matter of great confidence, as they urge to blind Bartimeus, Mark. 10, 49. Bee of good comfort, arise hee calleth thee. He doth with
his call, assure them rest and refreshing of soule. There is no difference, for all have sinned and are sallen short of the glory of God, all are lost: The difference in degrees of sinne makes no difference impossibility to be justified, beleeving in Christ, Rom. 3. Men of civill life, brought up in the bosome of the Church, renounce their advantages (in the eyes of men) that in Gods eyes they may finde favour by having the righteousnesse of God▪ not their owne: Wee which are Iewes by nature, not sinners of the Gentiles, know that a man is not justified by the workes of the Law, but by the faith of Iesus Christ: even we I say, have beleeved in Iesus Christ, that wee might be justi∣sied
by the saith of Christ, and not by the workes of the Law, Gal. 2. 15, 16. Philip. 3. There is no sinne that can be repented, that a man may Acts 13. 38. 39. despaire of pardon of, Mark. 3. 28. All sinnes shall be forgi∣ven unto men, and blasphemies. Consider all sorts of sinners 1 Cor. 6. 10. 9. that have beled upon this ground, th od hath con∣cluded all und sinne, that he might have mercy on all: That Christ Iesus came th the world might be saved by him; and such chiefe sinners are made patterns to others. It appeares that grace being offred, there is no other let, but the refusall of grace: What could I have done more that I have not done? Esay 5. For God beseecheth us to re∣ceive it, willing to conferre
it, 2 Cor. 5. Christ will put none away that come to him, Iohn 6. 37. Doubt you of the sufficiency of Christs sa∣crifice to obtaine peace with God for you, because your sinnes be so many and great? It is sufficient for the sinnes of the whole world, 1 Iohn 2. Or feare yo God will not pardon y destroy you? Hearken to him avouching the contrary, 2 Pet. 3. 9. Yea swearing for confirmation of your faith, As I live I have no pleasure in the death of the wic∣ked. Ezech 33. 10. 11. Seeing all are lost, even Vse 3▪ the elect as well as the repro∣bate, Rom. 3. 23, There is no difference, for all have sin∣ned, and are deprived of the glory of God: only this odds there is; some are children of
perdition by eternall iudge∣ment Iohn 17. 12. 2 Thess. 2. 3. Rom. 9. of God, Vessels of wrath prepared to destruction, for whom Christ would not so much as pray: they were not given him to save, but ap∣pointed to wrath, forewritten 1 Thess. 5. 9. 1 Pet. 2. 8. Iude v. 4. to condemnation, children of the curse, 2 Pet. 2. 14. But others, though they were by nature ildren of wrath as well as othes, yet they were not appointed to wrath, but to obtaine salvati∣on by the meanes of Christ Iesus, to whom they shall eve∣ry one of them come, & not one of them be lost, Iohn 6. 37. 39. It should move men to recount with themslves often what they were, and that for diverse uses. 1. Tht well instructed in the particulars of our mi∣sery, Vse 1.
and that doctrine one time after another laid upon our hearts, we may runne to Christ still with singular af∣fection, 1. Pet. 2. 2. 3. 4. It is noted the constant act of be∣leevers to come to Christ their living foundation. 2. To keepe themselves Vs 2. humble and abased in them∣selves, because of all that they have done, remembring their wayes and workes that were not good, Ezech. 16. 63. and 20. 43. You shall iudge your selves worthy to be cut off. Eze. 6. 9. They that seriously re∣pent, they doe not sleightly acknowledge their faults, but recount with themselves how many wayes, how long, and with what pertinacy they have provoked the Lords an∣ger; and stirre up themselves
to a detestation of their for¦mer led life, and become ab hominable to themselves. The Lord would have us so taste his goodnesse in pardoning and purging us, as that our sinnes truly displease us, and we remember them with bit∣ternesse. The Apostle abasing him∣selfe because of his former life, ascribes all the good in him, or done by him, to Gods free grace, 1 Cor. 15. 9, 10. And puts other Christians in minde of that which they were when God called them, 1 Cor. 12. 1, 2. Yee know you were Gentiles, and were carri∣ed away unto the dumble Idols as ye were led: that they might magnifie the compassions of God, in their change, and not to use their gifts to ostentati∣on,
but to the praise of Christ, 1 Tim. 1. 12, 14. Ephes. 2. 11, 12. I serves to sirre us for∣ward Vse. to righteousnesse, and to bee as earnestly carried to that as ever wee were to sin, Rom. 6. 19. 2 Pe. 1. It is suffi∣cient to have spent the time past, &c. To preserve from A∣postasie, 2. and to hold us to God, with study if it could be, to make him amends by standing full in all his will for the injurie wee have done him. It helpes to faith in God 3. for the continuance of his good wl and pardoning our sinnes of weakenesse, seeing when we wee enemies, hee rd us of his great love and abundant mercy, Rom. 5. 9, 10.
It helpes to condole and be compassionate toward sin∣ners, consideing the Lords compassion towards us to pull us out of that woe. FJNJS.
