25919 99855515 21010
THE SCHOLLERS PVRGATORY, Discouered In the Stationers Common-wealth, And Discribed in a Discourse Apolo∣geticall, asvvell for the publike aduan∣tage of the Church, the State &, vvhole Common-vvealth of England, as for the remedy of priuate iniuryes. By GEO: VVITHER. Pro: 18. 13. He that answeares his matter before he heare him, it is shame and folly vnto him. Suffer him then that he may speake; and when he hath spoken, mock on, Iob. 21. 2. IMPRINTED For the Honest Stationers.
The occasion and contents of this Apology. THe Author of this ensuing Apology haue∣ing the Kings Grant, concerning his booke (called the Hymnes & Songes of the Church) vniustly & malitiously oppo∣sed by the Stationers, who vnchristianly vili∣fy & scandalize alsoe, the said Booke, to the con∣tempt of his Maiesties powre, the hinderance of deuotion, the preiudice of the Authors estate, & the disparagment of his best endeauors: He doth here Apologize both for his Booke & Priueledge, shewing the true grounds of their spightfull oppo∣sition▪ discouering the Progresse of it, answearing such friuelous obiections as they haue dispersed, & discouering how iniurious alsoe, they are euen to the whole Common-wealth in many other parti∣culers. It hath bene offred to the Presse, because it was otherwise impossible to divulge the same so vniuersally as they haue spread their scandalls; And it was directed alsoe to the most reuerend Conuocatiō, that the said Booke might be corrected or approoued of as the wisdome of that graue As∣sembly shall finde cause: & that the representatiue body of the Church of England, beholding a glimpse of the Stationers harbarous dispositions in misvsing this Author, might from thence take occasion to be informed, What other insolencyes & abuses they are guilty of, both to the disturbance of Christian vnity, & to the Common preiudice.
If the Printers hast, shall occasion any slipps, he desires that if his worke be legible he may be ex▪ cused▪ Soe, doth our Author likewise, if in the me∣thode or language, any ouer sight be committed. For, haueing many other employments, and being constrayned to write it in hast (that it might bee imprinted before this present Session of Parlia∣ment were expired) there may be somewhat ouer∣seene perhapps, which needeth pardon. But as it is, he humbly offers to consideration▪ the said Apo∣logy; whose perticulers are these that follow. 1. First, an Induction; after which the Author haueing breefly touched vpon those troubles, Im∣prisonments & expences, which compelled him to make some benifite of his owne books, sheweth why he gott his Hymnes confirmed vnto him by his Maiesties Letters Patents, & what honest Course he tooke in procuring his Grant: Pag. 1, &c. 2. He sheweth how vniustly & ingratfully the Stationers therevpon opposed him; how vncivel∣ly they abused him; how vnchristianly they vili∣fied his Hymnes, rather as Censurers then sellers of Bookes: And a little toucheth vpon the parti∣culer vsur pations, In sinuations, Insolencyes, Aua∣rice, & abuses of Bookesellers, Pag. 6, &c. 3. He declareth why he exercised his Muse in Diuinity: What reason he had to translate the Canonicall Hymnes into Lyrick verse; & that some of the Cleargy mooned him therevnto▪ He sheweth
alsoe, to what end he composed the Spirituall Songs for the obseruable tymes: Of what nature that Booke is, which the Stationers oppose: And what they doe in particuler, rayle & obiect against the said Booke. Pag. 11, &c. 4. He proueth by diuerse Arguments that the said Hymnes are necessary, & not impertinent as the Stationers obiect: Then toucheth againe vpon the abuses & grosse partiality of the Sta∣tioners, acquiteth himselfe of seeking his owne profitt (to the publike preiudice,) as his Aduer∣saries vntruly affyrme: and demonstrateth his Pa∣tent to be neither Monopoly, as the Stationers al∣leage (& as some of their Patēts are) but rather a benifite. Pag. 24, &c. 5. He setteth downe the Stationers peremptery claime to all Authors labors: refuting a Lawyers foolish judgment passed on their behalfes. Instan∣ceth in what particulers they vsurpe larger Prero∣gatiues then they will allow the King: And then (haueing iust occasion) pointeth at their fraudulent & vnsufferable abusing of the people in their My∣stery of Booke selling. Pag. 29, &c. 6. He particularizeth în what vnciuell termes the Stationers vilifie his Hymnes: How vniustly they disparage his expressions: And how impu∣dently they vsually preferr & divulge those per∣nitious & impertinent things, whereby they them∣selues may receaue profitt. Pag. 33, &c.
7. He iustifies his expressions: Protesteth with what mind, what preparation, and with what Caueats he proceeded in that worke. And there withall mētioneth some of those difficulties which are in such a taske & speaketh somwhat cōcerning the metricall version of Dauids Psalmes now in vse. Pag. 35, &c. 8. He maintaines the lawfulnesse of vnderta∣king a worke of that nature, notwithstanding he is no profest Diuine, against those who obiect he hath intruded vpon the Diuine calling; & glanceth at the ignorance and envy of those Obiectors. P: 39, 9. He discouereth how presumptuously they haue countenanced their detraction and opposition, by pretending that the Lo: Archb: of Cant: and∣others are all affected to the said Hymnes & Grant. And it is made euident that they haue impudently abused the Lo: Archb: therein. Pag. 45▪ &c. 10. He giueth reason; for his translating and publishing the sōg of Salomō▪ in Lyrick verse. Setts downe the Stationers impious and scurrilous man∣ner of traducing it. Expresseth somewhat of that Songs comfortable vse, with what may be said in answeare to them who think it ought to be re∣strained, for feare of being misapplyed. And ha∣ueing spoken somewhat concerning his owne pro∣ceedings, submitteth all to censure. Pag 49, &c. 11. He displaies the Stationers demeanor to∣ward those who come to aske for his Booke. Setts
forth the quality of those whom they haue drawne to passe their censures against it. Shewes how wil∣fully the Kings iniunction, & his pious intent there∣in hath bene reiected: And what inconueniences are likly to follow their insolencyes, if order be not taken. Pag 63, &c. 12. He vpholds his Hymnes for the obseruable tymes, against the Stationers & those whom they haue stirred vp to oppose them: Offers them to strictest examination▪ Shewes his Christian sim∣plicity in cōposing thē; that they tend to the glory of God, and the furtherance of vniformity: That they were lawfully Authorized: That they are con∣sanant to the word of God, the Doctrine of the Ca∣tholike Church, and to all the lawes and ecclesiasti∣call Ordinances of this Realme. Pag. 66, &c. 13. He intimates that it is probable his Hymnes are scandalized by none but such as are ill affected to the gouernment of our Church. Shewes that his prefaces hath vindicated all our Solemnities from those imputations of popery, Schismaticks hath cast vpon them: Toucheth vpon the pious vseful∣nesse of the Churches Discipline: Illustrateth their impiety who seeke to disparage or abolish it, And specifieth in what places, & in what ridiculous manner the Stationers passe their virdicts vpon his booke. Pag. 69, &c: 14. He setteth downe how barbarously the Sta∣tioners seeke to disparage all his Hymnes by rea∣son
of that for S. Georges day: How vnchristianly they misinterpreted his pious & warrantable intētion in com∣posing that Hymne; & therevpon taketh occasiō to speake somewhat of the pious vse of that solemnity; of the most noble & most Christian order of S. George & the Patron thereof; to the honor of that institutiō, & in reproofe of the vulger & ignorant misconceits of his Reproouers. Pa. 76. 15. He humbly intreats that neither his youth, his cal∣ling, nor the vniust scandalls of his Aduersaries may pre∣iudice what he hath well done: She wes why his writings & Actions are exposed to more scandalls then vaniest inventions bring on their Authors; protesteth what it is that made him thus endeauor to maintain his reputation; & professeth some what of his hopes & Resolutiōs. p: 84. 16. He displaies the true condition of his aduersaries▪ by shewing how nere they paralell Dauids enimies, & that they haue giuen him iust occasiō to take vp in a lit∣teral sēce almost euery bitter cōplaine wherby the Psalmist hath expressed the cruelty of a malitious multitude. P. 87 17. He expostulatheth concerning that vnequall dea∣ling the world hath hitherto vsed towards him: And (taking it a little vnkindly that any of those who ought to cherish men in good employements, should do him iniu∣ry by a rash censure) Toucheth vpon some others who to∣gether with the Stationers haue iniuriously & causelesly detracted from his labors. Pag. 89. 18. He nominateth many of those perticuler iniuries offred him by the Stationers. He describeth alsoe the po∣wre, policy, & true condition of his opposers, with many of those dāgers, disadvātages, & incōueniences which their malice portend▪ And then shewes both how much he con∣temneth all they can bring to passe, & how he hopeth to conuert all their hate, mischeefes, & slanders; to his future profitt & commendation in their despight▪ Pag. 94.
19. He giues the reason of his hopes of preuailing; cōcicture Gods good purpose in suffring him to be afflicted by these Adversaries, & his other troubles; apologizeth for that ouermuch sharpnesse▪ which he hath seemed to vse; & makes it probable, that he hath no vncharitable intentiō in any thing which he hath expressed in this booke. p. 103. 20. He renounceth to haue any purpose to Disparage or defame either the whole Corporation of Stationers, or any particuler member thereof, & that no other may abuse this Discourse to that end; he shewes alsoe, how all the reprehensions therein expressed, may be applyed to those only who are guilty, & how euery man that is innocent, or sorry for his ouersight, may, if he himselfe please, be freed from all personall blame or scandall. Pag. 108. 21. To prevent their malice likwise, who would per∣happs apply this Discourse to the generall disparagment of the Stationers Mystery; he hath added the definition of an honest Stationer; & the true Character of his contra∣ry, whom he calleth a meere Stationer, & against whom, only, this booke is intended. Pag. 116. 22. He reconeth vp, some of those many inconueniences which the Vniuersities, the State, the whole Common∣wealth, & the Church of God suffers, by the Disorders among those whom hee calleth meere Stationers; but reser∣ueth their amplification to another Discourse, which he intendeth to publish if there be cause. Page 127. 23. And lastly (to shew he hah not aymed at the shame or ruine of any, but at their reformatiō only) he offers to dis∣couer a profitable remedy for what he hath foūd to be ami∣se; to the glory of God, the content of the King, the quiet of the State, the honor of learning, & to the credit & profit of the Stationers themselues. And these, amōg some other ac∣cidentall passages, are the cōtents of this Apology, p. 130.
To the most Reuerend Father in God. the Lo: Archb: o Canterbury &c. and to the Reuerend LLs. Bishops, & others; in the Conuocation house assembled. MOst Reuerent Fathers; Notwithstanding I ac∣knowledge my selfe vnworthie, that this Re∣uerend Assembly should from their more wighty affaires, turne their eyes, or inclyne their eares to my priuate Fortunes: Yet if those testimonies, which I haue already giuen of my true affection to the peace & prosperity of that Church and Common-wealth, of which you are members: or my promise of future indeaours, or your owne pious inclinations may de∣serue▪ so much for me▪ I humbly beseech your Reue∣rences, to receiue this following declaration, into your serious and christian considerations, and to ouchsafe respect thereunto, according to the piety becomming this Reuerent Assembly, and that rule of charity, which commaundeth al men (without excep∣tion) to be so inclyned towards others, as they desire others should bee affected towards them in the like necessities. For▪ most Reuerend Fathers, I am not ashamed to confesse that an extraordinary necessitie hath inuited me to interrupt you in this vnusuall manner. And yet mistake me not, I am not so necessitated, as be in doubt of falling into base want or to feare I can bee ouertaken with any inconuenience, from which I could not be deliuered without your commiseration,
but perhaps rather, God hath layd his hand on me by some affliction, that I might be constrayned to offer that vnto your considerations for my priuate ease, which I should neuer haue found opportunity to pre∣sent for the publike good, if oppressions had not pre∣pared me thereunto. Cammomile thriues not vnles it be trodden on; the plate must to the hammer before it wilbe in fashion: and such is our naturall corrupti∣on, and selfe loue, that till the sparkes touch our own houses, we can sleepe though the citie be on a flame. Nay, euen those who are grapes of the mysticall vine Iesus Christ, must bee crushed in the winepresse, or brused on the tongue, at the least, before they yeald any profitable nourishment. If it be so with me, though my particular smart hath giuen the occasion of this narration, somewhat may ere the conclusion, bee deliuered not impertinent to more generall con∣sideration. And once againe therfore I beseech your patience. About the time of the last Conuocation, I com∣posed a little Poeme, well knowen throughout this kingdome; wherin haueing to conscionable purposes, expressed such resolutions, as euery reasonable man should endeauour to entertayne. And hauing as op∣portunity was offered, glaunced also in generall tear∣mes at the reproofe of a few thinges of such nature as I feared might disparage or preiudice the Common∣wealth; some particulars, not then in season to bee medled withall, were at vnawares so neerely toucht vpon, that I vnhappily fell into the displeasure of the
State: and all my apparant good intentions were so mistaken by the aggrauations of some yll affected towards my indeauours, that I was shutt vp from the society of mankind. And as one vnworthy the cōpassi∣on vouchsafed to theeues and murderers, was neither permitted the vse of my penne, the accesse or sight of acquaintance, the allowance vsually afforded other close prisoners, nor meanes to send for necessa∣ries beefitting my present condition. By which meanes I was for many dayes compelled to feed on nothing but the coursest bread, and sometymes lockt vpp foure and twenty howers togeather, without so much as a dropp of water to coole my tongue. And beeing at the same tyme in one of the greatest extre∣mityes of sicknesse that was euer inflicted vpon my body, the helpe both of Phisition, and Apothecary was vnciuilly denied me. So that if God, had not by resolutions of the minde which he infused into mee, extraordinarily inabled me to wrestle with those, & such other aflictions as I was then exercised withall, I had beene dangerously and euerlastingly ouercome. But, of these vsages I cōplaine not; for, they are past: & He that made me, made me strong enough to des∣pise them. Nor doe I here mention them as accu∣sing the State of iniustice: God forbidd. For I assure my selfe my restraint was iust vntill such tyme as I had acquited my selfe of what was layd to my charg; Yea I assure myselfe the seuerity of my sufferings was vn knowne to that most honorable counsel which om∣mitted mee; and that more fauour should haue beene
shewed, if meanes had beene afforded mee to com∣plain; Because as soone as I had opportunity to ius∣tifie my honest intentions, and to giue reasons for my questionable expressions▪ I was restored to the com∣mon liberty; (as I perswade my selfe) both with the good fauour of the King, and of all those that re∣strayned mee. For, the greatest faulte which ouer I committed, confessed, or others coulde discouer in those writings; was this, that they fauoured a little more of Honesty then discretion. And verily should euery man publickely  for his indiscretions as I haue done, our prisons must be made larger then our streetes. The reasō then why I thus begin this discourse with relation of my past indurances, is to sharpen the dul∣nesse of my oratorie on the remembrance of those things, and to begett in your hearts the more feeling of that christian compuntion which they must en∣tertaine before this declaration, that I nowe intend wilbe of any force. And least I haue not yet deliuered enough in that kind, to stirre vp your regard, I will (vnder your fauours) proceede a little further in the discouery of my outward fortunes, before I propose what principally I doe desire this reuerend Assmbly should please to take notise of. May it please you then to vnderstand, that my punishment ended not with my imprisonment. For, before I had lycence to come abroad againe into the world, I was forced to expences so farre beyond my abillity, that ere I could be clearely discharged, I was
left many pounds worse then nothing: And to inioy but the name of liberty, was cast into a greater bon∣dage then before. Wherevpon, comming abroade againe into the worlde accompanyed thither with those affections which are natural to most men, I was loth (if it might conueniently be preuented) either to sinke belowe my ranke, or to liue at the mercy of a creditor. And therefore (haueing none of those helps, or trades, or shifts, which many others haue to releeue themselues withal) I hūbly peticioned the Kings most excellent Maiestie (not to be supplyed at his charge, or by any proiectment to the oppression of his people) but that according to the lawes of nature, I might enioy the benifit of some part of myne owne labours, by virtue of his Royall priuiledge. For, by an vniust custome (as most of your Reuerences well knowe) the Sta∣tioners haue so vsurped vpon the labours of all wri∣ters, that when they haue consumed their youth and fortunes in perfiting some laborious worke, those cruell Be-masters burne the poore Athenian bees for their hony, or else driue them from the best part thereof by their long practiced cunninge. Which to preuent, his Maiestie vouchsafed my reasonable re∣quest, with addition of voluntary fauour,  mine owne desire. For, before his warrant to Master At∣torny, he gratiously expressed his royall commnda∣tory allowance of my Booke, which I had presented him withall, peticioning his priuiledge for printing thereof. And both in the procuring of it, and in the
passing of his Graunt, I tooke no other course, then what I haue hitherto vsed, and purpose to vse for euer in all myne affaires: that is; neither directly, nor indi∣rectly to solicite any man to fauour me, otherwise thē he shalbe moued by his owne conscience, and the iustnes of my cause, when I haue made means to dis∣couer the true state thereof to his vnderstanding. Nor was this manner of proceeding any hindrance vnto me; for my Graunt neuerthelesse passed his Ma∣iesties hand and euery office after (where many times lets are cast in the way) with so much vnusual fauour, and such good wishes, besides expedition, that I was greatly incouraged to ingage my credit almost three hundred poundes further thereupon; to imprint, and diuoulge my Booke, according to his Maiesties Let∣ters Pattents. All which expence, together with my paynefull endeauours, are now in danger to be lost, to the ouerthrow of my new hopes; and (which is my greater griefe) to the hinderance of those my friends, who haue aduentured their goods in my sinking ves∣sell. For, some of the Booke-sellers (who like the Siluer Smithes of Ephesus, preferr their vniust gaine before conscience, or piety) though their Corporation hath much profited, and is daily inriched by my former la∣bors, though they may haue benifit by this in questiō; though they are not ignorant of the greate troubles, and hinderances I haue receiued by that which did the more aduantage them; though they are priuie to my large expence in this worke, and howe much it
wilbe my vndoing to the world-ward, if it succeede not; though they knowe it fauoured both by his Ma∣iestie and those also who are esteemed amonge the most deuout, and learned of the Clergie; though their owne consciences (whatsoeuer they pretend) tel them it tendes to the glory of God, and the furtherance of true deuotion, without preiudice to any particuler man; yea, though I haue orderly proceeded in recei∣uing the benefit of mine own labours, without taking away the least part, either of their, or of any other mans iust profit: I say, notwithstanding all this, they indeauoured, without all compassion, or honest con∣sideration, not only to procure the ouerthrow of my Graunt, and with it (so farr as in them lyes) my ruin al∣so, because I would not let them haue the benifit ther∣of at their owne rates: But haue publikly, and vniustly slaundered me, as one that had proiected, and procu∣red a priuiledge to the generall greeuance of the sub∣iect; which thing I vtterly abhorr. Nor haue they thought it sufficient ingratfully to seeke the compassing of their owne ends, by the ru∣ine both of his state and good name, whose former studies haue beene a meanes to helpe the raysing of them; But they will disparage the Kinges power and iudgment, rather then fayle. Nay, to shew them∣selues suparlatiuely dareing to attempt any thinge to further their designes, there be of that generation, (I beseech your patience, if passion may seeme to carrye me away: tis in the cause of God) I say there be some of them, who spare not God himself, and his religion:
but (AVDAX OMNIA PERPETI) haue blasphemed the sacred expressions of the holy Spirit, and vnchristianly vilified that Booke which supreame Authority hath commaunded to be published for the reuerence and practice of deuotion. And because in doing this, they would not seeme so prophane, as to make their gaine, the cause of their opposition, nor be thought so heathenish as to call out for Diana with their types at Ephesus, they crye, TEMPLVM DOMINI, the Temple of the Lord; and craftily cullor their ayme with the cloak of sanctity, and zeale of true religion. Yea they are growen so malepert, and arrogant, that being but the pedlers of Books, and for the most part ignorant fellowes (acquainted with no∣thing concerning them, but their names, and pryses) they neuerthelesse dare take vpon them the miscen∣suring of any mans labours though allowed by autho∣rity. In this kind, among diuers others, I at this present suffer their inisusag in a high measure. And in me they haue abused the King, the State, and the whole Hie∣rarchy; Yea God, and religiō. Hauing therfore propo∣posed their iniuries of other natures, to the considera∣tion of them, vnto whome properly they belong: I am bould to appeale yet hither, that I may obtaine the cē∣sure of this most reuerend Conuocation, concerning those particulers which are most genuine to be deter∣mined of in this place I doe protest vnfaynedly, that I will deliuer no∣thing in my relation, which proceedes from spleene or
malice: nor expresse my selfe in more sharpe tearmes, then my consciēce shal witnes charitable, and necessa∣ry, to let your Reuerences vnderstand the height of those iniurys, that I am to complayne on; and the liue∣ly character of those fellowes, whose inignityes the whole common-wealth of learning suffers vnder. For they haue by their sly insinuations, and honest preten∣ces so farre screwed themselues into the good opinion of many Reuerend, and Honorable parsonages, and so strengthened themselues through the abuse of their fauours; that my fingers will not serue, and therefore pardon me if in a case of necessity, I somtime vse my teeth to plucke those rusty nayles, forth of the faire table of their yll deserued esteeme. Neuerthelesse conceiue me not, I pray you, that I goe about to lay a generall ymputation vp n all S∣tioners. For, to disparage the whole profession, were an act neither becomming an honest mn to doe, no a prudent Auditory to suffer. Their mystery (as thy not vntruly tearme it) consists of diuers Trades incor∣porated together: as Printers, Booke-bins▪ Clas∣makers, Bookesellers. &c. And of all these b some honest men, who to my knowledg are so greeued be∣ing ouer-born by the notorious oppressions and pro∣ceedings of the rest, that they haue wished themselues of some other calling. The Printers mystery, is ingeni∣ous, paynefull, and profitable: the Booke-bin ∣cessary; the Claspemakers vsefull. And in  r∣tailer of bookes, commonly  a Booke-seller, is a Trade, which being wel gouerned▪  ∣in
certaine bounds, might become somewhat seruice∣able to the rest. But as it is now (for the most part abu∣sed) the Bookeseller hath not onely made the Printer, the Binder, and the Claspmaker a slaue to him: but hath brought Authors, yea the whole Common∣wealth, and all the liberall Sciences into bondage. For he makes all professers of Art, labour for his profit, at his owne price, and vtters it to the Common-wealth in such fashion, and at those rates, which please him∣selfe. In-somuch, that I wonder so insupportable, and so impertinent a thing, as a meere Book-seller (consider∣ing what the profession is become now) was euer per∣mitted to grow vp in the Commonwealth. For, many of our moderne booke-sellers, are but needelesse ex∣crements, or rather vermine, who beeing ingendred by the sweat of schollers, Printers, and book-binders, doe (as wormes in timber, or like the generation of vi∣pers) deuour those that bred them. While they did like fleas, but sucke now and then a dropp of the writers blood from him, and skipp off when he found himselfe diseased, it was somwhat tollerable: but since they be∣gan to feed on him, like the third plague of AEGIPT without remoouing, and to lay clayme to each Au∣thors labours, as if they had beene purposely brought vpp to studye for their mayntenance. Yea, since they take vppon them to publish bookes contriued, alter∣ed, and mangled at their owne pleasurs, without con∣sent of the writers: nay and to change the name some∣yms, both of booke and Author (after they haue been
ymprinted) and all for their owne priuate lucre; like traders in stuffes, who vnder new names, many tymes shift off their old wares. And yet further also, to dis∣parage, or censure maliciously, both writers, and their labours, and so vsurp vnto themselues the high autho∣rity of the Church and State. I say these things consi∣dered, it is high tyme to seeke a remedie, and a remedy (I hope) wil shortly be prouided in due place. In the meane tyme I humbly beseech this reuerend Assēbly, to take an assay of thē in my particular cause, and in their manner of dealing with me touching that booke before mentioned, & lately priuiledged by his Maiesty. For, they haueing very vnchristianlik tradu∣ced both my selfe, and it, I will (according to my duty) giue vnto your Reuerences, a true account of all my principall proceedings, and intentions, and my reasons against their fayned obiections; together with what was by authority determyned by that work. And then leaue my selfe, and it, vnto your Reuerences, to ap∣proue, alter, amend, or condemne, as you shall thinke fytt. wherein I will rest satisfied, although it be to th ouerthrowing both of my credit and estate. First then, may it please you to vnderstand, that be∣ing from my childhood in loue with the study of Di∣uinity (though I haue yet, neither knowledge, nor o∣pinion in my selfe worthy of so high a calling) I ym∣ployed that naturall faculty which God had giuen me vpon such expressions, as sauouring of honesty, and re∣ligion, won me the generall good opinyon of honest men. And though I was so young euery way, that, I first
began to write, and then to learne (as the childishnesse, and indiscretions of my Poems discouer) yet they pro∣cured me much respect, and applause. which well con sidering on, and weighing my knowne insufficiencies, the slendernesse of my performances, and my little meanes of knowledge, together with what base en∣tertaynment lynes of that nature vsually finde in the world: I began to parswade my selfe, that God had ex∣traordinarily gyuen me this vnlooked for esteeme to some better purpose, then eyther that I should dispyse the same, or glory in it to a vayne end. And that which made me giue most fayth to such an apprehensiō, was this: I obserued, that the good repute which I had at∣tayned vnto, neuer gott me any outward profit, nor euer be fryended mee in the compassing of any thinge for my pleasure. Wherevpon, least God should turne his blessing to a curse, and my reputation to my shame, if I sought not what way to ymploy it, vnto his prayse: and ob∣seruing withall, that we make vse of the most excelent expressions of the holy ghost in rude, and barbarous Numbers, whilst our own wanton fancies were payn∣ted, & trymed out in the most moouing languag. Me thought it fared with vs, as with those agaynst whom the Prophet Hosea complayned, that dwelt in sieled houses themselues, whilst the Temple of God lay wast And therefore seeing no other to vndertake the same, I spent about three yeeres, to prepare my self▪ for such a I aske, and then proceeded with the translation of the Psalmes according to that ability God had giuen
me. But before I had halfe ended them I heard that one of much better sufficiency had made a long, and happy progresse into that worke: and therevpon in expecta∣tion of his more able performance delayed to proceed with what I had begunne, vntill such tyme as I was in∣formed that the other was by the multiplicity of weighty Affayres compelled to giue ouer his labori∣ous Attempt. And then▪ I thought my selfe engaged a∣gayne, to proceede. Now, dureing the tyme of intermission as aforesaid, that I might not want an imployment answereable to my first intention I was by some of the Clergy (who I hope were moqued there unto by the Spirit of God) inuied to collect and translate into Lyricke-verse▪ the Hymnes dispersed▪ throughout the Canonicall Scrip∣tures. Which I imbraced with much readynes, & per∣soid willingly; adding vnto thē such other pards of Holy-writt, Creeds and Songs, as I conceiued pro∣per and necessary to be sunge. And, because some can well enough allowe an end∣lesse variety of foolish Songs and ballads, ēding to the  of the flesh and the deuill, yet be apt to say, wee  Psalmes, and Songes enough in this kind already. And so  also, as I haué heard others (who pre∣sume much on their own fondnes in ) in no∣rāt by demaūd, what ye Sōgs of Mos, Debrah,  & sch like, are pertiēt vnto vs. To let those, &  vnlerned, & ignorant men know, that the Holy Ghost  none of the Canonicall Scriptures tyll these tymes of  in  haue in a short Proeme (∣ding
to the opinion of the true Church) declared: that those Scriptures, are euery whitt as vsefull and necessa∣ry for vs, as for them in whose tymes, and for whose particuler occasiōs they were first written. And before each Hymne, I haue presixed also a briefe preface, to shew in what sence the congregation, or men may priuately, and ought to repeat them. Moreouer, hauing with griefe obserued, how the Church of England (lyke Iesus Christ crucified betwen two theeues) is traduced, and abused between Papists, and Schismatiks: the one falsly charging her with want of order, and christian discipline; the other as vniustly vpbrayding her with popish and superstitious obser∣uations. And hauing experience, that there are great multitudes of wel affected people, easie to be led aside for company into the later ouersight, through want of some to informe them better, who would with smal a∣do be conformable, if they had meanes of instruction concerning their particuler mistakings. Yea, many of these being wel inclyned towards me; and I not know∣ing which way to vse that affection better, then to make it a meanes of increasing christian vnity and de∣votion. I resolued to publish some what, to stirre vp in them that obedience and reuerence, which they ought to expresse towardes the pious ordinances of the Church: and if I lost any mans esteem for so consciona∣ble an attempt; I assured my self I lost nothing but what was neuer worth the sauing. To that end therefore (hauing receiued incourag∣ment and taken aduice, from some of the most deuout,
and learned of our Deuines) I composed certayne Hymnes, and Songes, appropriated to the ordynary publike occasions of our Congregations, and to those tymes obseruable by commaund of the Churche, and by the authority of the State; that soe God might bee gloryfied in euery Solempnity, and those tymes not so much prophaned and contemned, as heretofore. And, because I had heard some Teachers in Israel professe themselues ignorant concerning the vse of the Holy-days obserued in our Church, I tooke the more paines (though not presuming to teach them) to ex∣presse before ye proper Song of euery obseruable Time or other occasion, their religious vse; briefly, & in such a manner, as I hope euery reasonable capacity may thereby vnderstand, our Churches discipline in that poynt, to be farr from a needles, popish, or superstious Tradition. Moreouer, that I might not trouble any mans cha∣rity or deuotion in the vse of these Hymnes, I was as watchful, as possible I could be, to make all my expres∣sions free from bitternesse, or touches of those contro∣uersies, which might giue offence to the weake mem∣bers of our Church. And God so prosper me, as I was and am cleare, from meaning to grieue, offend, or dis∣content the soules, or consciences of any. Thus with a good purpose, I began and finished those Hymns and Songes, which make vp the Booke, called the HYMNES and SONGS OF THE CHVRCH. So named, not for that I would haue them accounted part of our Lyturgie (as I haue de∣liuered
to his Maiestie in my Epistle) but because they do for the most part, treate of such particulers▪ as con∣cerne ye whole Church of God. And this is that booke▪ for which his Maiestie vouchsafed mee the priuiledge before mentioned, and which he pyously & gratiously commaunded to bee annexed to the singing Psalmes, that it might be ye more generally & the more conue∣niētly divulgd amōg his subiects for their instruction. And indeed, by that means, those poore people (whose Pastors suffer them or cause them to be misin∣formed concerning that poynt) shall carry about with them in their most vsesual book, what may at one tyme or other open their vnderstandinges to perceiue their errour. This is that Booke, for which I (was euer worst vsed for my best intentions) suffer more, then for all my for∣mer in discretiōs; & for which, I haue receiued those af∣rōts▪ that may wel be rāked amōg my greatest iniuries; notwithstanding it had besides the ordinary allow∣ance of Authority▪ the particular approbation, and cō∣mendation both of the King himselfe, and of many the members of this most reuerend Conuocation. Yea, this is that Booke, for which the Com∣mon wealth of Stationers ( Tyrrany vnheard of in former ages) desire to make me as odious▪ as if I had ympolyed my whole study to the oppression of this weale publike, or to the subuertiō of religion and for which they haue persued me with such violence and clamor as hath seldome or neuer been exampled in any cause.
Heare therefore (I humbly beseech you) their parti∣culer obiections; and for his sake (who hath honoured you with high places, and holy callings) be you Iudges betweene mee and them. For though in regard of my selfe, I should take no more notice of their malicious wronges, then the Nightingale in a Sommers night, doth of the barking of dogges, & whooping of Owles: but sing on without distemper, to the contentment of myne owne soule. Yet since their clamorous noise hin∣ders others from heareing the voice of the Charmer, and through my sides, wounds the credit of Authority, and may parhapps hereafter incourage them presump∣tuously, for the bringing in of greater inconueniences: I desire their dealing with me, may be taken notice of by this most Reuerend Assembly. To which end, I haue here sett downe, what they cry out, to the disparage∣ment of me, and my booke, instead of dispersing it a∣broad according to his Maiesties royall commaund. Some giue out that my booke containes nothing but a few needles Songs: which I composed, and gott priuiledged by Patent, meerely for my priuate benifit, to the oppression of the Common-wealth. Some discourage those that come to buy the booke: other whiles denying that it is to be had, & other while peremptorily protesting against the selling of it, or dis∣gracefully telling such as enquire after the same, that the worke is Ridiculous, and that it better beitted me to medle with my poetry, then to be ampering with diuinity. with such like other wordes of contempt. Other some there be, who dare auerr that my▪ Lords
Grace of Canterbury, with many of the Bishopps, and best Deuines, doe much dislike and oppose the saide Hymnes. Others againe buze in the peoples eares that the Hymnes for the Obseruable tymes are popish, and tending to the maintenance of superstition. And some there be among them, who (in such terms of ribaldry, as no Stewes can goe beyond them) blas∣phemingly affirme, that the CANTICLES are obscene, and not fitt to be divulged in Song, or Verse. Yea, many other obiections they make, and cast out diuers aspersions, aswell vpon the Author, as on his booke, to bring both into contempt. The maliciousnes, and superfluity of wickednes, appearing in these their euill speakeinges, your Reue∣rences can easily perceiue: Neuerthelesse, forasmuch as there lye Padds in the straw, which the best iudge∣ments cannot discerne at the first sight. And seeing I haue been openly traduced, as vnbeseemingly intru∣ding vpō the deuine calling, and stand now accused as one that hath hatched and brought forth such thinges for my temporall aduantage, which are offensiue, and scandalous to ye Church, and consciences of good mē; which I would not willingly be guilty, of for all the world (by your patience) I do hereby giue an account of my action now in question, hopeing that it shalbe to the satisfying of this reuerend Assemblie, the con∣tentment of such as haue vpon misreport been offen∣ded, & to the shame of myne opposers. And I trust al∣so it shall discouer, that although there may be founde
indiscretions, or ouersights in my vndertaking, yet I haue deserued fairer vsage, my aduersaries lesse credit, and my studies better entertainement then heretofore they haue found. To keepe my selfe the closer to that which shalbee pertinent to this Apology, I wil make these particuler obiections my Theames, which I haue repeated: nor will I bring any other authorities to make good my defence, then the true relations, of what hath ben don, and such plaine arguments as mine owne reason shal∣be able to frame. For, if this discourse come to the veiw of your Reuerēces only, you wel enough know, what the Recordes of Antiquity can afford to these purposes. And if it happen among those only of meane capacity such playne expressions, as I purpose to vse, will acquire most credite among them. And first, whereas they giue out, that my Hymnes are needles; they doe not only thereby contemne, and slight my paynes but lay an imputation of vanity vpon the wisedome of the Holy Ghost also. For a greate part of them are parcells of the Canonicall Scriptures: originally Songe. And, to say any fragment thereof, were needeles, is in effect, to deminish from Gods words, vpon which followes a heauie curse. God deserues euery day to be praysed of vs for deliuering his Church, by the ouerthrow of Pharoah in the redd Sea, as much as he did in the very moment of their deliuerance. And the song of Moses then vsed, doth in each particuler, as properly concerne euery christiā Congregation, as it did the Iewes themselues
vpon that occasion. For, Gods mercy shewed to v in our baptisme, (and the spirituall ouerthrowe of the deuill, pursuing vs with an host of sinnes, and tempta∣tions,) is in myne opinion more effectually exprest to a spirituall vnderstanding, by apprehending the acti∣ons and circumstances of that temporall deliuerance, thē it could be by ye power of any words, or by any other ordinary means; except by contēplating of that most excellēt material obiect, the Sacrament of Bap∣tisme it selfe, of which the other was but a type. In like manner, all the other Canonicall Hymnes do admyrablie help towards Gods euerlasting mer∣cies, and for illustrating those particuler Misteries of our christian fayth, which they did typically and pro∣phetically foreshew. Yea, they are part of the prophe∣ticall witnes, as the Hymnes of the newe Testament are patt of the Euangelicall witnes, of our interest in Christ Iesus. And verily, the late neglect of their appli∣cation, in our christian mysteries, hath not onely much iniured, one of the two great witnesses of our saluati∣on: but giuen occasion also, that many vnsound pro∣fessors haue corrupted them; euen to the bringing in of diuers Iewish and Talmudicall fancies, to the feare∣full distraction of weake people. But, were not those Hymnes necessary in respect of the variety of their arguments, yet the variety of expression, were somwhat needful, although the mat∣ter were the same. For, as the seuerall dressings of one sort of meate, maks it diuersly agreeable to the pallats, and stomackes of men: so the various manner of things
deuered in holy Scripturs, makes them applicable to our vnderstandings; and what in one kind of deliuery seems harsh, or obscure, in another kind is acceptable, and more easily apprehended. That which is easie to you, is hard parhapps to me: and what may be thought an impropriety to some great iudgments, doth many times most properly insinuate the speakers meaning vnto them of weaker capacityes. In obseruing the seeming differences amonge▪ In∣terpreters in their trāslatiōs of these words: NASSE∣CHV BAR, (part of ye last verse of the secōd psalme) I conceiued thereby, that the profitable vse of variety, was very apparant. For, the translation most agreeable to the original Hebrew renders ye words: OSCVLE∣MINI FILIVM. the Septuagint, APPREHEN∣DITE DISCIPLINAM and Saint-Hierome, ADORATE PVRE: which beeing all or∣thodoxe Interpretations, and agreeable both to the scope of the Psalme, and that which the wordes origi∣nally beare, and all standing well together also with the Analogie of fayth: this variety made me conceiue in my meditations therevpon, that the holy ghost had deliuered his meaning in these triple Equivokes, that they might the more properly▪ bee accomodated to the seuerall States, and ages of his Church. For (pardon me if I erre) me thought in saying, OSCVLEMINI FILIVM (which was according to the genuin, & most cōmon vnderstāding of y• original words among the Hebrewes) I apprehended that the Holy host exhorted his Church among the Iewes to homage and worshipp that Sonne of God, whoe
was diuers wais made māifest vnto thē to be their true King. And APPREHENDITE DISCIPLI∣NAM, (being according to that Translation, which I am perswaded God himselfe extraordinarily proui∣ded to reueale his truth by vnto ye Heathen) I concei∣ued that ye Holy Ghost perswaded his Church among the Gentiles. (who yet knew not Christ their Kinge) to imbrace the knowledge of him. And ADORA∣TE PVRE (beeing the first transation that in latine the Church publikly receiued, and about that tyme the true worship of Iesus Christ begining to be adulterated) my mynd gaue me (that psalme being a manifest prophecie concerning the kingedome of Christ to the worlds end) it might be, that God did by that interpretation perswad those peruerters of his Truth to repentance, who should disturbe the peace and quiet of his kingdome in these later tymes. But I stand not so thereupon as if I could not submitt to better iudgments: Sure I am this medita∣tion is no way repugnant to the Catholike verity; and howsoeuer it shalbe approoued, it serues wel enough to my purpose for demonstratinge, that the variety, or different expressions of sacred things, are not need∣les, but do afford aduantage vnto those of meane ca∣pacityes, if they meditate vpon them with reuerence and humility. If it be but to awaken our dullnes, and take away our wearisomenesse in holy duties, variety is needful. For, flesh and bloud (as we finde by daily experience) loaths those things, wherwithal they are naturally best
plesed, if they be to frequēt: how much more tedious then will those things be vnto vs, which are perpetu∣ally iterated in the same words, being naturally vn∣pleasing to a carnall eare? Since god in mercie hath prouided and permitted vs meanes to assist our weak∣nesses, let not such as are strong enough to be with∣out them, condemne the vse of such helpes in those, whoe beeing not so able, must haue their affections weaned by degrees from their childish inclynati∣ons. We see the Flesh and the Deuill, hauing for their seruice thousands of vaine Songes, and prophane bal∣lads stored vp in ye Stationers warhouses, haue neuer∣thelesse, many Muses perpetually ymployed for the composing of new Straynes; And that many hundred pounds are yearely consumed vpon them, to the in∣riching of those marchants; to the shame of our pro∣fession, to the corruption of youth, and to the building vp of the kingdome of sinne, and Satan: as it is well knowne, and obserued by many of good note in this reuerend assembly. Yet there haueing been for diuers ages together, but so many Hymnes composed, and published, as make in some impressiōs not aboue two sheets and a halfe of paper (for the reuerence and prac∣tice of Deuotion vnto the honour of god) they are censured impertinent; malitiously exclaymed on; vio∣lentely opposed; and the Author of them seeking for the needefull hyre of his labour, (but his due, and what strangers should haue been suffered to make thereof) is publikely accused as a man coueteously hunting af∣ter
the world, and an iniurious oppressor of the com∣mon-wealth. Oh god! how partiall are all men bewitched with selfe-loue, in the prosecution of their base ends! and how vncharitable in their censunes! For the Stationers haue not onely labored to depriue me of the benefit due to my labours, but also to make me appeare with∣out Christianity in my intentions▪ by affirming that I sought myne owne benyfit onely, in composing my booke of Hymns, & in publishing it according to the kinges commaund. My Poem last deuulged was sayd to haue been written in myne own prayse▪ & the Hymnes for my priuate profit; I wonder to what pur∣pose, y• next booke I write shalbe cōposed. Verily, if I be not altogether forgetful of myne owne thoughtes, o too apt to beleeue ouerwell of my selfe (as parhaps I am) my principall ayme was the glory of God in both those vndertakinges. Neuerthelesse, truth is, I am so inclyned to the corruptions of other men, that although I did what I was able, yet was I not al∣together soe free from outward hopes (as I ought to haue been) in those works. My weake fortunes, my troubles, and the charg∣ablenesse of a studie that bringes with it no outward supplie, put me vnto a kinde of necessity to cast my thoughts a side vnto woldly respects but I haue siue been sory for it vpon better consideration. And as a iust reward for my too earnest lookeing after vaine ho, I doe now accept of my present trouble, that outwardly is like to impouerish me. And the tyme
thereof, drawes me the more heedfully to consider it, being iust about that season, wherein I expected to reape some contentment in the fruition of my labors and expences. God graunt this experience may inrich me another way, and settle my hopes vpon more cer∣taine thinges and that those who accuse mee of this imperfection, may examine their owne heartes, and (if they finde them guilty of the like infirmity) learne by myne example to confesse their errour. And my pray∣er shalbe, that we both may more directly seeke gods glory in our vndertakings. But why should I be the man more accused, the all others, for seekeing after the iust hyre of my labours? am I the only One guilty of studyinge myne owne profit, in the course of my paynefull endeuours for religious ende? I would to god I were, and that no man liuing saue I, were so wicked, as to make his owne glory, and inriching, the end and scope of his christian diligence. For doubtles, such an vniuersall pi∣etie, would be a powerfull meanes of drawing me to repentance. But I beleeue, there be so fewe, who can with the Apostle cleare himselfe herein, that if none might be permitted to throwe at me the stone of re∣proofe, but only they who are free from this weaknes, I may walke from Saint Michaels Mount in Cornwal to Douer & from thence euē through our mitropoli∣tan Churches, to the farthest Northeren Isles without touch of exception. And whereas they obiect I haue compassed a prive∣ledge to the publike greeuance; your Reuerences shal
ceiue how innocent I am from giuing cause of such an imputation, if you please to consider the circum∣stances of his Maiesties Grant with his pyous intenti∣on, and my carriage in the procuring and execution of it. For, I did not, as some of the Stationers haue done, in the name of many, and by pretending the reliefe of the poore (whome they may be prooued therby to oppresse) monopolize the principall bookes of Sale within this Realme (euen those wherein the whole cō∣monwealth haue a inst interest) which is really one of those Monopoes that our State abhores. But hauing composed a new Booke, which no man could claime a share in, while it remayned myne owne, and in mine owne power to make publike or no; & proposing the same to his Maiestie, briefly and plainely, without pre∣tēce of any by-respect) I obtayned a free and gratious graunt to make such benifit thereof as vsually hereto∣fore in like cases, his Maiestie hath vouchsafed vnto o∣thers: yea such as the Stationers would haue made of it without a priueledge if so be I had left it in their power. Nor can any disaduantage come to the Common∣wealth thereby, seeing the price is lymited to be such as▪ themselues sell bookes for, like chargeable of the same kind. Besides, no mans trade or ymploy∣ment, is therby vsurped vpon, hindred, or taken away: but many are rather sett on worke in seuerall professi∣ons, more then before. Insomuch that there can be no publike grieuance truely named or probably preten∣ded which that priuiledge is cause of: except it bee a
griefe to some fewe Idle drones, to behould the labo∣rious lyving vpon the sweate of their owne browes. Indeed The Booke-sellers do peremptorily chal∣leng an interest in euery mans labour of this kind; and a worshipfull Lawyer was lately pleased on their be∣halfe to say, that the benifite arisinge from the sale of bookes, was their ancient, and lawfull birthright. But if his Masterships Iudgement be noe better in other cases, I hope to blesse my selfe from his opinions. For vnlesse he can proue, the Author hath sould them his birth-right (as often he doth, for lesse then a messe of pottage) he being the elder brother, the right first (by his owne lawe that he professes) falleth vnto him. And there are other heires (but of a collaterall lyne) the Printer, and Booke-binder that clayme iust title bee∣fore the booke-seller: at least-wise may in Gauile∣kind be coheires with him; yea indeed, the meanest of them doubly deserues the better right. But it may bee our learned Counseller, was a kentish man, where in some place, the yongest brother inherites by custome of Borough English, and so thought perhapps that the like teneur might be peculier vnto the Booke-sellers trade. Therefore as I am willing, his ignorance should excuse him, so I hope, all Authors shalbe excused, and and vnblame worthy, if hauing their proper rightes in∣croched vpon, they seeke repossession by the royall power. To that purpose is my priueledge; which the Sati∣oners haue not onely called in question before the
high Court of Parlament (whose Censure I shall bee ready to abide with good contentment) but by many clamors, and by a multytud of papers in print al∣so, scandalized the Kinges Grauntas, an oppression; and cast vpon me the vniust imputation of a base Mo∣nopolist: wheras I doubt not but I shalbe able to proue that his Maiestie hath vouchsafed me nothing, but what was, IVS REGALE, and in his Lawfull power to conferr; and that I enioy nothing by vertue of the Priueledge he graunted me, but what I am honestly capable to receiue. For, yf his Maiestie hath not a le∣gall power to confirme vnto me that which is natu∣rally myne own, By what right then, doe they and o∣thers enioy priueledges for those books wherein eue∣ry mā hath as good property as they▪ Or if his Maiesty hath not Authority to commaund the addition of a fewe leaues (for Gods glory, and the peoples edificati∣on) to such a booke, as hath allowance from the Prerogatiue Royall onely; Then, either the Stationers are very presumptious, in anexing the singing Psalmes and Robert Wisdomes Songs to the Bible and booke of Common prayer, at their owne pleasures, and for their owne profit: Or els their Prerogatiue is more ab∣solute then the Kings. For, the Stationers doe not onely reape the Bene∣fit of diuers books by vertue of his Maiesties Graunts, in such wise as the same is vouchsafed vnto me, but in a farr larger manner, and (acording as they execut thē) to the publkie iniury many waies. Yea, by the lawes and Orders of their Corporation, they can and do setle
vpon the particuler members thereof, a prpetuall in∣terest in such Bookes as are Registred by them at their Hall, in their seueral Names: and are secured in taking the ful benefit of those books, better then any Author can be by vertue of the Kings Grant, notwithstanding their first Coppies were purloyned from the true ow∣ner, or imprinted without his leaue. Moreouer, they annexe Additions to bookes for∣merly imprinted, and increase the pryses of them ac∣cordingly, though y• matter be altogither impertinēt. And yet if the King do but conferr vpon some Author the sole printing of a tenth part of his owne labours, (which he might stil haue reserued in his owne power) Or but please (for the Reuerence and practise of deuo∣tion) to commaund the addition of a fewe leaues to some booke authorized by the State onely: they im∣mediately breake out into an vproare, as if the Kinge had dealt vniustly with them; As if the Author had cō∣mitted Sacriledge: and as if the Common-wealth had beene ready to sinke vnder the weight of that bur∣then. Good God! how many dung-botes full of fruitles Volumnes doe they yearely foyst vpon his Maiesties subiectes, by lying Titles, insinuations, and disparaging of more profitable Books! how many hundred reames of foolish prophane and sensles Ballads do they quar∣terly disperse abroade? And howe many thousande poundes doe they yearely picke out of the purses of ignorant people, who refer the Choyce of their books to the discreations and honesties of these men! by that
meanes ridding their warehouses from heapes of trasla and refuse, which might els haue layne by the walles till the Ratts had eaten it? how vnconscionably is the Subiect by these vsages robbed both of his mony and tyme? how often in stead of being bettered, are their manners corrupted and their affections drawne away by lewd and wanton Poemes? how vnchristianly is their loyalty somtyme shakē by seditious Pamphlets? Yea, how dāgerously is their faith & religiō peruerted by those many hereticall and schismaticall Treatises, which they from tyme to time secretly or openly dis∣perse through his Maiesties Dominyons. How vnfortunate am I (as some thinke) that haue∣ing performed a good worke; doe neuertheles heare it exclaimed vpon as a friuelous labour, and stand accu∣sed for oppressing the people (because a fewe Hymnes contayning the prayses of God are commaunded to bee divulged the most conuenient way) whilst such abuses as these afore mentioned, and many of a higher nature, may be winked at in my Ac∣cusers: Yet, I say rather, how happy am I & how much bound to praise Gods mercie, who couers the multi∣tudes of my transgressions and still bringes me into publike question for such Actions onely, as shall vpon Tryall become myne honor, and to the shame of my Traducers. For, I am confident that I shal in due time be deliuered from that, and from all other scandalous imputations which the world hath layd to my charg. And therefore whether it be now or hereafter, I am indifferent; and place such assurance in gods loue that
I can stay his leasure. I procured the Kinges Graunt (being the possibili∣ty of a temporall blessing) by moouing for it, where I ought, and as I ought to seeke the same, without en∣treating any mans furtherāce; and if it be not in euery perticuler iust and conuenient, that I should enioy the same; yt shall goe, and I wil venture an vtter vndoeing rather then make vse of any mans friendship to detain it. For, God (who hath hitherro prouided for me in such a manner as best befitted both my temporall and spirituall Condition) will I knowe, continue his pro∣uident care of me; while I can haue grace to be thank∣full, and retayne the resolution to doe my lawfull en∣deauour. Howsoeuer (let the worlde conceit of mee as it pleaseth) I scorne to enioy my lyfe, much more any priueledge to the common preiudice: and am a∣ble to demonstrate (as shall hereafter appeare) that my booke and the Kinges Graunt haue beene maliti∣ously traduced without cause. Yet, the Stationers haue not only scandalized the sayde graunt vniustly, and layde the imputation of impertinencie to the Booke of Hymnes without cause; but feareing (as it seems) lest their publication would discōuer their false dealing, and gayne me and my labour some good approbation in spight of their mallice; They haue (as I sayd before) practised also, or rather conspired, as much as in them lyes, to hinder the lawful sale of my Booke. For, they prouide them not in their shoppes as they are commaunded by Au∣thority, nor furnish themselues with those as with o∣ther
books, notwithstanding they may take them vp∣on trust, and make profitt of them before payment is required at their hands, being content somewhat to hinder themselues that they may disaduantage me. And to excuse this iniury they giue out, contrary to their owne knowledges, that if they take my bookes from me, none will fetch them out of their handes, which they falsly pretend, meerely to dispariage that which I hope they shall neuer be able to bring out of credit, tyl they haue lost their owne. For, they are dai∣ly so much enquired after, that had the Booke-sellers preferred them to sale as they would haue done if the coppie had been their owne, twenty thousand might haue been dispersed, long ere this tyme. Yea if they had either any loyal respect to the Kings pyous com∣maund; or loue to the practise of Deuotion, or but that humanity which is to be found among Infidells; they might haue deulged a hundred in place of euery ten which are yet dispersed. For, though fewe knowe where to get the sayd Hymnes, because they are sel∣dome to be had amonge the Booke-sellers; yet thou∣sandes of them haue beene bought vp by gentlemen and others, whoe (hauing enquired out, with much difficulty, where to finde them) report to mee howe much I am abused amonge the Stationers, and how hardly they cann forbeare from vsing them vnciuilly that come to aske for my Booke: with diuers other particular Discourtesies. But because those vsages doe demonstrate their owne euill disposition rather then disparage the said
Booke; I wil omitt to perticularize those many dis∣courtesies which I am that way offered, and proceed to answere such other obiections as they and their a∣betters haue framed to bring both my Hymnes and me, into contempt. And first, they obiect (forsooth) that they are not worthy to be annexed with their Psalmes in meeter, in respect of that insufficiency which they haue dis∣couered in my expressions. For, so harsh and impro∣per do my lynes appeare to these iuditious censurers, and their chaplins; that some compare them to DOD the fillkemans late ridiculous translation of the Psalmes, which was by authority worthily condem∣ned to the fire. Some tearme them in scorne▪ WI∣THERS SONNETS; and some, among them, the better to expresse what opinion they haue of their pi∣ous vse, are pleased to promise that they wil procure the aring Ballett singer with one legg, to sing and self them about the Citie▪ which base speeches pro∣ceeding from those skoffing Isalites, I could well enough brooke in respect of mine owne person▪ o met▪ For, there is soe much euill, euen in the best of my actions, that contempt is the fayrest reward, which they can iustly challenge: Yet, when I call to minde with what Christian intentions I was emploi∣e  those Hymnes, and howe many howers at ight I spent about them, whilst, it may be▪ my Traducers, were either sleeping out their ty, o  employed▪ when I consider also how many  & religious men haue approoued thē, & how
much their pious vse might further the reuerence and practise of Deuotion to the prayse of God; it greeues me that there should bee in this nation any so wick∣ed as to oppose so Christian a worke, to so friuelous an end. But, when I remember, by whome, and by what Authority that booke was allowed, and com∣maunded to be made publik; and withall, what miste∣ry of iniquity it is that hath conspired against the sāe; me thinkes it is an Iniurie not to be tollerated▪ Is it reason, they who liue by bookes, should bee permitted to abuse the Authors of their liuelyhood? Or is it seemely that those whoe (as I sayd before) are but the pedlers of books, should become their cen∣surers; and by consequent, both the censurers and de∣prauers of that Authority which allowed them? If this be tollerated, the fayrest draughts of Apelles, shalbe daily subiect to the foolish critiscismes of those ar∣rogant coblers; and the State shall not be able re long to publish any thing, but what they haue a fan∣cie to approoue. For, to this passe it is already come, that whatsoeuer the State dislykes shalbe imprinted and devulged by them (though both absurd and scā∣dalous) with twice more seriousnes, then any booke lawfully commaunded: but, let it tend to schisme▪ and they will disperse more vnder-hand in one weeke, then the Royall Authority shalbe able to di∣vulge in a yeare, toward the setling of vnity in the Church. I know not what it is which should make my booke of Hymnes appeare soe ridiculus vnto the▪
or so vnworthy to be annexed to the English Psalm∣book, as they pretend. In respect of the matter it can∣not iustly be excepted against▪ for, a great part ther∣of, is canonicall Scripture; and the rest also, is both a∣greeable therunto in euery perticuler, and consonant to the most approoued Discipline of the Church of England. Soe that (how squeishly soeuer some of their stomackes brooke it) they being allowed by Authority, are as fitt, I trust, to keepe company▪ with Dauids Psalmes, as Robert Wisdomes TVRK and POPE; and those other apocryphall Songs and prai∣ers, which, the stationers add to the Psalmebooke for their more aduantage: Sure I am, that if their ad∣ditions shalbe allowed of by the most voices, yet mine shalbe approoued of before those, by the best Iudgments. Now, as for the manner of expression which I haue vsed, I hope it is such as no iust exception cann be taken therunto; seeing I haue (aswel in that which is of my owne Inuention, as in the Translations) vsed that simplicity of speech which (best) becommeth y• subiect, without affectatiō to those poetical phra∣ses and fancies, which (being commendable in other things) would haue obscured the maiesty of those in∣ventions. To this I had so much regard (especially in my translations of the Canonicall Hymnes) that, if I mistake not, I haue as naturally, and as playuely ex∣prest the sence of them, as most prose Translations haue done. And if those indifferent men, who know the Poesy and power of the English tongue may be
my Iudges, they will censure my expressions to bee such, as shall neither be obscure to the meanest capa∣cityes, nor contemptible to the best Iudgments, but (obseruing a middle way) best becomming that pur∣pose, for which they were intended. I did not leape on a suddaine, or irreuerently in∣to this employment▪ but, haueing consumed almost y• yeares of an Apprentishipp, in studies of this kinde, I entred therinto conscionably & in the feare of God: nor haue I proceeded without his assistance, as the difficulties and discouragments which I haue passed through, do witnes vnto me. For, if it be well weigh∣ed, how full of short sentences, and suddaine break∣ings off, those scriptures are; how frequently, these Particles, FOR, BVT, & such lik, (which are graceful in the Originall Text) will seeme to obscure the de∣pendancy of Sense, in the English phrase, if the pow∣er of their signification be not heedfully obserued in those places: How hash the musicke will be, if the chiefe Pauses be not▪carefully reduced vnto the same place in the lyne throughout the whole Hymne, which they haue in the first Stanza; how many diffe∣rences must be obserued betweene Lyricke-verse and that which is composed for reading only: Howe the Translater is tyed, not to make choise of those fashion Stanzaes which are easiest, to expres the mat∣ter in, but to keep that with which he first begā: how he is bound, not only to the sence (according to the liberty vsed in other Translationes) but to the very words, or words of the same power with those vsed
in our allowed Interpretations: Lastly, how precse he must be, when he is forced to expresse any sentence by circumlocution, to labor stil to retayne a relish of the holy phrase in his expressions: I say, if all these circumstances be well considered, (and how difficult they make it to close vp euery Stanza with a period, or some such point that the voice may decently pause there) I am parswaded a worke of this nature coulde not haue ben persisted in, to this conclusion, by a man haueing somany weaknesses, and discouragments as I haue had; vnlesse the Almighty had beene with mee. Nor can I beleeue that the deuill would haue raysed vp soe many malitiously to oppose the same, if it had not tended to Gods honor. But sure, no man will grudge the annexing of the Booke of Hymnes to our metricall Psalmes now v∣sed, in regard of any faultinesse in their expression, yf they consider the meannesse of that Translation. For, though some (of no meane degree) are very violent for the mayntenance and continuance of their olde Version, pleading (as the papists do for many of their trumperyes) a long prescription, in steed of better ar∣gumentes: yet I know it to be soe much to blame, that no man of vnderstanding can sing many of those Psalmes, but with trouble to his deuotion. And I dare vndertake to demonstrate, that they are not onely full of absurdityes, soeloscismes, improprietyes, non-sēce, and impertinent circumlocutions (to more then twice the length of their originalles in some places) but that there are in thē many expressiōs also▪ uite beside if not quite contrary, to the meaning of
the Text. Which I would not thus openly haue de∣clared, but that euen schoole boys perceiue it, though some (that would be thought wiser) do ignorantly or wilfully, protest against an alteration of our singing Psalmes. Excuse me I beseech you, if I seeme a litle too playne in discouering the faultines of that wher∣of so many are ouerweening: for, I doe it not to dis∣parage the pious endeauours of those whoe tooke paynes in that Translation; but rather, commending their laborious and Christian intention, do acknow∣ledg, that (considering the tymes they liued in, and of what quallity they were) they made soe worthye an attempt; as may iustly shame vs whoe came after, to see it no better seconded during all the flourishing tymes which haue followed their troublesome Age: especially, seeing howe curiously our language and expressiones are refined in our triuiall Discours∣es. This hath giuen the papist, the Atheist and the Li∣bertyne occasion to skoffe at our christian exercises, and troubles the deuotion of many a religious man, who being desirous to sing with his vnderstanding in the congregations, doth often (before he is aware) loose the sence of the Prophet: yea and sometymes fall vpon direct nonsence, among those many imper∣tynent circumlocutions, and independancies which he is (for Rymes sake) compelled to wander through in that Translation. Neuerthelesse, some I knowe will be obstinate in defence of their oulde Meeter▪ and I shall seeme to
thē, as one that had presumpteously layd an imputa∣tion vpon our Church, and vnreuerently taxed what her Authority had commaunded; which, I thanke God, I am not guiltye of. For, I well enough knowe (and your Reuerences can witnesse it) that those me∣trical Psalmes were neuer commaunded to bee vsed in Diuine seruice, or in our publike congregations, by any Canon or Ecclesiastical constitutiō, though ma∣ny of the vulger be of that opinion: But (whatsoeuer the stationers do in their Tytle page pretend to that purpose) they being first allowed for priuate deuoti∣on only, ept into publik vse, by toleratiō rather thē commaund. Yea, custome hath beene hitherto their cheife Authority: and therefore wee may not onely lay open their defects to a good purpose (without iust blame to our selues or scandal to the Church) but I hope chang them also without offence, when a bet∣ter translation shal come to light. In the meane time there will be no reason, I am sure, why those shoulde condemne my expressiones while they approoue those measures we haue hitherto made vse of, in our Devotions. But, lest the worke should bee able to iustifie it selfe, in spight of their detraction, my Aduersarys do picke personall quarrells also: alleaging that I haue vndecently intruded vpon the Diuine calling; and that my performances being but the fruites of a pri∣uate spirit are therfore vayne & vnwarrantable. Yea (yf we may beleeue the stationers) many zealous Ministers haue taxed me for medling with a worke
of that nature, affyrming that it was a taske fitter for a Diuine then for me: and so bitterly haue many of them (as I heare) censured me for it, in their priuate conferences, that I haue good cause to suspect, it was rather enuie, then any thing else which induced most of them to be of that opinion. If it be a worke soe proper to a Diuine, that noe man else ought to haue medled with it, I would some of them had taken it in hand, who giue me so little thankes for my labor, that we might haue seene with what spirit they are guid∣ed. I wonder what diuine calling HOPKINS and STERNHOLD had more then I haue, that their me∣tricall Psalmes may be allowed of rather then my Hymnes. Surely, yf to haue been Groomes, of the priuie Chamber, were sufficient to quallify them; that profession which I am of, may as wel fitt me for what I haue vndertaken; whoe haueing first layd the foun∣dation of my studies in one of our famous Vniuersi∣tyes, haue euer since builded thereon, towards the erecting of such fabricks, as I haue nowe in hand. But, I would gladly know by what rule those men discerne of spirites, who condemne my endeauour as the worke of a priuate spirit. The tyme was, men did iudge the tree by his fruite, but now they will iudge the friute by the Tree. If I haue expressed any thing repugnāt to the Analogy of y• Christian Fayth; or ir∣reuerently opposed the orderly and allowed Disci∣pline; or issented in any poynt from that spirit of Verity which breathes through the holy Catholicke
Church; then let that which I haue done be taxed for the worke of a priuat spirit. Or if it may appeare, that I haue vndecently intruded my selfe to intermedle with those mysteryes of our Christian Sanctuarye, which the God of Order hath by his deuine Lawe reserued for those whoe haue, according to his Ordi∣nance, a speciall calling therunto; Then indeed let me be taxed as deseruing both punishment & reproofe. But, if makeing Conscience of my Actions, I obserued that seemely distance which may make yt apeare, I intruded not vpon ought appropriated to y• outward ministry; If, like an honest harted Gibeonit I haue but a litle extraordinarily laboured, to howe wood and drawe water, for the spirituall Sacrifizes; If, according to the art of the Apothecary, I haue cō∣posed a sweete perfume to offer vp to God, in such manner as is proper to my owne Faculty onely, and then brought yt to those vnto whome the consecra∣tion thereof belonges; If, keeping my owne place, I haue labored for the building vp of Gods house as I am bound to do, in offering vp of that which God hath giuen mee, and makeing vse with modestie of those gyfts which were bestowed on me to that pur∣pose: If I say, the case be so, what blame worthy haue I done? why should those disciples which followe Christ in a nearer place, forbid vs (frō doeing good in his name) who follow him, farther off? why shoulde they with Ioshuah forbid Eldad and Medad from prophesying, seeing euery good Christian wisheth with Moses, that all Gods people were prophets, and
that he would giue his spirit to them all. If I could haue beleeued that for me to enter into Orders would haue made me either the more profi∣table instrument of Gods glory, or caused my labors to haue been the more holie or the more edifyinge; what had letted me to procure that aduantag? Noe man liuing more honors that calling (or would think himselfe more honord) by being admitted therinto, thē I. yea, often haue I been vrged vnto it, & my pos∣sibillityes of outward preferments that way, are not y• least. neuertheles, I ā not ōly priuie to much vnwor∣thines, and many insufficiencies in my selfe, iustly dis∣enabling me of that function; but my mind perswads me also, that God hath appoynted me to serue him in some other course. There are diuers guyftes, and diuersitys of callings; and by the guift God hath giuē him, euery man may guesse at his calling, as the soul∣dier may know in what part of the battell to range himselfe, by those Arms his Captayne appoynted him vnto: and that place he ought to make good, vntyll he finde himselfe furnished and authorized for ano∣ther Station. I wil, as the Apostle counsells me, striue and coue for the best guifts so farr as God shall enable me: but in what place soeuer I make vse of them (I thinke) I may be indifferēt. For, euery good guift of God may be employed with aduantage in any vocation, one tyme or other. A common souldier haueing the ex∣perience of a commaunder, may by advising and di∣recting his fellowes in familliarity, and by keeping
his place with thē as a companion; fynd opportunity perhaps, to instruct them better in some military dis∣cipline, then the office of a Captayn will permitt. And soe fares it in the christian warfarr. Yea, euen I my selfe haue many tymes found occasion by meanes of my habite and outward fashion of life, to effect some good which I shoulde hardly haue brought to passe by a more strict profession. And as some cheerefull laborer, by carying stones & morter (by encourag∣ing his fellowes, and giuing now and then a word of direction) may further the building of a house more then many others, and winn great commendation in that imployment; who would be rather a let (if not the ruin of it) if he should take vpon him to lay the stones; So, I that haue as a cōmon labourer seriously and some way profitably endeuoured; presuming in∣to the place of a master workman, may become lesse eruiceable, and peraduenture a trouble to the busi∣nes which I thought to further. Let it not therefore, I beseech you, be an imputa∣tion vnto me, that I haue performed a better worke thē my calling seems to oblige me vnto. For, though some haue taxed mee for medlinge with that which seemes more properly to belong to their profession; it is odds but they are other while as busie in some employments which would better haue beseemed a man of my quallity, then one of their cote; and ther∣fore, let vs excuse & forgiue one another. That which I haue done, when it was my owne; was sub∣iect to any mans censure: but, nowe Authority hath
consecrated it, and deliuered the same forth for pub∣like vse; yt is noe more myne, but the worke of Au∣thority which they depraue. Let al my writings priuatly or publikly dispersed, be examined frō the first Epygrā that euer I cōposed, vntyll the publishing of these Hymnes now traduced by my aduersaries; and if there can be found out one lyne sauouring of such a mynde, as may giue cause to suspect I vndertooke that taske, without that true Christian ayme which I ought to haue had; or if the performance it selfe shall make it appeare that I pro∣ceeded without due preparation; or if you can haue a∣ny probable testimony that throughout the course of my lyfe, or by any one sāndalous act, I haue giuē that cause of offence as may disparage my studis, or trou∣ble their deuotions to whose vse my Hymns are ten∣dered; let those thinges be layde to my charge, vntyll I find meanes to disprooue or wash away such impu∣tations. Sure I am, no man can attempt such a worke with a heart more desireous to be rectified, or more fearefull to offend by a negligent performance; and therefore if I wanted an outward calling thereunto, (which this Reuerent Assēbly may supply) yet I hope I had that inward calling which is beyond the power of any to conferr. But, obserue the mallice of the Stationers; they are not content to smother my booke as much as may be, by denying to giue it vtterance according as the King hath commaunded, and as by their trade they ought to doe; or to disparage it, by striuing to make
me seeme vnfitting or insufficient for a worke of that nature: but, to countenance their detractions, they pretend, as I sayde before, that the Lo: Archb: with other of your LLos: haue disliked my Hymnes, & that my Lo: of Canterbury would this Parlament take order to suppresse them. I cannot but wonder at the bouldnesse and impudence of these fellowes, that dare publish such improbable vntruthes, to the dis∣paragement of honorable personages. For, many of your Reuerences haue receiued those Hymnes at my hands, and returned me that good respect, which hath been my encouragement; and I cannot thinke, any possessing those reuerent places, would haue so much forgotten humanity as to haue condemned my labors in such fashi as those giue out. It cānot be thought, they censured them vpon the Stationers reports; see∣ing that were an inexcusable leuity; and if they exa∣mined it, me thinks my paynes, my pyous intention, and the good vse which may be made of that booke, would haue mooued them to counsell me how to a∣mend that which was found amisse, rather then to disparage my whole work, for a few ouersights. Can I suppose they who should encourage men in their pyous studies, (and be glad to see that we are able in any measure to exercise our facultyes towardes the setting forth of Gods prayse) would be so harsh, to giue me hard censures for my paynes; be∣cause, forsooth, I haue not answered their expectati∣ons, in some one tiuiall poynt? Sure, this were not that tendernesse which might be expected in the Fa∣thers
of the Church; nor do I beleue that any of your LLs: would vse that seuerity towards me: for then, if I had no better comfortes then such critescisme affords, those who w their tyme altogether in idle∣nesse, and abuse their facultyes to vainest purposes, are in  n I. Now, that they haue abused my Lo: Grace of , by  his dislike of my booke, (to the disparagement thereof) I shal make yt very apparent. For, his Grace tooke notise that my booke was perused and allowed by his Maiestie him∣selfe; and worthily approued his Royall iudgement both in Diuinity and Poetry, the Stationers beeing present: he was informed likewise, concerning euery perticuler circumstance in the Grant, and how it was his Maiesties pleasure my booke should be anexed to the metricall Psalmes; and thereupon both illustrated the reasonablenesse thereof to the sayd stationers, and gaue them and me incouragment to proceed to com∣position touching the same: moreouer, the Canonical Hymnes haueing beene allowed by the Lo: Bp: of London (& part of them imprinted for an assay) I de∣liuered to my L: Archbs: own hands a coppy of them almost fowre yeare agoe; since when (about two yeares after) they, being imprinted altogether, passed without contradiction, euen to the diuvlging of a full impression: and lastly haueing an addition of spiritu∣all Songes, for the obseruable tymes, they came forth altogether, authorised as well by the Kinges perticu∣ler approbation, as by the common allowance ap∣poynted
by the State. Yea my Lo: of Canterbury himselfe, receiued one of those bookes from me vpon Michelmas day last, and, giuing me order to alter one word only, hath permitted al the rest to haue free pas∣sage without controwle. Is it likely then, that my Lord will soe iniure the Kinges iudgement and his owne, as to disparage in priuate, what they haue publikely allowed; or secret∣ly combine with the stationers to oppose the Kinges royall commaund, in that which he himselfe, hath ap∣prooued reasonable? Is it likely his Grace would soe dishonor the reuerent Authority of his place, as to make the stationers or bookebinders his instruments of suppressing my booke, in such a scandalous fashi∣on; consideringe what power hee hath giuen him, to take order and reforme in matters of that nature? or is it likely that his Lp: had soe litle compassion and respect, as not to consider what faultinesse might bee in my Hymnes, or what inconuenience might arise by my Graunt, vntyll I had bestowed (besides my paynes) so much cost in printing them, that he might at one blowe, make frustrate my studies, and quite o∣uerthrowe my estate both together? Whilst there was hope of a composition betweene me and the sta∣tioners▪ the Priueledg was no Greeuāce, neither was there any fault found with my Hymnes; and is it lik∣ly that since our disgreement, mallice and detraction should finde out those escapes, which the eye of Au∣thority could not discouer? Is it likely my Lo: would e soe partiall as to passe ouer all my paynes, and vn∣questionable
expressions without regard; & finding but one place doubtful, (as easie to bee amended as found fault withall) that he would haue sought to cast away my whole endeuour for that ouersighte which I was able and ready, with all humility to re∣forme? Or is it likly he reputed of so litle cōsequēce, what y• King was pleased to peruse & grāt a priueledg for; that neither his priuate deuotion, nor his publike care, would moue him to consider what good or in∣conuenience might succeede vpon the publication thereof, vntill the stationers had for their owne endes awakened him? Or if it were considered; can I thinke he would haue beene silent vntill it might be obiect∣ed to my publike disgrace? It cannot be, but that they haue abused my Lds: Grace and diuers other reuerend personages in their reports. For, such vsage of me were not answereable to y• reuerēce & pyety of their callings; & if religious endeuours should euer finde such encouragmentes; there were more hope of thrift (to the worldwarde) by makeing Ballades for the company of stationers, then coulde bee by composing of Hymns and spi∣rituall Songes for the honor of God. I hope no man in authority enuies me the honor of my emploimēt▪ nor grudges mee that poore profite which my labors may honestly bring in. For, though it bee no meane content to a christian, (whose soule is touched with the vnderstanding of spirituall comfortes) to bee an instrument of Gods glory; yet, that which I haue at∣tempted, mak me in regard of one of you, noe bet∣ter
then the meanest seruant attendinge on the out∣ward ceremonies, is in comparison of him, that hath y• most holy mysteries of the Church committed to his dispensation. And as for the benefit likely to arise vnto me frō that I haue done; I know not what it may proue hereafter, but hitherto I haue bene acquainted with nothing saue the priuation of it; and haue beene so preposterously rewarded for my best labors, that if all those whoe are thought to censure me, had mett with such discouragments as I haue done; it is tenn to one, but some of them now (florishing in eminent places) had sate as lowe as I doe at this day. But, if it shall please my Lo: of Canterbury: to par∣don them for abusing his name in the disparagement of my Hymnes; I shal also forgiue them. For, beeing warrantable in themselues, no mans Authority shalbe able to dishonor them: nor cann his eminence excuse them, if they be not iustifyable in their owne nature. I will therefore proceede to answere those two per∣ticulers, which are principally obiected against my booke of Hymnes, by the Stationers, and their Abet∣ers. First; they impudently giue out, that the Song of Solomon is not fit to be expressed in Lyricke verse: and that my expression thereof, is in some places obs∣cēe. Which, as I perswad my selfe, I shalbe able to dis∣proue; & shew that (vpō due examinatiō) y• modesty of my Version, with the conueniency of publishing that Song shall appeare so euident, as will make them ashamed of their mallice and ignorance▪ who oppose
it. For, whatsoeuer I am in my outward appearance, I neither consulted with flesh and bloode nor with myne owne fancy. when I medled with that sacred Mistery: and therefore (seeing there bee those who doe not onely cauill against the publycation of the Canticles in Lyticke Verse, but vnciuelly censure al∣so, with what minde I was employed on that sub∣iect) I could wish that, before they passe further in their iudgments vpon that booke, or me; they would a little iudge themselues, & impartially examine their owne hearts, whether it be not spleene or enuy which hath moued them, to carp at my labours. If it had not beene soe, I should haue beene tymely and Christian∣ly admonished, rather then so inhumanly traduced, as I haue been, where I was not to make answere for my selfe: yea, I hauing professed so much willingnesse to harken to instruction, some of them would haue thought me worthy the speaking vnto in a matter of that consequence; and there would haue beene vsed such sweete mildenesse in the reproofe, with such re∣spect of my labor and expences, and such care to haue preserued my credit and Christian patience in the re∣medy of my ouersight, as would haue witnessed from what good spirit it proceeded. And, thus I shall ex∣pect to be dealt withall, if: Authority shall please to call into question my Performances. But, from my Traducers what good vsage can I expect, seeing they haue not spared God, but blas∣phemously termed the expressions of his holy spirit
Obscene? For, this some of the most eminent of the stationers haue not blushed in publike to affirme, in the most immodest tearmes; whereupon many of the inferiors of their fraternity, doe (insteed of vsing my booke to that Christian vse for which it was publish∣ed) cary the same about them purposly to disparage it. Yea, at their Tauerne tiplings, and in all companies whereinto they can thrust themselues, they seeke oc∣casion to posses their hearers, that my book is vnwor∣thy to be receiued among good people: And the place (which to their vnderstanding is so offensiue) is in the ninth Canticle, where I render, THE KNITTING OF THE THIGHES, what the Latyne trans∣lates, IVNCTVRAE FEMORVM. and our English Version, THE IOINTS of the Thighes. I beseech you, what Obscenity is in that, more then in the holy Ghosts owne wordes? To the cleane all thinges are cleane. And I protest before God (at whose throne I shal be iudged for it, if I lye) I doe not remēber that I had one immodest thought (so much as cast into me) by meanes of any expression in that holy Song, during the tyme I was busied thereabout. But, with those cleane thoughtes, I contemplated the louelinesse of Gods workemanshipp, in the seuerall parts of the body; and there withall, soe temperately meditated those passions and passages, which are inci∣dent to an honest naturall affection; that, by contem∣plating those materiall obiectes, I raysed my vnder∣standing to more then vsuall apprehensions of that vnspeakeable loue, which is between the Diuine and
human nature in generall; and betweene Iesus Christ and my owne soule in perticuler. And, as I haue been, more then ordinarily apprehensiue of the content∣ments & discontentments incident to a naturall loue, (lymited within the boundes of Chastity) Soe; that heauenly Song, hitherto vndiscreetly neglected (and by the mallice of the Deuill iudged dangerous to be made common) taught me to be much the more af∣fected with those kindnesses, & vnkindnesses, which I felt betwene God and my selfe. Yea, so was I moo∣ued thereby, as it cann neither be exprest by me, nor conceiued by those, who haue irreuerent opinions of the meanes God hath prepared to beget those ap∣prehensions in their soules. Those that acquire their Diuinity, meerly by read∣ing books, will perswade vs, out of some few weake Authorityes, perhapps, that the Song of Solomon is not to be read of yong men; but by those onely, in whom the carnal affections are quit mortified. which (the scope of the holyghost being well considered) is iust as if they should tell vs, Fyre were to be made, rather with Ashes then with wood. But, he that hath gayned his humble knowledge, both by hearing the Church, & obseruing the power which Gods word hath showne vpon him, in his own affections; is per∣swaded that heauenly Poeme was composed & pre∣serued for the pyous vse of al men; & principally for yong louers, inflamed with a naturall loue: that by their carnall affections they might ascend, & be made capeable of that which is spiritual. So, other Allego∣ryes,
are chiefly intended to stirr vp those whoe are subiect to other Affections. For, litle would it pre∣uaile with an olde man, whose heart is setled vpon riches, and such like, to illustrat the pleasure he might receiue in his communion with God, by setting be∣fore him the mutual contentments enterchanged be∣tween two affectionat Louers; seeing those passages are vsually derided by the elder sort. And lesse would it moue that yong man who is delighted in beauty, and the perfections of his belooued, to expresse vnto him the spirituall happinesse, by Tytles, Treasures, or the profites and pleasures of a vineyarde; which hee meanely regards. I humbly desire your RRces, that my Christian labour in prepareing that Song for a more frequent vse, may not be made voyde, or become despised by those who speake euill of that they vnderstand not. The dispisednesse of my person and quallity, may at first appearance, easily drawe a rash censure vpon my actions (before due consideration) as it hath often done: And their opinion who oppose the publication of the Canticles in Lyricke Verse, carryes such a for∣mall showe of reuerence to that holy Poeme, and hath, at first sight, such a shaddowe of pyous respect (by reason of the spareing vse which the Church hath heretofore seemed to make of those Hymnes) that it may, at a blush, deceiue the vnderstandinges of good and learned men. But if they take leasure to examine the true state of ye Question, they wilbe able to satis∣fy both themselues and others, against that fruitleesst
opinion; which being mayntayned will open passage agayn or their heresie, who deny vnto the lay people the free vse of holy Scripture. Those whoe please to obserue with good pur∣pose my generall preface to that Song, and my Ar∣gumentes before each perticuler Canto, shall finde how necessary it is to bee presented to an vniuersall consideration; and perceiue whether I haue spiritual∣ly, or carnally meditated thereon, and whether I haue beene guided by the interpretations of the Catholike Church, or by myne owne fancy. If I haue any way rred, I am hartily sory for yt, and (humbly desireing pardon) am ready to giue satisfaction, both by publik acknowledgment, of my ouersight, and in takeinge away, or reforming what is amisse. If I haue don wel; God forgiue them whose fleshly vnderstandinges haue abused my good intentions; and I wish them the spirite of true charitye, that they may beecome more capeable of that celestiall Loue Song. For, the sweete contentmentes which I tasted in contemplateinge the mysteryes therein contayned, were somwhat in∣terrupted, through the care I had of them, whose ig∣norance, or wilfull blindnesse would depriue both themselues and others of those comfortes. And I pray God those that speake irreuerently of that Song, or hinder the publycation thereof (in such wise as may best rouze vp the spiritual affections) may repent thē∣selues thereof, least they come within danger of that curse those are lieable vnto, whoe add, or take away from the booke of God. For, though some foolish
Verse-haters (who are wise men in their owne opi∣nions) haue vndiscreetly passed their censures against translating the Canonicall Hymnes into our English Numbers; I shall bee able not onely to make proofe, vpon good occasion, that they may be as truely con∣verted into our meeter as into Prose; and that our Eng∣lish measures are capable of expressing them with as much power, and grauity; but to demonstrat also, that Verse was first inuented and vsed altogether in setting forth the prayses of God▪ and that those thinges which were originally penned in measured words▪ cannot be so properly nor so vsefully expressed in Prose, as in our Verse. It would too much nlarge this hasty discourse if I should deliuer heere all I could inferr to that purpose; or insist vpon all the reasons which I could giue in de∣fence of giuing way to the free vse of the Song of So∣lomon in our English meeter. But, vnder correction, and submitting my opiniōs▪ to your better Iudgmēts, I will in briefe, answere some of those reasons which I haue heard brought against the common vse thereof; that it may appeare I am not altogether without con∣sideration, in what I haue done. The principall causes obiected for restrayning of that Song, are three. First, least it should be abused by prophane or indisreet people; Secondly, because the Iewish Rabbines haue restrayned it from their Laicty, as vnfit for the vulger; and lastly, by reason the Chris∣tian Church (as they thinke) hath neither by command nor by practise, warranted the same.
It is true, that the Canticles, may be, and are often abused, (yea and the rest of the holy scriptures) euen by those who by restrayning them, seeke to preuent their abuse, as well as by others. But God forbid, that such as would rightly apply them, should be depri∣ued of their most comfortable vse, because sensuall men will turne that grace of God into wantonnesse. By that rule, the vse of most thinges should be taken away: for, many men abuse their liberty in that which is most lawfull: yea, the whole booke of holy scrip∣tures should be sealed vp, because many haue heriti∣cally applyed them; seeing the same may be alleadg∣ed for denyinge the vse of both Testamentes, which is obiected for restrayning the Canticles. The word of God looseth no worth, by any mans abusing of it; but he that abuseth the same, harmeth himselfe onely, and them whose owne corruptions haue made that the sauour of death vnto thē, which is lyfe in it owne nature: and whose power, if it bee hidden, is hidden to those onely that perish. Seeinge we permitt the rest of Gods booke to be read of all without exception, and euen this songe in the Prose; why should it be more offensiue in the meeter? since Diuinity and the prayses of God, may be prooued (as I haue sayd before) to be the most auncient and most proper subiects of Verse. If I haue not exprest the meaning of the Originall soe truely, or soe grauely, as the prose hath don; let it be declared in what per∣tituler, and I cann amend the ouersight, as easily as it may be found. For, whatsoeuer sence is giuen mee in
prose, I can as fully and as playnely expresse, againe in measured words. Yea, I doubt not, but I shall be able to iustifie that my Metricall Version of the Canticles, is as proper, as modest, and as perspicuous as most prose Translations; and that those who accuse it of Obscenity (haueing vncleane thoughtes themselues) doe rather accuse God then me, and blasphemously disparage the wisedome of the holy ghost. But, noe wonder: to the fylthy all thinges are filthy; euen the purity of God seemes vncleannes to them; and their preposterous discretion is ashamed of his prudence. But, some obiect it is vnfitting that Mystery should be exposed to the viewe and perusall of children; and I say also that it is as vnseemely the childrens bread should be deuoured of doggs, or that pearles should be cast before swine Neuerthelesse these thinges do often fall out soe, without remedy: and pitty it were that bread should be kept altogether from the chil∣dren, because they somtyme spoyle or play childish∣ly with that, which shoulde feede and norrish them. The story of ye incest of that Lot, of Thamer, & diuers other passages in holy scripture, are more subiect to abuse then the Canticles; yet clildren are permitted to reade them, because we knowe not by what war∣rant wee may diuide them from the booke of God. The best course therefore, is to instruct them with what mynde to pervse them, or to prefixe such war∣nings before those places, as I set before my Versiō of Solomons song. For, there I haue adiured al Readers, vnder payne of Gods heauy indignation, to be wary
with what mind and to what end, they shall make vse of those excellent Hymns: which I am perswaded, will be a meanes to make them lesse abused hereafter. The truth is, they cannot be more prophaned by children, then the whole Booke of God is by those that peruse it negligently; nor soe much as the most easie and most vsefull passages thereof, are, by those presumptious Li∣bertynes, and scoffing Atheists, who make applicati∣on of them accordinge to their owne humors. For, though an ignorant simplicity, makes children some∣tyme misunderstand such thinges as they read▪ or frut∣lesly passe them ouer, yet they doe not wilfully peruert them to wicked purposes; And therefore, God doth many times giue such a blessing euen to that which in their childhood they pervsed without vnderstanding, as that many tymes it is a meanes of bringing it the better into memory (to their great profit and comfort) in riper yeares. No holy scripture, or canon of our Church, hath commaunded the keepeing of this, or that parte of Gods Booke, from publike vse: and therefore why should any dissallowe free passage to those Hymnes in their proper kinde? seeing noe man knoweth by what portion of his worde, the Diuine prouidence shall please to call his children vnto a true vnder∣standing of their duties? who can tell, but that which is restrayned, may be with held from such as woulde receiue needefull comfortes thereby, as well as from those whoe will▪ abuse it? One tyme or another, wee may be enlightened by what is for a season obscure
vnto vs; and that sentence which was an occasion of stumbling, may be a meanes of rising againe to more strength being better vnderstood. Yea, (I perswade my selfe) it is lesse inconuenient, that a thousand carnal men should add to their confusion by the abuse of Gods grace, then that one of his children should want any comfort offered in his word. Much more might be said to this purpose; euen so much, that (if the likelyhood of truth deceiue not) it would make euery good christian fearefull to op∣pose the commendable vse of any part of Gods word vpon those weake foundations which fleshlie policy hath laide: but this I hope will suffice in this place. And, as for those exceptions made against the kinde of Measure which I haue vsed, and some perticuler expressions; I perceiue they haue been flirted out, ei∣ther in mallice to mee, or vpon a superficiall viewe, without considering the circumstances, the proprieties of the Languages, Metaphors, or Allegories; and therefore I regard them not: Partlie seeing my Versi∣on hath had the approbation of better Iudgementes; and partlie, because I knowe it ordinarie among such as those, to cauell at our most approoued Translations. Whereas some alleage that the Iewes permitted not the Song of Solomon to be read of the Vulger; what is that to vs? They being heritikes we ought not to be ledd by their example. They were diuided among themselues, concerning that Songe; some re∣ceiuing it among the bookes called Hagiographa, and some reiecting it. And it may be, those whoe recon∣ned
it among the holy writings; restrayned the com∣mon vse thereof by reason of that scandall, those had giuen, who (accountinge it a prophane writinge) had foolishly applyed the same, to Solomon and Kinge Pharaohs daughter: Or else, because the depth of the Mystery made them vnable to accomodate it to the common capacity. Or it may be (which is most prob∣able) they were moued to restrayne it throughe the mallice of the deuill; that after tymes following their example, the most excellent Mystery therin couched, might be the more obscured from vs of later Tymes, vnto whom the reuelation of it would much plainer appeare. And, their negatiue is hard (if not impossible) to be prooued, who deny that Song to haue at any time beene vsed by the christian Congregation in the pri∣matiue ages. For, they practised the singing of Psalms, and Hymnes, and spirituall Songes; and were at lest counselled (if not cōmanded) by Saint Paul thereto▪ Coll: 3. Why therfore, may we not thinke, that So∣lomons song was one of those which the church then sunge, seeing the holy ghost hath entituled it THE SONG OF SONGS? If it were then sunge, it is likely they sung it in those languages which were vnderstood. For, Saint Paul would sing, not with the spirit only, but with the vnderstanding also. And if yt may bee sunge by the congregation, in the vulger tongue, why not in Verse, the proper language of SONG (and the most moouinge way of expres∣sion)?
But, what necessity is there of examples; seeing in lawfull thinges, we may make presidentes, when we please, with good commendations? By what pulike example did we sing Dauids Psalms in English mee∣ter, before the Raigne of King Edward the sixth? Or by what commaund of the Church do we sing them as they are nowe in vse? Verily, by none: but tyme and christian deuotion hauing first brought forth that practise (by the prouidence of God) and custome ripening it; long tolleratiō hath, in a manner, fully au∣thorized the same. And, if our metricall translation of the Psalmes were rectified, and purged from those imperfections and escapes, which the first translators (worthy to be christianly excused) vnwillingly com∣mitted in that infancy of Reformation: There was neuer any one accidentall thing in the outward wor∣shipe of God, more helpefull to deuotion (or more powerfully stirring up the affections towardes set∣tinge forth his prayse) then the singinge of Psalmes, Hymnes, and spirituall songes, in such manner as the reformed Churches now vse yt. I cannot beleeue therefore, but that the singing both of Dauids Psalms and of the song of Solomon was practised in all ages of the Church since Christ, as freely and as frequently, as the strictnes and blind∣nesse of the tymes would permyt; though not with soe full and in soe publike a Quire as at this present. But, what if the Canticles had not beene ordinarily sung in former tymes? can that prooue the vulger vse of them to be now vnlawfull or inconvenient, more
then the vse of y• rest of holy scripture in our mother tongue; is proued inconuenient, because the blindnes of passed ages causeleslye restrayned it? May wee not iudge, it was rather through ignorance, and be∣cause they had them not prepared to be sung, as now they are? Or might it not be because the tyme was not then come in which a more publike vse thereof would be most necessary? For, the state of the my∣sticall body of Iesus Christ (from the creation to the last Iudgment) being expressed Allegorically in that song, with the seuerall appearances it had, and shall haue in the seuerall peryods of tyme, together with those admyrable loue-passages enterchanged bee∣tweene the diuine and human nature; we doubtles, whoe liue in the last Age of the world, (and hauing seene by long experience, and successe of thinges, much more of that propheticall song fulfilled, then those who went before vs) may without disparage∣ment to their knowledges, vnriddle some darke Ae∣nigmas, heretofore not vnderstood. And the consu∣mation of the LAMBES mariage being neere at hand, may the more properly, sing that Mariage song of his, to the glory of his name, and our owne spiri∣tuall comforts. To that end I fitted the same vnto our English Lyre, in measures becomming the nature of the sub∣iect, in a playne and vnaffected Phrase: and (if those whoe vnderstand both the scripture Dialect, and the language of an English Muse may be my censu∣rers) in words agreeable to ye meāing of ye holy Text.
Yea, I haue so well as I was able (in so fewe lynes) o∣pened also according to the Doctrine of the Catho∣licke Church, the Allegory of euery perticuler Canti∣cle, that God might be the more glorified, and the vnlearned both delighted and profited, in the repeti∣tion of those Hymns. And thus much I haue deliuer∣ed concerning what hath bene obiected touching the song of Solomon; not presuming to leade your opi∣nions towards myne owne endes; but to declare with what know edge and conscience I haue proceeded therin. And as this testifies I had some vnderstanding of that I went about; so to giue testimony also, how farr I am from being wilfull, in my owne opinions, I doe in all humility submit my selfe to be rectified by your RRces, in whatsoeuer I haue done or spoken: which (though offence had beene giuen; will, I hope▪ make me somwhat more excusable, then my aduer∣saryes pretend. Howsoeuer; I cannot dispayre. For yf those ouersightes which I haue vnwillingly com∣mitted in that performance, doe bring on me those outward troubles which shall frustrate some of my temporall hopes; yet I am confident, that those chri∣stian affections which Gods mercy hath made accep∣table in me, shall produce those inward comfortes which will vphould my faith, tyll my contentments are made perfect: and therfore his will be done. I come now to speake of that imputatiō by which the stationers and their Abetters haue don my book and me the greatest iniury: and that is in pretending my Hymnes for the Obseruable tymes, to be further∣ances
to Popery and superstition. When they cannot bring men to dislyke me and that labor of myne, by disparaging the vsefullnesse thereof; they obiect a∣gainst the manner or method: when that wil not serue turne, they except against my calling: when that wil not preuaile, they impudently accuse it of obscenity: when that effects not their purpose, they gyue out that it is inclyning to Popery: & when none of these courses will aduantage them, they rayle, and send him that enquires for the booke, to goe and seeke yt where he cann. But, the best of their stratagems hath beene by accusing yt of fauouring superstition. For, it hath not onely made many hundreds (whoe knowe not yet what the Booke treates of) to forbeare the buyeng and perusing of it; but hath giuen them oc∣casion also, to passe their censures on me in so vnchris∣tian a manner, as if I were an Apostate that had fallen from my Religyon; or sought the subuertion of yt, for my outward profitt. Wheresoeuer I come, one gyddy brayne or another, offers to fall into disputati∣on with me about my Hymnes. Yea; Brockers, and Costermongers, and Tapsters, and Pedlers, and Sempsters, and Fydlers, and Feltmakers, and all the Brotherhoods of Amsterdam, haue scoffingly passed sentence vpon me in their conuenticles, at taphouses and Tauernes. So that, insteed of diuvlging my booke that (according to the Kings intēt) yt might further y• reverence & práctise of deuotion, and confirme in his Maiestyes subiectes, obedience to the pyous disci∣pline of our Church; some of the stationers haue by
traducing it, giuen ignorant people occasion to speake the more in contempt of those Ordinances which they ought reuerently to obey. If these presumptions shall be suffered without rebuke, neither the Authority of the Church or State will shortly take place, but that onely vvhich makes for the profitt or humor of the Stationers▪ For, some of them dare already tell me to my face, that if the King had not peremptorely commāded the addition of my Hymns to the metricall Psalm∣booke, they would haue the sooner anexed thē; but by compulsion they will not. And for that cause, one of them (as hee himselfe affirmed) hath sold of those bookes, 500 lesse then hee might haue done, in one quarter of a yeare. What is this but to pro∣fesse wilfull disobedience in contempt of his Ma∣jestie & his pious Iniunctio? as if he had not powre to command the publication of a few leaues to the glory of God, without crauing their fauors? For, though it might be objected that I petiti∣oned the sayd Hymnes might be added to the me∣tricall Psalmes out of a priuate respect, as doub∣ting or foreseeing that the Stationers and others vvould feeke the suppressing of them, if they vvere not compoūded withall to their owne liking. Yet the Kings Maiesty had no such ende; but inioy∣ned the same meerely to this christian purpose, that those Hymnes might be the more conueni∣ently dispersed throughout his Dominions, for the edifying and instructing of his Loyall subiectes:
perswading himselfe, that those who haue enioyed so many greate Priuiledges by his gratious fauour, would neuer haue opposed that authority by which they fub sist, and by vertue wherof they re∣ceiue benefit of such Grants as are both of the same & of a higher nature: especially seeing it is proba∣ble that none of his louing subjectes, worthy the name of a Christiâ, would haue grudged to enlarge his booke the quantity of a fewe leaues (at the or∣dinary rate) to so pyous an ende as those Hymnes tend vnto; considering how many poundes are yearly consumed in triuiall Pamphlets and other vayne expences But why should I onely, complayne against the Stationers, & the inciuillity of those whom they haue stirred vp to clamor against the Hymnes for the solemne Dayes, as if I alone suffred in this vp∣roare? Do not your RRces perceaue, that the kings Iudgement & Authority suffers by it? Nay perceaue you not, that while they seeme to aime at me they strike at you, and seeke to ouerthrow or disparage the allowed Discipline of our Church? Verily, that is the white which they seeme to shoote at. And there is not one of them, but if he dare stand to his Objections before this reuerend Assembly, I dare vndertake to prooue him to be little better then a Schismatick in his opinions, & an enimie to the govermēt established in the Church of England. If vpō the review of my Hymnes there may be found either in them, or in their Prefaces, any thing re∣pugnant
to the Catholike Verity, or the allowed Discipline, I will recant it, make publike acknow∣ledgment of my error, and vndergoe what punish∣ment shalbe thought deserued. For I had rather be irrecouerably vndon both in my credit & estate, then to be an occasion of preiudice, or scandall to the Church of God. Nay let all my labors be made frustrate and my person be deliuered ouer to be subject to the tyrany of the Stationers, if my Hymnes doe not euidently appeare, vpon serious viewe, to be instrumēts of Gods glory; helpfull to deuotion; tending to Christian Conformity, and likely to be a meanes of deliuering our Solemni∣ties from being so much traduced and misvnder∣stood, for reliques of Popery, as heretofore. I am thus confident thereof, by reason of that blessing which God hath already giuen: For, not∣withstanding that great opposition of the Statio∣ners hitherto made, and those vilde imputa∣tions which they haue layd on my Booke, Many haue confessed vnto me that my Hymnes for the Obseruable Tymes and their Prefaces, haue made them more reverently affected towards that Dis∣cipline then formerly they were; And haue pro∣fessed, that yt shall for euer hereafter, teach them to be more conscionable in condemning and sleighting the obseruatiō of that which is establi∣shed in our Church: Yea, some Divines haue mo∣destly acknowledged, that they did not so well consider the piety and vsefulnes of those observa∣tions
as they haue since done. If I were so greedy of temporall aduantages as the Stationers iudge me; or yf I had meereley pro∣iected my own profit in the course of my studies, without making conscience of Religion: I haue had many, more easy and more thriuing waies, of∣fred me then the world is a ware of; and needed not to haue exprest my selfe in such manner as I haue done in my Hymnes (which I was certaine, before I published them would neuer purchase me good opinion from Papist or Schifmatick:) For (beside other waies of these times which I haue despised) I haue been offred a larger yearely stipend, and more respective entertaynments, to employ my selfe insetting forth hereticall fancies, then I haue yet probabilitey to hope for, by pro∣fessing the Trueth. Yea, I haue been wooed to the professiō of theire wilde & ill grounded opi∣nions, by the Sectaries of so many seuerall sepe∣ratiōs, that had I listed (or rather, yf God had not been the more mercyfull vnto me) I might haue been Lieutenant, if not Captaine, of some new Band of such Volunteers, long ere this tyme. But I thanke God, neyther the swelling impo∣stumations of vaineglory, nor the ytchings of sin∣gularity; nor the ticklings of selfe loue, nor the convulsions of Enuy, nor the inflamations of Re∣uenge, nor the hunger and thirst of Gold, were euer yet so preuayling ouer me, as to mooue me to the prosecution of any thinge against my con∣science;
especially, if yt seemed any vvay repug∣nant to Religiō, or the authority of the Church. Nay, those things which I might iustly and lavv∣fully haue done to my great advantage, and with∣out reproofe, I haue volūtarily forborne (euen al∣most to the ruine of my estate) for no other end; but because I feared least the malice of my Ad∣versaries should misinterpret my dooings, eyther to the scandall of Authority, to the offence of ig∣norant people, or to the troubling of their devo∣tions, vvho are ignorant of the reasonablenesse, and true purpose of my actions. I therefore beseech your Reuerences, that my Hymnes for the Observable times may be re-exa∣mined whether they be not in euery circumstāce agreable to the holy Scriptures and discipline of our Church: And if there be any passage or ex∣pression found among them, scandalously faulty, let it not onely be corrected according to the Truth: but let me be commanded also, to make publike acknowledgement of my ouersights: And if Authority thinke it expedient, vndergoe some penalty for my default. But if on the contrary (as I hope it will euidently appeare) those Hymnes and their Prefaces shallbe approoued much ten∣ding to the edification of the people, and helpe∣full to encrease true deuotion and Christian obe∣dience, by explaning the pious and commendable vse of those Ecclesiasticall constitutions, which many people haue ignorantly judged vnprofitable,
If they shall be found consonant to the Diuine word and conformable to the Cannons and Or∣dinances of our Church: If they haue been lawful∣ly allowed of by those in Authority, and may appeare to aduance the practise of Piety to Gods honour, and to maintaine those Rites only, which were agreed vpon, and established by our Parlia∣ments, Prouinciall Synodes, Nationall Counsels, and the Authority of the State And yf, moreouer, those who scandalize & oppose the sayd Hymns, may be probably suspected (yf not prooued) to haue eyther priuate malice and designes in their opposition, or to be some of those who are trou blesome and ill affected to the gouernment of our Church: Thē let their vnchristian behauiours towards Authoritey, and their vncivell daeling with me, be accordingly considered on. If those Observatiōs which our Church com∣mandeth were as vnprofitable or superstitions, as some of that ignorant Rable seeme to conceaue: Yet I hauing followed the steps of Authority, & prepared meanes to make those Obseruations the more edifying for the common people, methinks I might hope for better things, then to be abused for my labour and expenses. But seeing the Church hath by those obseruations, wisely and pyously, so distributed the commemoration of the principall mysteries of Religeon, that they may be once throughout euery yeare presented to publike con∣sideration; since the temporall blessings of euery
season are therby the better & the oftner tendred to our thankfull Remembrances, as well as those eternall Priueledges which we receaue by the In∣carnation, Natiuitie, Passion, Resurrection, and Ascention of our hlessed Redeemer, and the perti∣culer misteries of his holy-Saintes and Angells: And since I haue by Gods assistance found out, & by Authoritie divulged those helpes vvhereby the Churches pious intent in those Ordinances, may be the more vulgerly vnderstood & practised, both to her honour and the glory of God; vvhy should not I be defēded, against the malitious & irrelige∣ous combinations and practises of my Aduersaris? Nay, why am I rather giuen vp into their powre, to be traduced & abused for that, which in the opi∣nion of all good men, ought to haue procured me more esteeme? So farr am I from insinuating any popish Super∣stitiō among the people, that I haue vindicated all our Solemnities fom those imputatiōs which ig∣norant men haue that way, cast vpon them; by set∣ting downe their primatiue vse, freed frō the Cor∣ruption of the later Ages: and in such manner as they are obserued by the Church of England, who imposeth them, not as essentially pertaining to Re∣ligeon, but as accidentally helpefull towarde the performance of those exercises which are neces∣sary to saluation. For, whosoeuer can propose to himselfe any other warrantable meanes, which in his judgement may be more profitable to his
perticuler disposition, to stir him vp, and con∣tinue him in the practise of his Christian duties: He may (as I beleeue) freely make vse of them, and with good commeodation; prouided▪ he ney∣ther tye the Generality to his private Rules, nor presnmptuously neglect or contemne the alowed Church discipline, to the dishonor of Authority, and the offence of his vveake Brethren. Because (in my vnderstanding) humane Traditions & ob∣seruations discreetly established in the Church, do (in our highway to Heaven) resemble those markes which charitable and skilfull Seamn haue anciently sett vp to discouer dangerous passages, and a safe Channell to vnskilfull Mariners. If any man suppose himselfe so good a Pilot, that by his industry and continuall sounding▪ he can bring his Barke to a safe Roade, without heeding the com∣mon obseruations: Or yf his Vessell dravv so little water that by sayling ouer those Barrs (vpon which others most commonly strike) he can finde a neerer course into the Harbour; hee may steere by his owne Compasse. But, if he shall therevpō de∣face those auncient Beacons, which meaner Arts∣men haue neede of, or seeke to make contemptible those helpes which he himselfe was (yt may be) directed and preserued by in his tymes of lesse experience, vvee may justly taxe him of sacriledge and impiety. And the same taxation are they worthy of, who in their pilgrimage to the spirituall Canaan dispise
and seeke to abolish those generall furtherances, which theire vviser Forefathers had prouided, be∣cause they haue in their owne imagination) found out some discipline fitter for their particuler incli∣nations. Let them vse vvhat Christian aduantage they can in their priuate practise of pietie; but let them not measure the Church by their cubite, nor judge the profitablenes of her Discipline by the abuses or misinterpretatiōs of ignorāt Detractors. For, if those who fancie most perfection in their priuate rule of life, had at first wanted those helpes, remembrances, and publique meanes of in∣structiō, which were tendred them by the Church; they had eyther wandred, perhaps, after vncertaine pathes, or neglected to proceed at all in their Spi∣rituall Iourney. Our holy Mother the Church, hath many Chil∣dren of diuers tempers and constitutions, and as the Maister of a great Feast prouideth so, that eue∣ry Guest may finde some what to agree with his appetite; So Gods Church hath established such discipline for her childrē, that euery one may finde that which accordes vvith their capacities and in∣clinations. As, therefore, it were madnesse, for a Guest to rayle at his friēds Bāquet, because he saw there many moe varieries thē he listed to seed on; or some wholesome meates, which his stomack loa∣thed through his owne default: And as it were barbarous inhumanity in him that had learned the way through an obscure Desert, by heapes of stone
raised by his Predecessours, to pull downe those marks because he imagins that he hath foūd a pas∣sage vvithout them. So, it is monstrous impiety in them who seeke either to take away or make con∣temptible, those Chaistian helpes whereby others may be assisted, & by which they themselues were at first initiated; because forsooth they finde a dis∣tast through their owne distemper, or a possibillity of doeing well without them▪ through their owne ouerweening cōceit: And it is the greate mercy of God, if their presumption carry them not into the gyddy and vncertayne pathes of perdition. I wish hartily that those weake members of our Church, who are ignorantly offended at her Dis∣ciplines (because they knowe not the Christian vse of them) would with more sincerity, take those things into their consideration, & weigh how farr our Solemnityes are from that superstitiō wherof their blinde guides accuse them; how differēt from popish Obseruations, & how greate an offence it is to scandalize that Authority whereunto they ought to be obediēt in euery thing, not repugning the sacred word. And if they be not hardned in their malice) I would those Stationers also, who by falsly accusing my Hymnes of blasphemy and su∣perstition (haue drawne many of that censorious generation, to help them clamor against what they haue not yet perused) would make more consciēce of their actions, & not worke vpon the credulity of their customers, to the generall disparagmēt of
that booke vvhich they ought rather to haue ad∣uanced. But I feare I vvish an impossibility on the Statio∣ners behalfe. For, they haue so long, & so vnciuel∣ly, resisted those Himnes vvhich haue been pub∣lished for helpes to deuotion; that it may be doub∣ted they will be now ashamed to speake well of them, how profitable soeuer they be approued▪ Nor will yt be much materiall (I thinke) ere long, whether those who haue been my Detractors, praise or discommend. For, I am persvvaded they will make their dispositions so well knowne after a while, that no man of vnderstanding wil regard vvhat they speake. As yet, their true qualitey is not fully discouered; & therefore yf any should happen to ouer-heare them at their Goose-nest behind Saint Nicholas Shambles; Or vvhen a knot of them hath gotten a Cuntrey-Chapman, Citty-Customer, or nevv flovvne Academick, to some Drincking-schoole, vvithin the compasse of their verge; yt vvould de∣ceaue a common iudgement to obserue vvhat grauitey, zeale, and learning, some of them vvill consume in rayling vpon my Hymnes. One, as if he had been Register, or Liberary-keeper to all the primitiue Churches, vndertakes to tell his Audito∣ry, that no such thing had been published in the first 300 yeares after Christ: As if that had bene to any purpose. A second, out of his deepe vnder∣standing in such language, dares pronounce some
of my expressions obsceane. A third, by conuersing with the Titles of Bookes only (for their insides he vvas neuer acquainted vvithall) is become so learned that he yndes himselfe impudent enough to accuse me of blasphemy. A fourth (iustly suspec∣ting that his owne opinion will add no credit to his foolish invectiues) belyes some Reuerend cu∣stomer of his. or brings the Authority of some of those Worshipfull censurers, vvho vpon the Sta∣tioners bare credite, vse to condemne Bookes be∣fore they reade them. Yea, so shamefully will some of them aver & obiect, whatsoeuer they can ima∣gine vvill disparage my Labour; and vvith such counterfeite shewes of pittying me, and making a Religions conscience of their words, that such as know neyther of vs, vvould thinke them the very quintessēce of Sincerity, and me some irreligious Scribler, vvho cared not vvhat I published for mine ovvne aduantage. But, that whereby they hope to work me farthest out of good opinion, is my Hymne for Saint Georges day. Yea, the bare obiecting of that, hath made many (who passe for wiser men then they prooue) to condemne the same before tryall. And (as if that Hymne could haue beene to no purpose but to mainetaine a Popish and superstitious ob∣seruation) they rashly make yt an occasion of mis∣cōstering all the rest; and so malitiously vilify my honoring the solēnity of that day with a Hymne, as yf they had been of that Dragons confederacie,
for whose ouerthrow yt praiseth God. I knovv no cause there is giuen of such dislike. For, I haue ascribed no Diuine honor to any crea∣ture in that Hymne, nor appropriated it to that Martyr ignorātly reputed the tutelary saint of this Kingdome, and by some heretofore superstitiously inuoked in warlike incounters; Nor haue I sorted the Festiuall of Saint George among the solemni∣ties appointed by the Church, but mentioned the same as an Obseruatiō set apart by the State onely; as are the first dayes of Kings raignes. And though my Hymne prepared for that Solemnitey▪ is num∣bred among the Hymnes of the congregation, be∣cause it is composed as personating many: Neuer∣thelesse, euen that & all the rest, were by me intē∣ded for paterns to assist or direct priuate deuotiōs▪ rather then to be imposed for sett formes which I thought worthy to be vsed in our publike Assem∣blies. Were the obseruation of Saint Georges feast, as popish an limpertinēt, as some of my traducers ignorantly and irreuerently conceiue: yet since I neither inuented it nor haue power to abolish the same, why should I be blamed, for shewing vvith what meditations it may be the more appleyd to Gods glory, and redound to the greater honor and edification of those vvho are attendants on that solemnity? Seeing that place of Saint Paul which counselleth that vve should direct all our Actions to the glory of God, may be my warrant for so do
ing, without wresting the meaning of the Text. For, that Hymne together (with a Preface shew∣ing the true vse thereof, & whome we vnderstood by Saint George) I inserted among the rest, for those purposes. First, to giue men occasion of spi∣rituall meditations in their ciuill Tryumphs, & to remēber thē to honor God in those Solemnities, wherein he hath honored thē, with place & Tit∣le aboue others. Secōdly, that the order of Saint George, being one of the most honorable orders of christiā knighthood throughout the world; In∣stituted to the prayse of God, & (as I take it) our highest Title of honour, might haue more high es∣teeme then among some it findeth. And lastly, that such whoe are apte to misdeeme of those thinges whose Reasons and true purposes they know not, might be more sparing in their censures, and not conceiue (as many ignorantly doe) that our State acknowledgeth any other Patron, then that cham∣pyon of the holy catholike church, by whome the great Dragon and his Angels were ouercome. Euen those were my christian intentions in pub∣lishing that Hymne amōg the rest; which I offer to be censured by your RRces, whether there be iust occasion of scandall giuen thereby to others, or of any such reprooses as my Traducers haue be∣stowed on me. If it be so; let that Hymne bedi∣vorced from the rest in all future impressions. But yf it be otherwise, and that in your opinions it tē∣deth rather to Gods glory, and the honour of the
State; I doubt not but God and that Noble order, (of whose Solemnities I haue declared the right vse) will deliuer me from that many-headed mon∣ster, which hath Dragon like persecuted the ho∣norer and interpreter of their mistery. But, Saint George being receaued for a Martyr, and the order called after that Name, being at first founded vpon a very meane occasion; some are of opinion that there was neyther any such Allegory vnderstood, or to be vnderstood, in the story of Saint George, as I haue affirmed, nor any thing directly intended to the glory of God in the so lemnization of that day: And vpon this false ground, they improperley conclude, that I haue neyther warrant for shaddowing the true Cham pion of the Church vnder that Name, nor ground for applying that solemnity to so Christian a pur pose. That there was George a Martyr wee may be leeue, but that euer he slewe a Dragon & delivered a Lady (as the vulger story of saint George relates the same) there is noe probable testimonie: There∣fore yt hath bene generally vnderstood as an Alle∣goricall expression of the churches deliuerāce from the powre of Sathan. And that the Title of saint George may bee allegorically imposed vpon our spirituall Patron without iust exception, I haue de∣clared in my preface before the Hymne of saint George his Day, by an argument drawne from the greater. For, the Father being by the Aevangelist
called , that person, doubtles, vvho is inferior touching the māhood may in some re∣spects, be called by the same Name without irreue∣rence. Or if this be not sufficient, it may be infer∣red also by an argument from the lesse. For, if Iesus Christ be termed a Lambe, a Lyō, or by the Nams of creatures inferior to those, as a Doue, a Way, a Vine, &c, sure vve may then, vvithout exception, entitle him , and giue him such attri∣butes or appellations, as are proper to creatures of a higher nature; if they may with any warrant of the holy Text, serue to expresse him the better to our apprehensions. Soe ignorantly deuoute were those tymes in which the Order of Saint George vvas first insti∣tuted, that it may be some mistook our Patrō. Yet none can peremptorily affirm that it was any crea∣ted Saint whom our Fore fathers first chose to bee the Gardian of this Kingdome, & honored by the Name of Saint George, much lesse can they affirme that it vvas George the Martyr. For, if they had ay∣med at a creature for their Patron, it is likely they would haue chosen one of the blessed Patriarcks or Apostles, as Scotland, Spaine, & other Nations did; or one of their owne contry Saints, as in Ire∣land and France; and not haue committed them∣selues to a stranger-saint who, perhaps, neuer heard of this Realme; and of whose being, or holynesse they haue no certainty. Otherwise they were either much distrest for a Sainte, or very indifferent to
whose patronage they committed themselues. Our predicessors desiring a tutelary Saint for this kingdome, according to the superstition of their neighboring Cuntrys (as the Children of Israel longed for a King after the manner of other Nations) It may be, that it pleased God, (prouiding better then they themselves desired) to mooue them to make choyce of a Name, long since attributed to God himselfe; which being considered according to that allegoricall story aunciently ascribed therevnto (& vsually inter∣preted to meane the Champion of the Churcb) could not certainely be applyed to the person of any inferior Saint. And so, they honored in their solemnity the true Deitie, though it were, per∣happs, (till the light of the gospell begann to shine clearer) as ignorantly as the Athenians did, when they sacrifized therevnto, vpon that Alter which they inscribed, TO THE VNKNOW∣NE GOD. For the vulger history of Saint George, is in the litterall sence so improbable, so hyperboicall, & so voyd of testimony: And in the Allegoricall sence so proper; so auntiently re∣ceaued, So aluding to the Victory of Saint Mi∣chael; & that name of George, aunciently made the patron of soe many Christian Cuntryes, & Honorable Orders of kingthood, that I am perswa∣ded it siginfied no lesse person then he that is said to make warr with the Dragon in the Revela∣tion of Saint Iohn. But (whomsoeuer former
Ages vnderstood by St. George) the Soueraignes of that Order who were since the Reformation of Religeon (& who by the lawes of that fellovv∣ship are to resolue all doubtfull questions concer∣ning their Order) haue long since (as I am infor∣med) declared that by Saint George they vnder∣stand no other Patron then he to whose praise I haue directed my Hymne. Yet some will not allow the Solēnities of that day to be esteemed so reverend, nor the Order of St. George to be so Christian an Institution as I account it, by reason of that occasion wherevpō it is said to haue bene first inuēted. As if the almigh∣ty prouidēce did neuer turne mens vaine purposes, to become beyond their ovvne meaning the occa∣sion of that which is of great cōsequence. Yes ve∣rely. When Pharohs daughter vvent to fetch but an idle vvalke, shee brought home Moses the De∣liuerer of his Brethren: vvhen Saul went to seeke Asses, he found a Kingdome; & whē Agrippa heard St. Paul out of curiosity only, he vvas made al∣most a Christian. So, the first founder of that Ho∣norable Order, did intend a vvhile (it may be) to erect some Title of honor sutable to his first appre∣hension. But considering better thereupon, & ad∣uising vvith his graue Counsell hovv to establish that vvhich might redound most to his honor; he raised his purposes farr aboue the first designe, & instituted a new Brotherhood of Christiā Knights; which he & his Nobles entred into, & recōmēded to posterity, to be professed & cōtinued to the
praise of God almighty; the honor of the holy Church militāt; & the encrease & confirmatiō of brotherly loue amōg his Peeres: As their Records (& the Divine exercices vsed in the Church be∣longing to their order) do apparantly shew. Yea, they voluntarily oblige themselues to the obser∣uation of so many pious Ordinances & Resolu∣tions (vvhich are the conditions of their Order) that it testifies much piety in the first Founders, occasioneth much vertuous emulatiō in the prin∣cely Brotherhood, & is for these Reasons become so renouned, that it hath bene desired & receaued, by the greatest Kings & Princes of Christēdome, as one of the most Christean, & most honora∣ble Orders of Kinghthood in the vvorld. And to shew that those things which are worthy on thēselues are not thought any whitt disparaged among wisemen (because they haue sprung from meane occasion) the Soueraigne & fellowshipp of this excellēt Brotherhood (knowing it no shame to retaine the remebrāce of that which first occa∣sioned this institution) haue called themselues Knights of S. Georg & of the Garter. Yet as if they foresaw alsoe, that some foolish or malitious de∣tractors would from thence take aduātage, to en∣deauor how they might disparage, their honorable Fraternitey, they haue for their Impreza these words imbroydered vpon a litle Belt or Garter; HONI SOIT QVI MALY PENSE, which they weare as in reproofe & contempt, of all evill & sinister imaginations.
I am sorry there should haue bene any necessity of speaking thus much, in defence of that which is so apparantly commendable; but, since the ma∣lice & ignorance of some hath giuen the occa∣sion, I hope, neither the Kings Majestie the Soue∣raigne of that most Honorable Order here mētio∣ned, nor any member thereof will take it amise, that out of my zeal to their honor I haue spo∣ken according to my simple vnderstanding in a matter of such consequence. For, while it is permitted, that divine Mysteryes & those things which concerne euen to the honor of God Al∣mighty, may be defended by the meanest of his servants, when his adversaries haue made them disputable; I trust it shalbe excusable for me, to exprese my good opinion of this Mystery of State (which by some is not so rightly conceaued of as in my Iudgmēt it ought to be) especially seeing we haue had oftē experience that truth & honora∣ble Actions, become the more confirmed & the more glorious, by being drawne into question. I haue now delieuered vnto your RRces the reason of those things for which I & my Booke of Hymnes haue bene abused & miscensured by the Stationers▪ & their Confederates; humbly de∣siring your Fatherhoods, that if you perceaue any good in what I haue said or done, or any hope of makeing me such a one as I desire to approoue my selfe, that you would be pleased to giue your approbation to that which is well; & instruct me
wherein I might be made better. If not for my sake, yet for that truthes sake which you your sel∣ues professe, & for the honor of that devotion which (for ought you knowe) I haue truly sought to advance let not faulse imputations or the scan∣dalls of the malitious (which euen the best men were euer subject vnto) preiudice that among you, which I haue offred vp vnto God; or loose me any of your good opineons, vntill you shall see more apparant cause to condemne me. For, since God hath bene so mercifull vnto me, to couer all my transgressions in such manner that none cann iust∣ly accuse me of any scandalous matter, in all my life tyme why should men be so cruell, as to seeke my disparagment by my best endeavor? Let not my youth (or the want of that calling which I dare not vsurpe) make me or my labors the more contemptable to your Wisdomes; nor let the vniust Rumors which the Deceaver hath provoked my traducers to divulge, make those meditations seeme vnhallowed, which I haue pre∣pared for the honor of God. For, if the Devil had not perceaued them somewhat tending to the Almighties praise, doubtles, he & his Instruments would haue suffred them to passe as quietly, as those vaine inventions do, which he inspires; & yt would haue bene no more disparagment to me, to haue bene thought subject to some imperfec∣tions, then it is to other men; nor had my Life, my lines, my habit, my vvords, & my very thoughts
bene pried into & censured, as they haue bene: Which (liuing were I doe, so much knowne as I am, and the vvorld being so malitious as it is) might giue occasion to discouer some spotts in a fayrer garment then mine. I protest before the searcher of all hearts, that I am not carefull to make this Apology, or to be∣seech your good opiniō, so much to preserue mine owne personall esteeme, as to prouide that virtue and deuotion might not be hindred or scandalized through me or my deprauers. Yet am I neither insensible of my temporall repute, nor so desirous of maintaining it, as if I should droupe without it; or thought the honor of good studyes might not be preserued without mine. For, I know truth shall prevaile though I perish; and to the praise of God (& out of my confidence in his loue) be it spoken, I am perswaded, for mine owne part, that all the world shall not haue powre to turne me out of that course, which he hath set me into: but rather, make me relish my happinesse the bet∣ter by their disturbance, & enable me in due time to despise, most perfectly those vaine applauses & encouragments, whereby my weakenesse doth, as yet, require to be otherwhile supported. And, it may be those who shall liue in the next Age (how∣euer I am now thought of) will wonder how the Deuill could find out a Company shameles enough to oppose and dispaurage me in soe vnchristian a manner, as my Adversaries do.
For, they haue not only offred me those inju∣ries, afore mentioned, and many other which hu∣manity forbidds; but exercised their tongues also, so scurrilously; so vnciuelly, and so vniustly to the disgrace of my personn, that had I not long tyme envred my selfe to the barking of Doggs, and the snarling of such Beasts, I had bene much out of patience. If I might not be thought to misapply the text, (as I thinke I should not) there is scarce one passage in the Psalmes of blessed Dauid, con∣cerning the cōbinations & practises of a malitious multitude, but I haue had occasiō in a literall sēce to apply the same to my Aduersaries For, they haue rewarded me euill for good, and layd things to my charge which I knew not. They haue priuely laid netts to ensnate me without a cause. They haue re∣viled me all the day long, are madd vpon me, and sworne together against me. Like Oxen and fatt Bulls they haue enclosed me, grind at me like dogs round about the Citty; & when I sound the words of their mouthes as soft as butter, there was warr in their hearts. They hold all together, keepe thēsel∣ues close, & marke my stepps▪ whē they see me, they flatter, speake lyes, & dissēble with their double heart. They are sett on fyre, they haue whett their tōgues like swords; their teeth are speares & arrows, their lipps speake deceit, & their mouth is full of urfing and bitternesse, they haue persecuted me whē I was smitten, euē in my Aduersity they reioy∣ced,
& gathered themselues together against me, They whisper and take counsell to my hurt. The drun∣kards among them haue made songes on me; yea the very abjects haue assembled & made mowes at me, & so nearely imitated that crew of whom the Psalmist complaineth, that if my Hymnes vvere as full of that good spirit which inspired David, as my Adversaryes seeme to be of that evill spirit which possessed his enimies, my Son∣ges might vvell haue passed whithout exception. But, Gods will be done, For; I know he will in the best opportunity, deliuer me from those oppressors. I haue bene hithèrto as a deafe man to all they haue obiected, because I knew it was gods pleasure, that I should be afflicted for the evill which is in my vvorke that he might the more comfort me, for that which his goodnesse hath made good in me. And I had bene longer silent in their reproofe, but that my Adversaries haue, perhapps, bene permitted soe much & soe foo∣lishly to prouoke me, that those many iniuryes they haue offred others, might be called into que∣stion by this meanes, for the generall good. yea paradventure they haue giuen this occasion, that their owne words might make them fall. whether it be so or not, sure I am to be deliuered from them, when my suffrings are compleat. He that hath showne me troubles will (as he hath often done) novv also deliver me. Euen he vvill com∣fort me for those yeares wherein he hath afflicted
me; because I haue placed my hope only on him. Yea, he vvill shew me some token for good, that such as haue hated me may be ashamed, & that those vvho loue me may praise his name for my cause; In vvhich assurance, I vvill rest, ex∣pecting my revvard from aboue the Sunne. For, I haue vvith Salomon obserued and seene that here vnder the Sunne the race is not to the svvift, nor the batle to the stronge, nor bread to the vvise, nor riches to men of vnderstanding, nor favor to men of knowledge; but tyme & chance commeth to them all. Eccl. 9. 11. And, I hope that your RRces, vvhom as the Ambassodors, & true Ministers of God I haue euer honored, loued, & obeyed, vvill in vvhat you may be as helpefull in the setling of my ont∣vvard peace, as your Instructions haue bene to be∣get in me an invvard contentment. That, vvhich hath bene cēsured vndiscreet in my former studyes vvas punished seuerely: let not that also, vvhich the King & Authority approoues commendable, be made preiuditiall vnto me. For, vvhich vvay then shall I employ my selfe vvithout disadvan∣tage? Although I grudge not that men addicted to the most vaine exercizes, cann reap profitt & regard; Yet, methinks, it is somevvhat vnequall that he vvho hath bestovved his tyme, his paines, & his fortunes in better studyes, should be alto∣gether denyed his labor for his travell: Or vvhich is vvorse, suffer for his good intentions; & because
he hath endeauored more then a hundred, bee abused more then a thousand. I would it were otherwise, for their sakes, vvho haue but begun to tast the comfort & svveetnesse of attempting good things; that none of those may be discouraged (through my hard vsage) vvho haue in the prime of their youth, forborne their pleasu∣res, & forsaken the ordinary pathes of preferment, to prosecute that, vvhich may redound as vvell to the profit of others, as to their ovvne benefite. And I vvould to god, that such as ought to cherish & direct those, vvho desire to spend their tyme & best faculties in the seruice of God, vvould not so enuiously carpe at honest parformances, as many do, vvhen their humor is not fitted in euery perticuler: Perhapps alsoe, vvhen those per∣ticulers vvere approoued of, by wisermen. When an Archer hath shott, it is aneasy & an or∣dinary matter for the foolish lookers on, to say he hath mist thus, or thus much of the marke; but giue them the Bovv, & it vvill soone appeare that they are better at fin∣ding fault vvith others, then in doing vvell themselues. Against such as these; I haue had some cause to complaine, not only among the Stationers, but (I am sorry I should haue reason to speake it) some, euen of the Cleargy, are that vvay blame vvorthy; & haue (as I am credibly informed) so friuelously & so inuiriously objected
against my Hymnes; that their ovvne freinds, & hearers haue discouered that it vvas the Author rather then his Booke vvhich they affected not. For, al they could say being vrged, to expresse per∣ticuler exceptions, was this, that I was no Divine; And, it hath appeared to the iust disparagment of some among them, that they had neuer so much as handled the booke they disapprooued. Whence should this proceed, but from selfe corruption, & the basest enuy? And what flesh & blood could endure it, with silence? The most eminent, the most learned, the most devout, & the most approoued of our Devines, haue thought it worthy praising God, for to see a man of my quality exercize his faculty that way. Some of the most reuerend of them, haue sought me out, & honored me for it, with more respect then I find my selfe vvorthy of; that they might encourage me in such endeauors. Yea the Kings most excellent Majestie, hath by his priuiate ap∣probation of that booke, & vnder his publike seale, giuen soe princely a testemony of his de∣sire, to credit & cherish in his Subjects, exer∣cizes' of such nature; that their abuse of me, is not without some iniury to the Iudgment & Authority of his Majestie. Surely, he hath not deserued it at their hands: And alas, vvhat cause haue I gi∣uen them, that they should thus deale vvith me? What labor of theis did I er traduce?
Or vvhose good repute at any tyme haue I envied at? vvhen I haue seene the nakednesse of some among them, I haue couered it. Yea, I haue la∣bored to saue the reputation of such as these, vvhere their indiscretions had nigh lost it: And vvill they so recompence me as to conuert my best Actions to my reproach? Cann they not be con∣tent to be silent, vvhen they are not disposed to approoue, but must they dispraise alsoe, to the encouragment of my other ignorant Aduersaries in their opposition? And, because I haue per∣formed a laborious vvorke, not so exactly, per∣happs, as they conceaue it might haue bene; vvill they make it more my disparagment, then it is to some of them to be employed about nothing? If in any thing I haue deserued ill, let them not secreetly traduce me, but christianly reprooue me according to the duty of their callings. If I haue deserued nothing, let them advise me hovv to merrit better; or suffer me to be altogether vnspoken of, as those many thousands are that do nothing. If I haue deserued any thing, let tm leaue me to the fruite of mine ovvne labor, & if that be not able to reward it selfe vvith∣out their cost, I vvil suffer the losse. I haue hi∣therto spent my ovvne tyme & fortunes, in my studyes; neuer ayming at any of their spirituall promotions, (no not so much as at a lay Prebhend) for my labor. For, the principall revvard I seeke, is that vvhich euery eye seeth not, & that vvhich
those vvho iudge my affections by their ovvne, think me to haue least thought on. As for that outward benifite vvhich the necessityes of this life, & my fraylties vrge me somevvhat to looke after; it is that little profitt only, vvhich my worke naturally brings vvith it selfe: nor shall I be long discontented, if that alsoe be taken from me. Some haue already a strong expecta∣tiō to see me wholy depriued of it; & some (kind harts) could be content to allow me a part there∣of, but not so much as they suppose my iust profitt vvould amount vnto. For, (they say) that were too great a consideration for so lit∣tle a vvorke. Wherein, they shew their grosse partiality: For, thousands a yeare is not accounted suffieient for some who haue suddainely attained their estates, by vnnecessary or base (& perhapps, wicked) employments: Yet, they esteeme one hundred too much for him that hath performed a worke honest & profitable to the publike▪ be∣cause he performed it in a shorter tyme then some vvould haue done. Neuer thinking how many yeares practise & expences, he had first coned▪ to make himselfe fit for such an  neuer considering what he might haue gained, if he had bestowed the same tyme, charge, & indus∣try in other professions; neuer regarding owlōg he might haue bene vvithout hope of profit, if that had not happened, Hovv vncertain the fruite may yet prooue, nor hovv many troubles,
charges, and hinderances he hath bene heretofore at, without any consideration at all. But, I leaue them to their vniust diuission: Let them alot me what they please, & ballance my Talent as they list. God will prouide sufficient for me, to whose pleasure I referr the succeffe: &, though I may in this manner speake a little, to shew them I am sensible of their vsage. Yet, they shall see I will walke as contentedly, what euer happens, as if I had the fullfilling of all my hopes. I beseech your RRces to pardon me, though my penn hath spirted a little ynke on those last mētio∣ned; For, next the Stationers they haue bene of all others the most iniurious vnto me: And saue that I haue a Christian regard, to their calling, and to preserue the patience becomming him that hath exercized himselfe in sacred Stu∣dies, I had here dropt gall, and made them perceaué that I haue as true feeling of harsh vsages, as other men. But, I do for Gods sake spare them, and for your sakes, whom I haue found ready to comfort, assist, and direct me in my good pur∣poses. I do forbeare the Stationers alsoe in the mention of many particuler mivsages yet not spoken of; and in desisting to agrauate what I haue hitherto touched vpon, so farr forth as I haue cause.
For, if I should here declare vnto your RRces, by way of illustratiō how many seuerall Discourtisies they haue offred me; hovv they haue resisted the Kings Grant, since the beginning of our Controuersy: hovv they concluded to let me dis∣burse all the mony I could, before they would openly oppose me, that thē my profit being hinde∣red I might be constrained to yeald to their plea∣sures, or to be ruined in my estate: Hovv vio∣lently they haue euer since persecuted my purpo∣sed hinderance, to my great losse: How willfully they haue misenformed the Kings Majestie & diuerse honorable personages concerning my Grant (& my procedings) to procure my damage: Hovv vniustly they gaue out among their Customers, that my Grant was a Mono∣poly, & an exaction to the oppression of the people: Hovv impudently & faulsly, they haue verefied, that I had procured that no man might buy a Bible, Testament, or Communi∣on-Booke which out my Hymnes: How they compelled a fevv of the Bookebynders (whose estates much depend on their fauors) to pre∣sent the high Court of Parliament with di∣uers vntrue suggestions in the name of foure∣score; when as all except 4. or 5, of them, did (as I haue heard) reiect the said information as faulse & rediculous: hovv foolishly they haue sought to make me seeme pore in my esta∣te, as if I had aymed at some reputation that way:
Hovv from day to day, during all this Session they haue maintained three or foure of their Instruments, to clamor against me at the Par∣liament house dore, in so rude a fashion as vvas neuer exampled in any Cause: How farr they haue threatned to engage themselues & their fortunes in my opposition: Hovv dishonestly they dare pretend the good of the Common vvealth when they haue but priuate ends; & vvhen they themsel∣ves do really oppresse the same, & are (in a higher nature) truly guilty of those greeuances, vvhich they faulsely lay vnto my Charge: Hovv maliti∣ously they haue hindered themselues & their whole Company, of an assured benifite, that I might haue the greater losse: Hovv they take occasion in all Assemblyes to vent as much as they cann to my disparagment; as if they had projected to make me (if it vvere possible) infamous through out the whole Kingdome. I say, if I should giue vnto your RRces all these perticulers truly Illustrated; & shew how false I could prooue their informations; hovv cruell their dealings, hovv base their slanders, hovv absurd their cavills, & hovv much I haue vvith patience endured them vnspoken of (till this day) in hope to find them better affected; you vvould say that God had ena∣bled me beyond the povvre of mine ovvne vveak∣nesse. And perhapps alsoe, you vvould think it a vvorke of mercy, to helpe deliuer me from their Tyranny.
But, the amplification of these things, and my answeares to all those obiections vvhich they haue published, I reserue for the high Court of Parlia∣ment; or for their hearing vvho shalbe appointed Iudges of the differences betvveene vs. And then, if I shall not appeare vvorthy to be freed frō their oppression, I wilbe cōtented still to suffer; & to giue vp both my labors and Priueledges to be the prey of their Auarice. In the meane tyme, I vvill defend my selfe and my right as I am able. In vvhich I know, I shall haue much to doe; Seeing those vvhom I am to resist are an Aduersary so many wayes armed for my disad∣vantage, as I could hardly haue found out the like. For, they will not only come against me, in the Name of a respected Corporation, preten∣ding the good and releefe of a pore Multitude (vvhich I shalbe able to proue vnder the hands, of 60 of their owne Company they haue made porer then otherwise it vvould haue bene) but they haue so many other fayre pretences alsoe, such clokes of sincerity, and such vnsuspected in∣sinuations to screwe themselues into good opi∣nion, to his disaduantage vvhom they op∣pose, that he shall haue need of all his facul∣ties. And, though their cause should appeare faulty: Yet, they haue soe plentifull a stock to make it hopefull; soe many heads to plott euasions; soe many Soliciters to prosecute their desig∣nes,
such Instruments ready to stretch their consciences to serue them; So many seuerall per∣sons to procure freinds; Such a multitude to lay the shame and blame among▪ when they do a man any wilfull or apparant iniury; So much oppertu∣nity (by meanes of their Trade and Customers) to possesse the generality on their behalfes; Such a Brood of Ingles (by reason of their many trouble∣some suites) in euery Court of Iustice, and about euery eminent person, ready to serue their turnes; And so desperately valiant are they in vowing the persecutiō of what they vndertake (though it were to be maintained by the expence of many thou∣sand punds) that to graple with them, and come of vnfoiled, were one of Hercules his la∣bors. I scarcely sett my foot into any place, whither I vsually resort, but I am told of their foule lan∣guage against me: I seldome meet that man of my Acquaintance, but they haue possest him with somewhat against my Grant; Nor come I into that Noble-mans lodginge, where they haue not already one of his Chamber, or some other near about him, forward to dispute their cause; and vppon all occasions to possesse their Lord with such vntrue suggestions as they dare informe. And questionles they haue other aduātages that my ex∣perience among them, hath not yet discouered; which if God should turne to foolishnes, I doubt they would grow desperate. For, (as I am told)
one of them vvas not ashamed lately to affirme, that if their ayme succeeded not, it vvould cost some their liues. God blesse the men, and giue them grace to see their distemper before it come to that; and in tyme to suspect the honoesty of that cause, vvhich vvresteth out such vvords of despera∣tion. For mine owne parte, my conscience is witnesse of such vvarrantablenes in mine, that (vvhether I sink or swimme in that particuler) I hope, and am perswaded, it shall make toward my best happinesse. But, I haue gotten (some vvill say) such a powre∣full and furious Aduersary by this quarrell, that I shall fill my life full of troubles & dangers. Indeed, I looke to find them perfect enimies; but (since I must haue enimies) they are such soes as I would desire to haue. I expect they vvill proue violent & subtill, but not so violent or subtill, as the Deuill, who is euery moment watching to deuour me: And, it may be their malice vvill make me so vigi∣lant ouer my selfe, that I shall the better escape his. I haue heard one that thinking to kill his enimie, gaue him a sleight hurt that cured him of a mor∣tall disease; and so may they serue me. I was euer as carefull as I could be, of my wayes; Yet, knowing no great Foes I had, but such only as were spirituall, I more striued for an inward sin∣cerity, then to make fayre appearances outwardly; and therefore gaue, perhapps, some occasion now and then, of scandall through my simple freedome:
because, haueing no ill purpose, I thought euery looker on, vvould censure as charitably of my Ac∣tions, as my Intentions deserued. But, novv I shall haue remembrancers to prouoke me to more strict circumspection, & betwixt the Deuill in se∣cret, & my nevv foes in publike▪ shalbe kept, I ho∣pe so watchfull, that myne eye shall not dare looke off from God. Nor, my hand fasten it selfe vpon the rotten stae of any humane protection. I will perswade my selfe, that where ere I goe, one of them doggs me: & though it is not the feare of the world for which I make conscience of vvhat I do, yet an outward obiect may sometyme quickē an inward consideration when it is almost a∣sleepe, & I embrace the occasion▪ They lately threatned the marking of my wayes: & I therefore giue them hearty thankes: for, I ne∣uer since behold one of their Fraternity, but it is an Alarum to me, & driues me immediately to consider, what I last did, what I am then doing, & what I purpose to goe about. Nay, I haue apos∣siblity of braue Aduantages, if their enmity en∣crease, as it hath done hitherto. There is not an ouersight which I was guilty of since my cradle, nor a Folly which I was euer suspected of, nor any forgetfulnesse which I may be prone to fall into; but I hope they vvill enquire it out & lay it to my charge. That the great Accuser may haue the sse to obiect, at the last Iudgment.
These priueledges will I gaine by it. If they ac∣cuse me of ought wherein I am truly faulty; it shall I trust moue me to a true repentance, begett in me amendment for the tyme to come; & through the shame of this life, lead me into the glory of the next. If any cry me be obiected whereof I am cleare, I vvill remember that the vvorld hath sometyme praised me more then I diserued, so (etting her praises & disparagments to ballan∣ce one another) vvill forgiue her, & haue as lit∣tle to do vvith her, hereafter as I cann. Yea, it may be that if my Aduersaries vvould once speak out & openly, that which they whisper priuately to to my disgrace, I should thence take occasion not only to acquite my selfe of many imputations, vvhereby I am novv iniured to the scandall of my personn, & the hinderance of some of that good vvith my labors might els effect; But I shall paraduenture alsoe find oppertunity thereby to to publish that, which vvill teach others vpō what considerations they may keepe their minds quiet, in the like affliction; And shevv them how to convert all malitious defamations to the shame of their enimies, to the glory of God, to their present consolation, and to their future aduantage for euer. Nay if my Aduersaries hold on that violence vvhich they now make shevv of, I trust to Discouer hereafter, by my constant example, these to be no brauadoes or meere verball florishes▪
but that there is in my soule a reall knowledge & feeling of what I professe. For, I haue by my selfe mustered my forces; and I haue considered that I am but one, and they ma∣ny: I know no man of powre whose assistāce I may challenge by any desert of my owne, whereas their large gratuities haue that way made them strong. I find my naturall bashfullnesse to be such that I could not (though it were to saue my life) trouble men in honorable place about my priuate quar∣rells. For, if they be altogether strangers it seemes to me impudence to solicite them; If we are but acquainted only, me thinks I should first deserue somewhat. And I hold that he who is worthy the name of my freind will do me what fauor he cann without asking it, assoone as he par∣ceaues I need him. On the contrary; their audaci∣ty is such, that they cann shamelesly importune and scrape to any man, for their aduantage; euen to those whom they haue abused rather then faile. I haue remembred likewise, that I am scarce able to prouide their due fees required in the prosecu∣tion of my cause, whereas they haue large bribes to giue (if any liued in this Age that vvould ac∣cept them.) I haue pondered alsoe, how vnapt my disposition is to vvork vpon dishonest Aduanta∣ges, and how readily they take all oppertunities to my vvrong. Beside these, many other dispropor∣tions I discouered in our strenghts vpō my survay; Neuertheles when I had sett downe the nature of
my cause, and surveyed vvhat Amunition God  a good conscience had stored vp vvithin me, I made vp my Resolution for the cumbate; And, now I beginn to be acquainted with their skir∣mishes, the more my dangers appeare, the lesse are my discouragments. Yea, I vowe, all their great threats are but as so many handfulls of dust cast into the vvind; and all the mischeefe the vvhole body of their forces is yet able to bring about, cannot breake me of so much sleepe as on flea. For, when according to Dauids example I seek to strenghthen my saith with calling to mind Gods former protections; I finde that when I was all alone and vnarmed (after the manner of the vvorld) I was deliuered from two afflictions, vvhich (all circumstances considered) were as dan∣gerous in appearance▪ as the Beare and Lyon which assailed Dauid: and I take it for an inal∣lable token, that I shall be now alsoe saued from the Philistian-like troupe, and their Goliah-like Champions, who haue railed vpon that which vva prepared for the honor of the liueing God: And (though I am not vsed to their vveapons) shall be provided of a sling and a stone sufficient enough to encounter their yron speares, and brazen head∣peeces, in spight of that Targateer in vvhom they trust. And I am perswaded that God hath per∣mitted me to suffer what hath be fallen me by their meanes, not only to punish my synnes, and
exercize my faith in him; but that being a little experienced in Dauids afflictions, I might haue somevvhat the more feeling of that which he suf∣fred (by reason of the Combinations of his vvicked Aduersaryes) and oe be made the abler to expresse his passions, and the persecutions of Iesus Christ and his members, sett forth in his holy Psalmes; which I am preparing for our English Lyre. For, I finde aswell by my owne experience, as by the testimony of diuers learned men conuersant in that booke, that it can neuer be relished or vvell vnderstood by any man, vntill he hath passed through the tryall of some extraordi∣nary afflictions. These expressions will to some (paraduenture) who are not acquainted with me, and the true state of my cause, seeme impertinent and vnsauory; but, I knowe their vse & necessity to be such, and haue so vvell examined the warrātablenese of my priuate ends therein, (and the probablenesse of a profitable successe) that I am not ashamed to ex∣pose them to the vvorld; nor fearefull of any man dislike. Nor do I value the taxation of those who shall vpon the view of this condemne me of too much bitternesse in the reprouing and laying open the cruelty of my Aduersaryes. For, my conscience is vvitnesse that I haue vsed no termes of sharpe∣nesse but such as I haue example for, out of the cō∣plaints of the meekest saints of God; and such as are properly required to describe the true nature of
their malice. And I protest before the almighty God, that to my knowledge I haue added nothing in this discourse concerninge them, but what is either true in my owne experience, or so proba∣bly declared vnto me, that I haue no cause to sus∣pect the contrary: And so far am I from bearing the least personall malice to any of them, that I dayly pray for them as heartely as for my selfe. Yea, that day in vvhich they do me the greatest vnkindnesses, I most earnestly vvish them well; & do thē feele my spirit striuing against my naturall corruption on their behalfe, more powrefully then at other tymes. And (vvhateuer they beleeue of me) God let me not prosper in any affayre of this life, if I vvould not be depriued of my best earthly hopes, rather then do a vvilfull iiury, euen to him among them of vvhose particuler malice I haue most experience. Which prote∣station, no man haueing the feare of God dare to pronounce vntruly; nor cann any man haueing the charity of a good Christian, suspect it to be false, being so deliberately declared. Or if this asseueration be not enough, my dayly practise and behauior towards them vvill witnesse somevvhat on my befalfe. For, though they haue not only hindered my profit to the va∣lue of some hundreds of pounds since our dissen∣tion, but vvasted much alsoe of my principall estate;
Yet, when I had sufficient Authority to haue made my selfe immediatly whole againe, vpon their goods who were prime Agents against me; neuer∣thelesse, I long forbore to put my powre in exe∣cution, and vvhen I vvas compelled to execute it vpon some of them, I returned their goods back againe vpon their owne entreaty, & forgot and forgaue all misvsages without returning so much as a harsh vvord vnto them, or retaining so much as the charges of ceasure; because, if it had bene possible I vvould haue vvonn them by fayre meanes. Yea, vvhen it vvas in my powre to haue procured the committment of some among them, who had showne themselues most spightfull vnto me; I forbore to aggrauate the matter against them, according to their desert (euen out of meere charitable compassion) though I suspected they vvould laugh at me for my labor, as I heard after∣vvard they did. Which doth (at least) proba∣bly verify that I haue no malignant or reuengfull inclination toward the personn of any one among them. For, what cann they deuise against me more prouoking then they haue already done? Verely, there is no other cruelty lest, for them to prac∣tise, but the torturing of my flesh: & what is that, in respect of vvounding my reputation, which they haue so much endeauored. Men of the basest condition vvill dayly haz∣zard their bodyes for the defence euen of their suparfluous goods, or vpon the giuing of one
disgracefull word; & therefore, it seemes that among some, those are greater iniuries then to vvound & kill. How great wrong do I then beare in my fame, that suffer patiently not only their triuiall imputatiōs, but to be vniustly alsoe, accounted a blasphemer & a profane person? and am by their meanes depriued, not only of super∣fluities, but in a manner of all my liuelyhood? For when those Freinds who are engaged for me are satisfied (to which purpose there is yet I praise God, sufficient set apart) I vovve in the faith of an honest man, that there vvill not be left me in all the world, to defend me against my Aduersaryes, & supply the comon necessityes of nature, so much as vvill feed me one vveeke, vnles I labor for it. Which, my enimies are partly enformed of, & do therevpon triumph. But not to my discon∣tentment. For, I do comfort my selfe, to think how sweet it will be to sitt hereafter at some ho∣nest labor, and sing those Hymnes and Songes to the praise of God, for which the vvorld hath taken from me her fauors. Nor doth it trouble me to publish thus much of my pouerty, though I knowe it vvill sound disgracefully in the eares of most men. For, I meane to procure no man to hazzard his estate for me, by pretending better possibili∣ties to secure him then I haue; as others vsually do: Nor value I the reputation vvhich comes by vvealth or such like things as may be lost through the malice of others, because I know I shall be the
better esteemed of for those toyes, by none but Fooles or such Ideots as will sooner blush to be found pore, then dishonest. Yea, I am assured that among good & wise men, it vvill be no more shame vnto me to be made pore by such meanes as I haue bene, then it is to be made sick by the hand of God: Nor cann I think it vvill be more my disgrace to haue vvasted my estate through my studyes, then it is to some other students to haue thereby empaired their healthes. But, some will object that I haue by publishing this Apology not only taxed those vvho are guil∣ty of such things as I haue perticularized, but layd a publike imputation alsoe, vpon the whole Company of Stationers; & bene so generall in my accusations that the credit euen of those honest men among them, vvill be much endangered. Indeed, the good & badd are incorporated toge∣ther into one body, & so intermixed that it wilbe very difficult to shoot at the Starlings & misse the Pigeons. Yet, I haue discharged this among them (in spight of their threatning the Starchamber) & if novv it be examined where my pelletts fell, you shall find none wounded, but those Starlings which haue troubled the Doue∣house; & that there is not one innocent Doue dispoiled of a feather▪ I protested in the beginning of this discourse, that I had no purpose to lay any scandall vpon the whole Corporation; & that it may appeare I pro∣tested
no more then truth, I will here shew you how those Stationers against vvhom I haue com∣plained, may be knovvne from such as I desire to except from this accusation. I vvill be bold to averr, that many, (& the most powrefull of them) are some of those vvho vsurpe the mani∣ging of the Companies affaires; and that to cullor their malice & priuate coueteousnesse, they do in the name of the Corporation & at the common charge prosecute against me; pretending that it is the cause & good of their vvhole Company, for which they stand. Neuerthelesse, I do not take the vvhole body of the Corporation to be my aduersary, no more then I vvould think the whole Citty of London hated me, if the greatest part of the Court of Aldermen should persue me with malice vpon a priuate quarrell. For, most of those men who are princepally busy against me, vnder the name of the Company of Stationers, are aboue all others iniurious & scandalous to that Company; as appeares by those petitions which haue bene heretofore preferred both to the Kings Majestie & the Parliament house, by some of their owne fraternity, against the oppres∣sions & vsurpations of their Gouernors. Those in∣deed may well be called the scumme (that is the creame) of the Company. For, if they were throughly churnd, welnigh all the fatnesse of his Majesties gratious priueledges giuen to re∣leeue their pore, and for the generall benifite
of their Corporation, vvould be found in them. And so farr is the maine body of their Society from fauoring their courses, or from fearing any disgrace to them by this Apology that lately hea∣ring it vvas to be divulged by the name of the Stationers Commonvvealth; they did▪ expect it with much content: In hope it vvould be an oc∣casion to make some vvay to their deliuerance, from those iniuries vvhich they suffer. And veri∣ly, if you had heard, as I haue done, how many of the Printers, of the Bookebynders, and of the yonger Bookesellers among them, do complaine against most of their Gouernors, and how many matters of great consequence they do probably obiect: You vvould thinke it were vnsufferable, and that it is great pitty there is not some course taken for the strick examination of their Abuses, in such manner that those who are oppressed, may come to declare their greeuances vvithout feare of a future disaduantage. For, those against vvhom they vvould complaine, haueing now in their povvre the estates, & employments of such poore men as think themselues oppressed, they dare not openly appeare against them, vntill they perceaue a likely hope of being fully, speedily, and impar∣tially heard; lest it turne to their vtter vndoing, if they preuaile not. But, what if those aforesaid among the Statio∣ners (who vvould be taken▪ forsooth▪ to be the whole Corporation) haue not abused their owne
society only, but that trust alsoe vvhich hath bene committed vnto them by the State? What, if it may be proued that those bookes vvhich they haue taken from others as vnlawfull, haue bene di∣vulged againe by some in office among them for their priuate commodity? What, if it may appeare they haue solde those bookes vvhich did to their knovvledge cōtaine matter iniurious to the person of the King, and Prince? VVhat, if many of those pamphletts vvhich haue disconten∣ted his Majestie, troubled the State, & disturbed the people, were dispersed (nay procured to be ym∣printed) by some of those? & that their shifting it vpon their seruants, with such like evasions, vvill be found of no truth? What, if it vvill be justi∣fied, that the Wardens of their Company haue found such bookes imprinting; taken a vvay part of them; knevv they vvere vnauthorized and scan∣dalous; & yet permitted both the presse to go on, and the bookes to be divulged? What, if they haue dispersed popish and schismaticall bookes more then any others? What, if those foolish & prophane bookes vvhere vvithall the vvorld is novv filled to the peruerting of youth, and the corrvption of good manners, be manifested to be the coppies that haue enriched many of them? What if those vvrongs, offred to the Vniuersities, and those greeuances vvhich the vvhole common∣vvealth suffers (in being burthened with volumes of trash▪ in being oppressed in the prizes of bookes
and iniured by their vnseruiceable bynding) may be declared to be altogether by their default? Verely, if I should instance vpon these particulers, what I could; their Foundations would shake, & the vvhole frame of their foolish machinations would be shattred about their eares. But, I spare to proceed further vntill they shall further cōpell me: (euē for the sakes of their pore vviues & Children) & vvould vvish them to be vvarned by this gentle Item, to amend among themselues vvhat is amisse before the strict hand of Authority cease them; lest it be then made apparant to the whole King∣dome, that my cheefe persecutors among the Sta∣tioners, be those who are so vnvvorthy to beare the name of the vvhole Company, that they are not so much as good members thereof, but rather, enimies, Robbers and Defamers of their Society, and iniurious to this vvhole Commonvvealth. But, doe I lay this to the charge of all those who are the rulers of this Corporation? No vere∣ly, not to them alone. For, I beleeue there be some of their Cheefes greeued at the peruersenesse of such among them vvho haue bene iniurious to me, & to their Society; and I think they vvould vvillingly remedy all, if the vvilfulnesse of the rest were not more powrefull then their good perswa∣sions; as one (not of the meanest of them) lately confest vnto me. There be alsoe among the in∣ferior sort of Bookesellers, (as my experience hath taught me) some vvell and some ill affected to
my cause: among vvhich multitude, if any man be desirous to distinguish those men from the rest, to whose charge I purpose not to lay the abusing of me, in such manner as is mentioned in this dis∣course; by these obseruations following yt may infallably be done. When any man shall come to a Stationers shopp to buy a Psalmebooke, or any other booke, with which the Psalmes of Dauid in English mee∣ter are bound vp: if he be proffered that booke with my Hymnes therevnto, annexed (according to the Kings Command) or if vvanting it, a rea∣sonable excuse be made; or a promise to prouide it according to the Customers desire: or if vpon the mentioning of me, and that worke of mine, he do neither cauil, nor obiect any thing to the disgrace of that, or me: or if vpon enquiry after this booke, he promise to procure it, or shew some likely cause why it is not to be had, & nei∣ther raile, nor grumble, nor looke doggedly on him that demands it, before departure: that man was neuer any of those that abused me. Or, if he were, it seemes he is either sorry, or so ashamed he hath wronged me, that he deserues to be forgiuen: & therefore, I vvould not that any thing which he was guilty of to my harme, should be layd to his charge while he continues in that temper; but my desire is (if it vvere possible) that euery man vvho hath heard him abuse me, should rather quite forget that any such vvronges had bene done.
For, some haue bene ledd on to iniure me out of meere ignorance; some, for Company sake; some, because of their dependance vpon such as are my illwillers; and some, by reason they beleeued ouerwell of those who missedd them: all which, will turne another leafe, as soone as the state of my cause appeareth. But, they vvho haue out of pure malice persecuted me, will not so relent. The Deuill owes them a shame, & vvill not suffer them to see vvherevnto their enuy & blind Coueteous∣nesse vvill bring them, before he hath payd them. Assooone as euer this booke shewes it selfe a∣broade, I durst wager the price of it, that you shall finde those fellowes at some Tauerne within a flight shot of Paules, constulting, quotinge, com∣menting, and obseruing, vvhat may be collected out of it, to my disaduantage: and, if anger do not put them beside their old custome, it vvill cost them a vvorthy legg of Mutton, a Capon, and a gallon or twoe of vvine before any matter vvill∣be disgested vvorth their expences. Next mor∣ning (it is tenn to one els) they may be found at some Lavvyers Chamber, to know what cann be pickt out of this Apology, to beare an Action of slander; or some such like cullor of prosecuting the Law, against me. But, that vvill be to little purpose; for the booke is so large that if their Counsell haue any good practise, he must be fayne to take tyme vntill the next long vacation to read it ouer; and by that tyme, he vvill haue the same
opinō of thē which I expresse. Assoone as they com frō Counsell; at some typling house they vvill pre∣sently meet againe, to comfort themselues vvith that little hope which the law seemes to pro∣misse. And it may be, thither they vvill send for some of those hyreling Authors of theirs, that vse to fashion those Pamphletts that suite the seuerall humors and inclinations of the tymes; or one of those that penns for them such vvorthy storyes, as the Dragon of Sussex, Tom Thumbe, and the vveekely newes. From vvhom if they cann pro∣cure but the promise of makeing some foolish libell against me; or to publish an impudent re∣ply to my Apology; it shall not cost him a far∣thing, if he sitt among them till tvvelue a clock at night; and perhapps he shall haue somewhat in earnest alsoe, of a better penny. If any man enquire of thē for my booke of Hym∣nes, he shall be sent avvay vvithout it; and per∣happs they vvill passe some scandalous censure therevpon. If this booke be asked after among them, they vvill presently discouer themselues by some bitter language; and by protesting against it, as a scurrilous and libellous pamphlet: vpon the very nameing of me, their cullor doth vsually change: And if the Company and I should haue any meetings together about these matters in que∣stion, those vvill discouer themselues from the rest, by their Distempered lookes, their contemp∣tible speeches of me, their furious behauiors,
& these are the marks, whereby I distinguish those whom I accuse from those whom I cleare. And, here are no personall Notions, whereby the per∣son of any perticuler man is vninstly desamed (for publikely to accuse any one in that kind vntill Authority require it, is both vnlawfull & vncha∣ritable) But these are markes of quality, which if any man haue vpon him (especially being thus forewarned) it is his ovvne fault if his dis∣grace follovv. And I do no greater vvrong in saying he that doth this or thus, is my mali∣tious enimie; then in affyrming, that he who stealeth is a Theefe. But, these rules do but only marke my freinds from my Foes among the Stationers: Because therefore, I haue charged them in generall with some abuses publikely iniurious; I vvill declare alsoe, how such as are to be approoued blamelesse among them, shalbe knowne from the rest; by ex∣pressing the trne definitiō of an honest Stationer; & the liuely Charecter of his cōtrary. Whom, for difference sake, I call a meere Stationer. An honest Stationer is he, that exercizeth his Mystery (whether it be in printing, bynding, or sel∣ling of Bookes) with more respect to the glory of God, & the publike aduantage, then to his ovvne commodity: & is both an ornament, & a profita∣ble member in a ciuill Commonwealth. He is the Caterer that gathers together prouision to satisfy the curious appetite of the Soule, & is carefull to
his powre that whatsoeuer he prouides shalbe such as may not poyson or distemper the vnder∣standing. And, seeing the State intrusteth him with the disposing of those Bookes, which may both profitt & hurt, as they are applyed, (like a discreet Apothecary in selling poysnous druggs) he obserues by whom, & to vvhat purpose, such bookes are likely to be bought vp, before he will deliuer them out of his hands. If he be a Printer, he makes conscience to exemplefy his Coppy fayrely, & truly. If he be a Booke-bynder; he is carefull his worke may bee strong & seruice∣able. If he be a seller of Bookes, he is no meere Bookeseller (that is) one who selleth meerely ynck & paper bundled vp together for his owne aduan∣tage only; but he is the Chapman of Arts, of wis∣dome, & of much experience for a litle money. He would not publish a booke tending to schisme, or prophānesse▪ for the greatest gain: & if you see in his shopp, any bookes vaine or impertinēt; it is not so much to be imputed his fault, as to the vanity of the Tymes: For when bookes come forth al∣lowed by authority, he holds it his duty, rather to sell them, then to censure them: Yet, he meddles as little as he can, with such as he is truly perswaded are pernitious, or altogether vnprofitable. The reputation of Schollers, is a deare vnto him as his owne: For, he acknowledgeth, that from them, his Mystery had both begining and meanes of continuance. He heartely loues & seekes the prosperity of his ovvne Corporation▪
Yet he vvould not iniure the Vniuersityes, to ad∣vantage it, norbe soe sawcie as to make compa∣risons betweene them. He loues a good Author as his Brother, and vvillbe ready to yeeld him the due portion of his labors, vvithout vvrangling. When he comes to be Maister or Warden of his Company, he labors truly to rectify what is a∣misse; but fyndes so many peruerseones, and so few of his good mind, that his yeare is out, before he cann bring any remedy to passe. He greeues for those Abuses vvhich haue bene offred, to me, & other Authors; but fynding that by speaking on our behalfes he is likely to bring himselfe into an inconuenience vvithout profitt to vs; he prayes in ilence for amendment, and that God vvould not lay to the charge of the whole Corporation, that vvhich but some among them are guilty of. He feares none of those reproofes vvhich are to be found in this booke: For, he knowes himselfe cleare, and is resolued to make sale of it so it come forth vvith allowance from Authority. In a vvord, he is such a man that the State ought to cherish him; Schollers to loue him; good Cu∣stomers to frequent his shopp; and the vvhole Company of Stationers to pray for him; For, it is for the sake of such as he, that they haue subsisted, and prospered thus long. And thus, you haue the true discription of such a Stationer as I exempt from my reprofes; now followes the Charecter of him, at whose reformation I haue aymed.
A meere Stationer is he that imagines he vvas borne altogether for himselfe, and exercizeth his Mystery without any respect either to the glory of God, or the publike aduantage. For which cause, he is one of the most pernitious superfluities in a Christian gouerment, and may be well termed the Deuills seedman; seeing he is the aptest Instru∣ment to sowe schismes, heresies, scandalls, and sedi∣tions through the vvorld. What booke soeuer he may haue hope to gaine by, he vvill divulge; though it contayne matter against his Prince, a∣gainst the State, or blasphemy against God; And all his excuse wil be▪ that he knew not it cōprehended any such matter. For (giue him his right) he scarcely reads ouer one page of a booke in seauen yeare, ex∣cept it be some such history as the Wise men of Gotham; and that he doth to furnish himselfe with some foolish cōceits to be thought facetious. He prayseth no booke, but vvhat sells well, and that must be his owne Coppy too or els he will haue some flirt at it: No matter, though there be no cause; For, he knowes he shall not be questioned for vvhat hee sayes; or if he be, his impudence is enough to outface it. What he beleeues is pre∣pared for him, in the next world, I know not▪ but, for his enriching in this life, he is of so large a faith, that he seemes to beleeue, all Creatures and Actions of the vvorld, vvere ordayned for no other purpose but to make bookes vpon, to encrease hi trade: And if another man, of his small vnder∣standing,
should heare him plead his owne suppo∣sed right vvhere none might contradict; He would halfe thinke, that all our Vniuersityes, and Schooles of Learning, were erected to no other end, but to breed Schollers to study for the enri∣ching of the Company of Stationers. If an Author out of meere necessity, do but pro∣cure meanes to make sale of his owne booke, or to peruent the combinations of such as he, by some Royall & lawfull priueledge: He presently cryes it downe for a Monopoly; affyrming that men of his profession may go hang themselues, if that be suffred. Marry; Authors haue a long tyme preser∣ued a very thankfull generation of them from hanging, if they cannot afford them one booke of ten Millions to releeue them vvithall in a case of need: & vvhen that booke was the Authors owne alsoe, & no part of the Stationers former liuely∣hood. This is iust as reasonable a complaint, as if a Cōpany of Haglers should preferr a bill against the Cuntry Farmers▪ for bringing their owne Corne & other prouisions to the next markett. He will fawne vpon Authors at his first acquintance, & ring them to his hiue, by the promising sounds of some good entertainement; but assoone as they haue prepared the hony to his hand, he driues the Bees to seek another Stall. If he be a Printer, so his worke haue such appearance of being vvell done, that he may receaue his hyre, he cares not how vn∣workmanlike it be parformed; nor how many
faults he lett goe to the Authors discredit, & the readers trouble. If his employment be in byn∣ding bookes; soe they vvill hold together but till his worke Maister hath sold them, he desireth not, they should last a weeke longer: For, by that meanes a booke of a Crovvne is mard in one Moneth, which vvould last a hundred yeares, if it had 2d. more vvorkmanshipp; & so, their gaine & employment is encreased to the subiects losse. If he be a seller of Bookes; he makes no conscience what trash he putts off; nor hovv much he takes, for that vvhich is vvorth nothing. He vvill not stick to belye his Authors intentions, or to publish secretly that there is somewhat in his new ym∣printed books, against the State, or some Hono∣rable personages; that so, they being questioned his vvare may haue the quicker sale. He makes no scruple to put out the right Authors Name, & in∣sert another in the second edition of a Booke; And when the impression of some pamphlet lyes vpon his hands, to imprint nevv Titles for yt, (and so take mens moneyes twice or thrice, for the same matter vnder diuerse names) is no iniury in his opinion. If he gett any vvritten Coppy in∣to his powre, likely to be vendible▪ whether the Author be vvilling or no, he vvill publish it; And it shallbe contriued and named alsoe, ac∣cording to his owne pleasure: vvhich is the rea∣son, so many good Bookes come forth imper∣fect, and vvith foolish titles.
Nay, he oftentymes giues bookes such names as in his opinion will make them saleable, vvhen there is litle or nothing in the whole volume su∣table to such a Tytle. If he be none of the As∣sistance of his Company he ordinarily rayles on their partiallyty in mniging of the Kings Pri∣veledges or the generall stock; but, this he doth more in enuy, them in loue to vpright dealing: For, when he comes to those places (into which his very troublesomnesse sometyme helpes him the sooner) he makes all vvorse then before, & playes the knaue CUM PRIVILEGIO. He is then bound to pray for the poore, much more then they are, for him▪ For, they are indeed his Bene∣factors. He will be ready vpon all occasiōs, to boast of the 200. li: a yeare, which is giuen among their pensioner: but, he hath not thankfulnesse enough to tell any man, that it ariseth out of his Majesties Priviledges bestowed for that purpose, nor how many thousand pounds are yearely made thereof beside. If he once gett to be an officer in the Society; he forgetts to speak in the first personn for euer after; but (like a Prince) sayes, we vvill, & wee do this &c. He thinks vpō nothing more then to keepe vnder the inferiors of the Corporation, & to drawe the profitt of the Kings Priveledges to his priuate vse. He stands infeare of nobody ut the Archb: of Canterbury, the Bishop of Londō, & the high Commission, & loues nobody
but himselfe. I cannot deuise what his Reli∣gion is nor he neither (I think.) For, what sector profession soeuer his customer is of, he will fur∣nish him with Bookes tending to his opinions. To a Papist hee rayles vpon Protestants; to Pro∣testants he speakes ill of Papists; & to a Browinst, he reuiles them both. Yet, I dare say this for him, that he is an enimy to the alteration of Religeon in this Commonwealth, because he feares it would spoyle their Priueledge, for Dauids Psal∣mes in English meeter, or hinder the reprinting of many vendible coppyes. Marry a Tolleration he would hold well with all, soe he might haue but the sole printing of the Masse-booke or our Ladyes Psaltet. He will take vpon him to cen∣sure a booke as arrogantly a if he had read it; or were a man of some vnderstanding. He speakes of reuerend Doctors, as disdaynfully as of schoole boyes; And mentiones the Vniuersityes with no more respect, then if all their famous Colledges were but so many Almeshouses maintained out of the Stationers Hall. When he shall heare me or any other object those Abuses, which some of his Company haue offred me to my face; he will vn∣ciuelly giue the lye, & iustify the contrary, as con∣fidently, as if he had bene present at all tymes, & in all places. He is no more pittyfull to a pore man that falls into his powre, then a hungry Bea∣re to a Lambe. When he spakes of him whom he loues not, it is vsually with as much contempt (of
what quality soeuer the other be of) as if he were one of the Almesmen of his Company. If he co∣me among the rest of his fraternity about any cō∣trouersy betweene them and others; he will speake any vntruth that may aduantage his owne side: For, if the matter should require to be iustifyde, he knowes that among many the speaker will hardly be found out, & that when the lye is deuided a∣mong them all, there will not fall much shame vpon any one man. He will allow of no Priveled∣ges which the Kings Majestie shall vouchsafe con∣cerning bookes, vnles he may be interested in the best part of the profitt: Yea, rather thē those which are bestowed vpō his owne Corporatiō shalbe dis∣posed of for the benefite of the generallity, accor∣ding to his Majesties intētiō; he will go neare to do his best to forfeit them altogether: For, he will at any tyme suffer some mischeese himselfe to do another a great spight. He will sweare the peace or good behauior a∣gainst any one whom he is disposed to trouble, though there be no cause; And if he may haue but some of his Brotherhood to stand among; he vvill not stick wilfully to misinforme the whole Court of Aldermen to procure the com∣mittment of such pore men as he prosecutes. And this is one of his infallable markes; if he preuaile in a businesse, or haue but any hope of getting the better; the Tauerne is the Temple where he giueth his God praise: Thither he pre∣sently
repayres to offer vp the sacrifize of fooles; and perhapps is ledd from thence in slate, betweene two supporters (Porters I should haue said) to his owne howse, where he vtters his stomack to his vvife and famely. He is so extreame guilty, and so fearefull that most of these markes are to be found vpon him, that all his freinds shall neuer perswade him, but this Character vvas made by him; and therefore, he vvill take it to himselfe though he be one vvhom I neuer knew nor heard of. He will condēne the Stationer that sells this A∣pology for a faulse brother; and (if it be possible to drawe the rest to be so indiscreet) he will gett the whole Company to take this discription as an abuse to their Mystery; but, they wilbe better aduis'd. He will bestow both vpon me, and vpon this booke, all the foule termes he cann inuent; or giue out, perhapps, that it is nothing sutable to that Mynd which I haue expresse in my Motto: But, let him examine them together, & he shall fynde they disagree not in a word. He will much insist vpō all those bitter reprooes vvhich I haue vsed, and be very sensible of them (noe doubt) because they touch himselfe: but, those iniuryes which are the cause of them, he vvill neuer mention. He will tell his Companions, that they haue Boyes in the Church-yard, able to answeare all this: and (it is odes) but he will carpe aloe, at some want of vvitt or learning in these expressions;
as if there needed any great witt, or learning to be vsed, in bidding a Dogg come out. These pills may, perhapps, stirr his humors, but they will not purge away one dramm of his corruptions; For, he is so blinded with coueteousnesse & selfe will, that (to change his mind) Noyse will preuaile with him, as much as reason: & therefore, this which I haue written, was neuer intented to satisfy him, but others. He truly resembles the Ephesian Sil∣uersimthes; & rather then his Mystery should de∣cay, would preferr Paganisme before Christianity, prophane Ballads before Hymnes praysing God; &, that which he hath not ability to compasse by Reasons, he will attempt by vproares. To conclude, he is a dangerous excrement, worthy to be cutt off, by the State; to be detested of all Schollers; to be shun'd of all the people; & deser∣ues to be curst, & expeld out of the Company of Stationers. For, by the coueteousnesse, cruelty, & vnconscionablenesse of such as he; a flourishing & well esteemed Corporatiō, is in danger to come to ruine, & disgrace. This man, with such as he, are those whom I haue declamed against in this discourse, & no other; nor will I, that my generall accusations shall, in part, or in the whole be imputed to any man in perticuler; but to him that shall apply vnto himselfe this Character, or haue it prooued to be true vpon him by apparant testimony. For, it shall satisfy me enough (& it shall do the
Commonwealth good seruice) if by this satyricall discription of a bade Stationer, and my definition of a good one, those things which are amise may be amended hereafter. And this is an easy and war∣rantable vvay of Correction. For▪ I do not marke them out by their redd Noses, or corpulent paun∣ches (or such like personall defects) vvhich they cannot remedy (as some vvonld haue done) but by their vices which they ought to giue ouer. What an old Poet once said, is yet in force. ——LICUIT, SEMPERQUE LICEBIT PARCERE PERSONIS DICERE DE VITIIS. It shall be lavvfull euer; and hath byn To spare the personns, and to touch the syn. I hae taken that Authors vvord, and put his vvar∣rant often tymes in execution; and (though I haue smarted for it) neuer vvas, nor euer vvill be driuen from this course of proceeding against Male fac∣tors; vntill that foresaid Author come back and deny his warrant. Blame me not, if I seeme bitter to such as these▪ for, their disease needs it: I haue had meanes to know them perfectly; & was compelled to search into the very marrow of their Mystery: and when through my loue to a carnall rest, I became loth to meddle vvith such a nest of hornets (but to suffer an inconuenience rather) they were so oo∣lishly
confident, that they stung me to it. And doubtles, it was permitted by the prouidence of God, that their wickednesse might come to light, before it should occasion greater troubles. Yea, perhapps, I haue bene trayned vp all my life tyme in afflictions, & haue heretofore suffred cō∣cerning bookes, partly to experience me in their Abuses; & partly to enable me to beare out the fury of such a powrefull multitude as doth novv oppose me. Many men of good sufficiency, do wonder (as I heare) what abuses worthy all these words cann be found among the Stationers. For, alas think they; those do but sell bookes to such as come for them; & are a harmelesse kind of people by whom (to their vnderstanding) the Cōmonwealth can receaue no great preiudice, in any matter concerning their Mystery. But, when they haue read ouer this, it will begett another opinion: If not; my next discouery shall. For, I cann, yet launce deeper, & make it euident to the capacity of euery common man; that such as those whom I haue marked out, are they who are the princi∣pall dispersers of heresyes, & the prime disturbers of vnity in the Church. I cann demonstrate, that they are most tymes occasioners of those grudgings & discontentmēts which do other while distemper the minds of the people. That much trouble to the State, is procured by them; that they are the likelyest instruments to kindle factions, &
stirr vp sedition; that they haue invoulued and obscured the certaine tenents of our Church, amōg such a multitude of the priuate fancies and opi∣nions of vpstart vvriters; that the Common people scarce knovve vvhat principles vvee pro∣fesse; and our Aduersaryes take aduantage, out of their vnallovved Pamphlets, to impute to the Church of England, vvhat absurdityes they please. I cann make it euident they haue so pestered their printing houses, & shopps with fruitlesse volumes, that the Auncient & renouned Authors are almost buried among them as forgotten; and that they haue so much vvorke to preferr their termely Pamphlets, vvhich they prouide to take vp the peoples money, and tyme; that there is neither of them, left to bestow on a profitable booke: soe they who desire knowledge are still kept ignorant; their ignorance encreaseth their affectiō to vaine toyes; their affection makes the Stationer to en∣crease his prouision of such stuffe; and at last you shall see nothing to be sould amongst vs, but Cur∣rāto's, Beauis of Southamptonn or such trumpery. The Arts, are already almost lost among the vvri∣tings of Mountebanck Authors. For, if any one among vs vvould Study Phisick, the Mathama∣ticks, Poetry, or any of the liberall sciences, they haue in their vvarehouses so many volumes of quacksaluing recepts; of faulse propositions; and of inartificall Ryminngs (of vvhich last sort they haue some of mine there God forgiue me) that
vnles vve be directed by some Artist, we shall spend halfe our Age before vve cann find those Authors which are vvorth our readings. For, vvhat need the Stationer be at the charge of printing the labors of him that is Maister of his Art, & vvill require that respect which his paine deserueth? Seeing he cann hyre for a matter of 40 shillings, some needy IGNORAMUS to scrible vpon the same subject, and by a large promising title, make it as vendible for an impression or two, as though it had the quin∣tessence of all Art? I cann make it appeare alsoe, that they are the Cheefe hinderers of the aduancement of our lan∣guage, the principall peruerters of good manners; and the prime causers of all that irreligious pro∣phanenesse vvhich is found among vs. And, I doe foresee, that if they proceed as hitherto they haue done, they will be the ruine of their owne Mystery, & bring an invndatiō of Barbarisme vpō all his Majesties Kingdomes, vvhich God diuert. These things haue I discouered; & with a mind neither malitiosly bent to the ruine of the Cor∣poratiō of Stationers, or desirous of the shame or confusion of any one member thereof: but, (what∣soeuer some among them conceaue) I ayme rather at the profitt of the one, & the reformation of the other. And that this may appeare to be true. I vvill in due tyme shevv, that I haue sought as much how to finde a gentle plaster to cure those vlrs, as to make a sharpe instrument to search
them. For, if I may be heard without preiu∣dice; I cann declare by what meanes, and how, the Corporation of Stationers may be hereafter acquited of all those scandalls, that some corrupt members thereof, haue brought vpon it; How, the repinings and discontentments vvhich are a∣mong themselues, may be quieted: How, all my inivryes may be satisfied, to my contentment, without their damage; and how, all the publike abuses mentioned in this discourse, shallbe in some good measure preuented, for euer hereafter: to the Kings Maiesties great content, to the avoy∣ding of much trouble heretofore occasioned to the State; to the good likeing of both Vniuersityes, to the profit ease & credit of the Stationers thēselues; to the furtherance of Christiā peace & vity in the Church, to the preuention of many publik and priuate inconueniences, and in a vvord, to the glo∣ry of God, and to the honor and benifite, of all his Majesties Dominions. And now I haue done troubling your RRces for this tyme: Though I bent my bow to shoot in my owne defence; yet I haue stuck my arrowes vpon a publike enimie. Now you haue heard me, healpe, or leaue me to my selfe as you shall think fitting: For, I haue in euery circum∣stance honestly deliuered my Conscience; and I knovv God vvill deliuer me. Nec Habeo, nec Careo, nec Curo.
