5224 99840704 5231
¶ Come bring in Maye with me, My Maye is fresh and greene: (A subiectes harte, an humble mind) To serue a mayden Queene. A discourse of Rebellion, drawne forth for to warne the wan∣ton wittes how to kepe their heads on their shoulders. ¶IMPRINTED AT LONDON, in Fletestreat by VVylliam Grif∣fith. Anno Domini. 1570. The first of Maye.
¶ A discourse of Rebellion, drawne forth for to warne the wanton wyttes how to kepe their heads on their shoulders. A Cyuill warre, doth God and man abhorre, Hit staynes the ayre, and blots ye earth wt bloud Hit is a plague, a pestlence botch and soore, that eates vp Realmes, as worme cōsumes ye wood. Hit venom castes, as farre as Nilus flood, Hit poysoneth all, it toucheth any wheare, Hit is of kinde, much worsse then horses heare. That lyes in donge, where on vyle Serpents brede Rebellion first, sprang out of vipers sede, And nourisht was, in naughtie canckred minde, a lothsome lodge, for diu'lish geasts we finde. ¶ You subiectes all, beware that snakish beast, Which swels lyke toode, & borsts in sonder streight, Beware ye come, not neare that Adders neast, That heads & harts and bowells stings by sleight. Great fame you winne, in countreis cause to feight Great shame you get, with Rebelles for to hold, Great plagues therof in Bookes you see enrold. Great wracke & ruen, domestike braules do bring, They want no skourge, that striues against a king For right shall raigne, and rule as reason hoes, And sway the sword, in spight of secret foes. ¶ Eche other griefe, is heald with plaisters fyne, This findes no salue, so deepe the corzye goes,
With stayned handes, and blouddye staringe eyne This Monster great, in furye puffes and bloes: The source & sea, from whence all mischeife floes. And yet the Lord, that sittes aboue the starres, Brings them to naught, that seketh Ciuill warres The best reward, that euer Rebelles found. Was Tiborne threed, and hempen halters round, Or elles a choppe, of churlish botchers are, That with one bloe, ends all their beste knacks. ¶ Ambishious men, that still desires to clyme, Sediciously, do seke to pole and shaue, And naked birdes, when beggry is in prime, Do snatch for shroud, on foules that fethers haue. Rebellion thus, with paynted vizage braue, Leads out poore soules (yt knowes not gold frō glas) Who beares the packe, and burthen lyke the Asse. And well awaye, a rufull tale to tell, Their fal & ruen, skarce warnes their neibors wel Sedicion is, a sicknes and a byell, Whose breakinge out, bringes people in exyle. ¶ Desire of change, in thinges we present féele, Breedes flitting thoughts, of follies new to come, And rouling minds, that turnes like spining whels Hath great desire, to here the Forraine dromme. And whiles the Bee, in brainsick head doth homme On mad deuise, the idell man is lett, Then all is fishe, that fals in fyshers nett.
That knack séems good, that knau'ry much made of That right made wrong, that earnest made a skoff That tyell true, that stae starke staring nought, And eche mans cace in cruell question brought. ¶ Unbrideled will, to spoyle and hauoke rons, And headlong hales, the hastie wittes awrye: And subiectes soe, the true obedience shones, And falles in flame, as doth the feble Flye, But when in felde, a while these wodcockes lye, The Princes power, their conscience pricks so fast That courrage fayles, and home they ron at last. Then sute with teares, for Pardons do they make, And so lyke beastes, mens harts do feare and quake God strikes yt stroke, & plukes stout stomaks downe And with stiffe arme, stayes vp a rightful Crowne. ¶ Infect the brest, with breatch of promise dew, The mind makes place, to lodge ech branch of vice Forsake old troeth, and fall to fancies new, Familier fayth throw fondnes wareth nice. Who takes delight, to cogge and foyst the Dice, And nosled is, in cutthrote shiftes a while, Leaues all true playe, and pastime in exile. When practise proud, takes place in people mild, The Ciuill swaine groes sauege rude and wilde. And when madde horsse, in teeth doth brydell take, He plongeth oft, the riders backe to shake.
¶ Breake fayth and loue, & drawe a strangers yoke Mans folly spreades, abrode lyke sparkes of fyer: And doth great harme, yet makes but littell smoke, Tyll all our pomp, be tombled in the myer. O Britayne bloud, marke this at my desire, If that you sticke, together as you ought, This lyttle yle, may set the world at nought. If no then loke, for plague at Princes hand, Who here is plast, in peace to guide the land. Your wycked wills, shall come to no effect, For God shall saue, his choson and electe. ¶ Though Nuts do fall, that in the cluster grue, And goodly trées, would cleane forsake the barke: Yet may we not, bidde kyrnels all adue, Fresh buds wil blome, whiles stock hit selfe is stark Alas, wild heads, you know not well your marke. You shoote amis, when Booe is drawen to eare, And brush the cloth, full sore against the heare. The yarne in frame, will neuer cotten well, Whiles foule abuse, in weauers webb doth dwell. Troth tryes out all, & shall throw time be knowne, when Rebelles craft, shall cleane be ouerthrowne. ¶ In dede tis good, to draw one yoke and lyne, The house long stands, that wone good groūd doth beare, But for to drink, ye dreggs in sted of wine: Is madnes sure, and goeth against the heare. Swete Appells passe, the parings of the Peare,
One parfect dish, well seasoned as hit ought, Is better sure, then deynties derely bought, Knit fast the knotte, or els vntwyned threed In garments good, shall fayle the seame at néede. Shake setled tyles, from house and you shall see, That rafters great, and house can not agrée. ¶ Example make, but of the fagot nowe, Whose stickes fast bound, together long abydes: Plucke on sticke forth, and all the fagot throwe, In sunder shakes, and from the band hit slydes, Where banks do breake, there runneth out ye tides Where Commons knit, in countreys cause & right There Kyngs find frendes, & foes are put to flight. Where subiects snarre, & seuerall wayes do drawe Ther god poures plagues, throw iustice of his law. Then rage bursts out, and brings in wrack & rune, And so swete strings, are wrested out of tune. ¶ Dyd Rome not rule, the world at wil long tyme, Tyll hatefull hartes, dyd stryue for paynted shoes: And hautie heads, sought further for to clyme, Upon the splene, then subiectes compos goes, n whose attemptes, a sore desention roes. For when throw wealth, & pride in arre they fell. Rome was not Rome, that state became an Hell, And Diuels swarmd, in seate where senates sate, And turned lawes, to strife and lewd debate: Wrong stept in place, and right was banish quite And mufled worlde, in mischeife toke delite.
¶ The head thus sicke, the members fell away, And euery one, the other still deceaues: The tree left bare, the sappe must nedes decay, The barke once gone, ther was no hope of leaues, The strawe infect, the core forsoke the sheaues. The hyue of Bees, burst out of hony come, The Common wealth, was banisht out of Rome. So long as lawes, the true loue knot dyd knit, In triumphtes great dyd worthy Romaines sit. So long as loue, in chaynes dyd lynke the land, In passing pomp, the Romaine state dyd stand. ¶ This Realme of ours, had neuer yet the foyle, Tyll sausye sleightes, had seuered sheepe from fold, And malice hote, in rusty brestes gan boyle, And lukers lust, for gayne his countrey solde? Till reuell came, and stately stountnes bold, And set abroch, discord in euery shéere, The world we ruld, and liu'd lyke Princes héere. O English hartes, let this suffise I saye, To make you hate, Rebellion euery way. For if you do, in fury fyle your neast, You are much worsse, then senceles bird or beast. Finis. Quoth Churchyard.
