6610 R175933 99853920 19323
GRACE, MERCY, AND PEACE, CONTEINING 1 Gods Reconciliation to Man, 2 Mans Reconciliation to God. By Henry Denne An unworthy servant of the Church, Not by Arms nor by power but by my spirit saith the Lord of Hosts, Zach: 4.5. LONDON, Printed for the Benefit of the City of Rochester.
A Prayer. O Lord God, Father of our Lord Iesus Christ, who hast given commande∣ment unto thy Apostles and Ministers to preach the Gospell to every Creature; Bel old O Lord the oppositions; and threatnings, which the enemyes of thy Grace have breathed forth against thy truth, and thy seruants for thy truths sake. How they gnaw their toungs for paine, and blaspheme the God of  not re∣penting them of their deeds. Behold the troopes that are assembled together a∣gainst the Lord, and against his anoin∣ted sonne Iesus Christ; for to to doe what∣soever thy hand and thy counsell hath determined before to be done. Now
let the Lord grant unto his seruants, that with all boldnesse they may speake thy word, being nothing terrified by the Adver∣sarie: That the light of the Grace of God, may shine in the hearts of his people, that the man of sin and sonne of perdition may be destroyed by the brightnesse of thy comming Amen.
Acts 10.36. Preaching Peace by Iesus Christ. IT was our Savi∣ours Commande∣ment unto his Apostles Luke 10 into whatsoever Ci∣ty ye come say vnto them the Kingdome of God is come nigh unto you verse. 9. And into whatsoever house ye enter first say peace be unto this house, And if the sonne of peace be there your peace shall rest upon it: if not, it shall turne to you againe verse 5.6. I am this day by the providence of the Almighty, comea stranger to your City, And now what fitter subiect, can I thinke of for a
stranger to speake unto strangers than the glad tidings of Peace by Iesus Christ. Cornelius the centurion, with his kins¦men, and neere Friends, are the Auditors Peter is the preacher. And this text a part of that sermon at the preaching whereof the Holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the word. verse. 44. O that the Lord would vouchsafe that the like effect may this day follow the preach∣ing, of the word of this life. That as many as heare me this day; may goe away, filled with the fullnesse of God. Peter doth seem to say in effect, thus much, you are heere met together, to attend unto the word of salvation, delivered from my mouth, I can preachto you no other gospel, then that which was before by the Prophets declared unto the chil∣dren of Israell, in due time to be reveal∣ed (that is to say) Peace by Iesus Christ he is the Lord of all. The Proposition from these words, is that, the Gospell, is a Doctrine of Peace, by Iesus Christ. This Doctrine propounded, needeth
not soe much proofe, as explication namely, to shew unto you, what manner of Peace this is which is holden forth unto you, by the tender of the glorious Gospell. I hope you doe not expect, that I should this day declare unto you, any outward, temporall, or worldly Peace; in the middest of these distem∣pers, I would I might, and be yet a true Prophet. The Peace which is the sub∣iect of the Gospell is like the Kingdom of Christ, [being indeed a part of it] not of this world: Iohn 18.46. The Peace which came by Iesus Christ, is not an earthly Peace, our blessed Saviour will not, that you should entertaine, or har∣bour such a thought, as this: Thinke not that I am come to send Peace on earth, I came not to send Peace, but the sword; for I am come to set the daughter in law against her mother in law, and a man  shall be they of his owne houshould: Math. 10.34. If any one then shall preach unto you, that if you will im∣brace the Gospell, you shall have out∣ward Peace, and prosperity: Is not this
the presuptious man speaking His owne words: Is not this the pro∣phet prophesying in his own name, whom the Lord hath not sent? If any christian shall embrace the Gospell, in hope to attain outward felicity and pro∣sperity, let me tell him, his thoughts wander from the truth, and he erreth, not knowing the Scriptures, for if any man will come after me, let him deny himself, & take up his crosse, and follow me. Mat. 16.24. And all that will live godly in Christ Iesus must suffer persecution. 2 Tim. 3.12. Heare we also what Paule saith. 2. Cor. 11.23.24.25. verses. In stripes above measure, in prisons more frequent, in deaths oft, of the Iews five times received I fourty stripes save one, (that is in all 195. stripes) thrice was I beaten with rods, once was I stoned, thrice I suffered shipwrack, a night and a day have I been in the deep, in iorneying often, in perils of waters, in perils of robbers, in perils by mine owne country∣men, in perils by the heathen, in perils in the city, in perils in the wildernesse, in perils in the sea, in perils amongst false brethren,
In wearines and painfullnesse, in watchings often In hunger and thirst, In fastings often, In cold and nakednesse, what a catalogue of evils, what an inventory of afflictions have we here? And yet all this and more is the portion of a labo∣rious Apostle. And if we will seek for a true and sincere Minister of the Gospel, we shall, assoon find him in poverty and nakednesse, as jetting up and down the streets with atten∣dants at his heels, we shall assoon find him in the universitie of Newgate, or some other pri∣son, as in great mens houses, we shall assoon him in a cloud of reproach, as in a fat benefice or Cathedrall dignity, we shall assoon finde him at the Bar accused, of heresie, condemned for blasphemy as in the Courts of Kings, or Princes: for to the instruction and consolation of the people of God be it spoken, they shall put you art of their Synagouges, yea the time cometh, that whosoever killeth you, will think that he doth God service John 16. Seing then that it is clear, that it is no worldy peace, it remaineth yet to shew you what peace this is which the Gospel preacheth. It is not an ex∣ternall peace, but it is internall. yea eternall; It is a lasting, yea an everlasting peace, A peace which no tounge is sufficient to expresse, nor heart to conceive it is even the love of Christ that passeth knowledge Eph. 3.19. It is even the peace of God which passeth al. yea angelicall un∣derstanding If some great and  angell should undertake to declare this peace to you
am consident he would confesse his abi∣lities too weak, how much more I that am but dust and ashes? Surely when I shall have told you all that I am able I shall not tell you one hundredth part, & when you shall understand and believe all that you are able, you shall not attain unto the least part of that glory which shall hereafter be revealed; though I am not able to speak what you desire, or the thing it self deserveth, yet I will ende∣vout to speak what I am able: And I shall commend unto you a twofold Peace, the first Descending, The second ascending. The first is the tidings of the love and reconciliation of the everliving God unto the sonnes of men. The second declares the reconciliation of the sonnes of men to the everliving and everloving God. To speak plain, first I will shew, how God comes to be reconciled unto men. Beare with the term reconciled although improperly spoken of him that was ne∣ver an euemy. Secondly, I will shew you
how we come to be reconciled unto God. For the first How doth God come to be re∣conciled to men? I conceive now the drooping consci∣ence that sits in darknesse under the cloudy apprelhension of an angry Iudge, under the fearfull expectation of a terri∣ble account, to be given unto the consu∣ming fire, wil be very attentive to heare that which his heart so thirsteth after How God may be reconciled. Oh what shal I doe, saith the soule, to obtain the fa∣vour of God? What shall I doe to turn away his wrathfull displeasure from me wherewith shall I come before him? or how shall I appease him? Attend there∣fore and I shall declare that which thou wilt hardly believe, when it is told un∣to thee: for Lord who hath believed out report, and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed, Isa. 53.1. And yet that which I shall declare (if thou canst be∣lieve it, will fill thy mouth with laughter and thy longue with singing, Psal. 126.2 Take this proposition, God is freely, and fully reconciled to the elect, and loveth
them in Iesus Christ without any previous dispositions, without any qualifications, without any performances of conditions on their parts, unlesse to be polluted and finful be a previous condition or qualification. This is a bold proposition will the phari∣see say, this is too good newes, to be true will the distressed soul say. But I say the Lord break your stony harts, & give you an heart of flesh, that you may submit to his righteousnes. And I make no questi∣on but the glorious grace of the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, shal abundant∣ly be manifested, The method I intend is 1 To prove the truth of this proposition 2 To answer six obiections. 3 To make ap∣plication. 1 For the proof, When Eve and Adam (in whose loins we all sinned had eaten the forbidden fruit, and were now become guilty of condemnation. They hear the voice of God walking in the garden (which voice was this) thou haste at en, and thou shalt dy) they hide thmselves from the presence of God, amongst the trees of the garden; when man had sinn'd & was in a despairing condition, having not so much wit as to think of a saviour much
lesse the boldnes to ask one at the hands of an offended God. Now in this case behold the exceed-Love of God towards man, in giving and manifesting the promised seed, aswell to the terrour of Satan; as to the consola∣tion of mankind. And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed, and her seed, and it shall bruise his head, and thou shalt bruise his heel. Gen. 3.15 (See if I may compare the Crea∣tor, with the creature) how the Lords bowells doe yern upon man. And he cannot refraine himself, but that (least man should have been swallowed up with sorrow) the blessing of the promised seed, shall be first declared, before the Lord pronounce, the least curse against man. Father Abraham receiveth the promise in the uncircumcision of his flesh. And unto Adam is the promise revealed, in the uncircumcision of his heart; but lest you should think that some qualificati∣on in Adam, did forerun the manifestati∣on of the promise, I will referre you un∣to that place of Scripture which (I am
resolved) shall never slip out of my re∣membrance (and I hope the like of you) 2 Tim. 1.9. VVho hath saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not according to our works, but according to his own pur∣pose and grace which was given us in Christ Iesus, before the world began. What  there, that is not comprehended in this word grace? here you see that grace was given before the world began. Now what conditions or qualifictions were there in us before the world began? We may safely therefore say that the grace of our God was before all conditions, &c unto this we will adde in the next place one text, that like a diamond casteth his lustre in the dark, and ministreth a great measure of the spirit Eph. 2.4.5. God who is rich in mercie for his great love wherewith the loved us, even when we were dead in trespasses and sinnes hath quickened us together with Christ (by grace ye are saved.] What if I shall now prove so bold, as to make such a stop at sinnes, as shall shew that that part of the sentence is referred to that which went
before, so that we may say in plain terms that God loved us with his great Love, e∣ven when we were dead in trespasses and sins. If I shall read it thus, the text will bear it either in the originall, or in other translations. But if any froward person shall say that I doe iniurie in reading it thus and that this clause [dead in trespas∣ses & sins ought rather to be referred to quickened, which followes after then to the verb loved, which goeth before Let this man know that the sence will be one and the same: for when God quic∣kened us, then he loved us, with his great love, His love being the cause of quic∣kening: the effect of his Love, But thou sayst we were quickened when we were, dead in trespasses and sins. Therefore we con∣clude, we were loved with his graet love when we were dead in trespasses and sins For further confirmation I must intreat you to consider what is written by the Apostle Rom. 9.11.12.13 verses. For the children being not yet born neither ha∣ving done good or evill, that the purpose of God according to election might stand not
of works, but of him that calleth, It was said unto her, the elder shall serve the yon∣ger, as it is written Iacob have I loved, but Esau, have I hated. Now you see Gods love set upon Iacob, where were Iacobs qualifications? he had neither done good nor evill. Therefore it is plain that God loved him before any qualification. But some may confesse that the Lord loved him indeed, before he had done good or evil And yet may perchance ask a question upon a supposition, saying, suppose that after Iacob was born, he should have led a wicked and perverse life, suppose that for some yeares, he should have been a notorious, and prophane person, would or could the Lord have continued his love to such a person as this? I answer boldly yea; for Gods love and mercy, are mer∣cies of eternity, the mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting, upon them that feare him Psal. 103, 17, not only to e∣verlasting, as eternall in respect of time to come, but also from everlasting, age et∣nall in respect of that which is past, Gods mercies are not onely without be∣ginning,
but also without ending, as it is so often repeated even 26 times, Psal. 136. his mercy endureth for ever. This is it that is written by the prophet, I the Lord, I change not, Therefore yee sonnes of Iacob are not consumed. Mal. 3.6. Would you know the true reason, why the sons of Iacob are nor consumed, it is this, I change not: should the Lord change as often as we change: should his love in∣crease and decrease towards us, as often as our love to him, and obedience to his Maiesty, ebbeth and floweth, the Lord should be more variable then the wind, more changeable then the Moon, that the Lords love altereth not, although it hath beene sufficiently proved by that which hath been spoken, yet to the praise of the glory of his grace, I will proceed to shew you, by more restimonies that the Lord loveth all his elect, with his great love, even then, when as they lie weltring in their sinnes, & transgressions. Vnto this the Holy Ghost bears witnesse, Rom. 5. verse. 6. When we were yet
without strength, in due time Christ died for the ungodly. For whó Christ died, them the Father & the Son loved; but Christ died for the ungodly, that were without strength, Therefore such were undoubt∣edly beloved of God. Lest wee should think the first of these propositions to be weake, it is confirmed, verse 8. God commendeth his love to us, in that while we were yet sinners Christ dyed for us. And very worthy of observation is that which is spoken verse 10; When we were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his Sonne. Here we have more proved than I have yet undertaken; for my task is to prove, that God was recon∣ciled to us whilst we were enemyes. This text saith not onely so, but that we were recontiled to God when we were enemies: But of this more shall be spoken here∣after, only for the present we disire to have it granted, that when we were re∣conciled to God, he was without all doubt reconciled to us; for our reconciliation to him, is not the cause of his reconcilia∣tion
to us, but contrary his reconciliation to us, is the cause of our reconciliation to him, Now let us see the argument once againe, For whom Christ died: those he lo∣ved. But Christ died for vngodly, for sin∣ners, for enemies, Therefore hee loved ememies, sinners, ungodly. And with such a love, as is not onely verball, but reall, not in word but in deed & in truth, as doth al∣ready appeare by his death, and will; yet more plainly appeare those acts of love, communicated unto us, even when wee were in the state of vngodlinesse, in the worst estate and condition. Let us con∣sider that place so full of the glory of God, which is writen, Ezek. 16.2.3. verses, unto the 15. verse. Thou wast cast out in the open field to the loathing of thy Person, in the day that thou wast born. And when I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted in thine own blood, I said unto thee in thy blood; yea, I said unto thee in thy blood, ive. Why doth the Lord use this In∣semination, In thy blood, In thy blood?  it not because he knoweth how hardly
we are drawne to beleeve the glory of his grace? and how ready we are to rob him of the honour of his infinite mercy? The Lord doth as it were say: I know you will wonder at this, that I should say, Live, before you were washed, salted, or swadled, while you were in your blood, But I remember the act of my grace which passed upon you even in blood. I he Lord loved us not because we were washed and cleansed, but therefore he washed and cleansed us, because he loved us. See the freenes of Gods love, God so loved the world, that he gave his onely begotten sonne that whosoever believeth on him shall not perish but have everlasting life. Ioh. 3.16. This place is wel known unto you, it may be here lies hid something, which ma∣ny of you never discovered, namely that Christ given is the effect of Gods love, not the cause. And that the love of God goes before the gift of his son as the cause goeth before the effect. He therefore gave his sonne, because he loved. If this seem strange, that Gods love should be more ancient, in order of causes
then the gift of his sonne, Because that in him God doth communicate all things unto us, I answer, that Christ is God manifested to him in the flesh. 1 Tim, 3.16. And that all the blessings of that love, wherewith the Lord loved us eternally, are manifested onely in Christ Iesus. And in him they are fully manifested to have been for ever in the bosome of the Father: So that for us to say or think, that Christ purchased the love of the Father for us, is that which I am confident the redeemer of the world will not chalenge unto himself. But say (as in another case) it is not mine to give, but it was given to them, to whom it is given before the foundation of the world was laid, This is all that I am a∣ble to speak, unlesse it should be lawfull for me, in so reverend a mystery, to use a distinction, and to consider in the love of God the original of his love, and the continuation thereof, and to say that the original of his love was before the gift of his sonne, as the cause before the effect But that the continuation of love, is to be
referred unto the propriation of the re∣deemer, as the effect of that sacrifice which he offered, To speak plain, Gods love was before the gift of his son, as the cause before the effect. But the continua∣tion of that love, that he should loveus for ever, requires a foregoing propitiation & satisfaction. But when we shal say thus, we fall into a depth unsearchable, when we shall ask why the continuation of his love should rather require a foregoing propitiation, then the originall setting of his love upon us. I confesse I cannot tell what to say, for to cleare this; but trem∣ble to speak of this glerious mystery, And desire to refer my self to the iudgement of the spirituall, who are able to iudge all things, and to be instructed by them, whether it be not safer to rest, in that which was said before, then with subtilty of distinctions, to wade into the depth un∣searchable. We see the great love of God to us in our bloud, how that he so loved us, that he gave us his sonne, I will now be bold to step a step higher, if higher may
be, and to shew you that God did not one∣ly love us in our bloud, with his great love; But that his love to us in our broud was as great as ever afterwards. He loved us, I say, with as great love when we were in bloud and polltion as he did afterward when we were cleansed. I know the Pharisee will stamp at this, and say, Doth God love us aswell before conversion as after conversion? Did God love Paul, with as great a love when that he persecuted the Church, as when he preached the Gos∣pell? I will answer boldly, yea he did, And that I shall by the assistance of God prove unto you, against men, or de ills who shall oppose it. That God loved us being dead in trespasses and sinnes, you have heard proved: now give mee leave to propound a question, Whe∣ther this great love wherewith God loved sinners, be not his infinite love like himself? nay, whether is it any other thing then him self? God is love. 1 Ioh. 4.16. If this be granted that Gods love is in∣finite to sinners, that it is like himself,
yea, that it is himselfe: for love in God is not a quality: Then it will be plaine, that his love is not capable of increase or decrease, but is alwayes one and the same. The difference is in us, whose apprehen∣sions doe often increase and decrease. A∣gain, is not the love of God to be weighed by the pledges of his love? But we shall find the greatest pledges of his love to be given unto sinners even in the state of ungodlinesse. What greater pledge than the gift of his Sonne? In this God com∣mendeth his love, &c. as before. Rom. 5.8. All the mercies of God are commen∣dations of his love, but none like this: All other gifts are not comparable to the gift of his Sonne. He thht spared not his owne Sonne, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things? Rom. 8.32. If all things were laid in one ballance, and the Sonne of God in the other, no man doubteth, but that the Sonne of God would bee iufinitely beyond all things. Greater love than this hath no man, that
a man lay down his life for his friend, John 15.13. But greater love hath God, in that he laid down his life for his enemies. In this was manifested the love of God to∣wards us, because that God sent his onely begotten Son into the world, that wee might live through him. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that God loved us, and sent his Sonne to be the propitiation for our sinnes, 1 Iohn 4.9.10. Now that the Apostle saith, In this was manife sted the love of God. And, Herein is love, he doth it to this end, that hee might shew unto us, that Christ was the greatest manife∣station of Gods love: Hereby perceive we the love of God, That he hath laid down his life for us, 1 Iohn 3.16. These spee∣ches are all comparative, shewing us that Gods loue was manifest in nothing more, or rather nothing so much, as in the death of his Son. Abrahams love to God appeared in many things; but above all, in that he denied not his Sonne. For now I know thai thou fearest God, seeing thou hast not with-held thy sonne, thine onely
sonne from me, Gen, 22.12. May not we iustly say with admiration unto God, Now we know that thou lovest us, because thou hast not with-held thy Sonne, thine onely Sonne, Thus you see God doth not onely love us before conversion, but he loveth us with his great love, yea his grea∣test love that ever was communicated to the creature: for greater love did God never manifest to the creature, than that hee should give his Sonne. This may more fully appeare by severall effects of the love of God, communicated unto men, by God, in and through his Sonne; before conversion, faith, &c. or any thing in us preconsidered. He hath chosen us in him before the foundation of the world. Eph. 1.4. Again, Hee hath predestinated us un∣to the adoption of sonnes, by Iesus Christ to himselfe, according to the good pleasure of his will, to the praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he hath made us accepted in the be∣loved, in whom we have redemption through his bloud, even the forgivenesse of sinnes, according to the riches of his grace, verses
5.6.7. In whom also we have obtained an inheritance, being predestinated according to the purpose of him, who worketh all things after the counsell of his own will, verse 11. How many acts of God have wee here comunicated by his grace unto the crea∣ture, before repentance, faith, or conver∣sion, or calling. We will adde to these one act of grace more communicated to the creature in the state of ungodlinesse. God justifieth the ungodly, Rom. 4.5. yea take wee sanctificaiion in the common acception, may we not say God sanctisi∣eth the ungodly. For men are not sancti∣fied because they are godly, but godly be∣cause they are sanctified. Yea one thing more, even Calling it self, effectual Calling I meane, goes before conversion, as the cause before the effect: for calling is not an effect of conversion, but conversion is an effect of calling. It is necessary that God call before wee can heare; yea that God open the heart before wee can re∣ceive. If I did think that these things nee∣ded proofe, I would spend time about it.
You see now, Predestination, Choosing, Redemption, Iustification, Sanctificati∣on, Calling, opening of the Heart, all of them gracious acts of God, communica∣ted unto the creature before the conver∣sion of the creature to God. Let us heare the Lord speaking of his own work upon the creature, Esay 57.18. Hee went on frowardly in the way of his heart; I have seen his wayes and will heale him, I will lead him al∣so, and restore comforts to him, and to his mour∣ners. Whom wilt thou heale? O Lord whom wilt thou restore? Even him whose wayes I have seen. What are those wayes? Even frowardnesse and pervers∣nesse. Hee went in frowardly in the way of his heart. See againe, Esay. 43.25. I, even I am hee that blotteth out thy transgressi∣ons for mine owne sake, and will not remem∣ber thy sinnes. Whose sins will the Lord blot our? Looke wee back unto the 22. verse, Thou hast not called upon mee, O Ia∣coh, thou hast been weary of mee, O Israel, Thou hast made me to serve with thy sinnes, Thou hast wearied me with thine iniqui∣ties, verse 24. See, Thou hast been wea∣rie
of me, yea thou hast wearied me. This is Iacohs qualisication. This is Israels preparation. Then followes, I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy transgressions. As if the Lord would say unto his peo∣ple, as he speaketh by the prophet Ezek. Chap. 36.22. Say unto the house of Israel, Thus saith the Lord God, I doe not this for your sake, O house of Israell, but for my holy names sake, which ye have profaned among the Heathen, whither ye went, or as when Israel was neer the confines of Canaan The Lord speaketh thus unto them by Moses, understand therefore, that the Lord thy God giveth thee not this good land to possosse it for thy righteousnesse, for thou art a stiffnecked people. Deut. 9.6. As if the Lod should say, I will blot out your transgressions. But I would have you know the riches of my grace. It is not a∣ny thing in you that moveth me unto it. For there is nothing in you but rebelli∣on; but I doe it for my glory sake. As the Prophet speaketh in the name of the Lord, Esay 48.8.9. I knew that thou wouldest deale very treachercusly, and was
called a transgressour from the womb: for my names sake will I deferre mine anger, and for my praise will I refraine for thee, that I cut thee not off. This is all the qua∣lification we bring unto God, to win his love and mercie: We are rebellious, we are prophane, we are a stiffe necked peo∣ple. And if the Lord should not love us, untill hee find lovely conditions in us, surely he must hate us for ever: If God should not be reconciled unto us, untill we be reconciled unto him: he must con∣tinue our enemy for ever. Wherefore considering what hath been said, we will be bold to conclude to the praise of the glory of his grace, that his love and mer∣cie to us, is before all qualifications in us: that his love and mercy to us, is the cause of all qualifications in us. That his love towards us is as great before faith and conversion as after. There is no difference in him. But some will say, peradventure we grant that God thus loveth us, as is be∣fore prov'd; but it may be it was because hee foresaw we would be good, repent, beleeve, &c. Farre bee it from us to en∣tertain
such thoughts. He that well pon∣dereth what hath beene said, shall well perceive, that God doth not therefore love us, because hee foresaw we will re∣pent and beleeve, but therefore causeth us to repent, and beleeve in his time, be∣cause he loveth us. But to make this also more cleare, the holy Ghost declares, That the kind∣nesse of God towards man, appeared not by works of righteousnesse which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us, Tit. 3.4 5. The paterne according to which God setteth his love upon man, was not any thing save his rich mercy, whereby it is plain, Not that wee loved him, but that he loved us, 1 Iohn 4.10. Yee have not chosen mee, but I have chosen you, Iohn 15.16. As our Father Abraham recei∣ceived the righteousnesse of faith being yet uncircumcised, and then received the signe of circumcision, a seale of the righ∣teousnesse of faith which hee had yet be∣ing uncircumcised: So as Abraham was first righteous, and then circumcised; not first circumcised, and then righteous:
So the children of Abraham are first be∣loved and then converted, not first convert∣ed and then beloved, And as God did not account Abraham righteous because he foresaw he would be circumcised, But therefore he gave him the signe of Circumcision because he had made him righteous. So it is with the children of Abraham, God doth not therefore love them, because he foreseeth they will re∣pent and believe, but therefore he causeth them in his time to repent and believe the Gospel, because he loved them. Thus have I done with the first thing pro∣pounded in the handling of this proposi∣tion: The second followes, namely the answer unto the severall obiections. The first and greatest is this, if God love the elect while they are yet dead in trespasses and sinnes, tand so love them with his great love, and with as great a love before couversion as after, as is before proved. then how is it said. Psalm 5.5. Thou ha∣test all the workers of iniquity? And hither we may reserre many pla∣ces
of Scripture of like nature. If God hate all the workers of iniquity, how can he be said to love the ungodly? Thus you see in one short sentence, seemeth to be quite overthrown all that I have hi∣therto spoken. To wind out of this labarinth, which some having assayed, have further intangled themselves (with invocation unto God for the wisedome of his holy Spirit to guid us into the truth) I will first shew you what some have said to clear this; and then I shall deliver unto you mine own iudgement: And yet, I hope, not mine owne, but the iudgement of the Spirit of God, and of most of the Saints of God. First then, I find a great Cathe∣drall Doctor (moving the obiection, and labouring to give solution) to give us this distinction; That God hates the workes, but nor the persons of his e∣lect. I will not stand to question, whe∣ther there may be such a distinction ad∣mitted, or no, but will take it for grant; and yet I doe believe sinne to be of that
hideous nature, and the iustice of God so perfect, that he cannot but hate the person, unto whom hee imputeth, and upon whom he chargeth sinne, if so be the person charged cannot give full, perfect, and present satisfaction. And yet will I not say, that the Sonne of God. upon whom all our iniquities, great and small, were charged, was at any time, Filius odii, a sonne of hatred (for the father was eternally well pleased with him) the reason is, that our sinnes were no sooner charged upon him, but that hee had given full and perfect satisfa∣ction, being the Lamh slain from the foundation of the world, Rev. 13.8. Al∣though the soresaid distinction of person and workes, should be granted, without further question, yet give me leave to pronounce it nothing pertinent to the solution of the Obiection in hand: For the Text saith not onely he hateth the works, but the workers, (that is, the persons working) iniquite. A∣nother answer is brought to untie this
knot, by a jiugling distinction of a two∣fold love in God, namely, Amor bene∣volentiae, and, amor complacentiae, that the simple may understand, there is in God, say they, a love of well willing, and a love of liking. Now God (say they) loves his elect before their conversion, with the love of well-willing, but not with the love of liking. Like unto which we heare of a distinction not sel∣dome, Of the love of Election, and the love of Iustification. God (say they) loves his elect with the love of Electi∣on, but not with the love of Iustifica∣tion. First of all, I desire you to con∣sider, whether there be not more time then reason in these distinctions; the love of Election, and the love of Iusti∣fication, being not diverfities of love, or divers degrees of love, but divers ma∣nifestations of one and the same infi∣nite love. As when a Father hath con∣veyed an inheritance to his Sonne, here is no new love from the Father to the Sonne, but a new manifestation of that
love, wherewith the father loved the sonne before. Secondly, how can it be that God should not like the person whom he loves? There is indeed this difference betwen Humane love and Divine; Men commonly love because they like: but God likes because hee loves. Man cannot but love where hee likes. And I beleeve (speaking of the person) God cannot but like where hee loves. To make such differences of love in God, will I feare open a gap to ma∣ny foule absurdities. But suppose that these things could be so, it will appeare that God loves the persons of his elect, not only with a love of Benevolence, but a so with a love of Complacence and li∣king: For this ia the voyc of the Fa∣ther from heaven, This my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, Matth. 3.17. Here is a revelation of the love of li∣king, I am well pleased: The Father is well pleased in his Son. With whom? Surely with those unto whom hee had given his Sonne, that is, all his elect. A∣gaine,
this answer, if it were beyond all exceptions, yet it is very impertinent to the obiection: For the Text doth not onely say, that God loveth them not with such or such a love, but in plaine terms it saith, that the Lord hateth them that work iniquity. Now what shall we say, that God loves a person with infinit a love, beyond expression, or conceit, and yet at the same time, hateth the same person with that perfect hatred where∣with hee hateth all the workers of ini∣quitie. Let us take heed that we draw not a vaile before the face of God, and delude our selves and others with such frothy and impertinent distinctions. But I have by this time bred a kinde of wonder in you; what I shall speak, see∣ing that which other men have said thus far, liketh me not. I answer there∣fore, that this clause, God hateth all the workers of iniquity, and God loveth the ungodly, are both in Scripture, and therefore both true; yet in a different sense. The first, The Lord hateth all the
workers of iniquity, is the voyce of the Law: the other, the Lord loves sin∣ners, is the voyce of the Gospel, Now the Law, and the Gospel speak divers things; the one being the manifestation of Gods iustice, tells us what we are by nature: the other, being the manifesta∣tion of Gods mercie, tells us what wee are by grace in Iesus Christ. The Law saith, that every sinner shal be accursed. The Gospel saith, Iesus Christ came into the world to save sinners. The Law saith, God will by no meanes cleare the guilty, Exod. 34.7. The Gospel saith, God ju∣stifieth the ungodly. The Law declareth wrath without forgivenesse: The Gos∣pel, Mercy, grace and peace in Iesus Christ. Thus farre is the obiection an∣swered; but yet all difficulty and scru∣ple is not removed: For the Law, you will say, is an eternall veritie, whatso∣ever it saith, is true. I confesse it so, and one iot or tittle thereof cannot faile. But I say, with the Apostle, that whatso∣ever the Law saith, it saith to them only,
who are under the Law, and to none o∣ther. I say again, that the righteousnesse of the Law is fulfilled by Christ for us all; yea in all that walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit, Rom. 8.4. So that although the elect of God are sinners in the iudgement of the Law, Sense, Reason, yea and oftentimes Conscience; yet having their sinnes translated unto the Sonne of God, (in whom they were elected) they have the righteousnesse of the Law fulfilled in the Mediatour, and so become to be accounted righte∣ous in his sight; that as God on the one side delivered the innocent to death, as though hee had been a sinner, being made countable for our sinnes: So on the other side, God loveth, justifieth, cleareth the guilty and sinners, as if they had been holy, righteous, and blamelesse. The summe is this, that as Christ was no sinner indeed, and yet a sinner by im∣putation; so they that are Chrisis, are no sinners by imputation, and yet sin∣ners indeed.
Thus much for the first Obiection. The second followes. Objection 2. If God be reconciled unto us, before all condtions, &c. How is it that our Saviour saith, Matth. 6.15. If you for∣give not men their trespasses, neither will your heavenly Father forgive you your trespasses. Vnto which may be ioined that which we have, Matth. 18.35. So likewise shall my heavenly doe also unto you, if yee from your heart forgive not e∣very on his brother their trespasses. In which place we see, first, that unlesse we forgive, God will not forgive us: Nay more, that God will reverse the act of his mercy, if after hee hath forgiven us 10000. talents, wee shall not forgive 100. pence, wee shall bee delivered to the tormentors, until we pay the whole due. For answer to this Obiection, we must lay down two grounds; the first, That God rever reverseth the acts of his mercy communicated to his Elect. For the gifts and calling of God are
without repentance, Rom. 112.9. God is not a man that he should lie, neither the sonne of man that he should repent, 1 Sam. 23.19. The second ground, that Gods forgiveness of us is a fore-runner of our forgivenes of our brethren. And we can∣not truly forgive our brethren, untill wee doe apprehend Gods forgivenesse of us. Shouldest not thou have had com∣passion on thy fellow-servant, even as I had pitie on thee? Matth. 18.33. And upon this ground the Apostle presseth the Ephesians unto kindnesse and ten∣dernesse of heart, forgiving one another, even as God for Christs sake hath forgi∣ven you, Eph. 4.3. But then if this be so, what meane the foresaid places, which strengthen the objection? I answer: That for∣givenesse is there to bee taken for the manifestation of forgivenesse: Except ye forgive men, neither will your heavenly Father so fully declare, and manifest him∣selfe unto your consciences; and so this place pertaineth properly to our recon∣ciliation
with God, not unto Gods re∣conciliation with us. That this is not a subtile evasion, but the truth, appeares first by a place of Scripture; secondly, by the judgement of Interpreters upon a like place: The place of Scripture is found Luke 7.47. Her sinnes which are many are forgiven her, for shee loved much. What have wee here? that this womans great love was the cause of re∣mission, or that it went before her ob∣taining of remission, as Bellarmine con∣tendeth? Verily no: but it is plaine, that her remission obtained, was the cause of her love. Simon, saith our Sa∣viour, A certaine creditor forgave two debtors frankly: whereof the one ought five hundred pence, the other fifty; which of the twain wil love him most? Simon answereth well, He to whom he for∣gave most. Our Saviour maketh the application; Seest thou this woman? Thou lovest me a little, Thou hast bid∣den me to dinner. But when I came in∣to thy house, thou gavest me no mater for
my feet; but shee, hath washed my feet with her teares, and wiped them with the haires of her head. My head with oyle thou diddest not anoint, but this woman hath anointed my feet with ointment. Thou seest, that I have forgiven thee a few sinnes, and thou lovest mee a little, but this woman hath much forgiven her: Therefore she loved much: where∣by we understand two things; first, that her love was not the cause of forgivenes, but forgivenesse a cause of her love. Se∣condly, That forgivenesse in this place includeth the manifestation of forgive∣nesse: many sinnes are forgiven her, the sense is this, it appeareth unto this wo∣man, that I have pardoned a multitude of sinnes for her. This is the Scripture. The judgement of Interpreters in the Protestant Church, upon a like place, is occasioned by an argument ur∣ged by Cardinall Bellarmine, and other poplings, against the Protestants, on this wise: If, saith he, the Protestants have pardon of all their sinnes, in such
wise as they say they have, why doe they yet pray, forgive us our trespasses? if they be already forgiven? The Pro∣testants answer with one consent: that they doe beg at the hands of God, grea∣ter certainty, and assurance of his grace towards them: the Petition forgive us our trespasses, may well stand with assu∣rance of pardon. The condemned per∣son that is upon the ladder, having re∣ceived the pardon of a gracious Prince, heares it read; is assured of it, and re∣joyceth in it, yet this person being cal∣led into the presence of the King, if he should fall downe and say, Pardon mee my Lord the King; who could lay folly to his charge? So we having received the free pardon of sinne at his hand al∣ready, yet as oft as wee come into his presence wee cry to the glory of his grace, forgive us our trespasses: for while we beg at the hands of God, that which we have before received, we doe magnisie his grace, that hath freely gi∣ven it. Againe, who so sure, and certain
of pardon, but that he either needeth a greater assurance, or at least that assu∣rance to be by Gods mercy continued. Thus much for the second objection. The third followeth. If God love us in bloud and pollution, as well before conver∣sion, as after conversion; then to what purpose serve our faith and good workes? First, I answer this objection indirect∣ly, by propounding one question; whe∣ther thou thinkest that thy faith and good workes can obtaine, or procure the love and favour of God. If thou sayest no, then why doest thou make this objection? If thou sayest yea, then I demand, who shall give thee faith and good workes? Shouldst thou expect them from any other then from the hand of a loving God? Secondly, I answer directly, by shewing thee the true office of faith: Although faith do not procure Gods love and favour, yet is it to very good purpose, and exceed∣ing precious: That you may know the love of God, and be sealed with the ho∣ly
Spirit of promise. In whom after yee beleeved ye were sealed with the holy spirit of promise; which is the earnest of our in∣heritance unto the redemption of the pur∣chased possession, unto the praise of his glory, Eph. 1.13, 14. The Originall reades it, In whom beleeving ye were sea∣led: so that beleeving is sealing, and an earnest of the inheritance. Secondly, that beleeving you who were under darknesse, and in the shadow of death, and saw no light, yet I say beleeving yee might rejoyce with ioy unspeakable, and full of glory, receiving the end of your faith, 1 Pet. 1.8. Rom. 15.13. The God of hope fill you with all ioy and peace in be∣leeving. Thus you see your faith is to very good purpose, and yet not to that pur∣pose, to obtaine the love and favour of God. Thus much for the office of faith; yet doe I not undertake, to set out unto you the whole office of that most precious gift, but on  so much as may serve to answer the present ob∣iection.
But secondly, to what purpose serve our good workes? I answer, to very good purpose also: namely, to expresse our thankfulnes to God, and our Lord Iesus Christ, who hath delive∣red us from our enemies: That we being delivered might serve him without feare in holinesse and righteousnesse before him all the dayes of our life, Luke 1.74, 75. We doe not serve God to obtaine deli∣verance by serving of him. But of his free grace obtaining deliverance wee serve him. Wee doe not serve God to obtaine salvation, but obtaining salva∣tion freely by Iesus Christ, we offer up our souls and bodies, a living sacrifice of thanksgiving. I answer further, Thy good workes may bee profitable unto men, Tit. 3.8. but not unto God, who is of absolute perfection, and needeth not any thing which thou canst doe. Can a man be profitable unto God, as he that is wise may be profitable unto himselfe? Is it any pleasure to the Almighty that thou art righteous? or is it any gaine to him
that thou makest thy wayes perfect? Iob 22.2.3. Thus you see the office of your faith and workes. Because we say that God loves us as well before conversion as after, doe wee therefore make faith and workes void? God forbid. Must I needs put out my fire, because I will not set it on the top of the house? No, I will keepe it within the chimney, which is the proper place. Woe be to that Ci∣tie, where the sire shall overtop the houses: fire is precious in the chimney, bur dangerous elsewhere. Precious is the gift of faith, if kept within his own sphere; but if we shall begin to lift it up, and place it in the throne of Christ, what rock more dangerous to the soul? The Brasen Serpent was a great blessing so long as Israel looked at it by Gods appointment, to be healed of the bi∣tings of the fiery Serpents. But when once Israel shall burne incense unto it, let it be Nehushtan, a peece of old can∣kred brasse, 2 Kin. 18.4. Thus for the third obiection, the fourth follows.
If God love us with as great a love be∣fore conversion as after, then what need we take care what we doe? If we repent and beleeve, the Lord will love us ne∣ver the better; If we neither repent nor beleeve, the Lord will love us never the worse. Answer. I can hardly vouch∣safe to give an answer to this obiecti∣on, because the wise man adviseth, Pro. 26.4. Answer not a Foole according to his folly, lest thou bee like unto him. And yet I must give an answer, because the wise man commandeth, verse 5. An∣swer a Foole according to his folly, lest hee bee wise in his owne conceit. Lest if I should passe by this obiection, thou shouldest triumph as if thou hadst got∣ten the victory. I answer therfore with the Apostle, Shall we sin that grace may abound, and shall we sin because wee are not under the Law, but under Grace? God forbid, Ron 6.15. This obiecti∣on was moved by cavelling spirits even in the Apostles time, well nigh 1600 years agoe, and you see the answer. And
now the same spirit rageth in thee. But I thought what a customer vvee should have of thee. Thou vvouldest make men beleeve, that thou art no Iusticia∣ry, no Papist, not one that seekes to bee iustified by thy workes. And yet if thy workes cannot obtain Gods favour, if they cannot procure an increase of his love, thou will presently cast off all, and give liberty to thy flesh. Give me leave to speak plain, Thou art hee that turnest the grace of our Lord Iesus Christ into wantonnes, whose end is destruction, whose God is thy belly, whose glory is thy shame, who mindest earthly things, Philip. 3.19. But bee it known unto thee, that the grace of God teacheth (other things, namely) to deny alungodlines and world∣ly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously and godly in this present world. But I perceive by this objection, that thou accountedst this a doctrine of li∣bertie, to declare the free love of God in Iesus Christ: and thou thinkest it were better to hide this from the peo∣ple,
and to terrifie them with Hell fire, with wrath, and iudgement, and with the fierie flashings of Mount Sinai, and to keepe them in bondage. I can hardly refraine from giving thee very evill language, that art thus presump∣tuous and audacious to contradict the Lord Iesus, who hath given comman∣dement that the Gospel of peace should bee preached to all Nations. I will spare to speake what I think, and com∣mend unto thy consideration the iudg∣ment of one of our owne Countrimen, whose learning was by his adversaries commended, whose constancie and pa∣tience in his martyrdome was admired: it was Iohn Fryth; who writeth to this effect: Thou maist preach hell and damnation, and the rendring of a ter∣rible account to a severe Iudge, &c. seven yeares together, and yet not make one good Christian man. Hee that would make a good Christian, let the love of God be the first stone, which he layeth for the foundation. Thus hee
speaketh. And indeed what motive to obedience so strong as love? Many wa∣ters cannot quench love, neither can the flouds drowne it, Cant. 8.7. What greater feare then that which procee∣deth from love? If wee have an enemy whom we hate, wee sheath a sword it his bowels, or cleave his head with a Polax, and cry him no mercy: but how carefull are we not to do the least iniury to a friend? if we tread on his sin∣ger, we are sory at the heart. What greater aggravation of sinne, then to sin against love? Were not he an ungraci∣ous and rebellious sonne amongst men, who should reason thus: I have an in∣dulgent Father, who loveth me excee∣dingly, deemeth nothing too good for me, who hath given mee assurance and possession of his whole inheritance, therefore I will surely neglect him, I will shew my selfe undutifull against him, I will no more regard his com∣mands, or attend unto his precepts, but whatsoever will grieve him, that will I
doe. What heart could not afford to cast a stone at the head of such a sonne of Belial as this, to dash out his brains? For shame let the mover of this ob∣iection blush, and hide his head, let him consider his folly. The case is thine, thou art the man; because God aboun∣deth in free love, mercy, and kindnesse, therefore thou wilt abound in wret∣chednesse. I cease to speak any farther of this to thy greater shame. The fifth obiection followes, which is indeed more mannerly than the former. Object. 5. If God love us, bee reconciled unto us, before our faith and our conversion, then a man may possibly dye without faith, and yet be saved. I answer: This followeth not, be∣cause God hath ingaged himselfe to the contrary: which if he had not dore, much might have beene said. But wee see, hee that cannot lye, hath ingaged himselfe unto his people: I will put my Law into their hearts, & in their minds
will I write them, Heb. 10.6. And all shall know me from the least to the greatest Heb. 8.11. All thy children shall bee taught of God, Iohn 6.54. Isaiah 54.13. So that we say, He that beleeveth not shall bee damned. Not because his believing doth alter or change his estate before God; but because the God of truth hath promised, that hee will not onely give us remission, but that he wil also give faith for our consolation; and so faith becommeth a note and mark of life everlasting, and finall infidelity a sure  of eternall condemnation; that whosoever, or whatsoever he be in life or conversation, yet hee that belee∣veth not shall be damned. Thus much for the fifth. Object. 6. The sixth obiection: If God love us as you say, why doth he suffer us to live in 20.50. or 60. yeares? I answer: What art thou that repliest against God? How unsearchable are his judgements, and his wayes past finding
out? Rom. 11.33. Againe, let us aske Paul, why the Lord suffered him (be∣ing an elect and chosen vessell) to per∣secute his Saints unto death and bonds, and to cause many to blaspheme; and hee will tell us, that in him first Iesus Christ might shew forth all long suffering for a patterne to them which should here∣after beleeve on him to life everlasting, 1 Tim. 1.16. Thirdly, thou mayest as well obiect, seeing that God is of infi∣nite power, why doth he suffer sinne in the world? if thou shouldest, the Lord will give answer, My grace is sufficient for thee, 2 Cor. 12.9. Thus farre for the obiections, now wee come to the third thing propounded, The applica∣tion of what hath been spoken. Applicat. 1. In the first place we will observe the difference betweene the true Religion and the false, from that which hath been spoken. There are many religions in the world. And it fareth with diversi∣ties of Religions, as with diversities of
opinions: there is a possibility that they may be all false, but it is altoge∣ther impossible that they should be all true. There is but one true Religion, but there are many false: the false Re∣ligions seeming to differ exceedingly a∣mongst themselves, in very many things even in the obiect of worship, and in the matter, and manner; yet be they ne∣ver so different, there is one common foundation, wherein they doe all agree, and wherein they differ from the true. The true Religion propoundeth unto us a God in chiefe reconciled, pacified, pleased, a justice already satisfied, a propitiation made, sinnes taken away: and we have not one jote, not one apex in all the new Covenant to be found of reconciling God to us, but of our re∣conciliation to God: The new Cove∣nant manifesteth unto us a God alrea∣dy reconciled to us, and the whole mi∣nistery of reconciliation propoundeth our reconciliation to God. Now this is the common character of all false re∣ligions
of what sort soever, Iews, Turks Papists, pharisaicall Protestants, Hea∣then, all propound in some degree or o∣ther, an angry God, a deity not recon∣ciled, and then prescribe certain means and services whereby to appease his wrath, and to quench his displeasure, and to obtaine his love and favour. Man doth not oftner seeke after salvation, but hee naturally stumbleth upon this principle, What shall I doe to be saved? The world would bee saved by doing. Martin Luther speaking of this diffe∣rence, doth more than once compare the false religions unto Sampsons foxes, Iudg. 15.4. their heads looking divers wayes, but they were fastned together by the tayles. This comparison wee doe imbrace; yet I had rather compare them to Gentlemens Spaniels, which are fastned together by the necks, but loose at the tayles. They differ indeed in some circumstances, but in the main substance they agree in one. Doe wee not see some men contending with the
Papist, with wonderfull eagernesse? doe we not see others tugging, and haling, one one way, the other another, one for this ceremony, and another for that, as though there were a mortall difference betweene them, yea the difference so great, that it is sometimes the greatest reason for one side to refuse this or that because the other useth it: Now hee that shall search into the innermost se∣crets of these antagonists, shall finde, them that so eagerly differ about cir∣cumstance, (who could have beleeved it?) to agree in substance. Like ships that sail in the sea a great way asunder, yet all tending to one haven. All ten∣ding to this end, to win or obtaine the favour of an angry God. This that hath beene spoken may prove a helpe to ad∣minister a spirit of discerning unto the simple, in these distracted time, where∣in the Commonwealth is not more di∣stracted than the Church. Now among so many diversities of opinions, how shall we know which is the old and the
good way, that we may walk in it? One saith I am Christ, another nay, but I am Christ: for thy direction, search for that religion that abaseth man, that gi∣veth the glory of grace to God; that propoundeth the free love of God in lesus Christ, without mixture of any thing in the creature, that is the true re∣ligion, all the rest are false; that is the true way, and strait line, all the rest are counterfeit, and crooked. This is the first application. The second Application is to cor∣rect our idolatrous thoughts & iudge∣ments, that vve have had of God. What foolish fancies have possest our soules? How often have we thought God to be like unto our selves? How many times have wee imagined an angry God, a wrath full Maiesty? And sought to ap∣pease his indignation by fasting, by praying; by almes, by teares, and such like things? O foolish man! if his wrath should nor bee before appeased, what creature could stand in his sight?
Doe wee not see when some Lion-like man is incensed, the vvhole house trem∣bles, not one servant, no not a son dares come into his presence, before his wrath be over? If we so feare the un∣iust vvrath of man, how terrible would the iust vvrath of consuming fire bee? what great presumption were it for the creature to come into his presence, if his wrath were not appeased. We com∣plain of idolatry crept into our unhap∣py Nation. We complain of bowing, of cringing, of crossing, and many such fopperies. Search we, I beseech you, if idolatry have not hitherto crept into your hearts, if you have not set up a great idoll, and bowed unto that image, with all it vvorshippeth. Learne to make clean the inside as vvell as the outside of the cup. Learn to banish out of the soule those foolish and vain con∣ceits: learn to see the glory of the face of God in Jesu, and to worship him in spirit and in truth. There cannot bee greater idolatry committed, than to
conceive a possibility of gaining the love and favour of God, by vvorkes wrought in the creature. This is as great an idoll as that which was set up in the plain of Dura, in the province of Babylon, sixtie cubits high, Dan. 3. This is the Beast that hath made the whole earth to partake of her fornica∣tions. The third Application, is to stirre us up to admire the exceeding love of God, and his wonderfull goodnesse. Heare, O heavens, and give eare, O earth, vvhether ever the like grace were heard of, since the mountaines were framed. Who could have expected, that the Lord should have been halfe so gra∣cious? Did vve ever imagine to heare such a voyce from heaven to earth, so full of grace, so full of glory? Had the Lord propounded his love and recon∣ciliation to us, upon hard and difficult conditions, yet if possible, should not we have accounted it an happinesse, for what would not the distressed soul have
done, (vvitnesse the acts of our Fore∣fathers,) for to have purchased remissi∣on, and to have obtained the favour of God? But see, if any grace bee like to this grace: The Lord calleth from hea∣ven, unto the sonnes of men, by his Son Iesus, saying: O yee sons of men, what could I have done, or what could you have vvished me to doe, more then I have done? Behold, I am friends with you, I love you truly; see, have I not given you my Sonne? And now I be∣seech you by my Son, that you would bee reconciled unto me; I am friends with you, be you friends with me. Did vve ever think to hear the God of Hea∣ven to beseech and intreat us to bee re∣conciled unto God? That man should intreat God to be reconciled, vvas that vve might imagine; but that vve should find God already reconciled, and pray∣ing of man that he vvould bee reconci∣led; this is grace beyond expression. And as this sets forth the glorious grace of God, so doth it aggravate our
unthankfulnesse unto God, if vve shall refuse his gracious offer. If some poore and base man, some notorious person had offended the Ma∣gistrates of this Citie, vvhereby he had deserved severe punishment, yet the Magistrates should send for this offen∣dor, and declare themselves satisfied, and intreat him to shake hands with them: If now this offendor should stubbornly refuse to bee reconciled to them whom hee had offended, what should vvee thinke of such a person? The case is ours, it is wee that have offended God, God hath not of∣fended us; yet now when the offended God shall declare his grace, and send the ministery of reconciliation to us, who were offendors, if wee shall now refuse, and turne away our eares, and refuse to submit to his righteousnesse, what ingratitude will this be? That we may yet more admire the grace of our God, the Lord is pleased to use fa∣miliar expressions, to declare unto us
that it pleased God to betroath unto himselfe a wife, whom he would admit into so much favour, as to call him Ishi, my Husband, Hosea 2.16. unto whom he would vouchsafe so much honour, as to call her his Spouse, his Love, his Dove, &c. and to betroath her unto himself for ever. Who is it unto whom the Lord vouchsafeth such grace? What person is it whom the Lord vvill take to be his Spouse? Was there ever such a thing as this heard? That povertie should sue unto riches? That deformity should sue unto beauty, is no wonder: But that a Mighty, Rich, Beautifull, and Potent Prince, should sue unto a poore, old, decrepit, defor∣med, diseased, lowsie beggar, what sto∣ry can witnesse any such thing? And with reverence and trembling be it spo∣ken, the mighty God of heaven be∣troaths unto himselfe, and sweares unto vile, poore, deformed, sinfull, diseased, loathsom man. When man intendeth to take a companion of his love, some
aime at Nobility, some at Beau∣tie, others at Riches: these are the three load-stones that commonly attract the liking and love of man: But it is not so with God. Look we at the nobility of his Spouse, at her parentage, from whence she is descended; Thy father was an Ammorite, thy mother a Hittite: she is base borne, a daughter of whoredoms. But it may bee beauty might recom∣pence the basenesse of her birth. Look we at her beauty: her native beauty is blood and pollution, a deformed crea∣ture; Her artificiall beauty, neither washing nor swadling, nor salting. But peradventure, what was lacking in birth and beauty, might be supplied in riches and plenty, (for riches make many mar∣riages,) let us survey her riches: Behold, in stead of an habitation, Thou wast cast out in the open field: In stead of rayment not wherewithall to buy her wedding garments & ornaments, nakednes, even stark nakednesse, I spread the skirt of my clothing over thee, and covered thy na∣kednesse. Here is a Spouse that hath
not wherewithall to buy her a wedding garment. O the depth of the riches of the mercy of God! Neither noble, nor beautifull, nor rich; and yet the Lord hath set his love upon us. Nay, here is one thing exceedeth all this that hath been spoken: So miserable was our condition, that it hath cost the Lord a great dowry. And the Lord must buy us unto himself, not with silver or gold, nor with 200. fore-skins of the Phili∣stines: but with the pretious blood of the Sonne of God. I desire to leave you in admiration of this transcendent love, and to passe unto the fourth Applicati∣on to comfort the distressed soule. Here are the queries of thy burdened soule answered. What goodnesse must I find in me? What conditions? What qualifications, before that I beleeve God to bee a father to mee in Christ? What must I doe to bee saved? Thou seest here the freenesse of Gods grace, the glory of his reconciliation. And I will bee bold to say unto thee, as Moses
speaketh unto Israel in another case, Stand still, and see the salvation of the Lord, which he hath shewed you this day, Exod. 14.13. Or as Iehaziel speaketh unto Iudah in another case. Ye shall not need to fight in this battel, set your selves, stand yee still, and see the salvation of the Lord with you, O Iudah, and Ierusalem, 2 Chron. 20.17. What shall I doe to obtaine the favour of God? I say, be∣leeve him favourable unto thee, freely for his own sake. But here the poore soule will obiect and say, Alas! should I beleeve that have not one iot of good∣nesse in me; Nay more, that have all manner of evill in me? I answer, Thou hast as much in thee as God requires at thy hands, to precede his love, to goe before his reconciliation. If hee had said he could not love thee before such and such conditions, then thou might∣est have had cause to distrust his love. But thou hast seen his love to man, even dead in trespasses and sinnes. He came to call sinners, not righteous
to repentance: Come to him empty of all goodnesse, and partake of his ful∣nesse: come to him hungry, and hee shall fill thee; thirsty, and hee shall sa∣tisfie thee. O what iniury doe we unto the grace of God, in that wee imagine God to bee like unto some niggardly man, who will not bid us welcome to his house, unlesse wee bring our cost with us: The Lord lookes for nothing at our hands to obtain his favour: come unto him naked, and hee shall cloath thee. But the poore soule will yet ob∣iect further, and say: My case is yet worse then you perceive: for I am not onely void of goodnesse, I am not one∣ly full of filthinesse and abomination, but which is worst of all, I cannot leave my sinnes, I cannot forsake my whore∣domes and drunkennesse. How oft have I vowed? How oft have I promised? Yea how oft have I sworne to forsake my sinnes, and yet all in vain? I have returned with the Dogge to the vomit, and with the washed Sow, to wallow
in the mire? What say you to my case? If I should now come unto Christ, would he bid me welcome? If I should beleeve God loving unto mee, would it not be the greatest sinne unto me? Must not I forsake and leave my sinnes, be∣fore I beleeve? Must not I cast out the rubbish out of my soule, before Christ will love me? Must I not first bee wa∣shed and cleansed, before Christ will shew any favour unto me. Although the answer to this obiection doe pro∣perly belong unto the second thing to be shewed; (namely) mans reconcilia∣tion to God, yet I will speak somthing. And I desire thee to try one conclusion, to come unto Christ first, and leave thy sinnes afterward; get power from him to forsake thine iniquities. This is the reason why thy labour hath been in vaine, because thou hast gone the wrong way to work, that is, to mortifie thy sin first, and to come to Christ afterwards. Now how is it possible thou shouldest mortifie thy sin before thou beleevest
in his name, when whatsoever is not of faith, is sin? Doest thou thinke to cast out rubbish without him? Doest thou think to bind the strong man by thine own power? Thou art deceived. Woul∣dest thou mortifie thy sinne? See the order of the holy Ghost Col. 3.5. Mor∣tifie therefore your members which are upon the earth, fornication, &c. There∣fore, wherefore see vers. 1. if yee bee risen with Christ, seek those things that are a∣bove. First rise with Christ, and then mortifie. See the example of Mary, who had seven divels in her, shee doth not say, If I could cast out my divels, then I would come to Christ, but shee commeth and bringeth her seven divels with her, and the Lord casteth them our every one for her. Doe thou like∣wise, bring thy sinnes with thee, and let him cast them out for thee. If thou say, if I were washed, then I could beleeve, then I could come boldly to him, I ask thee, who should wash thee? I say, come unto him foule, and he shall make
thee cleane. Doth not hee call all that labour, and are heavie laden, Math. 11.28. the burden and load is sin. He doth not say, Lay downe your burden first, and then come unto me; but come un∣to me laden, and I will give you rest. But you will say, is it not written, that neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate persons, &c. shall inherit the kingdome of God? 1 Cor. 6.9.10. Againe, is it not written, with∣out holinesse no man shall see God, Heb. 12.14. To see God, and to inherite the kingdome of God, are nothing else, but to beleeve in God, and his sonne Iesus Christ. But this you see cannot bee without holinesse, therefore I must have holines first, before I can beleeve. I answer, the Text saith not to, but with∣out holinesse no man shall see God. If I should say, without eating and drink∣ing no man can live; wouldst thou pre∣sently conclude, that I must eate and drinke before I be alive? When sense will tell thee I must bee alive, before I
can eate and drinke. Yet this is thy ar∣guing, Without holinesse no man shall see God, therefore we must have holi∣nesse before we can see God. When it is evident, we must see God before wee can have holinesse: for, Whatsoever is not of faith is sinne, Rom. 14.23. But the meaning of the place is, that Christ will not only purge the conscience, but the conversation also of al such as come to him, that is, beleeve in his name, and that a reformed conversation shall (though not goe before) yet accompa∣ny a cleare apprehension of the grace of God in Christ lesus. And thus wee give an answer unto that other portion of holy Scripture, Fornicators shall not inherit the King∣dome of GOD; not that it is to bee thought, that men must first mortifie their sinnes, before they can come to the Kingdome of God; but that entring into the Kingdome of God, the Lord would vouchsafe unto them power to reforme their lives. And that this is
the true sense of the place, is plaine by the eleventh verse: Such were some of you, but yee are washed, but yee are sanctified, but yee are justified in the name of the Lord Iesus, and by the spirit of our God. They were such untill they were washt, and how were they washt? even in the name of the Lord Iesus, and by the spirit of our God. When the buyers and sel∣lers had prophaned the Temple, the Lord doth not stay while some body had cast them out, and then goe into the Temple afterwards, but he enters into the Temple first, and making a scourge of small cords, he drove them all out of the Temple, Iohn 2.15. So fareth it with the Temple of thy body, that is prophaned with sin, and thy conscience that is defiled with ini∣quity. Thou must not thinke that thy conscience must bee washed first, and then the Lord to enter afterwards, but the Lord must first entor, and wash thee and purge thee by his blood, which pur∣geth the conscience from dead workes, to
serve the living God, Heb. 9.14. There∣fore thou complainest, thou canst not leave thy sinnes, I say, thou hadst the more need to beleeve in Christ, that thou mightest have power to forsake them. But poore soule, thou dost ob∣iect further, and say, I have beene an extortioner, a grinder of the faces of the poore, a theefe, a purloyner, and what, shal I venture to beleeve in Christ before I have made restitution, and sa∣tisfaction to them whom I have wron∣ged? Are we not taught out of the Fa∣ther, Non remittitur peccatum, nisi re∣stituatur oblatum; without restitution no remission? I answer: first, there are many things that are well spoken by the Fathers, in one sense, which are perversly applyed in another. This sentence is true in re∣spect of reconciliation of man to man; but not true in respect of God to man, or man to God. As when a man shall by a lawfull Church bee for extortion excommunicated, the Church ought
not to receive him againe untill restitu∣tion bee made. And thus may wee in good sense understand other passages of the Fathers, which are otherwise per∣versly applyed by themselves & others. Wilt thou deserve pardon (saith Ambrose) wash away thy sinnes by teares. This is good in my first sence of reconciliation of man to man, as when the Church shall excommunicate an offendor, and hee shall humble himselfe with teares in his eyes, he ought again to be recei∣ved. But to apply this as a meares to reconcile God to man there can be no∣thing more abominable. by the way, to give thee warning of the grost applications which are made  the Fathers, by  nor what they  doubt: Thou  use thou hast not  say, beleeve first,  forward: for this,  beyond all except  stood forth,
and said unto the Lord, Behold Lord, the halfe of my goods I give to the poore, and if I have taken any thing from any man, by false accusation, I restore him fourefold. If wee looke backe to the sixth verse, there wee see that Zacheus received Christ ioyfully. Zacheus was an arch-publican, verse 2. a man that was a sinner, verse 7. yet this sinner, this arch-publican received Christ first, (not into his house onely, but into his heart also) and then he makes restitution af∣terward; goe and doe likewise; thou seest the abundant grace of God: bove and beyond all obstacles: if thou canst beleeve, thou needest not feare, though thou hast beene never so sinfull. Thus much for the fourth Application. Applicat. 5. The fifth: If God be so freely recon∣ciled to us, how ought we to be easie to be intreated to be reconciled one to an∣other? The Lord slow to wrath, and full of compassion, and loving kindnesse. Take
we heed that we bee not full of wrath, and slow to compassion. God is recon∣ciled to us before wee aske; how much more ought wee to bee reconciled to those that have offended us, and say, for∣give us? Oh that we had so much cha∣ritie in us, as to beare one with another, the stronger with the weaker, that un∣happy differences might have an end. Secondly, is God thus freely reconci∣led to us? Oh let us be intreated to bee reconciled unto him: which is the se∣cond generall I have to shew unto you, What it is for man to bee reconciled to God. FINIS
RECONCILIATION OF MAN to GOD. By HENRY DENNE. BEfore I enter to speake of Mans reconciliation to God, It is necessary that I premise a distinction, and shew you a two-fold re∣conciliation, set out unto us in the Scriptures. 1. Originall, 2. Actuall. Beare with the termes, I confesse they are not altogether so fit as I could wish: But I therefore thought fit to use these termes, that I might para∣lell this distinction unto another, used by Divines of Originall and Actuall sinne. Originall reconcili∣ation
is wrought without us by ano∣ther person, yet for us: you may call it the reconciliation of our nature. Actual reconciliation is wrought with∣in us, although not by our owne pow∣er. This you may call the reconcilia∣tion of our persons or consciences, the one being the reconciliation of our na∣ture to God, the other the manifesta∣tion of that, and the premised recon∣ciliation to our soules: That this is not an unnecessary distinction you shall find by comparing some Scrip∣tures together: the first is Rom. 5.10. When we were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his Sonne. Againe, Eph. 2.16. That he might reconcile both unto God into one body by the Crosse having slaine the enmity thereby, Col. 1.21.12. Thirdly, consider what is writ∣ten, 2 Cor. 5.18, 19. All things are of God who hath reconciled us to himselfe by Iesus Christ, and hath given unto us the ministery of reconciliation: To wit, That God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himselfe, not imputing their tres∣passes
unto them. Now compare wee these three places forementioned, with that which we find, 2 Cor. 5, 20. We are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christs stead, be yee reconciled unto God: In the former places the Apostle told us wee were reconciled; and in this place, he beseecheth us to be reconciled. For to take up this difference, I say that in the former he speaketh of our Originall re∣conciliation, wherein our nature was re∣conciled to God by Christ, in the se∣cond I say, he speaketh of our Actuall re∣conciliation, wherein our consciences be∣come reconciled to God, through the apprehension of the reconciliation which Christ hath wrought for us. First of all I must speak of our Originall re∣conciliation. And there I lay downe this proposition, that we were reconciled to God by the death of his Sonne, without any previous conditions in us, or per∣formed by us. You see it is the act of Christ upon the Crosse, it was done by his death: The Lord Christ being a
common person, taking our nature up∣on him, we are said to doe that which he did, and to have that done upon us which was done upon him. As in the first Adam we all sinned before we were, or bad committed any Actuall transgression: so in the second Adam we were reconci∣led. As by one mans disobedience, many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one, shall many be made righteous, Rom. 5.19. I say we are said to doe that which he did, as to be buried with Christ, by baptisme into death, Rom. 6.4. We are said to be crucified with Christ, as our old man is crucified with him, Rom. 6.6. to be dead and alive with him. Reckon yee also your selves to be dead indeed unto sinne, but alive unto God through Iesus Christ our Lord, Rom. 6.11. We are said to be risen with him, Coloss. 3.1. which is elegantly set forth by the Pro∣phet Hosea, speaking of the resurrecti∣on of Christ. He speaketh on this wise, After two dayes he will revive us, and the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight, Hose. 6.2. Yet more,
we are said to be placed together in hea∣venly places with him, Eph. 2.5.6. This is that which I call Originall reconcili∣ation. Whereby we see that not onely God was reconciled unto us, but also that our nature was reconciled unto God by the death of his Sonne, without any condition, or qualification wrought in us. Thus much for our Originall re∣conciliation. Now followes our Actu∣all reconciliation; to wit, the manifesta∣tion of Gods reconciliation to us, and of the reconciliation of our nature to God in Jesus Christ. Here I lay downe this proposition: Mans Actuall reconci∣liation to God requireth previous conditi∣ons and qualifications to be wrought in man by the spirit of God before man can be Actually reconciled to God, or Gods reconci∣liation manifested unto him. Althogh this proposition need no proofe, in regard that the world so far doteth on conditi∣ons, that they will hardly admit God to be reconciled to man, without performan∣ces in man: Surely much lesse will they thinke it possible that Man should be re¦conciled
unto God, without something wrought in man; yet for our better un∣derstanding I will shew you the proofe of this by certaine texts. As Except a man be borne of water and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdome of God, Iohn 3.5. Except a man be borne againe he cannot see the kingdome of God, vers. 3. To enter into, and to see the kingdome of God, is that which I call reconcilia∣tion to God: to know the favour and love of God towards us in Christ, re∣quires you see the condition of being borne againe of water and of the spirit, which is (not to be baptized as the Pa∣pists would have it) but to have such fruits and effects of Gods spirit wrought in us as purifie the heart, as water doth the body. Secondly, except yee eate the flesh of the Sonne of man, and drinke his bloud, you have no life in you, Iohn 6.53. Marke I pray you, he doth not say, that except yee eate the flesh of the Sonne of man, and drinke his bloud, yee have no life in God, or in Christ; but yee have no life in you. Now you see we must eat
the flesh of Christ, and drinke his bloud, or else we can have no life in us. To eate his flesh and to drink his bloud, is to be∣leeve in him, to have life in you, is to know Gods favour in Iesus Christ, as much as if he should say, except yee be∣leeve, yee cannot know Gods favour to you in Iesus Christ. Vnto this we may adde in the third place: Except yee re∣pent yee shall all likewise perish, Luke 13.3. And to this place we may also referre that place of which we had oc∣casion to speake somewhat before; with∣out holinesse no man shall see God, Heb. 12.14. not onely that holinesse is con∣comitant or companion of our seeing of God, but that faith being a part of (yea the first fruits of holines) is that where∣by the soule is brought to the sight of God in Jesus Christ. But I am not wil∣ling to spend time in larger proofe, though you cannot but perceive I might be very large herein, but I will for your better understanding, confine my selfe, and goe on to shew you in particular, what Conditions are required in us, be∣fore
we can be reconciled to God. And here I have occasion, for the better ex∣plaining of this, to commend unto you three sorts of conditions, 1. Antecedent. 2. Present. 3. Consequent. Antecedent Conditions I call those which are necessarily presupposed in us before we can submit unto God, or be reconciled unto him. They are such conditions as may be seperated from re∣conciliation in time, yea they are such conditions, as are, and may be in them which are not reconciled, nor yet ever shall be: so that they are proper, Omni∣bus sed non solis electis, to all the elect, but not onely to the elect. 2. Present conditions I call them, that goe before reconciliation, as the cause before the ef∣fect, yet are never seperated from recon∣ciliation in time, but are indeed the ve∣ry thing whereby the holy spirit of God doth reconcile man to God. 3. Conse∣quent conditions I call them, which doe alwayes follow reconciliation, as the
effect the cause, although they are inse∣perable in respect of time. And I there∣fore undertake to speake of these (al∣though the curious may thinke me blame-worthy for transgressing the rules of method) that we might be war∣ned of a rock and shelfe; namely, that we doe not confound these conditions together, and to take those for antece∣dent which are onely consequent: which to my knowledge hath made some souls to make shipwrack for a time, when as they would have in them before they beleeve, such conditions as are onely consequents, and not antecedents of faith: First, to speake of Antecedent conditi∣ons, which necessarily goe before our re∣conciliation to God: They shall be refer∣red unto two heads, the first is the know∣ledge of sinne, with whatsoever is requi∣site unto the knoweledge of sinne. The se∣cond is the knowledge of the depth of mi∣sery by sinne to be such, as we can neither help our selves, neither is it in the pow∣er of any other creature for to helpe us: but that we are undone for ever in re∣spect
of whatsoever we can doe or any other for us; for untill the soule be brought to this, there is no hope of re∣conciling it unto God: for you must know, that it is meere necessity that drives us: we are by nature haters of God, and cannot be brought to come to God in love before we perceive God to love us; such is the malignant nature of man, that if he could make any shift in the world, hee would not bee beholding to God for helpe: The prodigall sonne will never returne to his father so long as he can get cloaths for his backe, and meate for his belly elsewhere; but when he is brought to that passe that he would fain have filled his belly with husks which the swine did eate, and no man gave unto him, Luke 15.16. Then he is conten∣ted, to thinke of submitting to his fa∣ther, but not before, if he could have got a living by keeping of Hogs, hee would not have returned. Thus is it with man so long as he is in any hope to escape misery any other way, there is no hope of his returning to God. They that be
whole need not the Physitian, but they that are sick, Mat. 9.12. The Pharisee thinketh himself able to establish his owne righteousnesse: and therefore he will not submit to the righ∣teousnesse of God, Rom. 10.4. He cares not a pinne for Christ, he is whole; he cares not for the Physitian. If any man will come after me, let him deny himselfe and take up his crosse daily and follow me, Luke 9.23. No man can follow Christ except he deny himselfe, his own Righ∣teousnesse and holinesse, would you know a reason under the determinate counsell of God; why the Publicans and Harlots received Christ, but the holy Pharisees rejected him, (a true paterne of our dayes:) the Pharisees thought them∣selves able to stand upon their owne legs; they were alive in their conceits, and for them to heare of righteousnesse in another, was too great a disparage∣ment unto them and their holinesse; when the publicans and strumpets, be∣ing convinced of sinne, and having no righteousnesse of their owne, they are
contented to accept it upon any terms. A rich man, he sometimes scorneth a gift, and saith nay, but I will buy it, I will give satisfaction for it: but the poor naked man is glad to receive what he wanteth. Thus before the soule of man be brought to be reconciled unto God, it is necessary that it see it selfe a sinfull creature; yea so sinfull, That nei∣ther crying nor howling can wash it away; yea so sinfull, that no correction or amend∣ment of life is able to make satisfaction. Thus farre of the antecedent conditi∣ons: which as I said before, are proper to all; but not onely to them that are reconciled to God: for these that I have shewed hitherto, may be found in the not reconciled, even as in the recon∣ciled: yea, in the reprobate, even as in the elect. The second sort of conditi∣ons are present, which go before recon∣ciliation, as the cause before the effect; but is never separated from it; as being the thing I say, whereby the holy Spi∣rit of God doth actually reconcile the soule to God. Of this sort I finde but
one only condition; namely, of faith, or beleeving. Here are two things to be pondered. The first, That without be∣leeving, the soule (remaining in the body) cannot be reconciled unto God. The se∣cond, That by beleeving, the soule is actually reconciled unto God. For the first, it is proved. He that beleeveth not the Sonne shall not see life, but the wrath of God abideth on him, Iohn 3.36. To be re∣conciled to God, is to see life, therefore he that beleeveth not, shall not be recon∣ciled to God: but the apprehension of the wrath of God shall torment his wakened conscience. He that beleeveth not, shall not see life; he shall see no∣thing but wrath. Secondly, He that be∣leeveth not God, hath made him a lyar, 1 Iohn 5.10. That is, hath accounted him a lyar. Now, who can finde in his heart to be reconciled to a lyar? Wher∣by it is plain, that without, or before faith, man cannot be reconciled unto God. For the second, that by beleeving, the soule becomes to be reconsiled unto God: is proved; He that hath received
his testimony, hath set to his seale that God is true. John 3.33. As many as received him, to them he gave power to become the sonnes of God, even to them that beleeve on his name, Iohn 1.12. Whosoever belee∣veth, hath power to cry, Abba Father. And to this place, we refer that knowne text, Rom. 5.1. Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Iesus Christ. And this is the proper office of faith, (as it justifieth) to reconcile the soule and conscience unto God, and to make us at peace with him, by assuring us of his favour and good will towards us, in Jesus Christ, mani∣fested, in that God gave his only Sonne to be a propitiation for our sinnes, and to satisfie whatsoever the justice of God required at his hands. And this is our receiving of Christ, our putting on of Christ, and our living by faith (if we take faith for beleeving.) And thus much of the second condition which is present: Now followes the third sort of conditions, which are consequent unto our reconciliation, and things that ac∣company
our salvation. These conditi∣ons are first, Ioy in the Holy Ghost. Se∣condly, Love to God and his Church. Thirdly, New obedience in newnesse of spirit, and not in oldnesse of the letter. First, Ioy in the Holy Ghost, is a neces∣sary consequent, and an inseparble com∣panion to our reconciliation by faith; as appears by that which hath been spo∣ken before, touching joying in belee∣ving, with joy unspeakable and full of glo∣ry. And indeed, how can it be that it should be otherwise: can the men of this world hear of great possessions fal∣len unto them, without joyfulnesse? How then is it possible, that the chil∣dren of the living God, can come to the apprehension of the fatherly love of God in Christ, but they must needs sing a new song, yea, break forth into singing, and cry aloud, with the blessed Virgin, saying, My soule doth magnifie the Lord, and my spirit hath rejoyced in God my Sa∣viour, Luke 1.46. If I could this day bring you happy tydings of reconcilia∣tion betweene King and Parliament,
(which the God of heaven effect,) what joy would this work in the hearts of e∣very man here present? How much more shall the tydings of eternall peace by Jesus Christ, affect the soule with extraordinary comfort. Here what the Lord speaks concerning the new Jeru∣salem, God shal wipe away all teares from their eyes, and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, &c. Rev. 21.4. Let others think what they will; I firmely beleeve the new Ierusalem, to be the glorious kingdome of Iesus Christ, (which is righteousnesse, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost) advanced in the con∣science: and hither also are to be refer∣red those glorious things that are spo∣ken of the City of our God, by the Go∣spell Prophet, in these words, The ran∣somed of the Lord shall returne and come to Sion with songs, and everlasting joy up∣on their heads: they shall obtaine joy and gladnesse, and sorrow and sighing shall flye away, Isay 35.10. This is the promise of our Saviour, Your sorrow shall be tur∣ned into joy, Iohn 16.20. This is the of∣fice
of the Holy Ghost, To be the Com∣forter, to speak peace and joy unto his peo∣ple. And therefore amongst the sundry precious gifts, which are declared to be the fruits of Gods Spirit, joy, is not the least, Gal. 5.22. This also is the lot and inheritance of the Saints of God: for wee reade not of any converts in the Scripture, but we also read of the joy of Gods Spirit replenishing their soules: They, (even they) who were pricked in their hearts, and knew not what to doe, doe not eat their meat with gladnesse and singlenesse of heart, Acts 2.46. The Eunuch returneth rejoycing, Acts 8.39. Samarias conversion cau∣seth great joy in that City, Acts 8.8. But why do I stay on particulars, let us heare the Apostle for all; We also joy in God through our Lord Iesus Christ, by whom we have now received the attone∣ment, Rom. 5.11. We rejoyce in the hope of the glory of God: And more, we glory in tribulation also, Verse 2.3. Can the Sun be without her light? can the fire bee without heat? Then also may the cal∣led
of God, the reconciled to the Fa∣ther, be without joy and peace in belee∣ving. Can a man stop the ebbing or flowing of the water? then may the soules of the reconciled to God be de∣prived of those flouds of comforts, which flow from fountaines of com∣forts, into the subject of comforts, the soules of the people reconciled to God. This is the first effect of reconciliation, joy, and peace. The second followes; which is, Love to God: Love is also an inseparable consequent of mans recon∣ciliation: can man behold the beauty of God, and the glory of his face in Je∣sus Christ? And the soule not be ravi∣shed with love. See the love of the re∣conciled to God, in that garden of sweet expressions, the Book of Canticles; Stay me with flagons, comfort me with apples, for I am sick with love, Cant. 2.5. The love of the reconciled to God, it is a great love: Many sins are forgiven her, for she loved much, Luke 7. A love ta∣king great delight and contentment in the object beloved; My beloved is white
and ruddy, the chiefest among ten thou∣sand. His head is as the most fine gold, his locks are bushy, and black as a Raven, his mouth is most sweet, he is altogether lovely' Cant. 5.10. &c. Againe, it is a restlesse love, that canfind no content, can take no rest (nonot in her bed) if shee may not enjoy the presence of her be∣loved. By night on my bed I sought him whom my soule loved, I sought him, but I found him not, I will rise now and goe a∣bout the City, &c. Cant. 3.1.2. That this love is an inseperable consequent, a daily companion of mans reconcilia∣tion to God, will bee plaine, when wee shall see how the Holy Ghost, descri∣bing unto us the called of God, setteth them forth by this token of love unto Al∣mighty God: Eye hath not seen, nor eare hath not heard, &c. the things which God hath prepared for them that love him, 1 Cor. 2.9. We know that all things work together for good to them that love God, Rom. 8.28. This ornament of love is like the garment of divers colours, with which all the Kings daughters, which
were Virgins, were apparrelled, 2 Sam. 13.18. If a Woman bee seen in the streets without a party coloured gar∣ment, it is concluded, that she is either none of the Kings daughters, or at least no Virgin: so is this ornament of love (I say) that thing, wherewith all the people of God, reconciled to him, are adorned; if wee see a soule altogether stript of this ornament, we conclude, They are not in the number of Gods people; or at least not reconciled. Therefore the Holy ghost concludes; He that loveth not, knoweth not God, 1 Ioh. 4.8. And as on the affirmative, pro∣nounceth, Grace be on all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ, in sincerity, Eph. 6.24. So also on the negative, If any man love not the Lord Iesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha, 1 Cor. 16.22. Thus you see the consequents of our re∣conciliation, inseparably conjoyned to∣gether, so that no creature shall be able to put them asunder: you have seene Peace to the brethren, and love, with faith from God the Father, and the Lord Jesus
Christ, Eph. 6.23. The third consquent is new obedience in newnes of the spirit: As peace, and joy, and love follow, and attend upon faith, so is new obedience an attendant of love. This is the love of God, that wee keep his Commondements, 1 Joh. 5.3. If you love me keep my Com∣mandements, Ioh. 14.15. If a man love me, he will keep my words, verse 23. This is that which I had occasion to speake of before, that the holy Spirit of God doth not onely cleanse the conscience, but in some measure the conversation also: This is that which I said before, Without holinesse no man shall see God, and drunkards shall not inherit the Kingdome of God: I say again, that Christ entring into the soule, shall drive out whatsoe∣ver is prophane, and draw up the soule by the cords of love unto new obedi∣ence: And to this place we refer hatred of sinne, love of vertue, a godly sorrow for transgression committed, revenge upon our selves, for the things that are past, and a jealous care for that which is to come. But of these particularly
I cannot speake; for as Rome was not built on a day, so neither can it be puld down in an houre (I mean the Doctrine of Rome.) And here I would have made an end of speaking of the consequents of our Reconciliation, but that I fear the timorous soule will be ready to say, In thus saying you have filled my heart with sorrow: The consequents of our reconciliation being layd downe, I con∣fesse they are true; but alas, when I cast an eye back upon mine owne soule, I find my joy & comfort little, my love to be lesse than my joy, and my obedience to be least of all. This, this puts my heart in feare, and makes my soule to tremble. I answer, what is it that thou fearest, O thou of little faith? Thou answerest, thou art afraid, that God is not thy God, that hee is not reconciled unto thee: See thy errour, these things cannot be signes that God is not recon∣ciled unto thee; but they are signes, that thou art not fully reconciled unto God, but that thy faith is weake like the bul∣rush, that thy joy is as little as thy faith,
and that thy love and obedience is as im∣perfect as thy joy. Measure not the re∣conciliation of God to thy soule, by the perfection of thy obedience: for in so doing thou plungest thy soule into miferable doubts. But seeing the imper∣fection, not of Gods reconciliation to thee, but of thy reconciliation to God, cry thou unto the Throne of grace, Lord increase my faith, and make my love and obedience, my joy, and peace, to abound more and more, through the spirit of our God, and the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ. And thus have I now done with the Antecedent, the present, and consequent conditions, of our reconciliation to God. The next thing that I intend is to make Appli∣cation. It hath been hitherto mine endea∣vour, to declare unto you the misterie of salvation, and to imitate the skilfull Limbner, to give unto every Limbe and part, not onely his due proportion, but also his due place, and not to set the head where the foot should be, or the
foot where the head: I may peradven∣ture to many seem guilty, of that crime which was laid against the Apostle, to turne the world upside downe, and to place that in the bottome, which others make the top of the building, and to set that upon the roofe, which others lay for a foundation: But I submit my selfe to the judgement of the word: Consider we what hath been spoken, of Gods reconciliation to us without all conditions; of our reconciliation to God, originall and actuall: and now let us see, if these dstinctions be founded (as it is before proved) upon the holy Scriptures, of the Prophets and A∣postles, whether they bee not blame∣worthy that make no difference at all between these two, but confounding heaven and earth together, the Creature with the Creator, doe most absurdly apply those things which are antece∣dents, or causes of our reconciliation unto God, to be causes of Gods recon∣ciliation unto us, drawing a vaile before the free grace of God, and keeping the
soule from setling upon a sure founda∣tion: The Lord complained of the Prophets of old (the false Prophets) that they pudled the waters with their feet.) When water is pudled, it is not water; but water and dirt mingled to∣gether: In a puddle no man can discern whether it be deep or shallow: water is Doctrine, pudling is confounding of things together, without division or se∣paration: O that our dayes were free from this complaint! O yee Pastours of the Lords flock, that feed his heri∣tage; Be you contented to beare the word of admonition, from the meanest of the servants of God. Look back up∣on the waters, that yee have made the heritage of the Lord to drink: Con∣sider the pastures, which you have set before them: have you not made the LORDS sheep become a prey (sometimes to presumption, some∣times to despaire) by your Doctrine? Have you not made the soules of the righteous sad, and the soule of the wic∣ked to rejoyce? Consider your wayes
I pray you: Have you not many a time confounded the conditions of our re∣conciliation to God, making that to be the case, which is the effect, and that to be the effect, which is the cause? Let me beseech you to weigh these things, and to endeavour that your Doctrine may be the light of the World, that it may be cleare as the Christall, proceeding from the throne of God, and of the Lamb, Rev. 22.1. You sheep of the pasture of the Lord, the God of his inheritance, know, it your duty aptly to distin∣guish these things in your owne Con∣sciences, that you may enjoy the bright∣nesse of the glory, of the grace of God, set up in your soules, if you search into the reason of your many years bondage, of your miserable doubting, you shall finde your disease, in that which hath been spoken, and I hope the remedy al∣so: The Lord give you understanding. The second Application, may shew unto us the difference, between the re∣conciled, and the not reconciled: Al∣though both may bee objects of the
grace of God, both beloved of the ever∣lasting Father: yet shall you finde a vast difference, if you look either upon their Conversations, or their Consciences. The difference of Conscience is, the not reconciled, have a defiled, and pol∣luted Conscience. A Conscience that is either seared, and fitted with Atheisti∣call carelesnesse, or at the best, sitting in darknesse and the shadow of death, seeing no light, Matth. 4.16. when as the consciences of the reconciled, doe enjoy the light of the glory of God in the face of Jesus. Second∣ly, the conversation of the people not reconciled, is either a conversation pol∣luted with Pharisaicall righteousnesse, and blind zeale, (for all zealous per∣sons are not reconciled to God) seeking to establish its owne righteousnesse in the sight of God: or else a conversati∣on, according to the course of this world, according to the Prince of the power of the ayre; the spirit that wor∣keth in the children of disobedience; A conversation in the lusts of the flesh,
fulfilling the desires of the flesh, and of the mind, Eph. 2.2, 3. The third Application, sheweth us an open doore, for the easie understan∣ding and plaine reconciliation of many places of Scripture, which seem so ex∣ceeding different, as if no way of recon∣ciling could be found. Let us learne to distinguish, when God speaketh of his reconciliation to us, and when hee speaketh of our reconciliation to him. Let us learn to distinguish, between the thing, and the manifestation of the thing: the want of which distinction, breedeth an horrible confusion in the interpretation of holy Scripture; To give an instance, it is written, Galat. 3.26. Yee are all the Children of God by faith in Jesus Christ. It is written again, Gal. 4.6. Because yee are sonnes, God hath sent forth the spirit of his sonne into your hearts, crying Abba Father. In this last place, the Holy ghost declares son-ship to be the cause of giving the Spirit, as also he declareth it to bee an eternall grace of God, communicated unto his
people, Having predestinated us unto the Adoption of sonnes, by Iesus Christ, Eph. 1.5. But then if this be so, how are we said to be sons of God by faith, &c? I answer, the one speaketh of the thing it selfe, or of Gods reconciliation to us; The other of the manifestation of the thing, or our reconciliation to God. Againe, if the grace of adoption be an eternall grace, how is it said, wee are borne againe by the Word? 1 Pet. 1.23. and begotten by the Word? Iames 1.18. I answer, these places are to be under∣stood of the manifestation of Adopti∣on, not of the act of Adoption it selfe: And that this is so, is plaine, God hath begotten us againe unto a lively hope, by the resurrection of Iesus Christ from the dead, 1 Pet. 1.3. A lively hope is the thing, unto which we are begotten. And that it is ordinary in Scripture, to call the manifestation of things, by the names of the things themselves, will be plaine by two places, (I might bring two hundred) the first is Ierem. 1.10. I have this day set thee over the nations,
and over the Kingdomes, to root out, to put downe, and to destroy, and to throw downe, and to build, and to plant. How doth poore Jeremy destroy Nations? Even by declaring the judgements of God in the overthrow of Nations. And thus doth he plant, by declaring the merci∣full promises of God in the restaurati∣on of Nations. The second place is, Ioh. 20.23. Whose sins ye remit, they are remitted, and whose sins ye retaine, they are retained. How do the Apostles remit and retaine sinnes, but by declaring Gods gracious remis∣sion to every one that beleeveth, &c. But some may object and say, why doth not the Lord speak in plain terms? I answer who art thou that wilt cor∣rect the Lord, and teach him to speak? I answer againe, in our Saviours words, when his Disciples ask the question, Why speakest thou unto them in Para∣bles? Mat. 13.10. His answer is, Be∣cause it is given to you to know the myste∣ries of the kingdome of God, but to them it is not given. As if he should have said,
in respect of you, that are my people, I need not to speak more plaine; for you (being taught of God) are able to un∣derstand the misteries of the kingdom. In respect of others: I will not speak more plaine, because to them it is not given to understand the mysteries of the kingdome. Thus far for the appli∣cation: I now draw to an end: only I will give you the Skeleto or Map of that which hath beene delivered in a few words. Consider we the causes of Gods reconciliation, as it stands manifested to us in Christ. Secondly, the causes of our reconciliation to God. Gods reconciliation to us. 1 Efficient, Gods love. 2 Materiall, Christs righteousnesse. 3 Formall, Imputa∣tion of righteous∣nesse. 4 Finall, Gods glo∣ry, mans salva∣tion. Our recodciliation to God, Efficient, Principall H. Ghost, instrumen. tall faith. Mate∣riall, Christs righ∣teousnesse. For∣mal, Apprehension of Christs righteousness by faith. Fi∣nall, Gods glory, & mans consola∣tion.
Consider we the difference of these two in their causes. The finall cause of Gods reconciliation to us, is salvation; the finall cause of our reconciliation to God is, consolation. The Lord fill you with his Spirit, that the apprehension of Gods salvation may fill you with eternall consolation. Amen. FINIS.
