6903.5 33143096 28227
DIRECTIONS GIVEN BY THE PATENTEES, how their Compounded stuffe is to be vsed in Dying. IMPRIMIS all Colours to be made or finished with the said Stuffe, are to be wrought vpon good grounds of Woad, according to the lightnesse or sadnes of the colours that are intended to be made. Item, the Cloth, Kersey, Bayes, or whatsoeuer else to be dyed, is first to be boyled with Allom and Argall as they vse to doe for graine colours in halfe water, and halfe li∣quor or Float, and then to be landed, and very well cooled. The same must be finished in new float or liquors of Branne and water (such as ordi∣narilie are vsed for graine Colours) not aboue one day old, In manner following: First, the Lead or Copper being prepared and filled with a quantitie of the said Float or liquor propor∣tionable for such things as are purposed to be dyed, the Cloth or whatsoeuer else must be mathered, hauing an allowance of Mather, as followeth. For A Cloth for a French Russet of 60. l. waight, being a sad azure in woad, —Foure pound. For A Violet of the like waight, being a sad wat∣chet in woad,—Three pound. For A Purple of the like waight, being a light wat∣chet in woad,—Three pound. For A Tawney of the like waight, being a light Azure in woad,—Eight pound. And so proportionably for any colours to be dyed according to ye lightnes or sadnes of their Woads, Pro∣uided alwaies, that they be high ynough in woad for the colours purposed to be made. Then being mathered as aforesaid, they are to be very cleane washed, and the Lead or Copper to be pre∣pared with one third part of water according to the quantitie of Clothes or other things intended to be fini∣shed, And then a quantitie of our Compounded stuffe to be allowed, as followeth. For A French Russet of the waight of 60. l.—Fiue pound. For A Violet of the like waight.—Twoo pound and a halfe. For A Purple of the like waight.—Twoo pound. For A Tawney of the like waight.—One pound. Which Stuffe is to be put into the said third part of Water in the Lead or Copper, stirring the same con∣tinually till it boyle, which it must doe halfe an hower, and then put to the water, twice asmuch Float or li∣quor of a day old, or a day & a halfe at the most, this liquor must be swéet, and not made vpon stale grounds. Then your Lead or Copper being at a moderate or mathering heat, stirre about the liquor that the Stuffe may not lye at the bottome. 1 Then shoote in your Clothes putting in the saddest Colours first, for example, first a French Russet gi∣uing  it 5 or 6 ends ouer the winche very quicke, Then a Violet giuing it one or twoo ends in like sort, Then a Purple &c. when any of the aforesaid Clothes come to their height or sadnes, they must be landed, and ve∣ry well cooled, continuing the fier till the Lead be ready to boyle: 2 Their stirre about the Liquor and  shoote in the Clothes againe, and let them be handled 4 or 5 ends ouer the winche as shalbe thought fit, then let them boyle till they haue taken the strength of the Stuffe, or till they come to the Colours desired, then land them and coole them very well. 3 And if they be once more shot into the Liquor and handled 4 or 5  ends ouer the winche, they will be the better and fairer. Hauing thus finished any of the foresaid Colours, there may be dyed in the same Liquors (being refre∣shed with a little water or Float) Lauender colours, Siluer colours, Ashe colours, or such like vpon very light Woads, the same being boyled in Allom as aforesaid, and not washed out of their Boyling.
