A3199A R14861 11922821 50986
Animadversions ON THE PROPOSAL FOR SENDING BACK THE NOBILITY and GENTRY OF IRELAND. LICENS'D January 1. 1689/90. LONDON: Printed for Tim. Goodwin, at the Maiden-head against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet. MDCXC.
ANIMADVERSIONS ON THE Proposal for Sending Back THE Nobility and Gentry of Ireland. WAlking the other day in the Court of Requests (near to the Areopagus of London, where most men spend their time in nothing else, but either to tell, or to hear some new thing), I encoun∣ter'd a Pamphlet, dress'd up in the new Mode of A Letter to a Gentleman, and stiling it self, The Proposal for sending back the Nobility and Gentry of Ireland, &c. I began to think with my self, what pity it is, that now (when by a War with France, and the Inhibition of all Trade and Commerce from thence, the Commodities of that Countrey are grown scarce and dear) so much Paper should be wasted in such idle and unprofitable Trifles. If any Answer be made to this (thought I) there must be more Paper mis-imploy'd; if it pass without Animadversi∣on, the Author will be confirmed in the opinion of his own Sufficiency, and be tempted to expose more such unlick'd Lumps to the amusement of the Vulgar. Thereupon I sate down to read it, and was not at all deceiv'd in my expectati∣on; for I found it to be a bold, and most disobliging Justifica∣tion of a most irrational and impracticable Project, and ag∣gravated by a very dis-ingenuous humour of Personal Scandals and Reflections. But, to obviate all suspicion of Prejudice or Passion, I will take the Engine in pieces, and handle every Wheel and Joint of it, and then submit to every impartial Reader, whether R. B who subscribes the Letter, hath proceed∣ed with any tolerable candor, or discretion. But I desire to be rightly understood: I do not undertake this Task, to make an Answer to the Parts of his Proposal and Scheme; that is done throughly and sufficiently by the Answer given in to the Lords of the Committee, and I shall expose it anon: I design this
only to animadvert on the frivolous Cavils and Conundrums ventilated by the Author of the Vindication. And first (looking as big as Hudibras himself) he enters the Lists, with a bold defiance, That some of his Countrey-men dare not put their Honesty in the Ballance with His. I cannot judge of what I do not know; things immaterial and invisible can∣not be cramm'd into a Scale; and so dare not take upon me to be the Arbitrator. But surely his Honesty and Integrity may justly be call'd in question, who has so manifestly prevari∣cated in his Projections, and obtruded upon the World Propo∣sals and Schemes so apparently and materially differing from those he presented to the Council, and to the Committee. And (that I may use his words) to demonstrate both, my first and chief∣est Argument shall be to produce the written as well as the printed Proposals, that so every individual person may observe their in∣terfering and contradiction. The Proposal presented to His Majesty, and by the Lords of the Council communicated to the Committee. AFter the last Rebellion in Ireland, through the want of Tillage, there followed a Fa∣mine; and the heaps of those who dy'd of Famine, caus'd a Plague; so that many more dy'd by Famine and Plague, than by the War. The same thing may be fear∣ed now, there being little or no Tillage for the next year; and the common Irish, who liv'd most upon their Potato-Gar∣dens, being now in the Army, do consume five times more Corn than they did when they lived at home in their Cabbins; by which means the great Har∣vest of the English, which they
had this year, will be eaten up before the next; so that tho that Kingdom should be intirely re∣duced the next Summer, yet the want of Bread will make it Desolate; for the late King's brass Money, having eaten up all the Silver in that Kingdom, there is no Money left to pur∣chase Corn abroad, so that the People must unavoidably dye for want of Bread. There is now near one half of that Kingdom reduced, and yet the Protestants even of that part, are most of them still in England; the Consequence of their stay here, must be a Fa∣mine there: For the Irish are almost all taken up in the Ser∣vice of the late King, and those who are not, will not∣withstanding, neither Plough nor Sow, where they know not their Landlords; so that while the English stay here, and the Irish Farmers fly be∣fore our Army, there it must necessarily follow, that the more Your Majestys Army ad∣vances, the more must that Kingdom become waste; but if the English of Ireland, who are now here, were in that part of the Kingdom, which is now reduced, the Irish who now fly before our Army, would come in and gladly settle again under their old Masters.
Your Majesty has a fair op∣portunity to oblige the English that stay here to return, by the Address which the House of Commons made to Your Ma∣jesty in their behalf, for some relief for them. Now, if Your Majesty were pleased to trans∣mit into Ireland, whatever Your Majesty is graciously pleased to give them, excepting only what would bear their Charges thither, and order it to be there paid, with obligation on every Per∣son who receives any of it, to Sow such a proportion of Sum∣mer-corn (which may be done in March next) it will be the only means to prevent a Fa∣mine; and moreover, such numbers returning, would be a Terror to the Irish Army, and an Encouragement to the Labouring Husbandman to re∣turn, who is now fled, and who had rather be at the Plough, than at the Mus∣quet.
Such of the English as have their own Estates to go to, have no reason to expect equal share of Money with those, whose Estates are yet under the Ene∣mies; and that which is abated, or deducted from them, who can enjoy their own Estates, will be a considerable Addition, the better to enable those, whose Estates are yet unconquered, to settle for their present Sub∣sistence on the Lands that are forfeited to Your Majesty, which Lands will be thereby kept in a profitable Condition, to be given up as soon as these Men are re∣stored to their own Estates. As this will be a competent Provision for the Nobility and Gentry, so that which is yet remaining of the Collect-Mo∣ney, may be for the poorer sort; which being paid them at one entire sum, would be an help to settle them under the Gentry, to become Te∣nants, as they were formerly; and if they plow but little, yet their being in the Countrey will be an Encouragement for others to go over. If Your Majesty be pleased to order that this Collect Mo∣ney also may be distributed in Ireland, it will then be seen who are real Objects of Cha∣rity; and the Money will be laid out to a good use, and
not to feed the Luxuriousness and Idleness of some here (as too much of it does now) it is to be fear'd that all will not go over, who yet complain now that they have not whereon to live. The House of Commons did humbly address to Your Majesty for to lay down for our Relief 15000 li. (that being a fourth part of what they were pleased to rate for a years Allowance for us) they promising to see Your Majesty repaid. That Sum is indeed much too small to effect this Undertaking; but if Your Majesty were graciously pleas'd to make it the whole 60000 li. It would do greater things than I have yet mentioned; and would send away a multitude of People, whose wants make them very importunate and troublesome here; and it would be a means both of saving the Kingdom, and also the Lives of many thou∣sand of Persons in it. It is of as great Conse∣quence speedily to Plant that Kingdom, as to Reduce it; and perhaps 60000 l. may do that now, which cannot be done the next year with thrice that sum; while the English of Ireland stay here, it cannot reasonably be supposed that Strangers will go thither. And the Irish who are fed with Pro∣mises from the French, will believe them when they see the English so fearful to return.
If all such as are a Clamour and a Charge to England, may have this Money, for going to Ireland to receive, then all those who will not go over, will be left without excuse. And if this Money be not sent over now, and the Prote∣stants sent away to Sow Corn there, a greater sum than now pays the Army, will not be sufficient the next year to keep the English and Irish in that Kingdom with Bread. And the Prospect is yet more terri∣ble if we consider, That when ever Corn was dear in Eng∣land or Ireland, we always setch'd it from France; but now we must go seek other Markets, which cannot be done without vast expence, since this general War through Europe will take up so much Corn for all the Armies. I have laid down in another Paper, a Scheme, or Method to shew that all this is very easie to be practised; and I have also lay'd down some other great Be∣nefits of it, besides what are here before-mentioned.
The Proposal, as it is Print∣ed. AFter the last Rebellion in Ireland, there followed a Famine; and the Carcasses of those who died of Famine, caused a Plague; so that ma∣ny more dy'd by Famine and Plague, than by the War. The same thing may be fear∣ed now, there being little or no Tillage for the next year; and the common Irish, who liv'd most upon their Potato-Gar∣dens, being now in the Army, do consume ten times more Corn than they did when they lived at home in their Cabbins; by which means that great har∣vest of the English, which they
had this year, will be eaten up before the next; so that altho that Kingdom should be entire∣ly reduced the next Summer, yet the want of Bread will make it Desolate; for the late King's brass Money, having ea∣ten up all the Silver of that Kingdom, there is no Money left to purchase Corn abroad, so that the People must una∣voidably die for want of Bread. There is now near one half of that Kingdom reduced, and yet the Protestants, even of that part, are most of them still in England; the Consequence of whose stay here, must be a Fa∣mine there. For the Irish are almost all of them taken up in the Service of the late King, and those who are not, will not∣withstanding, neither Plough nor Sow, when they know not their Landlord; so that while the English stay here, and the Irish Farmers fly before our Army there, it must necessari∣ly follow, that the more Your Majesties Army advances, the more must that Kingdom be∣come waste; but if the English of Ireland, who are now here, were in that part of the King∣dom which is reduced, then the Irish, who now fly before our Army, would come in, and gladly settle again on their old Farms, when they have some body to protect them.
Your Majesty has a fair op∣portunity to oblige the English that stay here, to return, by the Address which the House of Commons made to Your Ma∣jesty, in their behalf, For one fourth part of a years Allowance, which in the whole did amount to 60000 l. Now, if Your Majesty were graciously pleased to give them here the Sum of 15000 l. being a fourth part thereof; and to transmit into Ire∣land the Sum of 45000 l. more to be there paid to such of them, as will go over, with Obligati∣on on every Person, who re∣ceives any of it, to Sow a cer∣tain proportion of Summer∣corn, (which may yet be done in March and April next) it will be the only means to prevent a Famine; it would send away a multitude of People, whose wants make them importunate here, and would in a great mea∣sure supply those wants. And moreover, such numbers re∣turning, would be a Terror to the Irish Army, and an In∣couragement to the Irish La∣bourer and Husbandman to re∣turn, who are now fled, and who had rather be at Plough, than at the Musket. Whereas now, the Irish who are fed with Promises from the French; will believe them, and be thereby en∣couraged, when they see the Eng∣lish so fearful to return.
Such of the English as have their own Estates to go to, have no reason to expect to be under the same Conditions with those whose Estates are yet un∣der the Enemy; and that Diffe∣rence made between them, will be a considerable addition, the better to enable those whose E∣states are yet unconquered, to settle for a present subsi∣stence, on such little Farms as their Circumstances will allow of, whereby they may get a lit∣tle Stock of their own, against they remove to their own E∣states: This will be a great help to those of the North, who have Land to set. As this will be a competent Provision for the Nobility and Gentry, so that which is yet remaining of the Collect-Mo∣ney may be for the poorer sort; which being paid to them at one entire sum, would be a help to settle them under the Gentry to become Tenants as they were formerly: and if they plow but little, yet their being in the Countrey will be an Encouragement for others to go over. If Your Majesty be pleased to order that this Collect-Money also may be distributed in Ireland, it will then be seen who are Objects of Charity, and the Money will be laid out to a good use. It is to be
fear'd that all will not go over, who yet complain now that they have not whereon to live. It is of as great Consequence speedily to Plant that King∣dom as to Reduce it, and per∣haps 60000 l. may do that now, which cannot be done the next year with Ten times that Sum; and while the Eng∣lish of Ireland stay here, it cannot be supposed that Stran∣gers will go thither to Plant.
If this Money be sent into Ireland, to be there given to such as will go for it, then those who will not go over, will be lef;t without excuse. But if this Money be not now sent over, and the Eng∣lish sent away to Sow Corn there, a greater Sum than now pays the Army, will not be sufficient the next year to keep the English and Irish in that Kingdom with Bread. And the Prospect is yet more terrible, if we consider, that when ever Corn was dear in England and Ireland, we al∣ways fetched it from France; but now we must go seek other Markets, which cannot now be done without vast ex∣pence, since this general War throughout Europe will take up so much Corn for all the Fleets and Armies. The first Scheme de∣livered in by the Projector. 1. IT is humbly proposed that the King would be pleased to cause it to
be made known publickly, That all the Nobility, Gen∣try, and Commo∣nalty of Ireland, who now are in England, and whose usual abode has been in Ireland, do forthwith return to that part of the Kingdom which is under His Majesty's Authority, under pain of His Majesty's displeasure, except such whom His Ma∣jesty shall particu∣larly order to stay here for His service. And that for their Encouragement so to do, it is humbly proposed, 2dly, That His Majesty would be Graciously pleased to give to all his English Subjects of Ireland, whose Estates have been returned in to the House of Com∣mons, and by them Rated, the Sum of 15000 l. to be paid them here, and that he would be gracious∣ly pleased to send into Ireland the remain∣ing sum of 45000 l.
Stir. to be there distri∣buted to such of them as will go over to that part of the Kingdom which is already con∣quered, and there Sow Summer-Corn on their Estates (if they be of that Countrey) or on such E∣states of the Irish, as the Commissioners to be ap∣pointed for that purpose shall assign to them, if their own Estates be in the Enemies possession; and the said 45000 l. be put into the hands of 2 sub∣stantial, wealthy Gen∣tlemen of that King∣dom, of clear and unset∣tled Estates, Men of known Integrity; and that are not Dealers in Money, who may be Treasurers of the same, they giving sufficient and undoubted Securi∣ty for the payment of the said 45000 l. in Ire∣land, in such manner as is hereafter lay'd down, and that without any Fees or other Charges to be paid by the Per∣sons who are to receive it.
3dly, That His Ma∣jesty would be pleased to nominate a number of Commissioners of the Nobility and Gentry of the North of Ireland, who knew all the E∣states of the Irish that lye among theirs; and that those Commission∣ers may have Authority to set out and assign the Estates of the Irish to such English as are willing to Sow Summer-Corn thereon for this next year only, and that eve∣ry Person whose share of the said Money shall amount to 20 l. or up∣wards, shall give Bond to the said Treasurer in the King's Name, to the value of what he re∣ceives, That for every 10 l. which he shall receive, he will Sow, if he be on his own Estate, Four Acres of Oats, Barley, or Pease. Upon his giving of these Bonds, the Commis∣sioners shall give him an Order to receive his share of Money from the Treasurers; and also a Writing of Assignment of the Lands, on which he is to Sow his Corn. 4thly, For the encou∣ragement of all such to go over, whose Estates are yet in the Enemies Possession, that they may be obliged to sow but 2 Acres for every 10 li. that they shall receive, because of the necessity that they will lie under
of building for themselves some convenient dwelling upon Land which is not their own. 5. That the said Treasu∣rers, or one of them, shall take care, that every person do sow as much Corn as by Bond he was obliged to do; and that the same be not negligently thrown into the ground, only to escape the Penalty of the Bond; and therefore that at Harvest∣time the said Treasurers, or one of them, shall ride about to see the same reaped; and that the Bonds shall be in force against all those who have not their share of Corn to reap, tho they did before answer the Obligation of their Bond by Sowing. By this means, His Majesty's fatherly Care of His People will most evidently appear, in contriving that his Sub∣jects there shall have at least 10000 Acres of Corn the next year; whereas with∣out this, there will not be an handful in the whole Kingdom, and thousands must die for want of Bread. 6thly, That every Gentleman who will go for Ireland, on these Conditions, shall out of
his share of the 15000 l. buy a good Musquet or Case of Pistols, for him∣self, and every Relation or Servant that he car∣ries over with him able to bear Arms; without the producing of which Arms in Ireland, and the making Oath that he himself bought the same in England, he shall have no title to any of the said 45000 l. in Ireland. Lastly, That the Col∣lect-money may be di∣vided, that one 3d part for the Relief of Women only, and the other two 3ds sent for Ireland, for the Encouragement of Tenants and Labourers to go over, to plow and sow for the Nobility and Gentry, or for themselves; and that these also, when they have entred their names to the Bishops, and o∣ther Commissioners of the Collect-money, that they will go, they shall receive, if they go from London, 20 shill. or if near the Sea, 10 shill. apiece to bear their Charges, and a good Musquet, or Case of Pistols, at Chester, (which the Commissio∣ners shall provide, and
pay for out of their Stock) and the rest of the Money they shall have divided among them at their arrival in Ireland; and that all such as will not go, shall find no more re∣lief here. We know by com∣putation, that there are in all about 10000 men that will go over; and by this means his Maje∣sty will, as it were, send a Recruit to the Army of so many fresh Innis∣killing Men, inspired with rage for their Los∣ses; Men, who when they get into their Countrey, will not be driven out again. So that our Army need not be weakned by put∣ting Garisons into any Town, but may march on entire; and these men will keep the Towns and Countrey behind them.
The second Scheme. 1. IT is humbly proposed that the King would be pleased to cause it to
be made known publickly, That all the Nobility, Gen∣try, and Commo∣nalty of Ireland, who now are in England, and whose usual abode has been in Ireland, do forthwith return to that half of that Kingdom which is under His Majesty's Authority, under pain of His Maje∣sty's Displeasure, ex∣cept such whom His Majesty shall particularly order to stay here for His Service; and for their encourage∣ment so to do, it is humbly proposed, 2dly, That His Majesty would be graciously pleased to give to His Eng∣lish Subjects of Ire∣land the Sum of 60000 l. Ster. and that it be put into the Hands of two substantial wealthy Gentlemen of that kingdom, of known Integrity, and that are not Dealers in Money, who may be Treasurers of
the same, they giving sufficient and undoubt∣ed Security for the payment of the same in Ireland, in such man∣ner as is hereafter lay'd down, and that without any Fees, or other Charges to be pay'd by the persons who are to receive it.
3dly, That the King would declare that no Person of Ireland should have Benefit of the said Money, but such as will go over to that Part of the Kingdom which is already Conquered, and there Sow Summer-Corn on their Estates (if they be of that Countrey) or on such Estates of the Irish as the Commis∣sioners (for that purpose to be appointed) shall Assign to them, if their own Estates be in the Enemies Possession; Wi∣dows only excepted, who shall yet have but a fourth part, or what their share would have amounted to out of 15000 l. 4thly, That His Majesty would be pleased to nomi∣nate a number of Comissio∣ners of the Nobility and Gentry of the North of Ireland, who know all the Estates of the Irish that lie among theirs; and that these Commissioners may have authority to set out and assign the Estates of the Irish, to such English as are
willing to sow Summer-Corn thereon, for the next year only; and that every person whose share of the said Money shall amount to above 20 l. shall give Bonds to the said Treasurers in the King's Name, to the va∣lue of what he receives, That for every 10 l. which he shall receive, he will sow three Acres of Oats, Barley, or Pease. Upon his giving of these Bonds, the Com∣missioners shall give him an Order to receive his share of Money from the Treasu∣rers. 5thly, For the En∣couragement of all such to go over, whose Estates are in the Ene∣mies possession, it may be declared, that they shall have 5 parts to the others three; and more∣over, that the shares of all such as will not go over (except as before ex∣cepted) shall be divided among them, because of the necessity they will lie under of building for themselves some conve∣nient Dwelling upon Land which is not their own. 6thly, That the Treasurers, or one of them, shall ride about, and see that every person do sow as much Corn as by Bond he was obliged to do; and that the same be not negligently thrown into the ground, only to escape
the Penalty of the Bond; therefore that at Harvest-time the said Treasurers shall ride about again to see the same reaped; and that the Bonds shall be in force against all those who have not their share of Corn to reap, altho they did before answer the Obligation of their Bond, by Sowing. By this means, His Majesty's fatherly Care of His People will most evidently appear, in contriving that his Sub∣jects there shall have near 10000 Acres of Corn the next year; whereas without this, probably there will not be an handful in the whole Kingdom, and thousands must die for want of Bread. 7thly, That every Gentleman who will go on these Conditions, shall receive from the said Treasurers 20 shiil. a man (being part of the said 66000 li.) to buy him a good Musquet, or Case of Pistols, and also shall have a reaso∣nable proportion to bear his Charges over, viz. all they whose shares do come to 50 l. or under, shall have out of their share 40 s. a head (not reckon∣ing Servants) and all whose charges exceed that, shall have 3 l. a head, as aforesaid; this, if they go from London, and but 20 s. a head, if they be near the Sea: We know by computation that there are about 10000 that will go over; and by this means his Majesty will, as it were, send a Recruit of so many to the Army, which will be as so many fresh Inniskilling Men, inspired with Rage for
their Losses; Men, who, when they get into their Country, will not be driven out again; so that our Army need not be weakned by put∣ting Garisons into any Town, but may march on entire; and these Men will keep the Towns and Country behind them. Lastly, That the Collect-Money may be divided, and one third kept here for the relief of Women only, and the two other thirds sent for Ire∣land, for the encouragement of Tenants and Labourers to go over, to Plough and Sow for the Nobility and Gentry, or Themselves; and that these Men also, when they have entred their names to the Bishops, and other Commissioners of the Col∣lect-Money, that they will go, they shall receive, if they go from London, 20 s. a∣piece; or if at the Sea, or near, 10 s. to bear their Charges, and a good Mus∣quet, or Case of Pistols, (which the Commissioners shall provide, and pay for out of their Stock), and therest of the Money they shall divide amongst them at their arrival in Ireland; and that all such as will not go, shall find no more Relief here.
The Scheme as it is Printed. 1. IT is humbly proposed that the King would cause it to be made
known to be His plea∣sure, That all the Nobility, Gentry, and Commonalty of Ireland, who now are in England, and whose usual abode has been in Ireland, do forthwith re∣turn to that part of that kingdom which is under His Maje∣sty's Authority, ex∣cept such whom His Majesty shall particularly order to stay here for His Service; and that for their encou∣ragement so to do, it is humbly propo∣sed, 2dly, That His Majesty would be graciously pleased to give to all His English Subjects of Ireland, whose Estates have been returned into the House of Com∣mons, and by them have been Rated, the sum of 15000 l. to be there distributed to such of them as will go over to that part of the Kingdom which is already Conquered,
and there Sow Summer-Corn, and that the said 45000 l. be put into the Hands of two substan∣tial, wealthy Gentlemen of that Kingdom, Men of clear Estates, without any Incumbrance or Set∣tlements, of known In∣tegrity, and that are not Dealers in Money, who may be Treasurers of the same, they giving sufficient and undoubt∣ed Security for the Pay∣ment of the said 45000 l. in Ireland, in such man∣ner as is hereafter lay'd down, and that without any Fees or other Char∣ges to be pay'd by the Persons who are to re∣ceive it; and that every Person, whose share of the said 45000 l. shall a∣mount to 20 l. or up∣wards, shall give Bond to the said Treasurers in the King's name, to the value of what he receives, that for every 10 l. that he shall receive, he will Sow, if he be upon his own E∣state, four Acres of Oats, Barley, or Pease, upon his giving of which Bonds, he shall receive his share of Money from the Trea∣surers.
3dly, For the en∣couragement of all such to go over, whose Estates are yet uncon∣quered, it is proposed, That they shall be obli∣ged to Sow but Two Acres of Corn for eve∣ry Ten pounds that they shall receive, be∣cause of the necessity that they will lye un∣der of being at some Expence upon Land which is not their own, and of paying some small Rent. 4thly, That the said Treasurers, or one of them, shall take care that every person do sow as much Corn as by Bond he was obliged to do, and that the same be not negligently thrown upon the ground, only to escape the Penalty of the Bond. And therefore that at Harvest-time the said Treasurers, or one of
them, shall ride about to see the same before it be reap'd; and that the Bonds shall be in force against all those who have not their share of Corn to reap (that is, if the same have happened through any neglect of theirs), altho they did before answer the Obligation of their Bond, by Sowing. By this means, His Majesty's fatherly Care of His People will most e∣vidently appear, in contri∣ving that His Subjects there shall have at least 10000. Acres of Corn the next year; whereas without this, pos∣sibly there will not be an handful in the whole King∣dom, and thousands must die for want of Bread. 5. That every Person who will go for Ireland on these Conditions, shall out of his first share of Money, buy for himself, and every Relation and Servant that he carries with him (who are able to bear Arms) a good Musquet, or Case of Pi∣stols for the Defence of his Family; without the producing of which Arms in Ireland, and the making Oath that he himself bought the same in England, he shall have no right to receive any of the said 45000 l. in Ireland.
Lastly, That the Col∣lect-money may be di∣vided, that one 3d part of it may be kept here of it may be kept here for the Relief of Widows and Orphans only; and the other two thirds sent for Ireland, for the encouragement of Te∣nants and Labourers to go over to plow and sow for the Nobility and Gentry, or themselves; and that these also, when they have entred their names to the Bps, and other Commissio∣ners of the Collect-mo∣ney, that they will go, they shall receive, if they go from London, 20 s. apiece; or if from the Sea-side, or near it, 10 s. apiece to bear their Charges, and a good Musquet, or Case of Pistols, at Chester and Bristol, which the Com∣missioners shall provide and pay for out of their Stock, and the lest of the Money they shall
have divided among them at their arrival in Ireland; and that all such of them as will not go over, shall find no Relief here. We already know by computation, that there are about 10000 Per∣sons that will go over; and by this means His Majesty will, as it were, send a Recruit to the Army (though it is not at all hereby intended that they shall be put into it) which will be as so many fresh Inniskilling Men, inspired with Rage for their Losses; Men, who, when they get in∣to ther Country, will not be driven out again. So that our Army need not be weakned by putting Garisons into any Towns, but may march on entire; and these will keep the Towns and Country behind them. And now have not the Answerers of this Proposal much Reason to cry out, that this is not the same with that which lay before them? that it differs in Alterations (but no Amendments) more of Matter, than Phrase. And whereas he alledgeth, that this might have lain before them, and saved a great deal of needless Trouble, but they positively refused it. I appeal to his own Conscience and Ingenuity (if his Ambition to be a Politician have not stifled the Sentiments of a Gentleman) whether those Persons (who sate in the Committee to consider of the Papers communicated to them by the Orders of the Lords of the Council) did not offer, and consent
with the Projector, that he might retract one of those Papers, if he would own, and subscribe the other; which he resusing to do, and withdraw∣ing in a Huff, they proceeded to what lay before them. But if any of them dealt so uncivilly with that poor Paper, as to doom it to light a Pipe of Tobacco, or cendemn it to a worse Imployment, I cannot apprehend how this should argue any want of Loyalty, and Respect to His Majesty; I rather think it a high Presumption in the Vindicator, to interess His Majesty in the sostering of his Abortive Conceptions. But as I cannot believe, or un∣derstand, that His Majesty would spend ten Days in the Perusal of it (whose piercing Judgment would discover the Emptiness of those Papers in the space of ten Minutes) so I account it no wonder, that it lay near three Weeks before the Lords of the Privy Council; where, I persuade my self, it might have lain till Doomsday in the Afternoon, if the fond Father had not cry'd to have his Child restor'd to him. And doubtless they thought it fitter for the Consideration of a more Inferior Assembly, to whom they remitted it; it being below their Wisdom, and high Imployment, to throw away their Time on such Paltry Business: And happy had it been for this Young Statesman, if it had pleas'd them to commit those crude No∣tions to the Bundle of Wast Papers; then the unhappy Author had not publish'd so ungrateful a Proposal, nor exasperated the whole Body of Irish Protestants by so unhandsome a Vindication. And tho he very rudely and unkindly taunts the Gentleman who expressed a dislike of his new∣fangled Whimsies; yet when Judges, Attorny, and Sollicitor Generals Places come to be disposed of in Ireland, I dare say, there will be found (even among those of that Committee) men very competently qualified for such Im∣ployments, and truly worthy to serve His Majesty in the greatest Trust. His Second Argument is a meer wheedle, fosting in the Approbation of a great many of the Gentry of our own Country: and with what a convincing Instance does he prove this? why it is the Sense of his most humble Ser∣vant R. T. Truly, if he do not produce Credentials, that this Single-soul'd Gentleman, R. T. was imploy'd to represent the Sense of a great many more; I must conclude that his right Name is Legion, that he carries a Ga∣rison in his Guts. But if the Vindicator writ to some Persons, on whom he has an Influence, in Leverpool, and dictated, and bespoke their Answer (which is more than whisper'd among us) it was an easie matter for him to transcribe it for the Press. And because the Gentlemen in Chester seem'd to be prejudiced by mis-representations of it from London, the Crasty Proje∣ctor writ an insulting Letter to Chester, that the Gentlemen, who answered his Proposal, were ashamed of it, and rebuked for it; which, how false soever, yet he by often repetition of that Fiction, at last imagin'd it to be real, and true. But to confront R. T. and those at Leverpool, I will set up T. T. and produce a Letter from him, in which may be seen the Sense of the Gentlemen in Chester.
SIR, WE had hopes of having the 15000 l. speedily, but I fear it may be delayed, if not quite lost, by some of our own Peoples foolish doings: By this last we had an Account of Sir R. B's Project, to cause Plowing and Sowing Oats in the North; he wrote a Letter to Captain Foster, to prevail with us here, to Subscribe our Consent to his Project, but at the same time never sent us the Par∣ticulars of the thing, so that he must either take us for Fools, or that we have a mighty implicite Faith and de∣pendance on his Parts and Interest; all that he mentioned in his Letter was, that 45000 Pound should be advanced and paid to the People of Ireland in this Kingdom, who should return to the North, and fall to Plowing and Sow∣ing Oats, for which they should have 5 Pound per Acre, which (if his Proposals to the Parliament consist of no other Particulars) is one of the wildest and most unlikely Projects, to take effect, that ever I heard of. I doubt not but every body would be glad that good store of Corn were sowed in the North against the next Season, and that there were some probable Measures taken to incourage it, but no body can imagine that the King or Parliament (who I believe have occasions enough for all the Money they can raise) should advance 45000 Pound, to sow Nine thousand Acres of Land, which may be bought at Harvest time for 18000 Pound, for Oats was never yet worth at most 40 Shillings per Acre; nay and the Party that sowes the Land to have the Corn afterwards. I be∣lieve if the King would for encouragement bestow 4 s. per Acre on the Weilder, which would buy Seed or pay the Rent, 'twould be much cheaper to the King, than to ad∣vance 45000 Pound, and it would certainly encourage the People of the North to sow enough for the Army next Summer; or if some abatement were made the Country in Excise and Chimny Money, proportionable to what they should Plow, perhaps it might encourage them to do something; for my share I pretend not to projecting, but if this of Sir R. B. be, (as we are informed by
other Letters it is) that all who shall receive any of the 15000 Pound, must be obliged to go into the North to sow Oats, I fancy he designs to hinder the Payment of it, for on those Terms few certainly will take any of it; for does the Knight think that the Gentlemen of the Quill, and Tradesmen, and others, who never understood any thing of the Plow, (and who if they should undertake it would do more hurt than good at it) should go into the North and turn Plowmen, without any prospect of Hor∣ses, or other Materials for plowing, or of Houses to lye in? For I believe those are scarce enough to quarter the Army: Or does he intend to Transport the other three Provinces into Ulster? I believe his Worship will preserve his own Person in England, and cares not what becomes of a great many better; if it be left to every ones Choice (by his Project) whether they will go on those Terms of 5 l. per Acre, or stay, I doubt not but the Gentlemen of the North themselves will (if they be sure of the Money) earn it all; or if Sir R. B. has a mind that some Gentle∣men of other Provinces should mix with the Northern Peo∣ple in this Affair; there is Sir F. B. who we hear is a joint Projector with Sir R. B. and others, who I could name at London, who I believe with little intreaty will take all the Money on any Terms they will part with it; and so I have done with Sir R. B's Project, which I would not have medled with, had I any thing else to do. T. T. Perhaps in the Third place some of those who were there (and the Assembly consisted of there times Fifty) did mis-un∣derstand it, that is to say did approve it: (the Number of whom will hardly reach to make a Mournival) perhaps some of his few Accomplices may have subscribed a Paper, ex∣pressing a sense consonant to his Proposal; yet I am apt to suspect this Assertion, since the Vindicator (who has pub∣lished so readily his Proposal, and the Leverpool-Letter) has forborn to stuff this Subscription into his Farce. But be as it will, it is undeniably certain, that the Sense of the Gentry at their meeting ran generally against it.
As for what he says of the Committee, consisting of three out of a Province; if that was not a fair way, I would desire to know in what manner can he Project that a Committee should be chosen? it must be a select Number, else it is no Election: Business must be appointed to them, else they are no Committee; it must consist of such as are present, and must be named by them who are present; and I am sure that in the great and solemn Assembly of Parliament, the Members name one another, and so they become a Commit∣tee. But let him say what he pleases, I very well remember that the Establishing of that Committee was done withal Calm∣ness, without Dispute or Contest, until two (either nomi∣nated by the Projector, or suspected to be in Conspiracy with him) were publickly, and with some Resentment, re∣jected. He takes the liberty to say, that he saw at their Table some Gentlemen of Munster, whose Estates singly are by all their Neighbours owned to be more than the Estates in Ireland of the three Persons, who now stand for that Province in their Com∣mittee. This is considently spoken, and very idly; for it is notorious to the Neighbours in Munster, that if the Estates of those Persons, who stood for the Provincce of Munster in that Committee, were discovered and laid in the Bal∣lance, they would poise with any as many Gentlemen of Munster at that Table; and would certainly outweigh those two, who stickled at that time for the Place, though the Projectors Estate were cast in with them to help the Bal∣lance. But suppose it true, that seven or eight of those twelve Per∣sens are in such good Circumstances here, that they would not return, if the whole Kingdom were reduced, does that render them unqualified to be of the Committee? or if others fetcht over thousands in Cash; and will generously release their claim to any share of the Fifteen thousand Pounds; or are called to the Bar, and in some small Practice here; are not they the more fit, and more impartial Arbiters of what is most conducing to the Benefit of Ireland? The remainder of the Paragraph is in coherent, and not well tacked to the rest, and by the forced Inference, or Application, (that some Gentlemen, who had good Estates, and
great Stocks, are become distracted by excessive wants. I might have suspected that the Author had pointed at himself, had he not mentioned the putting of Daughters, young Gentlewo∣men well educated, to Service: for I think the Projectors Children are not yet grown up to that Maturity. And I retort his own Words. What barbarous Cruelty is it to hinder Men from getting Relief (how dear soever they pay for it) who otherwise may be forced to starve, or perhaps to put an end to their miserable Days with their own Hands? But let God and the World judg, who it is that has maliciously, or ignorant∣ly most contributed to such unfortunate Possibilities. These Men are not unwilling to go themselves, but probab∣ly their Reasons may be such, as will demonstrate it un-pra∣cticable for others to go, upon such delusive Terms as the Pro∣jector has contrived. Therefore, to follow his Method, I will impart to the Reader the very Answer drawn up by the Committee, and presented to the Lords of the Council. The Answer of such of the Nobility, Gentry, and Com∣monalty of Ireland, as are now in and about the Cities of London and Westminster, to a Project contain'd in Three Papers; which were by the Right Honoura∣ble the Lords of the Committee of Council for the Af∣fairs of Ireland, deliver'd to the Reverend Dr. Walker to be communicated to them. WE having seen and duly consider'd the aforesaid Papers, do humbly offer First, That many of the Allegations and Suggestions in the said Papers contained, and on which the whole Pro∣ject is founded, are notoriously false, or very fallacious; as for Example. 1. The Suggestion that half, or near half of the King∣dom of Ireland is reduced, is not true, for really one fourth part of the Kingdom is not in his Majesties Possession; and even in the center of that part, the Irish, as yet, keep the important Fort of Charlemont, to the great Annoyance, if not the total hindrance of Tillage in the Neighbourhood of that Garrison.
2. The Allegation, that the Protestants of that reduc'd part are most of them in England is as untrue, it being certain that not a twentieth, and we believe not the fortieth part of them are now in this Kingdom. 3. The Assertion, that the consequence of the stay of the Irish Protestants here must be a Famine there, is a great mi∣stake, and the quite contrary is more likely; for if they were there, they and their Families would eat more than they could sow, or the Projector proposes they should sow, and consequently would hasten and encrease the Famine rather than prevent it. 4. The Suggestion, that too much of the Charity-money is expended to feed the luxury and idleness of some that re∣ceive it is very scandalous and no less false; since the small sum given to any one person is too little to administer to his wants, much less his luxury; and it is manifest by the Book and reports of the Commissioners, that the Charity∣money is distributed with as much care and caution as is possible, and very little of it is given to any of the Gentry, and that sparingly to such as greatly need it. 5. The Insinuation, that the Irish who now fly before our Army, would gladly return and settle again under their old Masters, is offer'd at adventure, and it is much more pro∣bable that the influence their Clergy have over them, and the Wrongs they have already done to their old Masters and Neighbours would hinder them from returning. More∣over the Country, to which those Irish are now fled, is far better and more Fertile than the reduc'd parts are, and so they are invited back to their loss; but if they had any such intention to return, yet this Argument is fallacious as to all the rest of the Nobility and Gentry that have no Estates nor Tenants in Ulster. 6. The main Supposition of all (viz. That there is want of Men in Ulster to till the Land) is not true; for there is not such want of Men there; but that which is really wanting in order to Tillage, is Seed, Corn, Cattle for the Plough, and other Necessaries. 7. The Suggestion, that the English are fearful to return, is very injurious and false; for it is manifest that the En∣glish desire nothing more than an opportunity to serve his
Majesty, the Protestant Religion and Interest in the reducti∣on of that Kingdom, and have always declared their readi∣ness so to do, whensoever it shall please his Majesty to ena∣ble them thereunto. 8. The Assertion, that those who will not go to Ulster will be left without excuse, is a great mistake, for it is a a just excuse for any Man not to engage in so unreasonable a Project, when the Grounds of it are untrue, and the me∣thods of it impracticable. 9. The Projector saith, that if the 60000 l. he not now sent over, and the Protestants sent away to sow Corn there, a greater Sum than now pays the Army, will not suffice to buy Bread to keep the English and Irish that are now in Ire∣land next Year. If that should be true, yet the Projector has not by any Proposal in these Papers offer'd any method to obviate it; for he proposes only sowing 10000 Acres, which will not serve those that sow them and their Families. 10. The Suggestion, that there are many forfeited Estates in Ulster (which is another Pillar of this Project) is manifest∣ly untrue; for there were fewer Irish Papists restor'd to their Estates in this Province then in any other in that Kingdom: So that there are no other considerable Estates in that part of Ulster, now in our Quarters, that belong'd to such Irish Papists, except the Earl of Antrim's, Lord Strabane's and Sir Neal O Neale's; and 'tis well known most part of those Estates are in Possession of Protestants by settlement in Jointures, Leases, Mortgages, or other Incumbrances. Secondly, The propos'd Method is altogether impractica∣ble: And, 1. As to the Proclamation propos'd, it is without Pre∣cedent or Law to oblige any person to improve and dwell upon another Mans Estate; and if it be answered, That the propos'd Encouragement will invite them, then there need no such Proclamation; for Interest is attractive enough without other Obligations, but the quite contrary appears by the general dislike of those Proposals. 2. The Inconvenience, Charge and Trouble of so tedi∣ous a Journey at this time of the Year, and the hazard and trouble of passing the Seas, would be so insupportable, that very few would be found to undertake it; but above all,
there being no Houses or Conveniences for the Reception and Entertainment of so many Families of the other Pro∣vinces, as the Projector proposes, should go to that reduced part, renders the whole Project unreasonable. 3. Either the number that will go will be very inconsi∣derable, or their proportion of the Mony not sufficient to bear the charge of the Voyage. The Proposer writes of ten thousand men that he has computed will go over, if so the 60000 l. will be but six pound apiece one with another; and when the price of a Musquet, or a Case of Pistols, and the Charge of the Journey and Voyage are deducted from eve∣one, there will not be enough left to support them, and much less to build Houses, buy Bedding (not to mention other Furniture) and to buy Seed-corn, Horses, and all other Necessaries for the Plough. 4. It seems very improbable, as well as unreasonable, that any person of the other Provinces should be induc'd to go to Ulster and build a House, and give it up at a years end, and live miserably in it the mean time. 5. It is unlikely that two such substantial wealthy Gentle∣men of Ireland, of clear and unsetled Estates, of known In∣tegrity, and not Dealers in Mony (as the Proposer describes them) can be found, who will take upon them to be Trea∣surers of the 45000 l. upon the terms proposed, or that can give sufficient and undoubted Security for the same. 6. That it would be great severity, and no less disservice to his Majesty, to force the Inhabitants of the other Pro∣vinces so far from their Estates and Relations, since they are so forward to assist all such Attempts and Impressions as His Majesties Forces shall make in their respective Provinces, where they may be much more useful. 7. To send the Nobility and Gentry of a Kingdom to till the Land, and to build Houses in a Country so impove∣rish'd, in the Winter-time, when neither Timber, Brick, Mortar, or other Materials for Building can be had in that Country, nor Firing, nor Victuals to comfort and support them till the Corn be reap'd; and to oblige all the several degrees of Men of that Kingdom to reap their Corn, and to lie under their Bonds, tho they have duly sown their pro∣portion, unless they do also reap it, would be an Injunction
far more rigorous than those of the Egyptian-Task-masters. And now having demonstrated, as we presume, That the aforesaid Project, is founded upon many false Suppositions and is in it self impracticable for the Reasons aforesaid, and many others, we humbly hope that the Project will be re∣jected; in all things most humbly submitting to His Maje∣sties great Wisdom. And when he says, p. 10. That His Majesty and his Privy-Council were well satisfied of the great Necessity and Benefit of the Proposal, and therefore gave it into the Hands of some Per∣sons to consider, &c. I take this to be arrogantly and preca∣riously insinuated, Why may it not as reasonably be sup∣posed, that His Majesty and His Privy-Council, to rid them∣selves from the Projectors Importunity, remitted it to some Persons of our Country, who, they well foresaw, would soon discover how impracticable and utterly vain the Pro∣posal is, and so would damn it? and I am clearly of his Opini∣on, That it was not at all to have these Gentlemens approbation of it, for they in their Wisdom knew it would never be approved by them. Most unkindly said! to call the poor robbed Protestants a Rabble. It is not likely that the Rabble could transport themselves and Families into England: and I am very con∣fident, that those honest People who composed that Croud (howsoever they might make no splendid Appearance here) made no contemptible Figure in their own Country. But to account Sollicitors, Attornies, Clerks, &c. so, and to make them a parcel of the Rabble, is a most injudicious and scandalous Censure; since their way of Education at School, at the Inns of Court, and Practise in the Courts of Justice, may fairly absolve them from the Ignominy of such a Character: beside that it is notorious, that some who appear'd there, and do pass under the Denomination of Clerks, are able to vie with the Projector in Estates and Plantations. As peremptory is his Claim to nuzzle himself under the Kings Robes, and pretend, that an Affront offered to him, is the same as if done to his Majesty. But now behold a wonder! no sooner did the mighty Man enter the Room, but the two inconsiderable Fellows of that Committee, who penned that scurrilous and abu∣sive
Answer, were absolutely confounded; and he that was reading it to the Assembly was struck silent, by the Magick Power of his presence: nay, they were so confounded with the sense of their own Scurrility, and Reflections, that for shame, they could not read any more, till he was gone; and after he was gone (mark that) then the Author began to beg Par∣don of the Projector. To the best of my remembrance, there was but one draught of an Answer laid before the Committee (though transcri∣bed twice, because of some Blottings, and Interlineations) while most of them present had so despicable an Opinion of this Chymerical Project; that had it not been honored with a Pastport from the Lords of the Committee, it had been answered only with Ha, Ha, He: in the mean Time if he be a stranger to the Contents of the Answer agreed on by the Committee, how comes the Vindicator to take Notice of it? and to answer the Paragraphs of it, page 11, & 14. And where he suggesteth, that the Gentleman at the Delivery of their Answer, received a severe Reproof to themselves, it is wholly untrue in matter of Fact: the Answer was deli∣vered in by the same person, to whom the Proposal was given by the Lords of the Council, from whom there came no Reproof, nor the least signification of any Dislike. It is but the Projectors malicious Fancy, that the Northern Gentry will be ordered to go without mony, as it is wildly inti∣mated, that some of them refused to go with mony. They have not deserved so ill at His Majesty's Hands, by quiting their Estates, and Habitations, out of pure Zeal to their Religi∣on, and untainted Loyalty to Him, rather than live under the Tyranny of their Oppressors, or voluntarily contri∣bute to promote the Interest of the implacable Enemies to King, and Country. But as none of them have resisted the Temptation of Mony to transport them; so none will demur upon the Kings Commands, if He think fit to o∣blige them to return, though they should beg by the way. And since he has so uncharitably pronounced, that their staying here is unaccountable, it is well for them, that he has founded his Doom upon a false Bottom, That some Gentle∣men of that Country of the best Quality have not lost out of their
Houses, to the value of a Silver Spoon. If there be such a House, it must be some inchanted Castle; for had it been visible either to Papists, or Protestants, it had not escaped a more detrimental Inquisition, nor compounded for so little Damage with the Military Romagers. I know one Person of Quality (the Lord Viscount Massareen) who, beside rich and plentiful Furniture in his House, and a mighty stock of Horses, Mares, and Cattle upon his Demesns, has lost above Three thousand pounds worth of Plate in his House, and has not saved of it so much as a Silver Spoon. But per∣haps he means those, whom before he hinted at, who re∣moved their Goods and Effects long before this Revolution, and so were out of Danger of losing out of their Houses to the value of a Silver Spoon. Yet even they (though they may have saved some Mony, Plate, or Housholdstuff) are deprived of their Rents, and will be forced (if they have not begun already) to live upon the Stock, and convert their Goods into necessary Food. His Objections are but the Transcript of the Committees Answer set down before, and it were a needless Repetition to say them over again. I look upon them as unshaken, notwithstanding all his undermining, and bombarding. Ne∣vertheless I shall look over his Reply, and endeavour to ren∣der his new Batteries forceless, and ineffectual. Indeed if it were possible, or probable, that the Return of a few into a desolate and ruined Country, would tend to the Preservation of them that will stay here: then (to al∣lude to his Simile) it were good service to throw some of the Passengers, and Goods over-bord, to lighten the Ship, and save the rest: but if in a Tempest some of the Mariners should leap into the Sea, to appease the Storm, it would contribute little to the Success of the Voyage. It is not impossible, but in the Counties of Down, and Antrim, and part of Ardmagh, by the Care and Conduct of Duke Schomberg, and the circulation of Mony, Food, and Firing may be had: but in the other six Northern Coun∣tries (where the Protestants must ramble, according to the Projectors Scheme) there were not Men to reap, no Horses to gather in, their last Harvest; and consequently their Provision for the ensuing Year must need be skanty: and
when by their Flight, and Desertion of their Houses, they had no opportunity to provide Turf, their stock of Firing cannot but be very slender. I will not take upon me to predict the Fate of such as should go there, and being there, should be distressed for Provisions. I do not doubt His Majesty's Care, and Tenderness: but at such a Distance, many unforeseen Accidents may intervene to frustrate, or prorogue His pious Intentions; while the poor Expectants must inevitably perish. The instances of the Vandois, and of New-England are no way applicable to this Occasion. The one are conducted with an Army, and Success attends them; the other were safe in their own Dwellings, and were easily supply'd with Bread, which was their only want. But now without Question the Man is in a Dream. He talks like a Hen wife, of Hens and Geese giving them Egs (as if he had lately come from Surveying Leaden-Hall, or the Stocks-Market) but will not know, nor understand, that in such parts of Ulster, where the Enemy have ra∣vaged, and even in many of those where our Forces are quarter'd, there is not left a Hen to cackle, or a Cow to give them Milk. As we may with too much Sadness and Truth contra∣dict his Assertion, that all things are at present in great plenty in Ireland (since the contrary is too sensibly felt there, and the consequence of it does ascertain our Miseries here) so I hope his presages of Famine and Plague are not ground∣ed upon Astrological Calculations: or if they be, may prove as erroneous as the Judgment of the Almanac Makers; and shall fall only on the Heads of them, who are Enemies to the King, and to the Protestant Religion. Methinks I see Sir Positive strut, and look big, when he assumes to himself the satisfaction, that the Government is of the same mind with him: and what a pertinent Reason he assigns for it? because true Policy is the same in all wise States. This indeed is a delicate conceit, that when our King has thrown off all Dependency, and Correspondence with the Church of Rome, the Projector will have him to take pat∣tern from the Court of Rome, and imitate them in their Politicks. But since he is pleased to fix that glorious Com∣mendation
on his Proposal, that it is agreeable to the sentiments of the wise State of Rome (a Consideration which would very much ingratiate him with King James, if he were but now at Dublin, and had succeeded Sir John Dary's in his Of∣fice of Principal Secretary of Scate) I am the less concern'd, that he has slander'd the Protestant Gentlemen of Ireland with the scandalous Nick-name, of a Cabal of our Rabble, p. 14. by which he must need intend the Gentlemen, who took too much pains to answer such an insignificant piece of Foppery; because he intimates, and ridicules them for set∣ting up for Irish States men, which certainly none of the Rabble would aspire to. I was either one of that Num∣ber, or had some very good Friends in it, and therefore I have as much Reason to resent a wound given to their Re∣putation, as the ill-natur'd Projector assumes to himself, p. 20. in his Epilogue to that Libel, by which he has aspersed the Honour of an honest and worthy Gentleman. And there∣fore henceforward I shall not treat him with that softness, which I intended at the first. In the matter of his Politicks he might perhaps amuse such a poor Rabble as we are; but when he comes to talk like a Traveller, or an Intelligencer, he is lamentably out, and the most ignorant of us can disprove him. For though there be no Army encamped near to Colrane, Belturbet, Eni∣skilling, or London-derry; yet in each of them there are so many Men in Garrison, that together with the Inhabitants of those respective places, there is no room to be had for stangers. But why will he shoot thus at random? With what confidence can he aver, that there are not in Derry twenty Houses uninhabitable? When if he had inquired of twenty Persons now resident in London (who endured all the Miseries of the Siege, and were Spectators of the Deso∣lation of that place) they would have assured him, as they have done me, that there are not in that City ten Houses, which may be inhabited with safety, and convenience. And if there be six hundred Soldiers there, as he seems to suggest, for my part I stand in admiration how they are accommodated with Quarters: for in the time of Peace, when the City was very populous, and full of Trade, when there were more Houses in the Suburbs, than within the
Walls, there were seven Companies quarter'd there (which hardly would make up four hundred men) the Inhabi∣tants grumbled, and complained grievously of it. This I do aver upon my own certain knowledg What an idle, and most improbable Whimsey has he found, as an Expedient to supply the Protestants with Hor∣ses for the Plough? That because the Irish ran away in such haste at the landing of our Army, that they left their Corn ripe in the Field, it is as likely that they left their Plough-Garrons behind them: If they did so, is it not more likely that they have been taken up by our Army, who stood in such need of Baggage-horses? And can he imagine, that the Souldiers will part with them for the business of the Plough? Methinks this subtil Contriver (who has invented a new Imployment of Itenerant Supervisors to see the Corn sowed and reaped) should have propounded the sending over two or three Muleteers, or Commissary Generals, to gather up the wandring Garrons of the Country, and to secure them in some Pin-fold, till they might coveniently be distri∣buted among the Gentlemen designed by him to till the ground at next Seed-time. What a lame incongruous Reason is this? Because we shall find black Cattle enough in England, to carry back; therefore we may be supply'd with Horses from Scotland and Wales. This is so ridiculous, that it would disparage a Mans Reason to go about to confute it. As little Ingenuity does he discover in his Answer to the next Objection. Because we are Sojourners, and Lodgers in England, and pay dear for the use of Houshold-goods, Beds, &c. therefore we may sojourn more cheaply in Ireland, where neither Houshold-goods, nor Beds, &c. are to be had for Mony. How scanty is the Intelligence brought to this small Politician? or how wilfully is he prejudicated in his Opinion? Tho in the Counties of Down and Antrim, many of the Inhabitants are returned to their Houses, very ill fur∣nished with Houshold stuff; yet in the other six Northern-Counties (especially London derry, Tyrone, and Dongal) they are so far from having Beds to lie on, that for the most part they have not a place to lay a Bed in; the Gentlemens Hou∣ses, Market-Towns and Villages being utterly burnt and de∣stroyed.
And I am very confident, that of the many a Score of Ship-loads of Bedding, and other Houshold-stuff brought into Eng∣land, there will be but a small share left to be carry'd back again, since the Owners have been constrained by their Necessities to convert them into Mony for their daily Sup∣port. He that consults (as he says) Bristol, North-Wales, Chester, Leverpool, and Cumberland, will find this to be true. But what! would he have us to go into a desolate Country, only because it is desolate? And suppose the Gentlemen would condescend to become Holders and Drivers of the Plough, yet what shall they do with their Wives and Children? Where shall they stow them? And tho the Country be not possessed by the Enemy, yet the Garrison of Charlemont, lying in the Center of Ulster, may possibly make such In∣cursions as will mightily dis-array the young Plough-men. But I perceive little Nehemiah would have us carry a Sword in one hand, and a Goad in the other. And where he insinutes an Inclination in us to beggar one another by Indictments for Trespasses, which has more of the Lawyer in it than the Christian (as if Christian and Lawyer were in the Predicament of Opposites) I may well say, That his Supposition hath more of the Viper in it than the Lamb. And I wish also, that his snarling and cavilling do not give the People of England occasion to think us litigious, and an un∣charitable People; or at least very tame and supine to suffer one man with Impunity to abuse a whole Kingdom. Sir Silvester Brown, who propos'd to the Council in Ireland, to settle Stages, and a Post-road between Dublin and Holyhead, under the Sea; or he that would have O Brasile (being a floting Island) clapt in, like a Gusset, be∣tween England and Ireland, that so they might become one intire Island, did not offer at a more impracticable Project, than this of Treasurers, Supervisors, Riders, Land∣waiters, and Corn-Guarders. And tho perhaps he may have an Eye to two publick-spirited Men, duly qualify'd, who would postpone their private Advantage, and undertake this Labour for the publick Good; yet I remain in doubt, that even those will hardly be perswaded to practise so great Self-denial, as to undergo so much Hazard and Toil, with∣out the Prospect of a Reward.
Truly he has placed a very obliging Complement on the Nobles of our Land, when he says, I bear as great a Respect to our Nobles, as the Answerers: And what Respect he bears to the Answerers (among whom also there were some of the Nobles present, and several were consenting) may be judged by his former Civility, when he styles them a Cabal of our Rabble, p. 14. who set up for Irish Statesmen. The noise he maketh about Proclamations and Precedents, is already still'd by the Answer of the Committee. And who could have suspected that a Protestant of Ireland should have darted suce virulent Invectives against his Country∣men and Neighbours? reproaching them with a fatal Lazi∣ness, to stand looking at their Country, and not return, tho perishing here with want; aggravating their Restiness by a Comparison with the French Refugees, and taxing the Good∣ness of our King, in troubling himself to conquer a Country for a People who will not return and plant in it when it is conquer'd: which discovers his Judgment to be as shallow, as his Hu∣mour is canker'd. Neither is he less mistaken in his Choro∣graphy, when he supposeth the Security of London-derry, or Eniskillng (the first of which is sixty Miles distant, and the other above thirty) though the Irish are are Sligo, but makes no mention of Charlemont which may infest them in a days march. But what if London derry, and Eniskilling, and other Towns were out of danger? what if the new Planters could all be crouded into the Towns? where shall the Plough go? the Corn must be sowed in the circumja∣cent Counties, and who will cover and protect them when they are following their Labour? But the Gentleman has read Heylins Cosmography, and can tell to an Inch how far it is between the Country of Vandols and Turin; and how little a distance there is between Hunningen and Basi. But to what purpose is this Historical Vaunt? where lyes the Elixir of the Application? If the Vandols had been up in Arms, and ravaged the Country to the Walls of Turin, it is very probable the Duke of Savoy would not have left Paris, and go keep his Court there: And if the People of Basil had been driven out of the City, and shelter'd in Amsterdam, I am ap to believe they would not have run in great hast, much less would the States of Holland have by Proclamation
obliged them to return within Cannon shot of their Blood∣thirsty Enemies. And now he gives you a Tast of his Craft: So cunning∣ly did he contrive to avoid the menace of the Proclamati∣on, by a tacit Proviso, that he is among those, whose usual a∣bode has not been in Ireland: And indeed I suspect a further reach in this State-Ingeneer; for that being ameng the first that shall go over to sow Corn, and believing (as he hath before surmised) that the People will not return and Plant, when the Country is conquer'd; it is demonstrable, that if His Ma∣jesty will send over Money, and appoint his two Publick spiri∣ted Friends to be Treasurers, they will soon agree upon the Partition. In the mean time he need not take the pains to go out at the gate, when he may safely creep out at a Loop Hole; and if he can do His Majesty more Service by sowing Corn, than by staying here, it is Talent beyond what I ever heard that accomplished Gentleman pretend to. It is a Noble Art to be a good Seeds man; and I wonder he has not put in for a Monoply, or a Patent for fourteen years, to be the Sower-General. It seems to be the design of the Vindicator, not so much to justifie the Proposal (though at all times he discovers a Self-conceited fondness of it) as to asperse and villifie the Gentlemen of Ireland now resident in London, representing them as an inconsiderable Number; noting them rather as a Club, who get together upon every Occasion; girding them with a secret Ambition of staying for Imployments, or to be made Privy-Counsellors; and upbraiding them with an unman∣nerly Presumption, in pretending to answer for a whole Nation, without consulting, &c. To this (though it may deserve a Return of another Nature) I shall only answer by direct Contradiction: for neither is it true, that forty or fifty Men upon every occasion, or that upon some Occasions there met less than Three hunder'd; whose Resolutions were consented to by Five thousand Persons resident in London, more conside∣rable for Number and Quality, than those in Bristol, Chester, and Leverpool; neither has any thing been acted in their Committee, without the Presence or Approbation of some of the Nobility, and some of the first Magnitude consulted.
Perhaps others hath given in Proposals to the King; perhaps the Pretensions of the Vindicator are as good as any Mans of them all, perhaps better: I am a stranger to the Persons of the one side, and to all Merits on the other, and therefore can say nothing. But this is clearly visible, that this Paragraph was prolonged, only that in the Fag-end of it, we might be told, That he was known to our present King in Holland, attended him in his Expedition for England, and has Access to him here; and this with an insulting Glance at some few of our Coun∣try Gentlemen, who know few of their own Countrymen, more than what they meet at an Assizes; when his Conversation is at the Courts of Kings, and his Diversion in the Closets of Princes. Nay the very Distribution of the Brief-money cannot escape his Censure. In his Opinion, it had been laid out to bet∣ter purpose, if imployd in the maintenance of his Project. Upon the next occasion, I hope he will imploy his Interest to be made the Kings Almoner. And now irritated by his own waspish Disposition, he falls fowl upon Sir St. J. Br—ck; a Gentleman, whom an Ac∣quaintance of many years hath render'd very well known to me, and no way deserving those black Characters fixt up∣on him in that scurrillous Pamphlet. And because I am convinced, that he suffers under those opprobrious Re∣proaches, meerly for his warmth and concernment for the Protestants of Ireland, I hold my self obliged to struggle in his Vindication, as far as my own knowledge of him will conduct me. And because some officious Person may have traduced this Gentleman, (by whispering to the Projector, that his Proposal was defamed by the other, with the Epithet of dishonest and knavish; which is not likely to proceed from a Person of his Prudence and Temper) the Vindicator has adventured under his own Hand, to publish to the World, that Sir R. B. is guilty of Knavery, Insolence, and Folly. Durus Sermo! This is Language fitter for Billingsgate, and deserves an Answer more severe, than is proper for me to use. Ne∣vertheless I shall endeavour to be his Advocate, as far as my experience of him and his Actions will warrant me. And passing over the Calumny he placeth on the Gentle∣man, (that he has kept lusty young Men, that would have gone
over with our Army, these five Months in Pay upon the Brief-Money; that he has promised to carry over a hundred of them as Cadets; that the King will be deceived in relying on him) the improbability of which may justly supersede all labour of Confutation, by a blunt Declaration that it is not so: I shall only say, that I have not observed a Gentleman more injuriously treated, nor more undeservedly. And because (according to his Method) he has squeesed in an Occasion to celebrate the great Author of a late excellent Treatise, called the Character of the Protestants of Ireland: I begin to be con∣firmed in my suspicion, that the Author of the Proposal and of the Character, is one and the same: (notwithstanding that there is a great Disparity in the Style and Design of those two Papers, as well as in the Humour) had not the E∣pithet of great, not properly applicable to him undeceived me. This Gentleman (whom the Vindicator caluminates) is a∣bove sixty years of Age; had the Character of a Colonel forty years ago; has been setled in England for Fifteen years past; what Temptations could prevail with him to forego his Quiet and Retirement, and expose his Life to imminent danger? I am satisfied, that his Undertaking was truly ge∣nerous, prompted by Zeal to his Religion and Country; proposing to himself a requital only in the futurity of De∣benters, and putting England to little or no Charge for his present Pay. And if by his care, and Charity (which has appeared universal to all the distressed Protestants of Ireland) he procured a small and temporary Relief for lusty young Men, as well as others; he is very ill requited by such a Sar∣casm, as if he had kept them in Pay by the Brief-Money, and so cheated Widows and Children of the Common Charity. What his Behaviour was in the time of the late King, I am not privy to; but this I will say, that if he did truckle to the Idols of those Times, he is the most alter'd Man in the World: I have known him these many years a stout stickler for the Protestants, and their Interest, and on that Account mightily envy'd, hated, and threatned by the Irish and Pa∣pists. But let the Truth of these Scandals be measured by his next Assertion, where he confidently says, This Gentle∣man proposed in the Committee, that the Fifteen thousand Pounds might be applyed to the raising of his Regiment, and mounting
them; when it is notoriously known to all of that Commit∣tee, that there never was the least Motion to any such Pur∣pose made among them. And if before the Kings pleasure were known, he ta∣citly informed himself, whether he might rely on a certain Number of Men, to compose a Regiment, or a good part of it; I think it was but common Prudence in him, to be as∣sured of that before he undertook it to the King, least his Proposal might prove as impracticable as that of the Projector. And when he demanded forfeited Lands, in lieu of present, and growing Pay; it was at his peril to lose the satisfaction, if they did not deserve it, and the King could run no Risque by it. And now if the Vindicator will put himself into the Balance with this Gentleman, he must forgive me if I say, it w con∣cern him to cast in some visible Trumpery, beside the airy weight of his Reputation; else it is easie to guess on which side the Scale will turn. But let any one judg, whether that Man be not scurrillous, that shall (without the least co∣lour of Reason) say of a Gentleman, that he provokes even Clergymen to beat him? As I heartily wish the Proposal of the Projector may not make him any thing; so I agree with him in Opinion, that he is unable to execute the Treasurers Place, and unqualify'd for it; though at the same time he may fan∣cy himself big enough to fill the Place of Principal Secretary of State, or some other great Employment, where Profit may be had without Danger: It is an ungentile Humour to make Comparisons; and though the Projectors Estate be setled, and has lasted for four Generations past, (which perhaps some Men do wonder at) what need was there to say, that he got none by perjuring himself, or other men; is not that a tacit Re∣flection on Sir S. B. as if he had gotten his by such means? I would fain know if Two Gentlemen, having handsom Wives, should fall into a Debate about their Honesty, and one of them should say, my Wife is a handsom Woman, but I am no Cuckold, would not the other presently ap∣prehend that he meant and reflected upon him? But the Estate of Sir S. B. it is well known was honestly gotten, by the meer dint of Industry, and most of it at sixteen Years Purchase, after the Court of Claims was
But will you quarrel, Sir, because they would not give you admittance among them, when they were drawing their Answer? Is that a usual way among Antagonists? why you know, that formerly as soon as you entred the Room where they were reading it, the Reader was struck silent, they were ashamed to read any more, till you were gone: and would you have them run into the same Error again? Alass! the Fancy can never operate clearly, when the mind is awed by the Presence of a Superiour Ascendent. This Essay proves your Conjecture right, That some of us do make that use of the leisure we have by our Exile, to answer every new Pamphlet, that does not suit with our own Notion: So that if you think fit to retract your Resolution, and put out a Reply, I shall hope to find leisure to furnish a Rejoynder. In the mean time let it be observed, that when your first Paper was decry'd, you had leisure to alter your Sense in the second: and when both were confuted by the An∣swer of the Committee; you had then opportunity to re∣form them both, and publish your last Model without the Errata's in the former. The rest is but a Repitition or Comment upon his former Discourses, insisting upon the sowing of Corn, the Distributi∣on of Money, the approbation of the King and Council, &c. On∣ly he superadds on irresistible Incouragement to the Under∣taking, that he has declared his Purpose of going along, and un∣dergoing to the utmost of his Ability whatever hardships we shall meet with. And who would be so hard-hearted and so stupid, to refuse to go under the Conduct of such a Leader? or baulk any Hardship in the Society of such a Companion in Misery. The Paper concludes with a scornful side-look upon all the Protestants of Ireland, who do not concur with his Sense and Notions, as having forfeited His Majesties Favour (which if any did suspect before, they knew no reason for it till now) to which there is no possiblity of being restored, but by an humble Supplication to his Majesty, &c. joyning with the worthy Irish Gentry of Leverpool, whom they may find in the Person, or at the Lodgings of one R. T. And by this it seems, that the Author of it not only had the Honour to be known to our present King in Holland, and to attend him in
his Expedition for England (when if there were not two more of Ireland to be seen, he means two more such as himself) and to have access to him here, but would make us believe, that he is acquainted with the Kings Mind, and knows the very Ex∣pedient that may capacitate us to be Partakers of his Fa∣vours. He that has imbroyl'd the Kings Affairs, and retarded the swift-winged Success of his Forces in Ireland, is bound to ask the Kings Pardon; and so is the Author of the Vindi∣cation; and not only so, but to crave Pardon of all the Protestants of Ireland, the Nobility, Gentry, Lawyers, At∣tornies, Solicitors, Clerks, &c. and all whom he terms a Rabble. But if he be not so ingenious as to publish his Re∣morse in a penitential Sheet, I mightily dread his Fate, which if it prove unhappy, he must only thank himself for it. FINIS.
Lately Printed, A Just and modest Vindication of the Protestants of Ireland, with Reflections on a late Pam∣phlet, Intituled The Character of the Protestants of Ireland, &c. Sir St. John Broderick's Vindication of himself, from the Aspersions cast on him, in a Pamphlet writ∣ten by Sir Richard Buckley, Intituled, The Proposals for sending back the Nobility and Gentry of Ireland, together with a Vindication of the same.
