B1084 R5539 11893358 50469
Harrison. I. Caren. . Cooke. . Peters. T. Scott. . Clmnt. O. Cromwell. Ad. Scroope.
THE LIVES, ACTIONS, AND EXECUTION OF The prime Actors, and princi∣pall Contrivers of that horrid Murder of our late pious and Sacred Soveraigne King CHARLES the first, of Ever blessed memory. WITH Severall Remarkable Passages in the Lives of others, their Assistants, who died before they could be brought to Justice. By GEORGE BATE, an observer of those Transactions. LONDON, Printed for Tho. Vere, at the signe of the Angell without Newgate, 1661.
To the Right Honou∣rable James Lord Mar∣quess of Ormond, Earl of Brecknock, Lord High Stew∣ard of his Majesties Houshold, Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, and one of his Majesties most Honourable Privy Councel, &c. Right Honourable, I Hope your Lordship will be pleased to pardon the Authors presumption in his humble Dedication to your Lord∣ship, of this small De∣scription of the prime
Authors and Contri∣vers of the most Horrid Murther that ever was committed in the Face of the Sun; For such I am sure your Lordship did alwaies account that of our late Soveraign, and such likewise was it look't upon by all Truly and Pi∣ously Ingenious in the whole World. Farre be it from me to have the least thought, that my mean Pen should draw
a Lively Representation of his late Majesties (both) naturall and acquired ver∣tues shining with so much splendor through the Darke and thick Clouds of his Af∣flictions; yet to the end the world might see the Black∣nesse of the Designes of these Miserable Men, who so wickedly persecuted our Soveraign like a Partridge upon the top of the Mountaines. I have at the close hereof attempted some∣thing
that might make them appear the more Wicked, by how much they Murthered so Pious, so Incomparable a Prince. My LORD, You had your share of the miseries in those times, and your Life was hunted after by these Blood-Hounds. The re∣markable passages of whose Lives and Deaths are here presented to your Lordships View; this being but as an Essay to what hereafter shall
be set forth in a greater Vo∣lume. And now may your Lordship Live to see Peace Flourish all your time, and may your Children inherit he Blessing thereof, as well as your outward substance; May your Lordships Loy∣alty (which cannot be ex∣ceeded) be Copied out by them; and may the reward of your Fidelity and Con∣stancy be an immortall Crown when God shall
take you to his owne King¦dome, is the Prayer of, Your Lordships Humbl Devoted Servant, GEORGE BAT
The Prooemium. WHen it pleased Almighty God to turn again the Captivity of Sion, and to return with glory his Sacred Ma∣jesty, to the undoubted Dominions of his Ancestors, after a black and dark night of Confusion, Usurpati∣on, and Rebellion; and (by his ap∣pearing within this his own Hemi∣sphere) to dispel and scatter all those malignant Clouds which for twelve years together had beniht∣ed these three Nations; The Par∣liament thought it their duty in the behalf of the People of England, to make inquisition for that sacred and innocent blood which was shed in their names, and upon the pretend∣ed accompt of their consent: For
which purpose, a special Commissi∣on of Oyer and Terminer was issu∣ed, and the Sessions House in the Old Baily appointed for their tria and condemation: Now the inten of this discourse is to give a disco∣very of the Lives, Educations, an Deaths of the prime Actors an principal Contrivers of that horri Murther of Butchering our late pi¦ous & sacred Sovereign King Cha the First of ever blessed Memory wherein I cannot but premise th prophetique expression of that hol Man of God Mr. Christopher Love when he was upon the Scaffold viz. That those who had gotten pow by policy, and used it with cruelty, shoul lse it with ignominy, at the close o which words, Mr. Love was inter¦rupted by Alderman Titchbourn, the Sriff of Lodon, who would no sufferm to proceed; but the Alde¦man hath snce found it verified i his own experience, having sinc
changed his Chain of Gold, for Fet∣ers of Iron. In the prosecution of this design, many strange and horrid consultati∣ons were in debate; the original contrivers whereof were very few; he first Cockatrice Egge that was hatcht in this wicked crew, was Lt. Col. Joyces seizing the King at Holmby, whereby he was immedi∣ately taken from Major Gen. Brown, who then attended him by order of the Parliament; and translated to the power and tyranny of a vicious and mercilesse Army, and at that time (being but the proemium of the Kings afterwards unhapy fate) it was the words of Cromwell to Hugh Peters, by way of question, Whe∣ther there could not be found a way to set∣tle the Nation without the Kig? To whom that miserable wretch repli∣ed, That there was no way to do it, but by taking off his head. This Oliver Cromwell being thus the
chief Actor in this sad Tragedy and for that he received not the r¦ward of his iniquity in this Worl but is conveyed to the immedia Judgment of the all just God, shall only give you a brief Char¦cter of his Education and Life, wi some notes and observations on  Death. Oliver Cromwel was a man, to gi him his true Character, of val in the head of an Army, and wicked policy in the front of  Council; being born in Hunting  Shire, and brought up in the Un¦versity of Cambridge, until his d¦bauched incivility, and sottish i sobriety expelled him that plac He was so constant and lewd a Live at his first comming into th World, that his wits in his afte years was chiefly imployed to mak up the breaches of the former; fo which purpose he fore-saw tha there was no way to help his d¦cayed
Estate, but by turning facti∣s, upon which accompt, he esently appears a great Stickler gainst Monarchy and Episcopacy: d presently layes hold of the first portunity to appear in Arms, and assed through all the degrees of ilitary imployment, until at last e arived at General of the Army; aving first supplanted or under∣ined all honester men that stood in is way, wading to the Government f these Nations over head and ears  blood; for having first spilt the nnocent blood of our Sovereign, nd polluted his soul therewith, he ares not to spill the blood of his ubjects like water, plenty where∣f was shed in our streets, during is short and troublesome Reign, by is oppression, dissimulation, hypo∣crisie, and cruelty: When he was owned by a few to be Protector, he called several Parliaments, ex∣pecting that they would throw that
Title and the Government of these Nations upon him; but this way would not do, for though he nomi∣nated the very men that should fit in some Parliaments, and sent his private letters to have his own creatures chosen in others; yet he could not be established by them, which occasioned that his desperate expression at the dissolving one of his Parliaments, That he would ra∣ther be roled in blood with infamy to his grave, then surrender up that power which God and the People had put upon him. In the year 1656, a Parliament was called, and indeed his last; where none were suffered to sit, but such as would sign to own his usur∣pation; and one day, when about a hundred and odde sate, the great∣est part whereof were either his own servants, alliance, or friends, he is voted King (as some of them have said since, only to set him upon
that ticklish pinacle, that so his fall ight be the greater) but the Army ould not endure that title which so tely they had buried with so much retetended seeking of God, other∣ise called hypocrisie and mocking f God; but yet he accepts of the ignity, preheminence and pre∣ence of a King in all respects what∣oever, and acts as one accord∣ngly. But here his heart is broke, he o ingratiate himself with the Peo∣le, mittigates the Tax, although his expence increased, the publike Assesment is reduced from 120 to hreescore thousand pounds per men∣em, and the charge of the Navy and Army continues as before, whereby he ran much behind hand with them both; and in the mean time the King our now gracious Sovereign began to revive in the hearts of the people, several sums of money are sent him out of Eng∣land,
of which Oliver gets intelli∣gence, then he begins to contrive plots, many innocents are drawn in, Dr. Heit ta innocent lamb, with others, are devoured by this raven∣ous Wolfe, the Gen ry all the Na∣tion over are disturbed and impri∣soned, and all things now begin to be in a strange confusion; he sends for the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London, and to them Crocodile like he weeps and tels a story of the Kings preparation on the other side the water, that a great plot had been designing against him to the imbrewing the Nation again in blood, with other strange stories never thought of, before he con∣trived them himself; and now like the Devil he began to rave and tear when he perceived his Kingdom to be at an end; and at last having a Jury of distempers in him, all concentring together at one time to agonize that wicked body that had
been the Author of so much mis∣hief and Murther, he died on the hird of September 1658, and al∣hough he had at that time the so∣mnization of a Funeral fit for a ing of England, yet his ignomini∣us Statue and the mock Pomp of at dayes glory was soon turned in∣ shame and disgrace, by his own ouldiers and friends, who (now y the change of Government from ichard his Son to the Rump Parlia∣ent:) defaced and destroyed that tate wherein he was set up in Westminster Abbey, and converted is Protectorship into a more scur∣ilous disparagement, then that of ne of his meanest Souldiers. We ill take leave of this Monster, and ome to some of his wicked Abet∣ors, only will leave this Super∣cription to be engraven on his Tomb (if he be thought worthy of one.)
Here lies ignominious dust, Which was the only seat of lust; A man and yet a Monster too, That did both King and State undo; Most people say, this is his doom, That here he don't deserve a Tomb.
The Life of Ma. Gen. Thomas Harrison. HAving given you a short ac∣count of the General of this black Amy; the next whose picture shall be presented to you, is Maj. General Harrison, a great Canter in Divi∣nity, and a principal Header of the Fifth Monarchy Professors. He was born at Newcastle under line in the County of Stafford, of very mean parents, although he afterwards ar∣rived to a very considerable Estate: being gained chiefly by the miseries of the times, and the hypocrisie of his pretended preaching. His Fa∣ther was a Butcher, who brought him (according unto his ablitie unto
Learning, and after a while placed him with one Mr. Hulk, an Attourney of Cliffords Inn. But, what ever the matter was, he desired to live rather by the ruines, than by the practice of the Law: For not long after, he be∣took himself from his Pen to the Sword, and so insinuated himself with the deluded Army, that he past from one command to another, till at last he attained to be Major General of Wales; in which imploy∣ment to characterize his tyrannie, would swell to a volumn far exceed∣ing this intended Discourse. The Laws of the Land were not execu∣ted in Wales, but Major General Har∣risons Laws were there in full force. No Orthodox Minister could there be suffered, but whom he pleased to allow; and with the assistance of his Chaplain Mr. Vavasor Powel, (a giddy headed Parson, and second Brother to H. Peters) he endeavour'd the modeling of that Countrey, so,
as that none but their own proselytes should teach and instruct the people. In a word, he was the chief Holden forth to that dangerous people called Fifth Monarchiers, and the chief Incendiary to set on foot, malignant and evil designs against that sacred Institution of Kings and Princes; and one that upon the trial of our most innocent Sovereign, used this expression, That they should blacken that white person as much as they could, in drawing up their charge against him. About the time of the Murther of our said Soveraign, he was in great reputation with the Armie; inso∣much as he was several times intru∣sted with the Kings person, during that wicked confinement: He brought him from the Isle of Wight to Windsor, and there had the charge of his person: And it was reported to the King at that time, That this Major General Harrison had a de∣sign on foot to murther him private∣ly.
Which upon Harrisons trial, he denied, saying, That the King did once task him with such a thing, but would not believe it when he saw his countenance: and that the King said unto him, If those persons had been present that brought him such a report, he would give them the lie, for that he himself had some skill in Physiognomy, and perceived in his face better principles. When the King was brought to his trial, this Harrison was every day at that bloody Court; he was at all the private meetings for carrying on that wicked Act; he was at the consultations for drawing up that horrid Charge; he was one who ap∣pointed the time, the place, and the manner of the Kings Execution; and he was lying in the bed with Ireton in a Chamber in Whitehall, where Cromwell lay: Likewise, when those Miscreants contrived a Sub-warrant to murther the King, which was
drawn up by Cromwell for Hacker to signe, that morning when this unpa∣ralel'd act was done. He continued one of the Darlings of that Rump Parliament, untill the year 1653. about which time they began to think of a New Represen∣tative, as they then called it. But Maj. General Harrison contents not himself with the illegal power of the Rump Parliament; but con∣spires with Cromwell for their disso∣lution, although by his own confes∣sion in Newgate, it happened other∣wise, which take as followeth. That morning that Cromwell went to dissolve them, being the 23. of A∣pril, 1653. he called Harrison to go along with him; which he did, and as he pretended at that time, not knowing his design: But coming with him into the Parliament-house; and observing the disorder he put them into, by reason of his intention to dissolve them, he began to think
that those Members intended to per∣petuate themselves; and that there were others, whom, he said, God would finish his work by: and here∣upon he sided with Cromwell, com∣manding the Speaker to come out of his Chair: but he said, he would not come out, unless he were pull'd out: to which Harrison said, Sir, I will lend you my hand; which the Spea∣ker giving him, he came out of his Chair, and so that piece of a Parlia∣ment were then interrupted. But Cromwell now seeing the way was layd open for himself to usurp; and having kill'd to take possession, puts Harrison upon the work of dissolving that mock Parliament: which being done, they now contrive which way to call such a Parliament as would do what they pleased: and this was that which was called the praying Parliament, of which Praise-God Bare∣bone was a Member. These were not chosen by the Countrey, but by
Cromwell and Harrison, but after they ad played with the Govement wo or three months, these were ikewise in like manner dissolved. And now these two stand in com∣petition, who should be greatest in his earthly Kingdom. But Crom∣well having an Over-vote with the Officers of the Army, gets the head f Harris n, and will either make im bow to his designs, or break im in pieces: which Harrison refu∣ing to do, lays down his Commissi∣on and Command together; and as ever after the Usurpers Priso∣er, being carried from Castle to Castle through most parts of the Nation, like an exiled Malefactor. n which condition he continued for ome years, untill he was released y the Rump Parliament, whom otwithstanding he would not ac∣nowledg, but looks for the imme∣diate Reign of our Saviour upon the arth.
There was little more observable in the passages of his Life, but what were immediate forerunners of his Death. Maj. G. Lambert having made an escape from the Tower, had pre∣engaged some factious persons in the Countrey, of which this Harrison was one, to raise Forces against the King, who was now voiced in most parts of the Nation, to be returning home. But Harrison was taken in the very point of time, wherein he in∣tended to have headed a Party, and was brought Prisoner to the Tower of London, where he continued some months before he was arraigned in the Old Baily. He being brought to the Bar, see∣med to flight and unconcern himself in the Tryal; his Conscience being feared, was not at all penitent for being instrumental in shedding the innocent bloud of that pious Prince: But saying, That although other Kings had been privately assassina∣ted,
yet what he had done was in e face of the Sun, and in the fear  the Lord. He was found guilty y his Jury, and was condemn'd to e hang'd, drawn and quartered. On Saturday the 13 day of October, e was brought from New-gate; con∣ucted by a Troop of horse and some  the Trained Bands, and attended y the Sheriffs Officers, being drawn n a Sledg through the streets to hairing-Cross: where a Gallows was ected for his execution. All the ay as he went, he endeavoured to iscover to the world the undaun∣edness of his spirit, by the smiles of is countenance; which notwith∣āding would not do: for he betrayed  himself much fear by an agony of wet, and the more than ordinary embling and shaking of his oynts. Being come to the Gallows, he scended the Ladder, where he pake to the following effect: That
all that had been done in the late War, was by the strange and won∣derful Providence of Almighty God; That all the Windings and Turn∣ings that had been seen in the late Changes had been ordered and contrived by the same Providence; That by this Providence he was drawn in to be an unhappy Instru∣ment in the Kings Death; And the same all wise-disposing Providence had brought him to that End. After he had spake a little time to the same purpose, he went to Prayers; and then began to make himself ready for the Executioner. He bare up his spirits as much as could be, to flight Death, having taken a strong Cordiall in the mor∣ning to that purpose. His last words were, That now he was going to the Lord Jesus, and should at the last Day, come again with him i Glory, to judg the Kings and Prin∣ces of the Earth, and those that ha
been his Judges. He was not so much thrown off the Ladder by the Exe∣cutioner, but went as readily off himself. After which, the sentence was executed upon him; his mem∣bers were cut off, and with his bow∣els burnt; his Head was severed from his body, and on Tuesday follow∣ing set on Westminster-Hall Gate; and his four Quarters were ordered to be set upon the Gates of the City of London. Thus ended He, that did betray Hs King and Countrey; made a prey Of Law and Gospel, and did spend His chiefest skill to pu an end To Kingly Power, and throw down Both the Kings itle and his Crown.
The Life of Colonel Iohn Iones. COllonel John Jones, came of mean Family in Wales, was  man of no repute before th Warre; he was sent up to Londo to be an Apprentice, but was pl¦ced as a Serving-man to a Gentl man; and afterwards was prefer¦red to Sir Thomas Middleton Lor Mayor of London, with whom h lived many years in the said capaci¦ty; but the Warres comming on, h like the rest thought it would b good fishing in troubled waters, h went forth at the beginning of th Warres a Captain of foot, and b his factious principles, which at tha
time was the only way to get into preferment, he was taken notice of, and was countenanced and advan∣ced by the Cromwelian party; by reason whereof he was chosen a Parliament man in an absent place, and by degrees came to be made Governour of Anglesey in North Wales, and several other successive imploy∣ments: And now the same party thirsting after the blood of the King, this John Jones is made a chief instrument in prosecuting that horrid Murther, and an eminent blood-hound in pursuing this inno∣cent game; he set his hand to the Act for constituting that Court of Injustice, and likewise signed and sealed that black warrant for the Execution; for which service he gained more and more in the esteem of those wretched men, and was suddenly after sent with Corbet, Ludlow, &c. one of the Commissi∣oners of Parliament: (so called)
for the Government of Ireland, i which place it is admirable to thin with what state and tyranny he ca¦ryed himself, persecuting all tha were contrary to his principles, ta¦king up old Laws concerning th brewing of Beer and Ale, and pu¦ting them in execution with rigour plaguing all the houses in Dubli that sold drink, and not suffrin any one to be in any publique im¦ployment, that was seen to go int an Ale-house; by which means pe¦ple were forced to bugger Ale-hou¦ses and Taverns, and to go in at bac doores; and on the other hand, tur¦ing all out of imployment that wer not of the same Church with him discountenancing Orthodox Minist∣ers, & encouraging Mr. Patients, for∣merly a Stocking-footer in London to preach every Sunday before th Council of Ireland in Christ-Church Dublin; finally, to go into an Ale-house or a Protestant Church, du∣ring
his domination, were crimes a∣ike, and alike punished; insomuch hat none but Anabaptists and Welsh∣en were entertained at that time in beneficial places. News hereof was brought to Oli∣ver Cromwell, who by this time had assumed the Protectorship, and a way is contrived by him to get Col. Jones into England, but so as not to give him occasion of offense: which accordingly was done; for he was ent over with some Papers to Oliver Cromwell, but was never sent back again by him with an Answer there∣unto. He being a Man of an active spi∣rit, would not go off the Stage thus: out plays another game to ingratiate himself with the Protector, and so to come into favour again. For which purpose he marries a Wid∣dow, Oliver Cromwell's own Sister; conceiving, that he marrying into hat Family, he might take advan∣tages,
and lay hold of opportunities a the Court for the preferring of him¦self: but this likewise proved ineffe¦ctual, for he never raised himself on step higher by this conjugal Tie, bu onely to be one of those Mushroo Lords, which Cromwell made out  the meanest of the People. Whic mock honour his Lordship did no long enjoy, for soon after Cromwe dying, and he being one of his dis-ob¦liged kinred, made it his business  unpin the frame of that new mad Government, whereby the rubbi and afters fell upon their own hea and limbs; he being one of the chi supplanters of his Cozen Richar Cromwell. This exploit being thus accom¦plished, he is now very active  Wallingford-house, for bringing i the Rump again; which succeedin according to his expectation, he wa again made one of the Commissio¦ners for the Government of Irelan
with the aforenamed persons. He ent over again in July 1659, with ievt. Gen. Ludlow, who was Com∣mander in chief of the Forces: and udlow coming back again, left this Col. John Jones his Deputy there; ho being now Dominus fac totum, cts as rigorously as ever: which range kind of carriage of his, Mr teele, then Chancellor of Ireland, (a an of as haughty a spirit as him∣elf) could not brook: For finding imself overtopt by one whom he hought much his inferior; he very airly left Ireland, and the Govern∣ent thereof to this aspiring Phaeton, ho suddenly after run them all nto confusion. By this time the Rump Parlia∣ent was turned out again, by Lam∣ert, and a Committee of Safety have ow the Government tost into their ispose. With these Colonel John ones presently strikes in, and own∣th their power by a Declaration
from Ireland. But here this Unfor∣tunate Jack was soon dethroned For on the 6. of December following about five of the clock in the even∣ing, Col. Sir Theophilus Jones, Col▪ Bridges, and two or three more dis∣countenanced Officers, in pursuance of a Design very privately contrive and carryed on, siezed on Col. Joh Jones, and the rest of the then Coun∣cil of Ireland, took the Castle of Dub∣lin, and declared for a Parliamen and Gen. Monck, who was then it Scotland, and had declared for th like. This Col. Jones is kept close Pri∣soner in the Castle of Dublin, and the Rump Parliament getting into the saddle again, send for him and the rest over: but by that time he was come to Town, the Secluded Members had admittance into the House, by reason whereof, nothing was done against him at that time. And suddenly after, preparation being made for the Kings coming
home, Col. Jones hides himself; but otwithstanding his concealment, e was discovered one Evening a∣out twilight, in Finsbury fields near ondon, and apprehended, and car∣ed Prisoner to the Tower of London, here he remained till he was rought to his Tryal. The twelfth of October 1660, he as brought with the rest to the Old ayly, and his Bedfellow, Mr. Scot, eing immediately tried before, and ound guilty, he thought it was but n vain to plead, for that their Argu∣ments were the same, which they ad contrived to answer their Charge: and so he was soon found uilty. And on Wednesday following, he with others were drawn on a hurdle o Charing-Cross aforesaid, where he pake to the following effect: That e did now see what he had often be∣ieved, viz. That it was the Power hat made the Law, for that some
years before they had the power i their hands, and whatsoever the did at that time, was accounted La and executed accordingly; Tha now the King had executed the La upon them, and that the King di nothing but what he would hav done himself, were he in the King case: For the King did but like a lo¦ving and dutiful Son to a dear an loving Father. After a small pray¦er, he committed his Soul into th hands of God, seemingly peniten and was quartered as before. Go thou time-serving Serving-man, Take thy reward from Dun, that can Best pay thee; one who will be sure Thy utmost payment to procure. Then Exit Jack, without applause, And bid adiew to th' Good Old Cause.
The Life of Master Iohn Cooke. MR. John Cooke, a man of very good natural parts, had they been employed to the purpose for which God gave them; Was of n inconsiderable birth, and of a mall and mean Fortune: however, y his missimployed policy, and the old attempt of being Sollicitor in he cause against the King, in that wicked Court of Injustic; He was afterwards preferred to be a Judg in Ireland: by which, and other ways, he arrived to a considerable Estate. The first notice or mention which I find of him is, that he was a Barrister
Grays Inn, but had very little or n practice, and such men were adjudg∣ed fit for the prosecution of that hor∣rid Murther; who like Judas would betray their Lord for Thirty pieces of silver, which was the reward of his iniquity. The Rump Parliament about the 10. of January 1648, after they had made an Act for constituting a High Court of Justice, directed an Order to this Mr Cook, together with Mr Ask and Dorislaus, to draw up a Charge against his Majesty, in which Mr Cook was very active, and was the man that subscribed that wicked Libel in the behalf of the Commons of England, (who disowned that hor∣rid Murther,) and therein called his innocent Majesty, Murtherer and Traytor, and therefore prayed Ju∣stice against him as such a person; saying, That the bloud that had been spilt, cried for it. When the King was brought before those bloudy mis∣creants,
Mt Cook stood up and made  long Speech to them against the King, according to the aforesaid Charge; and when the King began o speak any thing by way of answer, e would interrupt him. He did often complain to the Court, that the King trifled away time. He moved, hat if the King would not plead to hat wicked Charge, the things con∣ained therein might be taken pro con∣fesso: and the last day he demanded Judgment of the Court against the Prisoner at the Bar, (which was the title he gave the King of England, &c.) Upon which sentence passed, and the horrid murther was soon com∣mitted after the same, And it is to be observed, That this Mr Cook was at that time prickt in Conscience, by the expression which he used to an old friend of his, discoursing with whom about the Kings Death, he said, That the King was a wise and a gracious Prince;
but he must die, and Monarchy wit him. And now having had a finger i this innocent bloud, he was resolved to plunge himself over head and ears therein; for presently after he writ a Book intituled, Monarchy no creatur of Gods making, and therein says, That the late King (meaning our blessed Soveraign King CHARLS the First) was the fattest Sacrifice that ever was offered to Queen Justice, &c. These things made the Rump Parliament begin to think of a way to reward him; and Ordered him as the thanks of the House, 300 l. per Annum in the County of Waterford in Ireland, whither they sent him like∣wise, and made him a Judg of that Law, which himself, contrary to his Oath, his Conscience, and his Rea∣son, had thus traiterously and ma∣liciously broken and offended. He was not long in Ireland, before the Commissioners for Government
of Ireland made choice of him as the chief Judg to examine, try and give sentence upon the Irish, according to such Qualifications, as a pretended Act of that Rump Parliament had made and allowed, and to transplant whom they pleased, into Connaught: some for their murther of the Prote∣stants, and others for their preten∣ded delinquency in assisting of the King: For which action I have heard his moderation much commended. During the time of his being thus a Judg, he was smitten with sudden checks of Conscience, which often made him, even upon the Bench, to fall into strange sighs and groans, ex∣pressing his sorrow for the Death of the King; and hath been often seen to strike his breast, which was se∣conded with a groan, and then fol∣lowed this expression, Ah poor Charls, poor Charls! As if the guilt of that in∣nocent bloud lay heavy upon his Soul, and tormented him with
continual and renewed disturban∣ces. He continued in Ireland for some years, during which time he preach∣ed up and down the Country; fa∣voured the Anabaptists; and at last, the Government changing, he was fiezed upon in Ireland, and sent by the Parliament or Convention there, unto the Council of England, to re∣ceive the just punishment of his de∣merits. Being brought to London, he was immediately sent to the Tow∣er, where he remained some time, untill he was brought to Newgate, and received a fair Tryal in the Old Bay∣ly, London. Upon his Plea before the Court, he expressed himself with such Law & Learning, that the Judg applaud∣ed the same, saying, That he was very sorry to see, that one that understood the Law so much, should transgress it so much. It was proved against him, That he often interrupted the
King in his Answers to that Court, and did use many unhandsom and uncivil expressions towards the King, all the time of that wicked Tryal; he being one of the loudest-mouth'd Bloud-hounds that pursued that in∣nocent Lamb-like Prince, in a full cry, all those days in which he was brought before them. The Jury that were upon him, went not out of the Court, but suddenly found him guilty. On Tuesday following he was Or∣dered to die at Chairing Cross. He was now as penitent at his Death, as formerly he had expressed himself in his life. He was drawn upon a hurdle from Newgate to Chairing-Cross aforesaid; all the way as he went, lifting up his hands and his eyes, he would often turn his face towards the people, desiring them to pray for him. Being come to the aforesaid place, he went up the Ladder very penitently and chearfully; he told
the Sheriff, That as for himself, h thanked God, he could welcom Death: but as for Mr Peters (who wa to die with him) he could very well have wished that he might be reprei∣ved for some time, for that he was neither prepared nor fit to die. He said little as to the making of a Speech, but prayed most earnestly and with affection both for the King and people: which beng done, the Executioner did his Office, and being quartered, his Head was Ordered to be set on Westminster-Hall, and his Limbs were sent to be set upon the Gates of the City of London. Law lies a bleeding; Monarchy Expires; sure then the Law must dy. But both revive, and Cook is made A sad example to his Trade. His Head stands as a fair Take-heed, How they the bounds of Law exceed.
The Life of Master Hugh Peters. MR. Hugh Peters, a man of a continued tur∣bulent spirit, and as it is generally repor∣ted, little better than frantick: One that as he was a ge∣neral Abettor and Encourager of all turbulent principles: so he particu∣larly improved them in that horrid Act of the Kings murther. He was brought up, as I am infor∣med, in the University of Cambridg, and from thence (having taken his Degrees) he set up the trade of an itinerary Preacher, never being con∣stant or fixt to any one place or be∣nefice:
and roved about the world, like an universal Church-man, cal∣led Jesuits: for sometimes he was in New-England; sometimes in Hol∣land & about the Low Countreys, and a∣non here in England, where he pre∣tended, that his tender conscience could not be yoked to the Church of England, nor submit to the Order and Government of the Bishops. When these unhappy Wars be∣gan within these at that time unfor∣tunate Nations, this Hugh Peters be∣gan to shew himself a forward Incen∣diary, to stir up and animate all fa∣ctious and discontented persons, now to appear and vindicate them∣selves and children from the Impo∣sition of Prelatical Tyranny; and persuaded such whose heads were as giddy and whimsical as his own, That it was the Lords Cause, and that now he was carrying on his own work among them. When the Parliament had raised
Forces, he goes out Chaplain to a Regiment, and many times appear∣ed a Captain in Arms himself, he preached the Souldiers into courage, to maintain and justifie their Rebel∣lion, and by wicked and absurd comparisons would tell the Souldi∣ers, That Heaven was full of Red∣coats that had been killed in that Cause; and that all they that con∣tinued in the same, should arrive at the like happiness. It would be too tedious to insert the many frenzical and frenetick humours, which this prophane Prophet used during the time of the Armies tyrannical do∣mination, and how the more poli∣tick chief Officers have laughed in their sleeves to see this sad wretch abuse both the Scriptures and the Souldiers too, with his wicked and scandalous interpretations there∣of. When the King was siezed at Holmby, by the damnable impudence
of a till that time mean and despi∣sed Officer, he was the first man that ever was heard to make men∣tion of the Kings Death, or for ought I know, so much as to imagine it. He was at the several meetings with Cromwell, Ireton, Harrison, and those other few persons that contrived it privately among themselves at the Star in Colemanstreet, and the Nags head over against Basinghall street; he prepared the People and Souldiers by Sermons for that wicked mur∣ther; and made use of his Calling (wherein he should have been the Minister of Peace) to be the Trum∣peter of Treason. Afterwards when the King was at Windsor, he was a∣mong the wicked Council of the Army, at the hatching of this Design; and when they brought the King from thence to Lon∣don, he rode before him audaci∣ously like his Almoner. This wicked Jesuitical Priest,
was the onely busie man, that dire∣cted how and where the Act for E∣stablishing the High Court of Ju∣stice, should be proclaimed; which done, he said, That there was a day a coming, (meaning that day when the King should be murthered) that the Saints had been for many years a praying for. And when that bloo∣dy Court sate, he used this expressi∣on, That he could even reverence them, their sitting did so much re∣present the great day of Judgment, and the tryal of the whole world, which should then be performed by the Saints. And now Mr Peters begins not onely as a private person, but as a Minister, to prosecute this worst of Evils. For the next day after the Court of that Injustice sate, he prea∣ched at Whitehall before that grand Tyrant Oliver Cromwell, and for his Text took that then abused place of Scripture, Psal. 149. the three last
verses; To bind their Kings in chains, and their Nobles in fetters of iron: This honour have all the Saints, &c. The Murther of the King is fi∣nished, and now Hugh Peters runs on to make Divinity the handmaid of his Devilish Doctrine: For the next Sunday after that abominable Fact was committed, he preaches again, and took his Text, Isai. 14.18, 19, 20, 21. All the Kings of the Nations, even all of them lie in glory, every one in his own house. But thou art cast out of thy grave, like an abominable branch: and as the rayment of those that are slain, thrust through with a sword, that go down to the stones of the pit, as a carcase troden under feet. Thou shalt not be joyned with them in burial &c. Upon the top of the margin whereof was written, The Tyrants fall. And in his Application of that mis∣interpreted Text, he compared the King of Babylon, to the King of Eng∣land: all the time of which odious comparison, Cromwell sate before him
laughing, not being able to forbear the same, to see this wicked Instru∣ment of the Devils, thus plausibly and confidently to avouch and main∣tain this hellish practice. The next occurrence which hap∣pened during these strange transa∣ctions, was the Parliaments appoin∣ting Oliver Cromwell to be Lord Liev∣tenant of Ireland, and to reduce the Earl of Ormond and the Lord In chi∣quin, to the obedience of that Rump Parliament: Who is appointed his Companion, but Mr Hugh Peters, and he must be the immediate Chaplain to the Devils Champion. In this Expedition for Ireland, it was strange and almost wonderful to think how God curst them with success, and how suddainly that Nation, which had so long groaned with the dayly effusion of bloud, was within the space of a year or a little more, re∣duced to that usurped power: Here Mr Peters advised them to make
short work of the business, and by giving an example to the strongest Garrison, they might thereby frigh∣ten the whole Nation: Pursuant whereunto, Tredagh was stormed, and although Quarter was promi∣sed, yet none was given, and 4500 souls were there butchered; most of which were English and Prote∣stants. Which cruel Act, giving an allarm to the whole Countrey, caused the rest to surrender upon Articles. About the year 1656. when Oliver Cromwell had assumed the Govern∣ment, Hugh Peters is a great Cour∣tier & a continual Asserter and Vin∣dicator of his Usurpation: but how∣ever it came to pass, Hugh Peters is presently out of favour, because he had too far courted a Court-Lady, & as some say, his active spirit had carnally known her: hereupon Hugh Peters grows litrle better than stark mad, raves like a Bedlamite, and
shews himself much more void of sense, than ever he was before: yet notwithstanding, for the wicked ser∣vice he had done, and for the further more damnable services which they expected he might, he was again dub'd a favorite to his aforesaid wic∣ked Patron. Finally, in the begining of the last year of Olivers Tyranny, Dunkirk be∣ing now besieged, and every day ex∣pected to be taken, Hugh Peters is sent over to encourage the Souldiers as his former wont had been, and being landed upon the Sands of Flanders, he immediately fell down upon his knees, and hypocritically praying, told the Souldiers, That he had assu∣rance from God, that they were to be the Instruments of making his name known to the utmost parts of the earth. Presently after Oliver dies, and Pe∣ters preaching the next day in the Chappel at Whitehall, took his Text
in Deuteronomy, My Servant Moses  dead: The drift of his Sermon being to make out Oliver Cromwell equall the Servant of God, as Moses ha been. And here ends the further mentio of our Prophet, for Governmen ever and anon afterwards being shift∣ed from one factious party to ano∣ther, at last all proved for Restaur¦tion of our Gracious Sovereign which happy day now hastening, an like the wings of morning makin haste to a perfect day, Hugh Pete with that black crew, desire to be a abscond, and as much in the dark  their actions had been, now play N inventus. But the eye of the Almigh¦ty Providence, at last found him out Although he flew for sanctuary to  Womans bed, that had now newl lyen in. But the intelligence bein certain, that he was there they press in upon him, he denying his name t be Peters, but his name was Thompson
and begging of the Constable and e rest, that they would not call im Peters, for fear the people hould tear him to pieces: But be∣g brought to the Tower, he not nely confessed himself to Sir John binson, but was well known to be he same man. And here we shall conclude his wicked life, and come to the passa∣ges of his miserable death. Being rought to hi Tyal, it is strange to hink with what stupidity he beha∣ed himself; for although upon is Arraignment he said he would not plead guilty for all the World, yet upon his Tryal he was found o be as is before exprest, one of the principal Actors in that sad Tragedy, and brought in guilty by his Jury, not being able to plead the least rational circumstance for himself. On Tuesday following, he was ordered to die, but was much dis∣composed
both in spirit and mind, for he retained much of his former Frenetick humours now he was going to Execution: He was drawn upon a Hurdle from New∣gate to Charing Cross, sitting therein like a Sot all the way he went, and either plucking the Straws therein, or gnawing the Fingers of his Gloves. Being come to the place aforesaid, not like a Minister, but like some ignorant Atheist, he ascended the Ladder, but knew not what to say or how to carry him∣self at the hour of his death, but standing there a while, at length he perfectly burst forth into wee∣ping, and then after a little pause he held his hand before his eyes, he prayed for a short space, and now the Hangman being ready, he very often remembred him to make haste by checking him with the Rope, and at last very unwil∣lingly he turned him off the Lader,
and after he had hung almost a quarter of an hour, he was cut down and quartered: His Head was set on London Bridge, and his Limbs on the City Gates. Upon Hugh Peters, written by an ingenuous Spectator of his Exe∣cution. See here the last and best Edition, Of Hugh, the Author of Sedition; So full of Errors, 'tis not fit To read, till Dun's Corrected it: But now 'tis perfect, nay far more, 'Tis better bound then 'twas before. And now I hope it is no sin To say, Rebellion, take thy swing: For he that sayes, sayes much amiss That Hugh an Independent is.
The Life of Mr. THOMAS SCOT. MR. Thomas S ot was born in the County of Buc∣kingham, of no noted Family: The first occasion of their publick notice, was by the wicked projects of this unfortunate mn, He was sent to London by his friends to be brought up in some honest Calling, which he was ne∣ver so honest as to practice. The highest preferment that he could reach before the Wars, was being a Partner to a Brewer in the Pre∣cinct of Bridewel, but of his honesty and faithfulness in his carriage
therein, I leave to his acquaintance and Neighbours to judge. But he hoping to make better profit by having a hand in brew∣ing of State Affairs, makes friends to a Borough in Buckinghamshire, where he was chosen a Burgess, and so improves the good will of this his Country, who made him a Par∣liament man, to the destruction and confusion of the whole; for being pre-prejudiced against the B shops and a constant envier a∣gainst Monarchy, he now had an opportunity to vent his malice, and spit his venome by long Speeches and dilated Harr a gues in the Parliament. This Tho. Scot being now crept into the House of Commons, whis∣pers Treason into many of the Members ears, animating the War, and ripping up and studying aggra∣vations thereunto, was forward up∣on all Tumultuous occasions, to
exasperate the people against the Bishops, and through them, stri∣king at the King himself. But it is to be observed how the drift of his malice soon after ap∣peared: This covetous wretch was so great an enemy to the Bi∣shops, onely that he might be par∣taker of their Lands; for not long after that too forward Abolition of that Order and Government, he then gets into the Bishop of Can∣terburies house at Lambeth, and there Lords it with as much state, as if he wanted nothing but the Ti∣tle of an Arch Bishop. And now his estate and his facti∣ous principles encrease together, grasping as much of the Church Lands as he could, and being of opinion that it had been no Sacri∣ledge, if he had pulled down the Churches themselves; and did not think it enough for himself to be engaged in the Lands of the
Church, but he would engage his Son in the Lands of the King, who was chosen, and acted as one of the Trustees at Worcester house in the Strand, for sale of the Lands of the King, Queen and Prince. In the year 1647. finding him∣self so far precipitated in the occasi∣ons and promoting of the War, he sticks close to the Army, and sayes, There was no putting up the Sword after they had once drawn it against the King, is admit∣ted to the consultations of their private Meetings: When they were contriving the death of the King, he was one of the cheif un∣derminers of that Parliament; For when they Voted, the Con∣cessions of the King at the Isle of Wight were a sufficient ground for the peace of the Nations, he with others, and their never failng Spea∣ker, flie to the Army, and coming to Town caused most of them to
be secluded; and he was one of the forty Members that Usurped the Title of a Parliament after they had driven away almost three hundred of their number, and was a chief instrument in setting on foot that wicked thing called An Act of Parliament for the Trying of the King. And because the Kings Seal could not be used to pass an Act against himself, they all set their own Seals to that horrid in∣strument, amongst whom, this Mr. Scot's was one. Every day that this wretched Crew (called the High Court of Justice) sate, this Mr. Scot would be sure to be amongst them; he was present and stood up when that impudent and unparaleld Pre∣sident commanded the Sentence to be read, and he set his nd and Seal to that bloody Warrant for the Execution. And now they thought their
work was done after they had thus barbarously murthered the King: Those few Members take upon them the Authority of the three Nations, and Mr. Sc t is appoint∣ed one of their Council of State, acts in the nature of a Secretary of State, and is made the onely per∣son to mannage the ntelligence, as well Forraign as omestick, both publick and private, and thinks himself little other then a petty Prince, in which condition he con∣tinued till the year 1653. at which time they were dissolved by the Ambition of the Grand Usurper. He kept under him (during the time of his domination) several Spies, called Pursivants, and was a continual perplexer of Printers and Booksellers, not suffering them to vent the least light of Transactions fo the information of the eople, but by his Substitutes, especially Ledsum; all honest and true Intel∣ligence
was not onely seized and suppressed, but the Divulgers thereof were both punished and imprisoned. When Oliver Cromwel took the Government upon himself, this busie body lay idle all the time, onely behaved himself like a Wasp upon all occasions putting forth his sting: He did nothing observable during that Usurpation worth our mention in this abridgement of their actions. But that Government under him ceasing, and Richard Cromwel now being setled in the scornful seat of his Father, Mr. Scot begins again to shew himself, and was a very a∣ctive instrument in dethroning that foolish pretender, and a chief Coun∣sellor at Wallingford house with Lambert, Fleetwood, &c. for the e∣stablishing of the Rump Parlia∣ment. Which succeeding according to
his desire, he now appears as emi∣nent as before, and is re-instated in the places which under the Rump Parliament he had formerly exer∣cised. But a second breach occasioned their second disturbance, Lambert having lately victoriously over∣come an undisciplined handful of men in Cheshire, under the com∣mand of ir George Booth, comes up to London like a Conqueror, and sets the Wheels so on work, as if possible, to turn out that Rump Parliament again, and so by Olivers policy to take the Government up∣on himself. And thus these Tray∣tors fell out amongst themselves, which brought Our Soveraign to his Right. Mr. Scot was much tickled at this sudden News, and appears now as one that could not brook such an inrruption; to which purpose, he with Mr. Weaver, Sir Anthony
Ashley Cooper, &c. Gentlemen of far honester principles then him∣self, set on foot several designs for regaining the sitting of that Juncto, as that of Portsmouth, taking the Tower of London, &c. which brought them again once more to their Usurped Government, and he is imployed by them, with Mr. Luke Robinson, to be as Spies over the actions and intentions of wise General Monck, who was now upon his March towards London, which proved ineffectual for their designe; for although they would not suffer him to speak with any persons but where they were pre¦sent, yet they could not gain from him the least cranny to peep out at whereby they might understand or guess at his future intended pur∣poses. Soon after, that Noble General gives the Secluded Members liber∣ty to go into the House, who till
that time had been debarred by force from that their priviledge, who onely sate to consider how another Parliament might be called and to dissolve that but supposed Parliament: And before their in∣tended dissolution Mr. Scot stands up and moves the House, that be∣fore they did dissolve, they would declare, That all the Proceedings which had been made in relation to the Kings murther, should be confirmed by the Parliament; which motion was so ill recented, that had not some moderate per∣sons interceeded, he had been at that time called to the Bar of the House, for mentioning them to be so barbarous as to be conceived to countenance or own the Kings murther; at which time he used this wicked expression, That he desired no greater honour then to have it Engraved upon his Tomb-stone, Here lies Tho, Scot,
one of the Judges of the late King, to the end the World might take notice of it. The Parliament which met the 23d. of April, being summoned, Mr. Scot flies beyond the Seas, to seek a place for that hot head, which he said he could not hide, which proved true, for not long af∣ter his Majesties restauration, he was taken notice of in Fladers, and there seized and sent Prisoner into England, and brought to the Tower of London, where he re∣mained some time until he was brought to his Tryal. Upon his Arraignment in the Old Baley he hd little to say for himself, pleading the power by, which he acted to be a legal p wer bec use they were owned by the people, &c. But being told that the power by which he acted were not the enth part of the Com∣mons of England, and that if there
had been a ful House of Commons, and Lords likewise, they could not by any Act of theirs take away the life of the poorest Cripple at the Gate, much less the Kings: He was left to his Jury, and so was pre∣sently found Guilty. And on Wednesday following, he with others, were drawn from Newgate n a Hurdle to their a∣foresaid appointed place of Execu∣tion. All the way as he went, his countenance was composed with a seeming cheerful gravity, and be∣ing come to Charing Cross he obdu∣rately and insensibly ascended the Ladder: He spake very little to the people, his chief business there, as he said, being to pray which being ended, he made no long stay, but was soon executed and qartered, according to his Sentence; his Head was set up on the Gate of London Bridge, and his Qurters were set on the Gates of the City.
This treacherous Scot desired to have, No other Motto on his Grave. Then this; That he was one that laid This bloody Scene, anth' King betrayd. But he no Grave could now attain, Wherey that Motto should remain.
The Life of Col. Daniel Axtel. COl. Daniel Axtel was a man of a malicious and covetous spirit; he was born of very pri∣vate Parents, and sent up to London to be put forth Apprentice: He had not staid long at his Trade, which was a Grocer, before these destructed Nations began to shew their distempers; and seeing no∣thing but letting of it blood would (as they said) procure its settle∣ment, he appeared a very forward instrument in taking up of Armes: He went forth into the War but a private Souldier, yet notwithstan∣ding
being a spiritually gifted man (for so he was termed) he very quickly arrived at the mark of a more publick notice. When the Army were gathered together at New Market in a muti∣nous manner against their Masters the Parliament, Agitators were chosen out of each Company to represent their pretended grievan∣ces. Here Col. Axtel (then but an ordinary Officer) was looked upon as an eminent and fit person to carry on that factious and wick∣ed design of refusing to disband the Army, when they were comman∣ded thereunto by the Parliament, and when the Parliament and the King had come to Tearms of Peace in the Isle of Wight, he comes up in the head of the Agita∣tors, and at the Bar of the Parlia∣ment House, he is forward in im∣peaching the Members thereof, calling them rotten Members, &c.
and at that time being Lieutenant Colonel to Col. Hewsons Regiment of Foot, he was very active that day the Secluded Members were imprisoned and disturbed, and was more then ordinary Officious in the doing thereof. When the High Court of cruel Injustice was established, all the time during their sitting, he com∣manded the Guards in Westminster-hall which attended them, and when the King came through the Hall to his Tryal, he commanded the Souldiers to cry Justice, Justice, and had the valour to beat such as did not execute his commands; and when Bradshaw taxed the King with delayes and trifling away time, say∣ing the Commons of England de∣manded him to answer to his Charge, (a Lady from the Galle∣ry said not half the Commons of England) this Col. Axtel said to s Souldiers, shoot the Whore,
pull her down, &c. And after up∣on the last day of their sitting, he again commanded them to cry Execution, Execution. Afterwards being the day when this unparaleld murther was to be accomplished, Col. Axtel was very busie that morning at Cromwels Chamber door, where Ireton and Harrison then lay together in White∣hall, and Col. Hunks, Col. Hacker, and Col. Phaire, to whom the War∣rant for xecution was directed, being sent for thither, Oliver Crom∣wel would have had them signed a Sub warrant to the xecutioner for the murther of the King, but Col. Huncks refusing, this Col. Ax∣tel told him, he was a peevish man, and that he was sorry to think, that now they were going into a safe Harbour, Col. Huncks should strike Sail before they had cast Anchor. He went afterwards into the next expedition for Ireland, where
he soon comenced Colonel. And it is strange what Hellish cruelties he used there, not onely against the Native Irish, whom he would mur∣ther like Vermine but even against Protestants and English not favou∣ring either, although he had not onely promised but assured them fair Quarter. The Army at this time being universally Anabaptists, and under the Government of that Grand en∣courage of them Henry Ireton, then Deputy of Ireland, Son in aw to Oliver Cromwel, this Col. Axtel was so too, being a general disowner of Orthodox Ministers, and a great countenancer of Sects and Factions, and a self conceited Preacher him∣self. He was made Governour of the County and City of Kilkenny in Ire∣land, and here he shews his cruelty so conspicuous, as that his very merciless brethren of the Army
condemn him: He hanged what Gentry of the Country he pleased, whether they were guilty or not, never affording them any Tryal, but making his own Will his Law, he exercised it according to his dis∣cretion, by reason whereof, many Innocents causelesly suffered; and for which, his own brethren on the Army drew up Articles against him in a Court Marshal, and he had then received punishment for the price of blood, had not the Ana∣baptist, and Charls Fleetwood in the head of them, at that time being the predominant party, past by the business. Soon after Charles Fleetwood be∣ing removed from the Govern∣ment of Ireland, and Henry Cromwel sent over thither to represent the Lord Deputy of that Nation; the Anabaptists was not only discoun∣tenanced by him, but their domi∣nation was reduced and levelled
equal to those of different prin∣ciples, which Col. Axtel perceiving (as likwise that now they were not suffered to have that rambling lati∣tude to domineer over the weak brethren as formerly, for such they counted all not alike principled with themselves) he with three others, formerly like himself, Go∣verning Charles Fleetwood, and in∣deed all Ireland, as they pleased, viz. Col. Barrow Adjutant, General Allen, and Quarter Master Gen. Vernon, came to Henry Cromwel, and in a great deal of seeming dissatis∣faction, delivered him up their Commissions, from that time ceasing to act any further, because they could not act as they pleased. There was very little more observable during Oliver Cromwels ife, onely that in that vacancy he ad a fair opportunity to encrease his estate, which indeed he made rise to at least 2000 lib. per annum.
At last Oliver dies, and Richards weakness being practised upon, (by his cunning and treacherous Kindred, though false friends) Col. Axtel appears very busie therein, and the Rump Parliament appearing again upon the Stage, he has order for a Regiment of Foot, and is sent to Ireland, where he had not been long, before Sir George Booth appeared in the head of a party in Cheshire; for the over∣coming whereof when the Army of England were thought too little but help must he had from Ireland also, for which purpose Col. Axtel is sent over ommander in Cheif of the Foot, and Col. Sakey of the Horse, which coming over of theirs proved ineffectual, for that the business was done before their landing. When Lambert and the Rump Parliament fell out, Col. Axtel is very forward and assistant for the
dissolving of them; he is one of the Saints at Wallingford house, and a contriver of the settlement of the Nation by a Committee of Safety, and he likewise is resolved with Lambert And the rest to fetch Gen. Monck out of Scotland, or to make him submit to their tearms; and accordingly he went down to head the Irish Brigade, then in Chshire, and marches them into the North, but they very unwilling nder∣took that business, and although with entreaties, beggings, prayers, and tears he wod them to prceed in th Good Old Cause yet he coul not prevail upon them; for they discered both Lambert and their own cheif Officers, and de¦clare for General Monck and he Parliament, and now Col Axel is left to seek his fortune, which at that time was more despera h when he first left his Master to go into he Army.
When the King ws comming home, he commits himself to the private Chamber of a particular friend, who thought it not safe to entertain him long, since Procla∣mation was made or for that purpose, and so delivering him up to the next Constable he was ordered to be snt to the ower of London. And shotly ater that, he was brought to his Tryal in te Old-iley, where his hi lea, was, That he had d  ng during the time of the Tryal of the King, but what he was commanded t by his superiour Officers, That he might have suffered as much for disobeying them, as now he was like to do for performing them; That he was no Parliament man, none of the High Court of Justice, no Counsellor, no Contriver, none that Sate, none that Signed to the ings death, onely acted as a Soul∣dier under command by virtue
thereof. But the Witnsses pro∣ving the aforementioned passges of his life, and that he had often confest in Ireland, that he had been a cheif instrument in bringing the King to that ftal Axe, as also se∣veral other black and horrid, cir∣cumstances, to prove him a princi∣ple promoter thereof; he was soon found guilty by the Jury, and ac∣cordingly received Sentence of condemnation. And on Friday following he was drawn from Newgate to Ty∣burn upon an Hurdle: He seemed to be penitent, but yet retained a cheerful countenance. Being come to the Gallowes, he seriously told the People, that he went out n the Wars at the beginning thereof, by the instigation and encouragement of a Minister in Ironmonger ane, who stirred him with many mo∣tives to shew him it was the cause of God &c. and many words to
the same effect. After which he prayed most affectionately for all sorts of people, uttering many Heavenly and Christian like ex∣pressions, and at last concluding desiring God for that poor Wretch that was then to imbrue his hands in his Blood, to bath his Soul in the blood of Jesus Christ. His end Was full of penitence and sorrow, and now being fitted to die, he ve∣ry willingly submitted to the hand of Justice, and being hanged, was soon after quartered, and his Limbs are disposed of upon the Gates of the City. This active Man commands the Guard Of that black Court, & loud was heard To cll for Justice, and did beat Such as would not the same repeat: Friend, pray be patient, now I hope, Justice hath met you with a Rope.
The Life of Gregory Clement. GReg. Clement was a man hard∣ly, worth the mention, con∣sidering the wickedness of his lewd life; He was a Merchant by his first profession, but failing therein and growing into a desperate fortune, thought to thrive by merchandi∣zing in Bishops Lands, wherein he got a considerable estate: He was turned out of the Rump Parliam. for lying with his Maid at Green∣wich, but was received amongst them again at their return after O∣livers interruption. His guilty Conscience and his Ignorance toge∣ther, would not suffer him to make
any Plea at the Bar or Speech or Prayer at the Gallowes: For be∣ing there, he was asked whether he had any thing to say before the Hangman did his Office, he said no, upon which, Execution was done, and being quartered, his Head was set upon London Bridge' and his Limbs disposed of as the rest.
The Life of Col. Adrian Scroop. COl. Adrian Scroop was descen∣ded of a good Family in Buc∣kinghamshire. He was in those days a great Puritan and stickler against the Bishops, which made him in the beginning of the Wrs to take up Armes against the King. He went forth at first a Captain of Horse, but being inveterate against the King, he soon got preferment in the Army. He was no Parliament man, and yet was drawn in as he pretended, by Olivr Cromwel to be one in the black List for the Tryal of the King: He was most dayes at that Court when that wicked crew sate
upon His Mjesty, and especially the last day w. Sentence was giv  him, and afterwards  and sealed the bloody Warrt for that horrid murther. I finde little mention of him all that short time of Olivers Usurpati∣on: But when the King came home, and set forth the Procla∣mation commanding those that were his Fathers Judges to appear, who were either fled or had hid themselves; Col. Scroop comes in, and delivers himself up unto the Speaker, with some others, and they had made a Vote, that he should be onely fined a years value of his estate: But soon after, he discoursing with General Brown about the Kings murther, justifies the act thereof, saying, He did be∣lieve it to be no murther; with other expressions tending to prove that the King did deserve death; which being reported to the Parliament,
he was wholly excepted out of the Act of general pardon. And being brought to his Tryal in the Old Bailey, the chief part of his plea was not so much to justifie the act, as the power by which he acted, saying, That they were owned both at home and abroad, and that he was no Parliament man, but acted by their Authority, who were then the Supream Au∣thority of the Nations, and he ho∣ped that Authority would excuse him. But being told as all the rest had been, the vanity of that plea, and the weakness of his Argument to prove the same, and how far they were from the least colour of Authority, he was left to his Jury, who soon brought him in guilty: And on Wednesday following, he was brought from Newgate to Charing Cross upon a Hurdle. He see  to look very cheerfully upon the Ladder. He bewailed
his unfortunate discourse with General Brown to be the chief cause of his being brought thither. And after he had prayed a pretty space, he surrendered himself up to death, which was soon done, and he was likewise quartered as the rest before him had been, and dis∣posed of accordingly.
The Life of Mr Joh arew. MR Jhn Carew was bor Cornw and descended of a very ancient Family there: He was alwayes of very fctios and turbu∣lent principles; at last rived at the same pitch of Op with Major General Har ison, and did pertake of the same  with him; and it is no wo  that n was one of the Judes of  King, wh was conng to  of his own Brother. All the time of the  he ap∣ped very maliciously against the King, and indeed all kind of
Monarchy. And when the Army came up to puge the House, when indeed none wanted more purging then those who were left after∣wards in it. This Mr. Carew was one, and was very busie at the pas∣sing of the Act for establishing a High Court of Justice; he set his Hand and Seal thereunto; he ws every day at the Court, and shewed his assent to the King murther by standing up when the Senence was read against him, and he likewise signed and Sealed to that w cked Warrant. Afterwards when the Rump Parliament was turned out, he Se∣questred himself from any publick imployment, and kept himself re∣served and retired; being utterly aginst Olivers Usurpation, as in∣deed he was against all Mnarchial Gvernment; and to give hm his due, he was one that made the least advantage by the mseries of
the times, then any man besides which I knew in that Rump Parlia∣ment. But the King being now come home, and he being known in his own Countrey to have been a for∣ward instrument in that evil de∣sign, was seized there, and sent up Prisoner to the Tower of London, and afterwards was brought to his Tryal with the rest in the Old Baily. Upon the reading of his ndite∣ment, which said, that they had committed that horrid murther, not having the fear of God before thi eyes, but being led by the instigation of the Devil; he plea∣ded error to the Inditement, say∣ing, That what was done, was not in suc a fear, but in the fear of the most Holy and most Righteous Lord, which troubled the Court much, to see him make od the Au hour of their murther. He was lkewise about to have justified the
Authority of the Rump Parlia∣ment, called by Mr. Prynn very well the Unparliamentary Juncto, which was answered as before, ha∣ving no other matter to plead for himself, the Jury went forth and found him guilty. And on Monday following, he was drawn from Newgate to Cha∣ring Cross on a Hurdle: First having prepared himself by drinking three pintes of Sack to bear up his spirits, which caused a more then ordinary flushing in his face, all the way he went, and sweat so much, that his Handkerchief could fearcely keep the water from running down his face: But his Spirits notwithstan∣ding thus encouraged, could not out-dare the conflict. Being come to the Ladder, he lifted up his Hands and his Eyes, and had sme private jaculations to himself. He spake very little, having now, as he said little else to do then to
pray, in which he was but short; wherein he desired God to guide and direct the Kings Majesty, to bless the three Nations with peace and happiness, and all sorts of peo∣ple therein; after which he sub∣mitted, and being turned off the Ladder, he was soon dead, and quartered; which being done, his Quarters were begged by his Bro∣ther of the King, and by him they are buried.
This wretched and unhappy man Appears, and does the most he can To shed his Soveraigns Royal blood; Which done, caused another flood Of tears and sorrow from all these Who with their Treason could not close
The Life of Col. Francis Hacker. COl. Francis Hacker at the be∣ginning of the Wars was a man of a desperate Fortune, one of a greater bulk of body then of perfections of mind; his factious principles advanced him in the Ar∣my, and made him of great repute with those Miscreants who con∣trived the Kings death, insomuch, as the High Court of Injustice thought they could not pitch on a fitter man unto whom to direct that wicked Warrant for to see the Kings murther performed. That morning this horrible act
was to be committed, Cromwel sends for this Hacker, with Col. Phaire and Col. Huncks, and would have those three to sign a Sub War∣rant for the Kings murther; the last two refused, but Col. Hacker subscribes to whatsoever Cromwel himself had Written for that pur∣pose. This Col. Hacker likewise by virtue of the said unwarrantable Warrant from that High Court of Injustice, goes to Col. Thomlinson, who had then the custody of the Kings person, and demands the King from him; carries him in the middest of his own Regiment through St. James Park, conducts him through the Gallery to the Banqueting House, and from thence brings him upon the Scaffold; and there stands according to his pre∣tended Warrant, to see that bloody and unparaleld Execution. Afterwards he continues in the
Army, sides with all parties that have the Government, and was a Col. in the Army at the very time when the King came home, and be∣ing seized and examined in order to find out the mystery of this Regi∣cide, he vvas sent to the Tower of London, and shortly after vvith the rest brought to his Tryal. His Tryal vvas very short, in re∣gard he could not deny the afore∣said actions of his in that unpa∣raleld business; and being asked by the Court, to whom he directed his Sub warrant to strike the fatal blow, he answered, that he did not know, for Cromwel, bid him write somthing and bid him put his hand to it, but whose hand he put in for that purpose he could not tell: This being all his plea, he was soon brought in guilty likewise. And on Friday following, he vvas drawn from Newgate on a Hur∣dle to Tyburn; vvhere he spake ve∣ry
little for himself, onely left the vvhole business of prayer to be car∣ried on by Col. Axtel, vvho perfor∣med it for them both; after vvhich being ended, he vvas onely hanged, and being cut down he vvas put in a Hese vvhich was there brought to carry bck his Body, his Son hath begged the same from the King, vvho granted him his Fathers body vvithout quartering, and according∣ly buried the same in the City of London.
As for Quarter Master William Hewle, in regard that though he be Condemned, yet is Reprieved, in order to a clear discovery of this wicked act: I shall leave his Cha∣racter and Description to the time, when Justice shall likewise make him an Example for putting on a Vizor on his Faces and a Frock on his Body for such a horrid purpose.
There are eighteen more Con∣demned viz. Sir Hard ess Waller, William He∣venningham, Isaac Pennington, Hen. Ma tin, Gilbert Millington, Roert Titch urn, Owen Roe, Robert Lil∣bun, Heny Smith, Edmund Harvey, John Dows Vincent Potter, Augu∣stine Galand, George Fleetwood Si∣mo Myne, Thomas Wit, James T mple, Peter Temple; of whom I think nt convenient to write ny thig of their lives, til I shall be prepared to give an account alo of the manner of their deaths. These are close prisoners in the Tower of London, till the pleasure of the Par∣liament shall be declared concern∣ing them.
Several others there are, viz. William Say, John Barkstead, Sir Michael Livesly Miles Coret, Thomas Woogan, Mr. Love, Daniel Blagrave, Andrew Broughton, Eward Denby, John Dixwel, Thomas Challoer, John Lsle, William Cawley, John Okey, Will. Goff, John Hewson, Valentine Wanton, Ed Whaley, Edw. Ludlow, Cor. Holland; Who vvander about the World as Vagabons, like Cain vvith they cry of blood at their Heels, vvho at last vvill o question be found out by the All searching hand of divine Justice, and brought to receive a condigne punishment fr their hor∣rible Treason; of whom also in time we shall give you a more per∣fect account. And thus I conclude the story of these few wretched and miserable Traytors, whose Limbs are set up as Lots Wife's Pillar of Salt, the re∣markable
examples of the Almigh∣ties just punishment, that thus would imbrew their hands in the Sacred blood of his own Anointed, which was so far a Deicide, as Kings are called Gods upon the Earth, and which ought to be the prayers of all truly Christianized, That God would cleanse the City and Nation from the guilt of that pre∣cious blood, so inhumanely and unchristianly shed, as before sail, and keep these Nations from Rebel∣lion and privy Conspiracy, from all false Doctrine and Heresie, that no Jesuitical plots from abroad, or A∣nabaptistical or Schismatical con∣sultations at home may he ever able to raise Sedition in the peo∣ple, or dist the peace of the King.
The Life of Henry Ireton. HEnry Ireton, Son-in-Law to Oliver Cromwell, a man full of wicked policy and contrivance; and his Fathers chief Councellour, and second in all his undertakings: he arives at Comisary Gene. in the Ar∣my, very factious in his Principles, and a great encourager of all that were such; A great Promoter of the Kings Death, & one that stood in the margent of Olivers enterprize in that wicked murder; he was not only of the High Court of Justice, but took upon him with Major Gen. Harison, &c. the appointing of the time, place, and manner of the Kings Execution.
After which he goes over with his Father Cromwell into Ireland, and by him is left Lord Deputy thereof; here he made victorious in the redu∣cing of many Garisons there, and at last sets down before Limerick, which Siege was the last that ever he made, for not long after the surrender of that City, he dyed of the Plague, his Death was very suddain and strange to the Army; but however he was sent into England, carryed to Summerset House where his Father mocks his Body with that vain glo∣ry, which himself had often declared against, and a Funeral in great state is made by the Army, interring him among the Kings of England, and Iretons Wife Oliver Cromwels own Daughters ordered by her Fathers means 2000 pound in money, and 2000 pound per Annum out of the Land of Goran in Ireland, being of the Lands belonging to the Marquess of Ormond, which he hath now re∣possed
again according to an Act of Parliament made in that behalf. Oliver erects a Tomb for this vi∣ctorious Sectarian Champion, with his Effigies, and his Wifes lying by him in King Henry the sevenths Chappel, which is since ignomini∣ously broken down, and no foot∣step lest of his remembrance in that royal and stately memorial of our English Kings, and his name is now as rotten, as his Carcass perished through the wickedness of his bloo∣dy Life.
The Life of John Bradshaw. JOhn Bradshaw borne in Cheshire, (and better sure it had been if he had nere been born) a man, although brought up in that honourable pra∣ctice of the Law, yet a shameful and most wicked destroyer of the very foundation and corner stone there∣of he was made Judge of the County Palatine of Chester, and afterwards of the Sheriffes Court in Guild-hall London, and from thence most auda, tiously and impudently he appears in the Front of the High Court of Justice, as their President; and judges him that was the Judge of the Law: and now I even tremble to think how I saw him the day of the
Kings Tryal in Scarlet, with a heart and conscience as deep dyed as his Gown, most divilishly & inhumane∣ly staining that white innocency of the Kings Majesty, with approbri∣ons and wicked language, which I dare not mention in this place, unless I give occasion of making that sad wound to bleed afresh in the sight of all tender, and truly pious Christi∣ans. This wicked and unparralleld murder, was not called to account in his Life but he lives (though in a very timerous condition) and acts as President to the Councel of State af∣terwards, and hath given him (by those who thought that by taking of Gods anointed, they did the Devil good service) several considerable Revenues, both in Hampshire and Cheshire, and among the rest lives (though not securely) in the Deana∣ry of Westminster, where for his safe∣ties sake he built his Study on the top
of Westminster Abbey, higer than the like was ever seen before, getting as nigh Heaven as he could whilst he lived, as not expecting to come there when he dyed. All the time of Olivers short Reign, he acted not: But the Rump Parli∣ament coming into play again, he is again reinstated in his former Presi∣dentship, and is made the prime Lord Comissioner of the great Seal of England. But Lambert turned out the Parli∣amen again, he raves now like one stark mad, flinging out of the room in usury, and calling them all Tray∣tors, and whilst the Committee of Safety sate, he seeing now that all things would make for the Kings in∣terest, goes home & takes his Bed, & never comes abroad more, his wick∣ed body was tortured wiih many di∣stempers, languishing in much pain and misery, insomuch that he was of∣ten reported, and really thought to
be dead before he truly was, his con∣science being seared, he repented not of his aforesaid wicked practises; and at last this miserable man passed through the aforesaid, much afflicted and tormented body to the immedi∣ate Judgment of God, and no doubt is gone to his place, his body was burned in Westminster Abbey.
The Life of Doctor Dorislavs. DOctor Dorislavs formerly a Doctor of the civil (by him made the uncivill) Law was by an order of this corrup∣ted piece of the Parliament, made one of the chief Councel with Mr. Ask and Mr. Cooke, to contrive and prepare a charge against the King, and very confidently he appears in the Court against him, seconding Mr. Cooke in his wicked demanding of Justice against the King. This Dr. Dorislavs pleaded that the King ought to answer the Court, and not in the least to question their authori∣ty, which proved his own death at ast; for not long after, he being sent
into Holland in the nature of an A∣gent from the Parliament, was stob∣bed in his lodging in the Hague by some resolute persons, who likewise not questioning their own authori∣ty) resolved to make him a part ex∣ample of the Kings Murder, his bo∣dy was brought from Holland to Baynards Castle in Thames Street, & from thence privately interred & accompanied with some pretended mourners in Westminster Abbey.
The Life of Thomas Hammond. THOmas Hammond of Surry, and of no great fortune there. He went out into the Army one of the Life guard of the Earle of Essex, and was afterwards made Lieyten Gen. to the traine of Artillery under the Lord Fairfax; this Col Ham∣mond afterwards was preferred to have the custody of the King at the Isle of Wight, and there not only undutifully but very sawcily and peremptorily behaved himself to∣wards him, not suffering the King to have any papers about him but what he would first peruse; and when the Parliament made those Votes of non addresses; as it hath been credibly reported, Letters were
write to this Col. Hammond, by Oliver Cromwell (who found that nothing could be done in their own affaire, till the King were taken off) that he should either remove the King out of the way or prison him by one means or other. Upon which Mr. Osborn then being in the Country, writs a letter to the House, that Major Rolfe had confest that such a Letter was written to Ham∣mond to the aforesaid purpose: but that Hammond had a good allowance for keeping the King, and therefore would not do it because he would not loose his allowance, and desired the said Mr. Osborn to joyn with him in conveighing the King to some pri∣vate place, and then they would do with him what they pleased. This business was strangely hud∣led up in the House, the Army party therein arguing that Osborn was a Malignant, and no notice was fit to be taken of his words; others
said that the Examination of the business was a Malignant design to draw Col. Hammond to this Town that so the King might make his es∣cape in the Cols. absence. But al∣though the business was then husht up, yet Mr. Osborne and others of∣fered to confirme the design, and that Rolfe was appointed to pistol the King, but still they endeaver to abscond the truth, Rolfe is sent up by Col. Hammond with letters to the House, and therein denies the business, and although the thing ap∣peared plain, (notwithstanding Rolfe with a trembling voice not halfe loud enough to make a satis∣factory answer, pleads at the House Bar, that there ws no such thing) he was suddainly conveyed out of the way by the Army, & Hammond was never so much as questioned. Presently after the design being carried on for the Kings Murther this Col. Hammond presents to the
House a Scandalous libel called the Agreement of the people, which contained nothing else but a desire of the Kings tryal and a subversion of the ancient Laws of the Land, which was ordered to be printed, although not a hundred part of the people had not the least thought thereof. And the next thing is the bring∣ing the King to his tryal in West∣minster Hall instead of the pretended making him a glorious King, and bringing him home to his Parlia∣ment, and this Col. Hammond (con∣trary to the advice, and to the great greife of Dr. Hammond) appeared as one of the Kings Judges, and afterwards became one of the great promotets of the Tyrannical usur∣per, and in the year 1654. When Oliver took the Protectorship up∣on him; Col. Hammond is sent into Ireland as one of the Privy Counsel of that Nation, Charles Fleetwood was made Lord Deputy, and Milts
Corbet, Cl. Thomson, &c. were made of the same Councell w him, for Oliver durst not trust such near him who had so lately betrayed the King; as conceiving they would do the like by him; but Col. Ham∣mond being landed at Dublin his Councelship was soon ended. For before a fortnight was ended he dyed of a spotted Feaver there very suddenly and unexpectedly, dying senecless, and therefore no accompt can be given whether he repented of that horrid murther or no; Fleetwood and his factious crew, gave him a solemne funeral and interred his Body in Christ-Church Dublin. And here I cannot but observe, how that politique usurper Oliver Cromwel, desired to remove all those who were in the least concerned in the Kings death as farre from him as he could for the aforesaid reasons. Who were all sent into Ireland, viz.
This C. Hammond, Col. John Iones, Lievt Gen Ludlow, Mr. Stle, Col. Hewsn, Col. Phatre, C. M. Thomlinson Mr. Miles Corbet, Justice Cooke, Col. Axtell Hwlet, &c. Col. Huncks, With many other private Officers, of the Army.
The Life of Colonel Richard Deane. RIchard Deane was first brought up by a Hoyman belonging to the Town of Ipswich, and after∣wards going to Sea, was Boatswain of a ship. But the Warrs coming on, he goes forth into the Army, and there thrives in many successive im∣ployments, because a man of like principles with those that then had the domination, viz. the Sectarian (which was the greatest) part of the Army when the Kings Death was contrived amongst them: this Colo∣nel Deane is a very forward busie-body, to promote and countenance it; he was one of the High Court of Injustice, Seals the Warrant for the Murther, and with Harison and with
Ireton appoints the place of Executi∣on. After which he continued with the Army, went into Scotland with Cromwell when he conquered the co∣venanting Professors where he was a Colonel of Horse, and finally he is made one of the General at Sea with General Monck, and General Blake, in the Fights which were made with the Dutch; but in the second Fight with them, he encouraging the Sea∣men, was shot in pieces with a Can∣non Bullet, and all the small remains they could find of him, were Cof∣find up and brought to Greenwich, and from thence were carryed by water in a solemn manner to West∣minster, and buried in the Chappel of King Henry the Seventh.
The Life of Colonel Thomas Pride. THo. Pride a man of a very mean (yet of a very uncertain) Birth, some of the Ancients have reported that he was a poor boy brought up by the Parish of St. Brides, Alies St. Bridgets London, and by them put forth at first, to an Ale-House-keeper in Bride Lane to draw drink, but whether this be true or no I will not assert it: But the first mention that I find of him, was, be¦ing a Servant to Mr. Hiccocks a Brewer in Southwark, and now living in the Bridg-house in S. Tulyes Street, there, with him he was a Drayman, and a common carrier of Beer with the Slings. When the Warrs began (he be∣ing
a busling fellow in any distur∣bance) he went forth an Ensigne un∣der the Earle of Essex, but by his continual siding with People like himself, viz. Ignorant, yet impu∣dent in all their proceedings, he at last commences Colonel of a foot Company, & now his meaness aims at nothing more than to be one of the Princes of the People. And when the Army at New-Market-Heath began the business of agitators, and by that means to for∣sake their old Masters the Parlia∣ment. Colonel Pride encourages and animates them thereunto, and upon their coming to London, he ap∣pears a great stickler to have the im∣peached Members, and Major Gen. Browne brought to Justice, and be∣cause the greater part of the House was so honest as to scorne to be taught and frighted into any illegal and base practises by the Army. This Colonel Pride together with
Sir Hardress Walter, & Col. Hewson, seize all the aforesaid honest and con∣scientious Members, driving them a∣way from the exercise of their trust comitted to their charge by their Country, and for some time for∣cing the greatest part of them into an Ordinary, called Hell near West∣minster-Hall, which accasioned some to use that expression that Pride car∣ried the Parliament to Hell. After this he proceeds according as the faction lead him, and is a great Councellour in all the consultations about the Kings Death, and when the King was brought from Windsor to his own House at St. Jamses. Col. Pride was very angry that the King was brought into his Chamber, al∣though (it being then cold weather) it was only for a small time (Col. Pride having a fire in that Chamber) until another fire in another room could be provided for the King. And now the time drawing near
wherein they intended this horrid Murther; Colonel Pride is made one of the Kings judges, he is among them very active every day, and when that black sentence was pro∣nounced, Col. Pride sets his hand & seal to the murder, and with his Re∣giment is upon the guard that day it was accomplished. Matters thus suceeding, and his Pockets being fil'd with the spoils of the people, he begins to think, then of his Draymans place, yet of a Brewers trade, and accordingly he laid out a considerable sum of mo∣ney upon a Brew-house in Pie-Cor∣ner, and by his Wife and substitutes kept the same for many years toge∣ther. After came on the Warrs of Scotland, which when Cromwel un∣dertook, he is a chief follower of his said Master, and is very forward in that enterpriz. And after when the Scotch Trophies and Colours wer
taken, and for the honour of that vi∣ctory hanged up in Westminster Hall; he was the Man that uttered the ex∣pression, that he would have the Lawyers Gowns hang'd there too. And thus he continues till Oliver takes the Government upon himself, Col. Pride assists him in this too, and stands up very much for this new made Protector, noe wayes doubting but that if Oliver were a King he should be one of his Inferior Princes; not long after h dubd him S. Thomas Pride, and yet by his usurping Mast∣er when they were among themselvs was often called Sir. Thomas Slings∣by, which indeed was the more pro∣per name of the two. Col. Pride being of a very great corpulent Body, by reason whereof his Gate was very uncomely, Crom∣well would used o say, when he saw him comming owards him, see here how Pride comes wadling too and a∣gain, as if he hd the Slings upon his back.
And being newly Knighted, he thought to adventure upon some noble Atchievement to make him∣self famous, and his first encounter was at the Beare-Garden, where the Beaes felt the couragousness of h valour, and were all slain in t Fight, upon which Col. Pride can off the Conquerer; For which and other services, t valourous Knight was suddenly ¦ter made a Lord, and thinks th Lords place would become a Dr  man very well; This mock hom sate not long before the Fabricator of it had an end put to his Life, and Col. Pride thought it not manners to stay behind him, whome he had alwayes followed in all his designs, and fearing a swing, insteed of his slings, he dyed about a month after him, neer Nonsuch in the County of Surry, which Parke of the Kings so called, he had as his Portion for his aforesaid wicked Services, the man∣ner
of his Death is uncertain, as that of his Birth, being buried in a Church, near there abouts, in the County of Surrey.
The Life of Francis Allen. FRancis Allen, a Citizen and Gold Smith of London, and Lived Over against St. Dun∣stans Church, neer Temple Bar, was a great stickler against the King, and one that had no way to improve his now decaying Estate, but by siding with the rising Sectaries; by which means he was made one of the Commissiners for their Cu∣stoms, and a Trustee for Sale of the Lands of the Bishops, Deans, and Chapters. And the time coming on wherein his Soveraignes bloud was to be spilt, he appears a forward Designer of that wicked Act, and
accepts very readily of the imploy∣ment of one of the Kings Judges; where he appeared every day to propagate the Murther, and was a great encourager of others to doe the same. He likewise Signed to the warrant for the Execution, and was ever after a continued Rump∣er, and a great enemy of Olivers, be∣cause he dissolved them: and I think it will not be unseasonable to insert in this place part of a mock hymn, which was made pretended∣ly by Mr. John Goodwin; although onely a Jeer made in imitation of the like Drollery which he made and caused to be Sung in his Church. Then spake one Allen of the City, at which we gave a shout. Who said indeed it was great pitty, we should be thus turn'd out. But Cromwell answered him again, and said, t'was such as he,
That were the Spunges of the land, and now must squezed be. Which indeed in some case was not said amisse, for he arrived at a very vast estate by being a Customer, and one of the Treasurers for sale of the King, Queen and Princesse Lands at VVorcester house, and of the lands belonging to the pretended Delin∣quents, at the Lord Cravens House in Drury lane; besides he compassed a considerable Estate out of the Lands of the Bishop of Chester, at a very inconsiderable rate. He dyed much about the time with Oliver Cromwell, at his assumed house at Fox-hall, and presently af∣ter him dyed his Wife also, leaving their illegal and ill-gotten Estate to his Brother Deputy Allen a He∣rald Painter in London, whose Heirs I doubt will have little cause to glory in it.
The Life of Thomas Andrewes. ALderman Thomas Andrewes was at first a Linnen Draper upon Fish-street hill, but im∣proved his Estate better by the times then by his Trade, for which purpose he was made a Treasurer for Plate, Money, and one of the Treasurers at War, for which he received three pence per pound; he was likewise one of the Commissi∣oners for the Customes, and with his brother Allen was likewse one of the Treasures for sale of the Lands of the late King, Queen and Prince, &c. These imployments being gain∣full to him, made him take any
course to maintaine and propagate the power by which he received them, whereupon he sides with the Kings Murtherers, and appears at that Court as one of his Judges, and at last signes likewise the Warrant for Execution, And now having had a hand in the King's bloud, he is resolved to blot out the Name thereof. For in the year, 1649. Alderman Reynold∣son Lord Mayor of London, in whose Mayoralty an Act was set on foot for the abolishing of Kingly Go∣vernment, and for the declaring our now Soveraigne, then Prince, a Traytor; which was Ordered to be proclaimed in the City of Lon∣don. But honest Alderman Reynold∣son refused to be present at that wicked Proclamation, and pub∣liquely and plainly told them, he would not publish any such thing; and for such his denyal, was fyned two thousand pounds, and three
months Imprisonment; yet not∣withstanding this, Alderman An∣drews accepts of the place of Maior in his absence: proclaimes the Act against Kingly Government, and serves out the remaining part of Alderm. Reynoldson's Government, as if he had been legally chosen to doe the same, and the next yeare succeeding, was chosen himselfe by the City, Lord Mayor of London. He arrived at very little notice afterwards, unlesse a Knighthood from the Protector, which he but little while enjoyed, although he was a principal Man at the proclai∣ming Richard Cromwell after the Usurpers Death. He had very many Children, most of his Sons got their Estates in Imployments under him, but never lived to enjoy them; for to his continued grief, he was hardly out of Mourning for one, before he had occasion to mourne for the
losse of another; At last a Suit of law coming upon him for a wrong∣fully detain'd sum of money which he injuriously kept in his hands of another Mans, he dyed suddenly full of years, in the Year 1659. and had he lived a Yeare longer, three that had been Lord Maiors of Lon∣don in Twenty years time had held up their hands at the same Barre where they had Condemned many Wretched persons which had not so much deserved it as themselves.
The Life of Col. John Venn. COl. John Venn, was a Citizen of London likewise, and as I have heard a decaying Tradsman, he was taken notice of for his more then ordinary forward∣nesse against the Kings interest; when the Wars increased, his Fa∣ctious Principles increased too, by reason whereof he was made Go∣vernour of VVindsor, where he had the opportunity to encrease his Estate, not onely by the Plunder of the Countrey thereabouts, but by getting into his possession much of the Kings houshold stuff, Hangings, Linnen, &c. He was a chief Con∣sultator with the wicked Councel
of the Army at VVindsor, and gave his Vote among them to Murther the King. Mr. Christopher Love, afterwards Martyr'd, Chaplaine to his Regi∣ment, who instructed him in better Principles then he afterwards pro∣fest, and about the year, 1645, or 1646: this Col. Venn took a house in Aldersgate-street, London, for the onely reason that he might be near unto Mr. Love, who then preached at St. Annes Church, Aldersgate, not far from Venns Lodging; and about the year, 1647: this professed Re∣ligious Collonel, being to remove from thence to a place called Brum∣ley near Kensington, by reason of which distance he could not enjoy, as he pretended, the benefit of Mr Lov's soul searching preaching, whereupon he hired the Author of this small Treatise to be a constant Hearer of M. Love, and to take his Sermons in Short-writing, who
made it his businesse all the weeke following to transcribe them again into a legible hand, whereby what Mr. Love preach'd one Sunday at St. Anns, was the next Sunday re∣preach'd by Col. Venn in his own Family. And yet this wretched Man acts contrary even to these Principles; in the year, 1648, he forsook both Mr. Love and his Re∣ligion too, and sides with the then prevailing factious party, and is nominated one of the Judges of the King, who by this time they had contrived to put to Death, to the great affliction and more then or∣dinary trouble of spirit of Mr. Love. Finally, he was one of the Judges of the King, and most impudently sate among them; he signed like∣wise to that blacke Authority that caused that unheard of Execution: and lastly, he proved a great enemy to Mr. Love, whom formerly he so earnestly thirsted after, and would
not appeare to helpe him either in his Imprisonment, Confinements, or Death. But at last, he himselfe was not much regarded, The judgements of God followed him in a troubled Conscience; and at last, going to Bed very well with his wife, he was found dead by her the next morn∣ing; no persons that were with him that night, nor his wife that lay by him, being in the least sensi∣ble of his approaching end.
The Life of Sir William Constable. SIR VVilliam Constable, was one of those who appeared eminently against Kingly power, he was a Co∣lonel in the Parliaments Army, and a great Sider with the Sectarian part thereof; his Estate was enga∣ged for Debt, and he knew no way to recover his Decays but by saying and doing as those wretches com∣manded; He sold his Estate to Sir Marmaduke Langdale for twenty thousand pounds, and afterwards beggs it againe of the Parliament; for that as he said Sir Marmaduke Langdale was a Delinquent, and so his Estate was in their Dispose, his
thus decay'd fortune made him side with the Conspirers of the King's Death, and he was one of his Judges, and set his Hand and Seal for taking away the Life of the King, and did as much as in him lay for transplanting and removing the very Name & memory thereof. He died in the Reigne of the last usurping Tyrant that I pray Eng∣land may ever have.
The Life of Sir John Danvers. SIR John Danvers was a Collonel in the said Army, was Brother to the Earle of Danby, who he proved to be a Delinquent in that Rump-Parliament, whereby he might overthrow his will and so compasse the Estate himselfe; he sided likewise with the Sectarian party, was one of the King's Judges and lived afterwards some years in his sin without repentance. But drawing near to his Death I have cause to believe that he re∣pented of the wickednesse of his Life, for that, then Mr. Thomas (now Dr.) Fuller was conversant in his Family and preached severall
times at Sir John Danver's desire in Chelsey Church, where I am sure, all (that frequented that Congrega∣tion) will say he was instructed to repent of his misguided and wick∣ed Consultations in having to doe with the Murther of that just Man. He died, (but how I cannot give an account) and hath no Question received his Judgement.
The Life of Isaac Ewer. ISaac Ewer, began his Estate with the Wars, and increased therein according to the successe thereof; he was a Colonel at Colchester Siege and there was at the Councell of War upon Sir Charles Lucas and Sir George Lisle, he was one of the Kings Judges, & Signed the Warrant for the Murther; afterwards went with Cromwell into Ireland, he was at that unheard of bloudy Quarter which was given to 4000 five hun∣dred accomplisht Men, at Tredagh in Ireland; where none in Armes escaped their Murther; although many of them laid down their Armes upon promise of their lives,
which notwithstanding they Mur∣thered; he was afterwards at the Siege of Clonmel in Ireland, and from thence at Waterford where the Town being taken he died sud∣denly after of the Plague, and was there buried.
The Conclusion. ANd thus you see how Evil pursu∣ed these wicked Men, who thus thirsted after the bloud of their Soveraign; Nay, I say of one of the most Pious Princes as ever Ruled the English Scepter. A King who had no other fault but his too much Clemency, wherewith his nature did abound; whose Piety was as Transcendent as his Clemency, immoveable as the Rock which neither the unruly VVaves of Sedition impetuously breaking there∣upon, nor the Boysterous and Irresista∣ble winds of persecution could work into the least complyance, or disturb in his resolved stedfastness; one that like the Palme Tree that could flourish with the greater splendor by how much he
was Prest with ponderous inconveni∣ences, and with our Saviour could bear the Crosse with as much ease as he did his Crown, and improve his Af∣flictions to the right use for which God Originally intended them, he could Spurne at the Glittering Glory of an Earthly Crown, and handling Christs Crown of Thornes could by the eye of Faith discern an immortal and eternal Crown of Glory. His Patience under Gods Afflicting hand was like that of St. Paul's farre above all that the world could doe to abuse it, and not only so, but rejoycing in his Tribulation also. The Impri∣sonment of his Body could not in the least confine his mind, but rather give the greater advantages to his heavenly Soul for nearer and more desired con∣verses with the King of Kings. No undutiful or unhandsome usage which he received from the meanest of his People could Aggravate him into any passionate reflections, or exasperate a∣bove
the degree of his sweet and com∣placent Temper, he could not be wrought beyond the bounds of his rea∣son, although he had to do with unrea∣sonable Men, nor was ever heard to use any expressions of Gaul and Worm∣wood towards those that gave him Gaul and Vinegar to Drink; he blessed those that cursed him, he prayed for those that persecuted him; and he de∣sired that those who would not suffer him to live with them in his Earthly Kingdome, might be received with him into the Capacious Kingdome of Heavenly Glory. His Charity was as Ʋniversall as that required from a Ʋniversal Chri∣stian; viz. To the greatest and most eminent of his forward Adversaries; to those who spit in his Face, he desired that their Faces might shine with the Ʋnction of the Spirit, and others who Vilifyed him with crying out Justice and Execution against him, he pray∣ed that their sinne might be forgiven,
and that they might not receive that Justice upon themselves which they cal∣led for unjustly to be Executed upon him. Nay, and further, he did often declare that he did as freely forgive all the world with as much freedom as he did hope to be forgiven, and named one particular person among the rest, saying, viz. I forgive Miles Corbet too, One who made it the greatest f his study to stretch abused law, Arguments against the King, and aggravating the Kings demanding Justice against the Five Members with all the exaspera∣ting circumstances imaginable, which was the chief Original cause of the fu∣ture civil and unhumane Bloudshed, & yet our most Pious and charitable Prince had charity even for this Man. His moderation was known unto all men, far above all mortal rules or ob∣servations, take him which way you will, either as Man, a Christian, or a KING, and in all three you shall find him to abound in his moderation; his
private Life as a Man was above the reach of envy to Tax him with any thing that might Blot or Staine his blamelesse conversation; His Christi∣anity caused him to comply with the Peevish Precipitate Distempers of the times, hoping thereby to allay that furi∣ous Fire which broke out among the Giddy headed People. And this our Gracious Soveraigne throwing the wa∣ter of his compassionate Christianity thereon to quench it, it proved like water cast on Lime, burn'd and smoak't with the greater Violence. His Kingly moderation far exceed∣ed the other two, for he Stooped and Condiscended even to things below himself, that he might let all the wrld see his readinesse to comply with any thing that might gratifie their distem∣pered and infatuated frenzy, which though nothing could do, he yet retain∣ed his aforesaid serious and moderate temper; and having at that time to deal with a contradicting and gain∣saying
People, he moderately contrives all things, as much as in him lay, to re∣concile and make up their ruined and irrecoverable Breaches. And lastly, His moderate Diet, his tem∣perance in all other affairs, his constan∣cy to his Queen, his fixed Religion, his heavenly Inclinations, his continued Devotions, his melting Clemeny, and his abused Charity, do all like so many Foiles shew the blacknesse of that Bar∣barous Action of Butchering such a Pious Prince, the parallell of whom cannot be Sampled among the now Peaceable Kings of the Earth. In a word, His very Enemies could give him no worse a caracter then what is contained in this, dimidium of his reall worth, which is represented but in dead colours, which no dubt but a more curious Pen will represent to it's lively Species. Some have said (as Cornet Joyce) that if ever King of England went to Heaven, our Glorious Martyr King Charles did, who laid
down his Life; and rather would lo his Prerogative, then the People shou loose their Priviledge. Oliver Cro¦well himself said, that he was a vn¦wise and Pious Man, but that he wi Ʋnfortunate in his War. And Cook said he was Wise and a Graciou Prince, but that he must Dye, and Mo∣narchy with him. And this was he whom these mise∣rable Men Sentenced to Death as a Murtherer, and a Traytor, whom Di∣vels must acknowledge as one whose pure conversation might cause his Name to be Registred in the Calanders of the Sainted Martyrs, valuing not so much his own, as the Lives and Safe∣ties of his People. A Gentleman standing at his sad in∣terment, threw this Distick into the Vault. Non Carolus magnus, nec Carolus quintus. Sed Carolus Agnus hic Jacet intus. FINIS.
