B4139 99825666 30052
Mrs. SARAH BRADMORES PROPHECY Of the Wonders that will happen, Anno Dom. 1687. Also what will be the EFFECTS OF THE WHALES Comeing up the River of Thames, and continued the 4th. and 5th. of August, Anno Dom. 1686. STrange and Wonderful, have been the Effects of such unusual Creatures as Whales approaching in Rivers; so kwe hath been the appearance of Co∣mets; But I am certain, none knows what will be the Issue of these Signes and Wonders, but the Almighty who is the Occasion of them; yet some Men have had the Impudence to pretend (and put it publickly in Print) that they know the Will and Pleasure of the Almighty; when there is nothing certainer in the World, than their not knowing the Mind of another Man; how can Man know that, which the Angels themselves are Ignorant of? the which they pretend to do by Starry Influence; but Cornelius Agrippa says, that the Wise rule not the Stars, nor the Stars the Wise, but God ruleth them both; and Cornelius Tacitus saith, that they are People Disloyal to their Prince, deceiving those that beleive them; and saith Varro, the Vanty of all Supertions floweth from the Bosom of Astrology; it's nothing but Poetical Fictions, by which the Astrologers do sive, cheat, and cozen Men, and gain by their Fables and Lyes, whilst (if you have ever seen a Hackney Poet) you may see his A—through his Pocket-holes. If our Life and Fortune depend not on the Stars, then it's to be granted, that the Astrologers Seek where nothing is to be found, but we are so fond, mistrustful, and credulous, that we fear more of the Fables of Robin Good-Fellow, Astrologers, and Witches, and believe more things that, are not, then the things that are, and the more impossible a thing is, the more we stand in fear thereof; and the less likely to be true, the more we believe it, and if we were not such, I think that those Deceivers, Astrologers, Couzenors, and Blasphemors, if they had no other way or Employment to get an ho∣nest Lively-hood, they would dye for hunger. Our foolish light Beleif, forgeting things past, neglecting things pre∣sent, and very hasty to know things to come; so that if by our Astrologers, one Truth be spoken by hap, it giveth such Creddit to all their Lyes, that e∣ver after we believe whatsoever they say, how incredible, impossible, or false soever it be, &c. But now I shall proceed to my Prophecy.
According to the Constellations of the Stars which I converse with, there will happen (Anno. 1687.) a Great Rot amongst the Quack Doctors, but they will not be half so much pitty'd, as if it had hapned in Rumney Marsh, for the Honest can spare them, and those as are not, will have no cause to Lament, for they oftner kill than cure. Likewise they have so daubed every Post, nay there is hardly a Creek or Corner in or about London, but a Man shall be disturbed with the Appearitions of the Quacks, (even at Noon Day) in making Water; for right before you, there stands No Cure no Money, or No Money till the Cure be performed; but when a Gentleman has Occasion, it's No Medicine without producing the Ready. And above him stands, A Speedy Cure without Mercury: Also either to the right or left, there is an Appearition cloathed all in Black, known by the Name of Aqua Tetrachymagogon, but for my part I have nothing to say against him, because I am One as hates Reflections upon the Ingenious: Than too near him stands Medela ab Alto, in Fanchurch-street near Magpy-ally; and now and then a Female Spirit appears, and immediately vanisheth. And last of all, which is the dreadfulest, appears, Yah Coronzon Otheos On Panthon Bohu Tohu, or Read, Try, Judge, and speak as you find &c. To give him his due, he is a de∣licate fellow, and not only verst in one, but in three Arts viz, Poetry, Physik, and resolveth all Lawful Questions in Astrology, although he understands no more of it than his Maid, I suppose ♄ might be in ill aspect with ♀ in the Action—As I said before, he is an excellent Poet, and his Lines so far ex∣ceeding the dull Pen of this Age, I thought my self obliged to do him the Justice, of reciteing some of his Poems, only Coating him as a faithful Friend of the Muses, and realy believing he had no hand in the Plot. ANd good Medicines cheap if that so you please, For to cure any curable Disease Bohu's best Pills better than the rest, Deservedly have gained Name of Best, In curing by a cause quite purging out Of Scurvy, French Pox, Stone and Gout, The head and belly, and the reins they Will cure while you may work or play His Pills often to their Makers praise, Cure, yea eaven inth' Dog-Days. Let not the world wonder, I will not my candle a Bushel put un∣der. For indeed it would be a Sin, For to hide my Tallent in a Napkin. Than his cheap pills at 3s. the Box, A certain cure for the Pox, Each box contains 36 pills I'm sure, Never better made scurvy to cure, The half box 18 pills at 18 pence, Tho' 'tis to cheap in your own Sence. So hoping you do not expect a Prophecy from one, who so much contemns them and their Art, I rather did it for two Reasons. 1st. That the Wise as well as the Ignorant might avoid the Rock of Deceit, if not, I cannot help it. The 2d. Is, I will assure you it's very hard times, and I wanted Money; so taking my leave till the coming up of the next Whale, I remain a True and Loyal Subject to His Majesty, Whom God Preserve, and in General, your Humble Servant; S. B. Printed by Authority. London Printed by S. J. 1686.
