B5244 R19928 12676382 65556
Harvest-Home: BEING The Summe of certain SERMONS upon Job 5.26. One whereof was Preached at the Funeral of Mr.  Musson, an Aged godly Minister of the Gospel in the Royally Licensed rooms in Coventry; the other since continued upon the Subject, by J. B. D. D. Late Pastor of the Holy Trinity in that Ancient and Honourable City. The first part being a preparation of the Corn for the Sickle. The Latter will be the reaping, shocking and inning of that Corn which is so fitted. LONDON, Printed for the Authour, 1674.
The Preface. THis small Treatise concerning the happy and heavenly end of an holy life, the Authour hath pre∣sumed to send to some of his noble and most worthy friends; as an Earnest and Token of his hearty thankfullness for sundry expressions of their bounty, in his now declining Age; humbly de∣siring of them to receive it as such; and of Almighty God, that they who have thus ministred to one of the Labourers of his harvest, may be (by this or other means) found wheat, meet to be laid up in the Garner of him, who is the great Husbandman, which will be the great rejoycing of him who is their bounden servant, and dayly Oratour at the throne of Grace J. B.
Iob 5.26. Thou shalt come to thy Grave in a full; age like as a shock of Corn cometh in, in his season. SECT. I. The certainty and necessity of Death to all, the priviledges of the godly; both in every State of life; and in death it self. THis Text presents to every heedfull eye The unavoidable necessity Of dying naturally, or violently; There is not one That lives on Earth, but shall ere long be brought Unto the Grave: yet they may sing, that sought To God in truth; and righteousness have wrought: To God alone Committed have their cause;  resigning Themselves into his hands; not once repining At the Almighties Chastning; nor declining, When God doth call:
At least Endeavour with their utmost might, To seek, commit, submit, as in his sight Walking continually, with hearts upright: These surely shall Find,  when God maketh sore, He bindeth up; Into their hands gives an all-healing Cup; And when he others wounds, they Dine, and Sup With bodies whole. In six,  and seven troubles he delivers; Each evil in those troubles breaks to shivers; At shapes whereof each ill man quakes and quivers: Also the Soul Of every godly man untouched stands; Free from the force of Body-killing bands; Their persons also scape their Enemies hands; And they are hid By powrfull providence from the scourge of tongue; Nor shall they fear destruction coming strong Upon them; but thereof, ere it be long Be fairly rid. At famine and destruction they shall smile; Yea laugh at both; for God shall reconcile Both beasts, and stones, within a little while, Friendly to them. Though for a while some Creatures may annoy And trouble them, yet shall they not destroy; Nor, when their forces all they do employ, Ever undo them. And they shall know their Tabernacle shall Be in sweet peace; their habitation small
Capacious enough to hold them all, And theirs, shall be; When they it visit;  nor shall they offend Sinningly: likewise shall their seed ascend To greatness; and as Spires of Grass, at end: Their Eyes shall see It spring, and flourish: the Posterity Of pious Parents have this honour high, They're under influences heavenly, Lastly, when fate Knocks at their door, they heartily are willing To open to it, Sith it is not killing; But opens to them Promises fulfilling; The glorious Gate That lets them into lasting happiness: They therefore hear Deaths call with joyfulness: Embrace him in their Arms with cheerfulness: they sigh, and groan To dye, and be with God and Christ, at rest: From Sinfull passions, which they much detest: From Travels, Troubles, wherewith sore opprest They sadly moan: They come unto their Graves,  even as it were Upon their own Feet, without any fear Going into them; and while they are here, In life abiding, They shall have health, & strength, and wealth at will; And multitude of years their Age shall fill: A Comely buriall also; nothing ill At all betiding.
O Then, who would not be a godly man! When such a Troop of good does all it can, To make him happy! Let us further Scan His thriving Bliss: He shall ascend, come in, as doth a shock Of Corn into the Barn; there shall no Block Be laid to hinder his free pace; no Lock, No Bar there is To stop his passage thither; when the time That he must dy is come, the bells shall Chime; Church-bells above the Stars, thus calling him, Come, come up hither. Angels, and blessed Saints crying aloud; Make haste to us, and leave the sinfull crowd, That wraps poor Wights on earth, as in a shrowd, Shut up together. An entrance in among the heavenly Quire Shall patent be, according to desire: And there with Love as hot as any Fire, His panting Heart Shall filled be; his tongue shall also sing The praises of his tender-hearted King; Who dyed that he might live: each one shall bring His several part; Joyning together, Hallelujahs sound, To all eternity: and there sins round, Coursing it in a ring, shall not be found: Compleat perfection Of holiness, and happiness, possest By all alike, from greatest to the least:
Both souls and bodies ever fed with blest, And sweet refection: These Lessons two, thus taught ith' Text; The certainty of death, and next, The promises of good to such, As pious are, wee'l briefly touch. SECT. II. The certainty of Death proved by the joynt Suffrages of Heathens, Testimony of Scripture, and Concurrence of Natural Causes: the time, place, means, and other cir∣cumstances of it unknown to us, are known only to God: And we are exhorted thereupon, not to search after the knowledge of them. ANd first that every Mothers Child must dy; Serius aut citius metam propera∣mus ad unam. Hear Heathens first, speaking thus seriously: We all do tend one way; and soon or late, Lanificas nulli tres exorare pu∣ellas Contigit— We clasp our Earth in Lifes expired date. Th'impartial Fates, whom all mankind are under, With keenest Scissars snip lifes thread asunder. Deaths tract we all must tread; our lives fair light Must be obscur'd, and set in Deaths dark night. Both crowned Kings, Non Ducis im∣perium non re∣gia mitra. and mitred Popes must yield To Death's subjecting Rod, and quit the Field. Corona Pontifi∣cis snmmi &c. Pale Death stands knocking at the lofty Towers Of Kings, as well as Beggars Huts, all hours. Pallida mors e∣quo pede pulsat pauperum Ta∣bernas, Regum{que} Turres. With equall foot, this debt we all must pay Heathens thus heard; what sacred Scriptures say,
Let us hear next: Psal. 89 48. 2 Sam. 14 14, Rom. 2.12.14.17. Eccl. 9.5. Job 30 23. Jos. 23.14. 1 Kings 2.2. Job 24.20. What man is he that liveth And shall not feel the stroaks death daily giveth? We must needs die, and be as water spilt Upon the ground; involv'd in Adams guilt. That they shall die, the living know full well; The Grave's the house where all ere long must dwell, This is the way of all the earth, Decreed It is by God, the Worms on all shall feed. Natural Causes may be given, why All bodies perish necessarily; The elements striving daily to Supplant; Some one in time will be predominant: Next the first matter, burning with desire Of new forms, longs th' old subject may expire; And fresh succeed. Thirdly the Radicall Moysture consuming still, threatens a fall; After its pass'd the height of augmentation; And wasted, needs must follow dissipation. Fourthly the Blood, as it grows old grows thick, By slow degrees, and so corrupteth quick. The Spirits also, natural in the veins; And vital in the Arteries (by means Whereof the life's maintain'd) and animall In nerves (whereby Sensations made) these all By use and labour wast: These causes cry, All humane bodies must consume and dy: 2 Cor. 4.7. Eccl. 9 2. Heb. 13.2. Testaceous Vessels; and obnoxious To casualties, that are most various. Two ranks of men there are; some good, some bad: Deaths Cannon plays against them both: 'tis sad To think why these must die; that they may go To their own place, Acts 1.25. to live in endless woe;
Death is to them an entrance into Hell: Not so to those who study to do well: Yet they must die; that being freed from sin, And death, by death; they may have entrance in To heavenly mansions; and be ever there, With God and Christ, loving without all fear; Receiving their reward of Gods free grace; With joy beholding his most glorious Face. The point is prov'd; the reasons rendred, why All, as well good, as bad must doubtless dye. The circumstances where, and when, and how, Are onely known to God; and we must bow To his good pleasure. First for time, it is Determined by a Decree of His; The criticall, and punctual time; Before Which, none shall part with life, on any score; Beyond it shall not live a moment. Whether The term of life be fixt, or altogether Moveable; Job hath stated: some ith' womb, After a short, dark life do find a Tomb: (A thousand Sculls found in one Nunnery) Some born alive, die in their infancy In Childhood, Youth, and Man-age, very many: The rest filled with years. Death spares not any. The Poem stil'd Mortification, Transcrib'd, may prove edification. How soon doth man decay! When Cloaths are taken from a Chest of sweets To swaddle Infants, whose young breath Scarce knows the way; Those Clouts are little winding sheets; Which do consign and send them unto Death.
When Boys go first to bed, They step into their voluntary Graves; Sleep holds them fast; onely their breath Makes them not dead; Successive nights like rolling Waves Convey them quickly, who are bound for death. When youth is frank and free, And calls for Musick, while his veins do swell; All day exchanging mirth and breath In Company; That Musick summons to the Knell, Which shall befriend him at the hour of Death. When man grows stay'd, and Wise; Getting a house and home, where he may move Within the Circle of his Breath; Schooling his Eyes; That dumb inclosure maketh love Unto the Coffin, that attends his death. When age grows low, and weak, Marking his Grave, and thawing every Year; Till all do melt, and drown his Breath; When he would speak; A Chair, or Litter shews the Bier, Which shall convey him to the house of Death. Man ere he is aware, Hath put together a Solemnity; And drest his Herse while he hath breath As yet to spare; Yet Lord instruct us so to dy, That all these dyings may be life in Death.
We all are full of holes, and take in Water At many breaches; made of brittle matter; At any time may be depriv'd of breath; We know not when: God knows our hour of death. And as the Time; the Place is known alone To God; scarce any of us, but can own The place where first we took our breath; but where We shall breathe last, this doth to none appear, But him, whose breath gave us both life and shape. The place assign'd by him; none can escape That strives to shun't: Th'infants of Bethlehem Crying in Cradles, Souldiers murther them. Eglon is kill'd in's Parlour. In the field King Saul is slain. His temple would not shield Sennach'rib from dying in't. Ishbosheth Upon his bed bereaved is of breath. Joab at th' very Altar. As the place Uncertain is, where we shall end our Race; So is the manner how: A thousand ways There are, whereby men terminate their days By sicknesses most ordinarily; Of other ways there is infinity. The Children of Jerusalem do dye By famine: Sodom's by Saturity: Some dye by Bears; 2 Kin. 2.23, 24. so Children that did jeer The new seen baldness of the Zealous Seer. And some by Lions; so that Prophet dyed, 1 King. 13.24. Who did obey, not God, but him that lyed. Herod by worms gave up the Ghost. Acts 12.23 Job. 1.18, 19. Jobs Sons And Daughters had their dissolutions, In midst of feasting, by the sudden fall Of that House, where they fed together all.
Corah, Numb. 16.31, 32, 33. and his Complices Swallowed were, By th' earth that opened (so they payed dear For their rebellion.) By a broken Stone Cast from a Tower, Judg. 9 53. 2 King. 16 18. Abimelech is gone. Two Captains and their fifties were by Fire (Call'd for and sent from heaven) forc'd t'expire. Zimri was burnt in his own Palace, 1 King. 16.18. by A Fire himself did kindle wittingly. Some dye by Dogs, Euripides did so. Some by a Fly; a seeming silly foe: So did a Pope of Rome. A Counseller Of the same City, strangled with an Hair. Tullus Hostillius was with lightning struck. Homer, because he at a riddle stuck, Propos'd by Fisher-men, dyed with grief: And Sophocles with joy, being judged chief By one voice onely in a prize of learning: Wherein he shew'd a judgment best discerning A Raisin stone did stop Anacreons breath. Thus numberless have been the ways of death. O by how small a thread does our Life hang! When such small things can give a deadly pang! In what shape death unto him will appear, No man can tell: these are to none made clear: Time, place, and manner of mens dying known Are unto God; and unto him alone. These being secrets, hid i'th breast of God Let us not search them; but while our abode Is here below; and while we move within The circle of our breath, let us begin To school our eyes, and minds, at length, and try What use to make of deaths necessity.
SECT. III. An Enquiry why men decline fitting themselves for that Death, that is thus certain: Three Reasons of it as∣signed: directions how to overthrow any force that is in them: an Exhortation to dye dayly, and the way of its performance discovered: good men have no reason to fear death; and why. BUt first a question must be answer'd; why Men every where are found so brutishly Sottish, and stupidly irrational; That few do fit themselves against their fall. The reasons are; first they immersed are In businesses, and pleasures of this life; To manage, compass these is all their care; In this they strive, and dearly love the strife; These earthly things take up their thoughts; expell All serious minding either of Heaven, or Hell. As Ants are toyling busily together, From morning until night, with strength so steady, To get provision in, in smiling weather; Regarding not at all the foot, that's ready To crush them; so doe people generally; Considering not at all that they must dye. A second reason is, Men look on Death, As farr off; most presuming that they may Retain, till they be very old, their breath; Ver. 17. And that its time enough when their last day Is near approaching, to begin to live A life of Godliness; that God will give
Them when they will, grace to believe, repent: They think it folly to forbear delights Of life, which is best spent in merriment; Eat, drink, sport, sleep; they will put away frights Of future judgment; these thoughts putting by; That th'onely thing worth living's well to dye; To learn how to the world to dye; and then How to dye out of it: and that the vast Concern of the eternal state of men Requires their freshest spirits, strength, and haste: They should think thus that not a dying sigh Will waft them over to those joys on high: Bedrid devotion; Chimney prayers, the Name Of God brought forth in a Phlegmatick cough; And Lord have mercy on me, will be lame; Sickness-repentance will not be enough: Though likely signs of truth of grace begin To shew themselves then, they will be too thin: Too weak to work scarcely a charity, In them that do survive: for if they dye True Penitents, as any seemingly, Turning from vice to vertue, probably; Leave them to God (saith Austin) who can tell Whither they'r gone? Non dien damnabi∣tur, nec dico Sal∣vabitua. whether to heaven or hell? Another reason of this desp'rate folly In most men putting off the thoughts of death; (Which makes them that they care not to be holy, Continue fruitless, as a Barren heath) It is the terrour and the dread, that such Thoughts bring with them; frighting them over-much:
Death called is the King of terrors, which Is tended with a thousand phantasies; And Ghastly apparitions; when these pitch Their tents about mens souls, they shut their eyes, Dare not behold them; labour to expel, Will not permit such guests in them to dwell. The certain hope fullest assurance, both, Of heaven, is scarce sufficient to disarm Death of its terrours: Paul himself was loth To be uncloathed, though he knew no harm Could come to him thereby, though he had been Rapt up, and things unutterable had seen, And knew assuredly that he should go To God, when he departed hence, 'tis hard To death to reconcile men; though they know As much as Paul did: yet their minds are scar'd, From serious thoughts of Death, how to resist These reasons, upon means we'l next insist. First, sith we must, ere it belong Leave all these earthly things, wealth, honor, pleasures; Let us not have affections strong Unto them longer, make them not our treasures: Nor let us marry To that which will not tarry: To dying comforts, living Souls That cannot dye; much less say each to other, Let us eat flesh, drink wine in Bowls, For we shall dye to morrow: rather smother Such carnall motions, That smother true devotions.
Let us be merry while we may, We never shall be younger: many such Are heard thus speaking, every day, In these our days; whose consciences no touch Of grace have felt, But into pleasures melt. All earthly comforts let us view, As they in truth are, Casks of happiness, Fugitive fancies, Errors hue, Embroidered lyes, but gilded emptiness, And sugred Gall: Such poysons they are all. So upon riches, honours let Us look, and we shall find them nothing better. Unto our time a period's set, Which is but short (so saith the holy Letter) Let us therefore Be fool'd by these no more. 1 Cor. 7.29.30, 31. But use the world as not abusing It; any thing therein, though lawfull; seeing The best thereof we judge worth chusing, At best is but a Scheme, a thing sans being; Which every day, Is posting fast away. Considering especially, The greatest Weight on smallest wyer hangs: Upon times point Eternity: O ponder what insufferable pangs Mans Conscience Will have for this offence!
For a small moment of delight, To venture his souls everlasting state One would think this thought should affright From tampering with sin at any rate: Now let us turn, Else we shall ever burn. This is the first means to expell Those cursed reasons. Next let us not look On death as farr off, knowing well What we find written in Gods holy Book, What? namely this, Our life a vapour is. The vanishing of which may be This day, before to morrow; Jam. 4.14. this hour before The next: we are not sure to see Another day, or hour: we should therefore Make every day, (In a Religious way) Our last, our dying day, how this Is to be done, give Ear attentively: Because the danger if we miss Is very great; Dying eternally Will as our due, Most probably ensue. First break off Sin, and turn to God As seriously this present day, as if We should no longer make abode; Never another see: with godly grief, Bewailing sins; Leaving them favour wins.
And when at any time, we are Tempted to any sin; then sadly think Soberly, saying, shall I dare To swear, to curse, to lye, to whore, to drink, Excessively? If I were sure to dye This very day, the hour wherein I spake or acted any of these Crimes? I would not so be found to sin; But rather choose to dye a thousand times: Because to dye So sinning certainly. Is to dye damned: next embrace Occasions all offer'd of doing Good: Kiss opportunities fair face; Lay hold upon times fore-lock; giving food; When any need, Defer not them to feed, Asking for Christ his sake your alms: Whom you see naked, thin clad, give them cloth; To cover, warm them: likewise balmes To sore, and wounded bodies: be not loth Your coyn to lend; Forgive both foe, and friend. Delay not doing good; lifes span: Makes not an Ell: Gal. 6.9.10. Prov. 3.28 let us do good to all; Chiefly to th' faithfull, what we can: Not weary of well-doing: thus saith Paul. And Solomon In the same path goes on
Say not unto thy neighbour, goe. And come again, to morrow I will give Thee, when thou hast it by thee, no: Whether till then, thou know'st not thou shalt live: He giveth sickly, That cares not to give quickly. What ever it be that thy hand sinds To do, do it with all thy might; there is No work, device, any man minds In grave, whither he goes; nor any bliss There to be had: Deferring therefore's bad. And as to matter we should look; So to the manner too: upon this ground Hypocrites doing good 'ith' Book Of God (not to their good) are often found; No small pains taking; Marring good works ith' making. Cain brought fruits, Esau lamented; Jehu reform'd; Herod did many things; Pharisees fasted, Judas repented; Many such instances the Scripture brings, To let us know, More is requir'd than so. And that God loveth Adverbs, better Than Adjectives: calls for sincerity In Spirit, resting not in letter: Yea that we do all duties fervently; Each service so, As we the last would do.
Now would we hear, read, meditate, Confer, sing Psalms, receive, for blessings pray, Work in our callings, recreate Our selves, if we knew we should dye this day? Draw out at length, We would our utmost strength. So when thou read'st a Chapter, read As if thou never should'st read Chapter more: Every time thou hear'st take heed; Attend, apply each word, open the Door, To let truth in, To mortifie thy Sin: Make thee to live a life of grace; Hear as if this Sermon should be last: Let meditation run apace On heavenly things, this day: as if when past, Thine eye behold Another never should. So praise, and pray to God to day, As if thou never shouldst praise, pray again. So eat, and drink, and work, and play, And buy, and sell; with all thy might, and main Strive to do all, As if God should thee call Presently hence, to give account Of all these things that thou hast done: what care Would'st thou take, higher much to mount Than a bare outward form, no labour spare, To be upright, Not playing th' hypocrite?
Followes the third means of repelling, The reasons taking off mens minds from thinking Seriously on death; hold them rebelling Against right reason; which if it were sinking, into their hearts, They would act better parts. The Poem tit'led Vertue, teaching That many spectacles do death present, A Lecture of Great Herberts Preaching, From his Theorbo's, let us be content, That shoul'd make way, To what we have to say. Sweet day so cool, so calm, so bright, The Bridall of the earth and sky: The dew shall weep thy fall to night; For thou must Dye Sweet rose, whose hue angry and brave, Bids the rash gazer wipe his eye; Thy root is ever in his Grave, And thou must Dye. Sweet spring, full of sweet dayes, and Roses; A box where sweets compacted lye; My musick shew's you have your closes; And all must Dye. Only a sweet, and vertuous soul, Like season'd Timber never gives; But though the whole world turn to Cole; Then chiefly lives. Let vertuous pious men not fear this King Of frighting fearfull terrors: Christ Jesus, rectifying errors, Heb. 2.14.15. Having death suffered for this very thing;
This very end, to cure this fear of death; Which gracious hearts Was wont to pierce with poyson'd darts, As with a sharp sword drawn out of its sheath; To wound them so, and work them such unrest; In bondage they With Israel serv'd in brick and clay: But their Redeemers Death their wounds hath drest; Delivered them from former Bondage; now They may, and ought To beds of ease and rest be brought: No fear of dying in themselves allow; But in triumphing wise with voices shrill, Merrily sing, O death where is thy mortal sting? There is in thee much good; nothing of ill. Death thou wast once an uncouth hideous thing, Nothing but Bones: The sad effect of sadder groans: Thy mouth was open, but thou couldst not sing. For we considered thee as at some six, Or ten years hence; After the loss of life and sence: Flesh being turn'd to dust, and bones to sticks. We look'd on this side of thee, shooting short, Where we did find The shells of fledg Souls left behind, Dry dust sheds no tears but may extort. But since our Saviours death hath put some blood Into thy face, Thou art grown fair and full of Grace; Much in request much sought for as a Good.
Therefore we can goe dye as sleep, and trust Half that we have, Ʋnto an honest faithful Grave Making our Pillows either down or dust. The Dialogue Antheme's likewise worth our hearing The Christian first Questions with death, in't self accurst: Which questions too, but sans the Christians fearing. Alas poor death, where is thy Glory? Chr. Where is thy famous force, thy Ancient sting? Alas poor mortall void of story; Death. Gospell and read how I have kill'd thy King. Poor death, and who was hurt thereby? Chr. Thy curse being laid on him makes thee accurst. Let loosers speak, yet thou shalt dye, Death. These arms shall crush thee. Chr. Spare not do thy worst: I shall be one day better than before; Chr. Thou so much worse, that thou shalt be no more. Death should be unto Godly men no more Terrible than Sleep is unto a weary man: A rest from labours, crosses many a Score, Unruly passions, which do vex them here: From winnowings Of Satan, dreadfull buffetings: They'r freed from these by death, and from their fear. The day of death is unto them a day Of Liberty; Beginning of felicity; Ferfect in part, which after a small stay,
Shall be consummate at the resurrection. When they shall be Rewarded for their industry; Have vision, and fruition in perfection. While they live let them make their lives as free From fears and griefs, as possibly they can; Eating and drinking; merry let them be; Singing cares, fears away, during this span: Let all clouds scatter: What shall befall hereafter, make no matter. The Lords Prerogative royal it is, Future events to order as he pleaseth: Let come what will, nothing can come amiss, To those that love him; this the Spirit easeth When 'tis opprest, In midst of cursed chances these are blest: Every wind blowing them profit; griefs The greatest, are, if taken in their way, Ready to prove themselves greatest reliefs; However every drooping Christian may Utter these words; Which by his Servant God to him affords. Awake sad heart whom sorrow ever drowns, Take up thine eyes which feed on earth, Ʋnfold thy forehead gather'd into frowns; Thy Saviour comes and with him mirth. Awake, awake, And with a healthfull heart his comforts take.
SECT. IV. The several blessings and comforts comprised in the Text, for good men; instances of such as have enjoyed them. Objection, that experience tells 'tis otherwise, with many of the Godly; Severall Answers put in to this. THe severall comforts in this text held forth, To every pious person, we Will mention first, next prove, apply the worth Of each of them, that each may see, Who will take pains. Till he an int'rest in the promise gains. A healthfull sound fresh lively constitution, Is the first blessing promised; He shall until his day of dissolution, From sole of foot to crown of head Free from attaches Of sickness weakness, in no part feel aches. Deut 34.7 We read of Moses faithfull in Gods House, This promise was made good to him, He lived sixscore years: 'tis written thus, His eye at this age was not dim; Nor natural force Abated; if not better'd, nothing worse Than in his youth. Hear Caleb speaking; Jos. 14.10.11, lo Fourscore and five years old I am, This day, as yet I am as strong as though But forty five; as when I came, From spying out (Sent on that errand) Canaan round about;
As was my strength at that time so 'tis now, Both to go out, and to come in: These two examples strive to shew us how Every Saint may comfort spin, And weave and wear it: Read promises of this first blessing quoted; Deut. 7.15. A body sick and weak they need not fear it, No sickness I will put on thee, Who hearknest to my words (let this be noted) The filiall fear of God shall be Marrow to bones: Health to thy Navel, Prov. 4.20, 21, 22. thou shalt fetch no groans. By reason of tormenting pain: Encline Thine ear unto my sayings; then Behold at hand preventing medicine; Thou shalt not be as Godless men, Who cry and roar; Their bodily distempers are so fore; Thy light like as the morning shall break forth, Is. 58.8. Thy health shall spring forth speedily, New vigour thou shalt get (which is more worth Than worlds wealth which is nought set by, When health is wanting, And men on beds are through diseases panting) The second blessing follows hard At th' heels of this (which is so much priz'd health) 'Tis that which most men have in most regard, Even plenty of this worldly wealth: They happy are accounted who have store Of riches, give them these they'l ask no more.
What pains is taken every where To get abundance? compass Sea and Land, Run upon Pikes of danger, without fear: No difficulties can withstand Them in their course, stick not at any evil; Willing for gain, to go unto the Devil. Now give thy self to Godliness In truth, not only shew (as many do Resting in frozen forms) this happiness With it thou shalt inherit too: All sorts of outward blessings very much, Are very frequently promis'd to such: Who Piety in power embrace, Gods hand in pouring forth will not be scanting; Those that possess his sanctifying grace; Silver and Gold shall not be wanting: With houses, cattle, corn, they shall be blest; And with all other earthly goods the best. The Patriarchs: Gen. 13.2.24.35. & 26.12. to 17. others after them Had also riches, fulness of Estate: The promise reacheth all of Abrahams stem: Gods deed of gift bears the same date Who walk in Abrahams steps are sure to find His vast estate, a substance to their mind. 2 Sam. 19.32. If they will my Commandments keep, Lev. 26.1. &c. They shall have fullness of these outward goods; For then I open will my treasures deep; Rain down from heav'n enriching floods: Such store I'le give, that you shall lend to many; Deut. 28.11. &c. And have no need to borrow ought of any.
If thou return to the Almighty, Job 22.23, 24, 25. thou Shalt lay up Gold as dust, even Ophirs Gold, As the stones of the Brooks; and even now Such numbers as cannot be told, Of Silver pieces: take one Context more, Which proves the point as well as many a score; Blest is the man that fears the Lord, Psal. 112, 1, 2, 3. That greatly in his statutes doth delight; To make his seed great, heavens will accord; Riches and wealth shall be in sight Of him, and his; their houses shall stor'd be, That others shall with admiration see How God doth bless his holy ones, Not suffering one of them to want what's fit; In times of greatest drought makes fat their bones When wicked shall be hunger-bit: This is a second blessing, and we find A third succeed of the same blessed kind. Good men and women shall live long: The shortest term is full a hundred years; Isa. 65.20. This space Gods promise hath set strong; Stronger than brazen pillars 'gainst our fears: None sooner shall Have Deadly fall: Gen 5 8, 11, 14.20.22, 27 31. &9 29. & 25 7, 8. & 35.28. & 50.26. Deut. 34 7. 1 Chr. 23.1. & 29.28. Job 42 16, 17. Luk. 1.7. & 2.36, 37. If any sooner dye, the clock goes wrong. How many longliv'd godly men De we read of? take an essay of some: In cited Scripture-Texts, and then See, and say if the point be proved home, And if it be, Conclude with me We all may safely say to it, Amen.
The promise of long life is made To every Godly man, and woman; Deut. 4.40. & 5.33 & 6.2. and 11 8 9 and 17 20. and 25 15. and 32.46, 47. look How much to prove this truth is said In the renowned law-givers last Book; Who doth discover Over and over, This to our eyes lest he should be mistook. So doth the holy Psalmist speak, What man is he that life desireth, Psal 34.12, 13, 14. and Loves many dayes, and not to break By some untimely act, lifes holding band? Keep thou thy tongue From guile and wrong; Thy flesh shall not grow thin nor sinews weak. For very many years together, Thou shalt see good, no ill at all shalt feel: Not chang'd at all, at any weather; As fair as is the Moon; as firm as steel; Thou shalt continue; With thy retinue: When thousands round about thee fall together. Hear God himself to every truster. In his power, goodness, truth and providence, Thus speaking, giving such a cluster Of grapes unto them, as revives their sence, Reason, and faith; For thus he saith Of all my Angels having took a Muster;
A charge is given them to keep My friends, Psal. 91.11, 12. who know and love me; that no stone Do hurt their feet, and when they sleep, Sweetly to be their keepers: not a bone E're shall so much As have a touch; Of evill enraged floods, and waters deep Shall not harm them: more-over I Who am their loving friend, mighty to save With long life will them satisfie; And shew them that of my hand they shall have Salvation; And Vision Thereof, both here; and to Eternity. Three Angels have already sounded: Hear The fourth preparing is to sound; a call Is given to all Saints to lend their ear: You must remove from hence both great, and small Your bodies turned to a Clod; Your souls appearance make before your God: This call to dye ungratefull is to most: O how unwilling worldlings are to leave Those loved things! whereof they make their boast Wealth, honours, pleasures, friends, death will bereave Of every one of these: a Dart Is that that galls them to the very heart. The godly on the other side shall be Most willing to leave all: nothing so dear Is unto them, which with alacrity They cannot part with: it is joyfull chear
To them, to hear they'r call'd away: 'Twould be death to them to make longer stay O loose this frame: this knot of man unty; That our free souls forthwith may take their flight; Soa up to God, and Christ: this is their cry; There, there, and no where else is our delight: They in their death are Volunteers: In the ungodly no such thing appears: Unwilling oft They are to live, but find No will to dy; their life's thrust out of door With violent hand; not with a cheerfull mind: Their shame pour'd out upon the open floor: Death welcom is unto them, why? Life is a burden through their misery: It's otherwise with godly men: attend, What Simeon says, Luk. 2.29. Lord let thy servant now Depart; my life most joyfully I end. And so St. Paul had a desire to bow At th' feet of death: Phil. 1.23. how did he thirst To be dissolved and to be with Christ! Thus shall it be with every godly one; (Truth having seal'd it) and Christ having been Laid in the dark bed of corruption; Perfuming it; without corruption seen: T'undress themselves they all see cause And call'd to come they seldome use to pause: Nor without honour shall they thither come: This is the fifth good promis'd in these words. To good men; th' illustration following home No small addition of delight affords:
But that a while must be supprest Till application's made of all the rest. Yet a few words we'l speak t'it, though the dead Are not at all affected with what's done Unto their bodies, yet when we do read (Among the rest) this commination Against Jehojakim, that he Should have the burial of an Ass, and be Drag'd and cast out beyond the Gates o'th' City; Jer 22.19. 2 Cho 35.24.25. Gen. 50.10. Acts 8.2. And find Josiah, Jacob, Stephen were Brought to their graves with a most dolefull ditty; Great mourning made for them: it doth appear, 'Tis necessarily infer'd 'Tis a great blessing to be so interr'd. To be with honour buri'd none shall miss, Of such a happy life and death as hath Described been; who ever godly is And persevereth in a pious path. Against these points objections lye: Experience seems to prove the contrary. Some very godly very sickly are; Most of the best are very poor; and many Dye very young; nor is it very rare To find Saints loth to part with life; scarce any Have honour more than usual, When they are born unto their burial. I Answer,  first, all is not gold that glisters; Many seem godly; really not so; No other than ith' Churches body blisters: Who find by search themselves such, let them know
These blessings are denyed to them; Because they are not of the holy stem. The promise is not made to Hypocrites: If upright sincere hearted ones be sickly; In want; short liv'd; at sight of death have frights, Loth to depart; and meanly buried; quickly This answer is return'd; though letter Be not made good to them, they have much better. In lieu of all: who hath the weight in Gold, For so much promis'd brass, will not complain Of breach of promise? were it good, God could Give every Saint all these in kind; maintain Health, wealth, long life: Its good some want Some of these outward goods; have measure scant: But all's made good in value, passing kind Abundantly: Communion with God, Is best ten thousand fold; content of mind Fully they have; though here under the rod Of sickness, poverty; they have In God, health, wealth, long life, all passing brave.
SECT. V. What is requisite to render us happy? where it is shewed, that God is the Greatest and only happiness of a Christi∣an: all things desireable are found in him: Reasons why nothing else can satisfie the mind of man; and that the promise of all good things is with advantage fulfilled to us in the enjoyment of God. A Pure, sufficient, satisfying good, Eternal also, must that good thing be, That can make happy: if but one of these Be wanting, it is understood, By all that have but half an eye, There's not enough to give man perfect ease. It must be pure; if any ill be in it, Sinfull, or penal, it will never do it: Sufficiency is likewise requisite: And satisfaction too to win it: Eternity must be put to it: Else happiness will be far out of sight. Now God, and he alone these properties Of beatification hath in him: Light without any darkness: all sufficing: Abounding with abilities; An Ocean wherein man may swim; And in joyes full, and true, without disguising.
But nothing else is such a good: the best Of creature-comforts mixt with something which Is not good; else how could they vanity Be call'd? and with vexation drest? Men honourable, healthfull, rich, That this is truth, do by experience try. Again, all creatures in the world, if they Stand by themselves, so many Cyphers are; (Till God a solid number added be) Not to be valued but laid by; As light, as blasted Corn, or tare; Set God aside there's not sufficiency. For one Soul in the whole creation: who Hath most of this worlds goods, hath not enough; He that hath least, he hath too much; unless He can (as Austin did) say so; All the abundance I pass through Is just nothing but want; doth not me bless At all, if it be not my God; in whom Is all the good that is in wife, child, friend, Health, beauty, learning, wisdom, wealth and power, Though not the same in kind; the same, And more in value doth extend Beyond them all; and on the owner show'r. The world and God together put, are not More excellent than God alone, for if An excellency be in any creature More eminently every jot, Already 'tis in God, the chief: Nor does that adding give a fuller feature.
What ever God is pleased to bestow, Upon me, let him take it all away; Give me himself; the bargain will be good Enough; (St. Austin) speaketh so, So should each pious person say; So saying, and so thinking breeds good blood. Satisfactoriness, sufficiency Follow: no happiness without content, And quietness of mind; if what we have Do not delight, and fill; stand by, Say sence and reason: merriment Cannot be had, if th' appetite shall crave. Now leave out God; what ever we take in; The heart will still be capable of more: The world with all its stock; which cannot fill The narrowest soul: let us begin To search the reason, why such store Cannot make silent, but here's craving still: Some say because the world is sphericall, The heart triangular: others do drill it To the concupiscible faculty, Whose size so large is, that not all The earth being a globe can fill it, But there will still be some vacuity. Others say th' object is not sutable Unto the faculty: none fill a Chest With wisdom, nor a Bag with vertue can: Even so things gross, and mutable Have no conveniency at best, With spirits: no fit food for th' heart of man.
Another reason's given; namely this: The appetite is rais'd by having; as A fire's increas'd by fuel, it is fed Withall: Some say the reason is Because we running in our race, Are after our perfection carryed; And cannot terminate desires in ought That's short of that which all the Creatures are. What ever is the cause, we are most sure, That's true which Solomon hath taught (And we must ponder on with care) Who loveth silver (by the fire made pure.) Eccl. 5.10 Cannot be satisfi'd with Silver, nor Who loves abundance with increase; As nought Can be the Souls perfection; so nothing Can be its satisfaction; for These are concurrent in our thought. What wants the first, cannot the second bring. Nothing (I say) but he that made the soul; None but the chief good can suffice it: El Shaddai; beyond whom nought's imaginable, Can give a satisfying Bowl: (The way unto it who can tell?) Beyond whom nothing is desirable. Adde lastly all is nothing, if it be Not alwayes: now there's nothing in this world, That changeth not; but God the same for ever Of whom all Saints have full and free Enjoyment; and are never hurld Into unhappiness: blest ones persever.
Th' objection's answer'd: all these blessings are Made up abundantly in God; Possest by every one, Who hath in truth Religion; No robber meets on th' road; Enjoying all these goods in manner rare. Or if he seem to be robb'd of health, wealth; In lieu of lead, he gainth gold: Even sanctifying grace Takes up those common blessings place; Which he doth firmly hold Esteems it therefore a most blessed stealth. Am I not better to thee (saith the Lord) Than all these outward worthless things? Thy Christian-patience I By these afflictions prove, and try: Sickness health; want wealth brings: These seeming evils real goods afford One grain of faith a thousand worlds is worth: Take comfort then in this, that thou In tears repentant sowing; And in all saving graces growing; Joy springs thou know'st not how; Shalt shortly reap when th' blessed fruits brought forth Cast all thy care on me for time to come: Mind only what thou hast to do: Seek to me and submit: With even foot I'le make thee fit, Upright to come, and go, Until like Corn shockt up thou art brought home
SECT. VI. Reasons why Good men are sometimes unwilling to dye. some grounds of their desires of longer life, in several objections and their invalidity discovered; those objecti∣ons answered: Three things further discovered, for the cure of this unwillingness to dye. THe illustration of these Promises, By this similitude i'th' text, Will to our tast be sweet; And meditation not unmeet, Is to be handled next; Will bring the soul to everlasting ease. Before I come unto this illustration; Job's coming to his grave in a full age Comes fresh again into my meditation; Deserves to come again upon the Stage; To act its part a little longer, I With this desire, without regret comply. Come on then; let us see what can be said, For and against Saints willingness to dye; And leave this life; it cannot be gain-said, But that some practisers of Piety Expressed have themselves loth to depart, 1 Sam 16.2. To God and men with Phrases pretty smart. Jer. 37.20. As Lot did linger when he was to go, 2 Pet. 2.8. Out of that sinfull City; where his Soul Was dayly vext with hearing, seeing; So It fares with other Lots who cannot roll
Off from their hearts this load; for so they find This lothness to depart, is to their mind. What should the reason be? Death is a parting Of two most dear, inward and ancient friends: David and Jonathan found this most smarting: 1 Sam. 20.41. Besides the best believe in part: grace rends Not all corruption out, till heartstrings break The spirit's willing, Mat. 26.41. but the flesh is weak. Moreover there are seeming reasons, why Some Saints so willing are longer to live; Form them into objections, by and by We will; to each of them an answer give: No real force in any we will prove, To make good men unwilling to remove. Loth I am to part with friends: Wife and children t'leave unsettled: Pleasures profits honour ends: With loss of these my heart is netled: And of my body specially, Which in a loathsom grave must lye. I would live but to such an age; To fourscore or a hundred years; Then willing to goe off the Stage I would be; and without all fears: More service unto God,  and men I fain would do; fain live till then. To the first allegation This answer I return: where is In any habitation, One friend with any Emphasis? Though David had his Jonathan, Scarce such a one hath any man
If any such, yet mutable, Psal. 146.3.4. Mortall at best, they are: and Saints By death get friends delectable, Of whom they'l never make complaints: As for thy Wife and Children left, Gods promises to them bereft. Of thee, are made that they shall be, Psal. 68.5. Provided for, when thou art gone: Father of fatherless is He; The good man's widow's portion; Settle thy heart in this belief. They shall not fail to find relief. Thou leave'st them better husband, father Than any that could look to them, In this world; to be chosen rather Ten thousand times of more esteem: Lastly it is but for a while, That thou shalt be without their smile. As for the worldlings Trinity, Of Riches, Honours, Pleasures, these Are such poor nothings; vanity Thou canst not part with but with ease: Especially considering Death will all these redoubled bring. As for thy body; which thou sayest Thou art so loath to lay down; think What it in truth is; then thou mayest Be satisfied; and not shrink: Its not the man: the Soul is so; The bodyes but the Casket. Know
Moreover it a Prison is, A rotten, ragged, garment, and If thou enamoured be with this; Then to thy comfort understand, It shall ere long restored be, (When by the grave refin'd) to thee. As for thy stint of time;  be sure Death the same to thee will appear Then, as it doth now: to endure A little longer, thou wilt hear Thy heart crave hard; O might I spend But some few months before my end: Who tost on Seas, is troubled that He's got so soon to th' Haven? if Desire be served, contemplate What cares, disgrace, distempers, grief, In dayes to come thou'rt like to find; Who sees not storms will rise, is blind. What fears of sin falling away Will dayly seize upon thee? then Consider, death's a debt to pay: Due first or last to God or men Its every whit as good, its best To pay this, then thou'lt be at rest. The last is onely a pretence: However this may Satisfie; God will not call for any hece, Until their work be done, till he Provided be his business To do, without them, more or less
Again its best give over, while We're doing well; and if god pay For half a day our penny, smile; We may and ought to praise him: pray That these objections thus remov'd, What follow's next may be improv'd. Three things I shall commend for cure Of this unwillingness in Saints to dye: First the great evils that Are in it; nothing that is pure Is to be found; but what doth putrifie, And much contaminate: We do disable Christ his death; Heb. 2.14.15. Obscure the evidence of our new birth; Trangress against example, Of such as wisht to part with breath; To be translated from this wretched earth On which they long to trample. We shame much our Religion Which doth not fright with purgatory-fire: Are worse than Heathens were; Who did embrace death coming on With cheerfulness, and very great desire: Without all shew of fear. We do resemble wicked wights, Who use to tremble when they hear of dying: So Felix did: yea worse Than children, mad men, whom no frights Of death possess; nor make them think of flying From it as from a Curse:
All creatures groan and call for change: We are below them all, if that we fear it This is a shamefull thing, And a disease that us doth range Below the beasts; let none be loth to hear The first Peale thus to ring. The second sounds the little reason Which godly men can see why they should wish To live one half hour longer; And not to think this instant season The best wherein to feed upon deaths dish: To make their courage stronger. To do this let them ponder well, The utter insufficiency of all Things here to contribute, To make man unto happy swell; To be thus kindly beneficial They move no foot. So far I say from comforting, In time of need; that sore vexations They prove themselves to be, The Preacher doth strong reasons bring, To work in all mens hearts convictions, That this is verity: The third means for the cure of this Unwillingness to dye in godly ones; Is seriously to muse, That very great reason there is, Why they should send for death with sighs and groans; And not its stroke refuse:
The miseries of this present life: The life of nature, and the life of grace: And then the happiness They have by death: evils are rife That load the life of nature; all the space They live here comfortless. Reduc'd to sins, and punishments, Sins are of two sorts, one without them roares; Adams transgression, Justly imputed conscience rents: Others inherent like a Piercer boars, With sharp compunction: These are of two sorts; some defile Our nature; which are call'd Original: Others our actions; these Are called actual; all the while We live on earth the best into such fall; Thereby their God displease: These are committed several ways, By thoughts, and words, and deeds of ignorance, Errour, infirmity, Presumption also all our dayes, We guilty make our selves, by choice; by chance; In some a long time lye. By every one of these we are Subject to debt, and danger, both divine: Bound over to Gods ire: The punishments which sinners bear, Arithmetick's not able to define: Lastly Eternal fire.
The second sort of miseries Molest the life of grace: How many wants! Gods presence; fellowship Of best friends; liberty, and ease: For want of these each Christian-spirit pants, Till these rich wines they sip. Add to these wants; how many evils? The danger of offending God is one; Dayly corrections; Dangers from creatures, men, and Devils: Danger of stumbling at full-many a stone: State alterations: All these and thousands more death frees Us from: great reason therefore there is why we should not long to live: Longer one day; with cold to freez; With scorching fires to burn uncessantly: See next what death doth give: Admission into happiness Ineffable, and unconceivable: Angells, mens tongues, and hearts Cannot conceive, much less express: Neither are of this matter capable: In any of its parts. Yet so much of the heavenly glory; Into which every Saint doth pass at th' point Of death revealed is Unto them, in the sacred story; To make them (if they will their eyes anoint) See death their choicest bliss.
SECT. VII. Whether good men may not only be willing, but desirous to dye: five cases wherein death may be lawfully desired. Objection touching the painfullness of Death answered, proposals to remove such apprehensions from us. A se∣cond objection about sudden or violent Death; a way of cure for such fears. MAy godly men desire As well as willing be to Dye? Many we read of did conspire; And to the question put did answer, Aye Moses, Elias, and Sampson, Paul, David, Jonah, Job, Simeon, and others, who do stand Shining in the Coelestial glorious Globe. Some of these pray'd to God To take away their lives; but why? They would no longer make abode, To bear so many a martyring misery. This was not a good ground: Self love and discontentments swaying: To recantation they were bound; Such passionate infirmity bewraying: But in five cases, we May lawfully desire, and pray For death; If we may glorifie God most thereby. Next to be tak'n away.
From lewd mens company; Who dayly grossely break Gods Laws: From sinfullness especially: That we no more make in our conscience flaws; Grieving the holy Spirit: And that we may be rid of grief, And crosses; which our Sins do merit: Yet with submission to our Soveraign-chief Finally for the full Accomplishment of Union With Christ, (from whom sin would us pull) By death we gain perfect communion. Nor to be rid of Sin, And be with Christ, may we desire To dye, unless we compass in Gods will; who doth on pain of death require. Us in our Station, Like Souldiers obedient, To tarry till dismission Be giv'n to march from this low regiment, Unto the higher: but yet It is a grace we should strive for; As for departure to be fit; So to be willing ever more, and more, To quit our Station here: And to rejoyce at warning given By sickness, that our end is near; Death being the porch through which we pass to heaven
The chiefest reason why With full cry of affection, we Should gallop after Death: thereby We are from sinning any more made free. While this life lasts we never Give over sinning, no man knows Whether he shall one hour persever In doing well, a spight the devil owes Us; and the greatest spight He can us do, is to allure Good to omit; Sin to commit; That we shall not be foyl'd we are not sure; Having in us a Source Sending streams forth continually; Setting us running in a Course Of all impiety, inquity; A root of bitter gall, And wormwood, never stockt up wholly Ready at every pin to fall, And to be more, and more, each hour unholy: Never cur'd perfectly Of our disease Hereditary, That loathsom cursed leprosie, Which whil'st we live on earth will with us tarry. And little do we know How far we may fall ere we dye: It's therefore best for us to go Thither, where there's no possibility.
Of sinning; falling more: And willingness to dye is one Effectual means to wound, and gore, And kill original corruption. But some may yet object The painfullness of death; this terrifies. To cure this fear,  let them reflect Upon worse pains which do from life arise, From day to day: nor is there pain in death, But life gives pain at parting with its breath. No sting in death being found; It cannot hurt at all; though it may pain: There's pain in curing of a wound: The Marriner, e're he the Haven gain, Takes no small pains, and thinks it well bestow'd; Though it was painfull, all the time he row'd. All wounds by death are cur'd: Who would not bear a little, for so great A happiness? a Haven being procur'd? Thereby an everlasting resting seat. But yet there is another senceless thing, Which doth to some Saints sence of terrour bring. Namely some kind of dying: Sudden, and violent death they cannot look On, with a smile; nor without crying: Nor can they bring their hearts these deaths to brook. Sith we must dye,  it matters not what kind Of death we dye, this should not move our mind:
Matter we should not how We go from hence, so much as whither we Shall goe: remember Christ did bow His head; and dy'd a cursed death, to free Each kind of death from being a curse to his; That every kind of death should be their bliss. SECT. VIII. Reasons why some good men in prospect of death have petitioned for a Reprieve: Practical directions to make us both willing and fit to dye. Self-murder shewed unlawfull, and probably damnable. WHat may the reason be (May some demand) that sundry precious Saints Beg'd living light longer to see; When they saw death at hand? made sad complaints? Their love of life proceeded from the love Of honouring God below; not yet above. From lawfull self-love too; Having not yet attain'd assurance full; They prayed for a previous view Of th' heavenly Canaan; before the Pull Of soul from flesh: desir'd some short abode; More quietly to render up to God. Their spirits, with submission To his good pleasure: another reason may Be rendred, why they fear'd dismission Because the old man still in part bore sway.
Best but in part are sanctified; but Before their end their fears are all out shut. Considerations working willingness In Christians all to dye, premised thus: Pass we to things in Practice: nothing less Effectual to work this will in us Provided we be righteous. First we must cleanse our hearts from carnall love, Of earthly things; the worldlings Trinity Must be renounced; we must get above The Moon: Rev. 12. wealth, pleasures, honours tye The soul to them too stedfastly: It cannot with good will be loos'd from them: The means to cut this Gordian knot, must be Carefully learn'd by all of Abrahams stem: First leave they must evil Society; And sort with godly company. Next needless cares, and business restrain: Then strive with God by prayer; and believe That he will give, what they would compass fain, And every day they must not fail to grieve; For Sin; and regularly live. Our sins must dye before us; else we are Sure to dye damned: who can willing be To dye in such estate? but if we care To rid our hearts of damn'd hypocrisy; We shall depart then cheerfully.
These are the motives, and the means to get This grace: if still we find a reluctation, And that we are loth to depart, as yet; Let's not despond; but live in expectation, Our end shall be endless compleat salvation. That we should alwayes willing be to dye, Hath been so prov'd, that none can it deny, To be a duty, and a priviledge, Promis'd to Saints, of which nought shall abridge Them: but whether it's lawfull to desire Death is a doubt to which we have giv'n fire Determined th' affirmative; in case Gods name thereby more glory may embrace Than by our life. See in the Margin places, Judg. 16.29.30. Evincing this one of the lawfull cases. Exod. 32. Rom. 9. Psal. 120.6, 7. 2 Pet. 2.7, 8. Another is that we may be set free From wicked mens vexing Society. A third that we may make an end of sinning. A fourth prevention of more crosses winning. Gen. 27, 46. 1 King. 19.3, 4. Rom. 7.23, 24. Psal. 38.3, 41 Phil. 1.21. to 24. Psal. 73.25. Quest. With this proviso; not immoderately Desiring ease; but most submissively. Lastly, to be with Christ, and to enjoy Intire communion, without mixt alloy. May one in any case (may some demand) His own life take away with his own hand? I answer roundly in no case we may By poyson, halter, knife, or other way To Make our selves away attempt, we must Cast the world out of us (this is most just) But not our selves out of the world, its base To run away like cowards; our short race
We ought to run; staying till God doth call Us hence: and then most gladly farewell all. Till then abide the battle we are bound. None but most wicked are in Scripture found, Who kill'd themselves: Achitophel did so: And Saul: and Judas: (as for Sampson; though He pull'd the house upon him; this was done In zeal for God by inspiration) It's damnable to leave our work, before God bid us leave it, upon any score. Who is himself; and breaks the jayl, must dye, For such a breach and that eternally. Yet pass not sentence upon such a soul; It may repent in parting: sans controll The act is haynous, hideous, killeth both Body, and Soul; unless repentance doth Suddenly interpose it self: and grace Step in a moment into justice place: Neither of which will probably be given; This sin beyond all others forfeits heaven: A sin most Criminous, and borders most Near to the sin against the Holy Ghost. FINIS.
Postscript. I finisht have The first part of this quickning Text, Presenting to all good men death and grave, Passing desirable: the next Part, I must crave Leave to delay The presentation of it, till More strength of spirit, body gain I may Which when God granteth; then I will make an Essay. The illustration Of what's there promis'd to unfold Humbly commend it to your meditation, And for a closure shall make bold some Consolation To annex, by Mentioning a doctrine which Hath in it truth in probability, Containing treasure very rich (Pray lend the eye) Gives hope to all Who vertuous, pious, patient are That they in the first resurrection shall Have part, with blessedness most rare. Holy withall, Transcendently Their souls, and bodies both shall be These raised, from the dead primarily; Those to them reunited by Omnipotency:
And live in bliss A thousand years; during which space They shall bless Christ their head with Emphasis For merit, mercy and free grace vouchsaf'd them: this Work of thanksgiving Will be the onely, or the chief Employment of the raised Saints, who living Shall all those years find fresh relief: together striving, Who shall outstrip Another in this glorious work Of praising Jesus with one joyful lip For treading down the Pope and Turk; Smiting thigh, hip, They all shall joyn, In singing Hallelujahs to their King, From whom none shall dominion purloin; Nor from his Saints, whom he shall bring With him: conjoyn Co-heirs in face Of all the World, who shall behold, Each of them Kings over the total mass Subdu'd unto them uncontrol'd And in th'end as Commissioners Of Oyer and of Terminer With him: Apostles; Gospel-Ministers Shall highest sit; much statelier Each one appears
Than Earthly Lords; Next these to pious private men A power of Judging also Christ affords ill spirits; their carnall off-spring; when Of death the cords Are loosed which detain'd in grave, till the last day Of generall judgement poor and rich Who wicked were; all cast away into the ditch, And Lake of fire Burning with Brimstone; sentenc'd hither By them whom then the whole world shall admire Assessors with their King together, Here counted mire. O then rejoyce At thoughts of reigning upon Earth A thousand years; which ended with great noise; Yea who have had a second birth While here; a choice Tranquillity More Millions of years thsands, On shores of Seas, even to Eternity You shall enjoy safe in his hands, Who did both dye And rise again, Ascended, sits, and reigns above, Hath purchas'd for them freedom from all pain, Embraceth you with arms of Love; By him you'l gain
A Kingdom that Is apthartal, amiantal, Amarantall beyond the reach and hate Of persecuting enemies all, Who at no rate Without, within, Shall neves vex them more; mutations There shall be none in heav'n; nor unto sin any the least temptations as first have been. Shall er'e be there But fellowship with God and Christ Uninterrupted; not the smallest fear of ever having loos'd the twist Of grace made here This doctrine of The raised, reigning Saints of God A thousand years, hath proof enough In holy writ, and their abode, By Earthly stuff. Inheritance. Of the whole earth is frequently Promis'd unto them, and as now all France, is Englands Kings titularly, who seem to dance After't alone, Possessing not a foot of ground Of that fair Realm: but as they shall anon Possessors of it all be found; really own
That wholly; as They have done, do, these kingdoms three: Thus it in time shall probably come to pass: Though haply our eyes shall not see save in a glass. This wish'd event Right so, though Saints at present have Little or nought besides bare aliment And rayment; both too far from brave, yet well content; They, ere't be long As Abraham, Isaac, Jacob shall Inherit actually (as by faith strong Those did, while living) Canaan all: which did belong To them and theirs By Gods donation: so with them, We being (as they were) of this world heirs, (which plain appears.) Shall really Possess a thousand years together This Earthly Globe with each commodity It doth produce, and serene weather, Lets then leap for joy. FINIS.
