C2374 R28555 10629621 45457
THE KINGS MAIESTIES LAST Most Gracious Message for PEACE: Sent to the Two Houses of PARLIA∣MENT the 29. of Ianuary, 1645. arms of Charles I C R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENCE DIEV ET MON DROIT Printed in the yeare 1646.
The KINGS Majesties last most Gracious Message for Peace. Charles R. HIs Majestie having received Informati∣on from the Lord Lieutenant and Counsell in Ireland, that the Earle of Glamorgan hath, without His, or their directions or privitie, en∣tred into a Treatie with some Commissioners on the Roman Catholique partie there: And also drawne up, and agreed unto certaine Articles with the said Commissioners, highly derogatory to His Majesties Honour and Royall Dignitie, and most prejudiciall to the Protestant Religion, and Church there in Ireland: Whereupon the said Earle of Glamorgan is Arrested upon suspition of High Treason, and Imprisoned by the Lord Lieu∣tenant of Ireland and Counsell, at the instance, and by the Impeachment of the Lord Digby: Who, by reason of his place, and former imployment in those affaires, doth best know how contrary that proceeding of the said Earle hath beene to His
Majesties Intentions and Directions, and what prejudice it might bring to His Affaires, if those proceedings of the Earl of Glamorgan should be any wayes understood to have beene done by the Di∣rection, Liking, or Approbation of His Maje∣stie, His Majestie (having in his former Messages for a personall Treatie, offered to give contentment to his two Houses in the businesse of Ireland) hath now thought fitting, the better to shew His cleare in∣tentions, and to give satisfaction to His said Houses of Parliament, and the rest of His Sub∣jects in all His Kingdomes, to send this Declara∣tion to the said Houses, containing the whole Truth of this businesse: which is, That the Earle of Glamorgan, having made offer unto Him, to rayse Forces in the Kingdome of Ire∣land, and to conduct them into England for His Majesties Servce, had a Commission to that pur∣pose, and to that purpose onely. That he had no Commission at all to Treat of any thing else, without the privitie and directions of the Lord Lieutenant, much lesse to Capitulate any thing concerning Religion, or any proprietie be∣longing either to Church or Laity. That it clearely appeareth by the Lord Lieute∣nants proceedings with the said Earle, that he had no notice at all of what the said Earle had Treated and pretented to have Capitulated with the Irish, untill by accident it came to his knowledge. And His Majestie doth protest, that untill such time as
he had advertisement that the person of the said Earl of Glamorgan was Arrested and restrained, as above∣said, he never heard, or had any kind of notice, that the said Earle had entred into any kind of Trea∣tie or Capitulation with those Irish Commissioners, much lesse, that he had concluded or Signed those Articles, so destructive to Church and State, and so repugnant to His Majesties Professions and knowne Resolutions. And for the further Vindica∣tion of His Majesties Honour and Integritie herein, he doth Declare, That he is so farre from conside∣ring any thing contained in those Papers or Wri∣tings, framed by the said Earle, and those Commis∣sioners with whom he Treated, as he doth absolutely dis-avow him therein, and hath given commande∣ment to the Lord Lieutenant and Counsell there, to proceed against the said Earle, as one, who either out of falsenesse, presumption, or folly, hath so ha∣zarded the blemishing of His Majesties Reputation with His good Subjects, and so impertinently fra∣med those Articles of his owne head, without the Consent, Privitie, or Directions of his Majesty, or the Lord Lieutenant, or any of his Counsell there. But true it is, that for the necessry preservation of his Majesties Protestant Subjects in Ireland (whose case was dayly represented unto him to be so despe∣rate) his Majestie had given Commission to the Lord Lieutenant to Treat, and conclude such a Peace there, as might be for the safetie of the Crowne, the preservation of the Protestant Religion, and no way dero∣gatory to His owne Honour and publique professions.
But, to the end His Majesties reall Intentions in this businesse of Ireland, may be the more clearly understood, and to give the more ample satisfacti∣on to both Houses of Parliament, and Com∣missioners of the Kingdome of Scotland, especially concerning His Majesties being engaged in any Peace or Agreement there; He doth desire, if the two Houses shall resolve to admit of His Majesties repaire to London, for a personall Treaty, as was formerly proposed, that speedie notice thereof be given to His Majestie, and a Passe or safe Conduct with a blank sent for a Messenger to be immediately dispatched into Ireland, to prevent any accident that may happen to hinder His Majesties Resolutions of leaving the Managing of the businesse of Ireland wholly to the Houses, and to make no Peace there without their consent: which, in case it shall please God to blesse His Endeavours in the Treaty with Successe, His Majestie doth hereby engage himselfe to doe. And for further Explanation of His Majesties Intentions in His former Messages, Hee doth now Declare, That if His personall repaire to London, as aforesaid, shalbe admitted, and a Peace thereon shall ensue, Hee will then leave the nomination of the Persons to be intrusted with the Militia whol∣ly to His two Houses, with such Power and Limi∣tations as are expressed in the Paper delivered by His Majesties Commissioners at Uxbridge, the 6. of February, 1644. for the terme of seven yeares, as hath beene desired; to begin immediately after the
Conclusion of the Peace, the disbanding of all Forces on both sides, and the dismantling of the Garrisons erected since these present troubles. So, as at the expiration of the time before men∣tioned, the Power of the said Militia shall intirely revert and remaine as before. And for their better Security, His Majestie (the Peace succeeding) will be content that pro hac vice, the two Houses shall no∣minate the Admirall, Officers of State, and Judg∣es, to hold their places during life, or quam diu se bene gesserint, which shall be best liked, to be ac∣comptable to none but to the King, & the two Hou∣ses of Parliament. As for the matter of Religion, His Majestie doth further Declare, That by the li∣bertie offered in His Message of the 15. present, for the Ease of their Consciences, who will not Communicate in the Service already established by Acts of Parliament in this Kingdome; He intends, that all other Prote∣stants, behaving themselves peaceably in and toward the Civill Government, shall have the free exercise of their Religion, according to their owne way. And for a totall removall of feares and iealousies, His Majestie is willing to agree; that upon the conclusion of Peace, there shall be a generall Act of Oblivion and free Pardon, passed by Acts of Parlia∣ment in both Kingdomes respectively: and least it should be imagined, that in the making of the Propositions, His Majesties Kingdome of Scotland, and His Subjects there, have beene forgotten or neglected, His Majestie declares, That what is herein mentioned touching the Militia, the naming of Offi∣cers
of State and Iudges, shall likewise extend to his Kingdome of Scotland. And now His Majestie having so fully and clearely expressed His intentions and desires, of making a Happie and well-grounded Peace: if any person shall decline that hap∣pinesse, by opposing of so apparent a way of attaining it; He will sufficiently demon∣strate to all the World, his Intention and Designe can be no other then the Totall Subversion and change of the Antient and Happy Government of this Kingdome, un∣der which the English Nation hath so long flourished. Given at the Court at Oxford, the 29. of Jan. 1645. For the Speaker of the House of Peeres pro tempore, to be communicated to the House of Commons at Westmin∣ster, and to the Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland. FINIS.
