C2573 R39035 18206875 107102
C R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon surmounted by a crown BY THE KING. ¶ A Proclamation Declaring certain Monies coyned in the Kingdome of Ireland to be currant in this Kingdome. WHEREAS the Lords, Justices, and Councell of Our Kingdome of Ireland, did publish in Our name, a Procla∣mation, the tenour whereof hereafter ensueth. viz. By the Lords, lustices, and Councell. IO. BORLACE. HEN. TITCHBORNE. WEE the Lords, Iustices, and Councell, having received His Majesties most gratious Letters of the 25. of May, 1643. under His Highnesse hand, and signature, the tenor whereof is as hereafter follow∣eth. viz. CHARLES R. RIght Trusty, and Right Wellbeloved Counsellors, we greet you well. We taking into Our Princely conside∣ration, that by reason of this most barbarous, and bloody Rebellion in Ireland our good Subjects there are reduced to that extream penury, that now (as their last help, and refuge) they are inforced, and desirous to have such little plate, as they have left them, to be coyned for their releefe, into some small peeces of Mony, that might passe currant in exchange both there, and in Our Kingdome of England, and that the quantity of Plate, or Bullion there so to be melted downe, and Coyned, is of so small, and inconsiderable value, that it is not worth the charge of erecting a Mint there, according to Our former intentions, which would likewise take up more time then their present, and pressing necessities will permit: We are therefore gratiously pleased for the reliefe of Our good Subjects there, to require, and authorize you, and doe hereby require, and authorize you, to issue forth one or more Commission or Commissions, under Our great Seale of that Our Realme, unto such Person or Per∣sons as you shall think fit, thereby authorizing him or them, to melt downe such Plate, Coyne, Bullion, or Silver, as shall be brought unto him or them, into small peeces, to the value of five shillings, halfe Crownes, twelve-pences, and sixepences, or of any lesse value, which severall small peeces they shall make of the same weight, va∣lue, and allay, as Our Monies now currant in England, of those values respectively, are; and shall stamp the same on the one side, with these letters (scilicet) C. R. for Carolus Rex, with a Crowne over those letters, and on the other side, with the values of the said severall peeces respectively, and the same so made and stamped, to redeli∣ver to the bringers of the Plate, Coyne, Bullion, or Silver, so melted downe. And we farther authorize you hereby, to make all such peeces, as shall be so made, to be currant by Proclamation there, We intending to make the same currant in this Our Kingdome; And that you appoynt such allowances unto the said Person, or Per∣sons for their so coyning of the said peeces, as you shall think convenient; and that you take of them good, and sufficient security for their true melting, making, and delivery of the said peeces, in weight, value, and allay, as good as our Monies of the like value now currant in England are, so that no fraud, or abuse be done to Our People herein. And for your so doing, these Our Letters shall be your sufficient warrant. Given under Our Signet at Our Court at GIFORD, the 25. of May. 1643. By His Majesties command.EDWARD NICHOLAS.
ANd whereas by His Majesties Commission, under the great Seale of this Kingdome, bearing date the se∣venth day of this Moneth, in the ninteenth yeare of His Majesties Raigne, Sir John Veale Knight, Peter Vandenhoven, and Gilbert Tonques Goldsmiths, are authorized to melt, or cause to be melted downe, such Plate, Coyne, Bullion, or Silver, as shall be brought unto them into small peeces, according to His Majesties said directions, and whereof an eight part is to be in Groats, three pences, and two pences. And whereas the said Sir Iohn Ʋeale, Peter Vandenhoven, and Gilbert Tonques, have entred into Recognizance of two thousand pounds sterling, for the true making of the said peeces of the same weight, value, and allay, as His Majesties monyes now currant in England of those values respectively are, and for the redelivery of such peeces unto the bringers of the Plate, Coyne, Bullion, or Silver, whereof the same shall be made, they first receiving for the coyn∣ing thereof, the summe of three shillings for every pound weight, every pound being three pound of sterling mony, according to the weight of the Tower of London so to be melted downe or coyned, and so after the same rate for a greater, or lesser proportion, and no more. Now we the Lords, Iustices, and Councell, accor∣ding to His Majesties good pleasure so to us signified as aforesaid, doe by this Prolamation in His Majesties name publish and declare that all such peeces as shall be by them (the said Sir John Veale, Peter Vandenhoven, and Gilbert Tonques) melted, or caused to be melted down, or coyned according to His Majesties said Letters, and Commission, do and shall presently after the publishing of this Proclamation be currant money of and in this Kingdome, and do and shall passe as currant money in all exchanges and payments as well of debts as for any Wares, Merchandizes or other Commodities whatsoever. And we require the Major, and Sheriffes of the City of Dublin to cause this Proclamation to be forthwith published, and proclaimed throughout this City and Sub∣urbs. Given at His Majesties Castle of Dublin the Eight of July, 1643. La. Dublin. Ormond. Roscomon. Edw. Brabazon. Ant. Midensis Cha. Lambert. I. Temple. Tho. Rotherham. Fr. Willoughby. Tho. Lucas. Iam. Ware. G. Wentworth. As in and by the said Proclamation may appeare. AND whereas Our pleasure and purpose was and is, that the said severall peeces of coyne, should be made to passe currant as well in this Our Kingdome of England, as in that of Ireland, We doe by this Our Proclamati∣on publish and Declare to all Our Subjects within this Our Kingdome of England, and Dominion of Wales, That all such peeces as already are or shall be coyned according to Our said Letters, and the Commission thereupon granted doe, and shall presently after the publishing of this Our Proclamation, be currant mony of and in this Our King∣dome of England, and Dominion of Wales, and doe, and shall passe as currant Mony in all exchanges and payments, as well of debts as for any Wares, Merchandizes, or other commodities whatsoever. And We doe hereby will, and re∣quire that this Our Proclamation, be forthwith published, and Proclaimed, throughout all Citties and places of this Our Kingdome of England and Dominion of Wales. Given at Our Court at OXFORD, this thirteenth day of October in the ninteenth yeare of Our Raigne. 1643. God save the King. Printed at Oxford by LEONARD LICHFIELD Printer to the University. 1643.
