C3436 15566133 103853
By the King. A PROCLAMATION For the Apprehending certain Persons therein Named, Accused of High Treason. CHARLES R. WHereas it appeareth by Information upon Oath, That Francis Evers, alias Ewrie, alias Ireland, late of Tixall in the County of Stafford, John Gaven, late of Wolverhampton in the same County,  Vavasor, alias Gifford, late of Boscobell in the same County, Edward Levison, late of Wilnott in the same County (being all Iesuits) and also  Broadstreet, late of Horecross in the same County (a Popish Priest) are guilty of the late Damnable and Treasonable Plot for destruction of the Kings Royal Person, the Subversion of His Government, and for the Extirpation of the True Protestant Religion Established by Law within this Kingdom; The Kings most Excellent Majesty (with Advice of His Privy Council) doth by this His Royal Proclamation straitly Charge and Command all and every Iustices of the Peace, Sheriffs, Mayors, Constables, and other His Majesties Officers and Loyal Subjects what∣soever, That they do use their utmost and most effectual endeavour for the Apprehending and Securing of the said Offenders, and of every of them, and after such their Apprehension, they do with all speéd and care, bring them and every of them unto, and before one of His Majesties Principal Secretaries of State, or the Chief Iustice of His Majesties Court of Kings Bench, to be by them, or one of them, Examined, and Committed to safe Custody, in order to their Trial. And His Majesty doth hereby straitly Forbid and Prohibit any of His Subjects from Concealing, Sheltering, Relieving, or Receiving any of the said Offenders, under Peril of being themselves proceeded against (as by Law they may) for the Crime of High Treason. And for the better Encouragement of such as shall do their Duty herein, His Majesty doth hereby Graciously promise to any who shall Discover and Apprehend the said Evers, the sum of One hundred pounds; and to any who shall Discover and Apprehend any other of the said Offenders, the Reward of Fifty pounds; which said respective Sums shall be immediately respectively paid down to the person or persons who shall Apprehend the said Evers, or any other of the Offenders aforesaid, and shall bring, or cause to be brought, such of them before either of His Majesties said Principal Secretaries, or the said Chief Iustice. Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Fifteenth day of January 1678/9;. In the Thirtieth year of Our Reign. God save the King. LONDON, Printed by John Bill, Christopher Barker, Thomas Newcomb, and Henry Hills, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1678/9;.
