C457 11182663 46579
Canterburies Conscience convicted: O R, His dangerous projects, and evill intents, tending to the subversion of Re∣ligion detected: as also some particulars of those Treasons whereof he is now attainted, lying prisoner in the Tower this present. 1641. To the tune of All ye that cry O hone, O hone: or, The wandring Souldier. AS by faire Londons Tower I walkt, I heard, a Prisoner make reat moane; And thus unto himselfe he talkt, Good God from me all ioyes are gone. I lookt about and there I found Lord Canterbury in distresse, With folded armes he trac'd the ground, And these sad words he did expresse. O England England I confesse, That an ill Shepheard I have béene, I ought to bring thée in distresse, Lord Iesus Christ forgive my sin. Twas I that lately made a way For Popish wolves to suck thy blood, Twas I that should have béene thy stay, But ever did more harme then good. Twas I that mov'd the King of late To take up armes against the Scots, I have offended King and State, But the Parliament found out my plots. And now I find an honest heart Is better then a cunning tongue, Such honest men as I did thwart, I now repent I did them wrong. My wisedome and my schollership Advanced me to high renowne, But justice gave me such a trip, That justly brought my honour downe. Ambitious thoughts my minde did sway, As I did sway faire Englands lawes, Which made the people daily say I favour'd not an honest cause. Like Icharus I sored high. And with the wings of fame I slew, But in the twinckling of an eye, Mine honors bid me all adiew. Greatnesse with goodnesse seldome méet, He is not alwaies good that's great: Where wit and grace each other gréet, That makes a gentleman compleat.
The second part To the same tune. HOw oft have I the lawes abus'd, My mighty power who durst withstand, The innocent was still accus'd, I had the law at my command. Each day by day I shew'd my spite, And fill'd the commons hearts with woe, And whether it was wrong or right, If I said I, it must be so. I threatned the Iudges still, My very lookes kept them in awe, Because that I would have my will, Against all reason right and law. I rul'd the law, the law not me, In my high inquisition Court, And there I usd such cruelty, Which grieves me now for to report. Now justice knowes what England ayles, She stands to doe faire England right, She weighes my actions in her scales, And then she finds my grace too light. Had I but so much gracious bin, According to my honored place. I had béen cleare from many a sin, Which lately brought me to disgrace. My power was so mighty growne, As if it would oretop the State, But now of late tis overthrowne, I bought it at too deare a rate. I licenst bookes pernitions were, Ladders to climbe to Popery, Which I my selfe esteemed deare, My bad intents was knowne hereby. I lived in this glorious vaine, Till England was almost undone. Untill the Commons did complaine, And said I was the Popes owne sonne. But now I live to sée the day Where I so much deserve your hate, I dare not now for pitty pray, Because I find it is too late. England forgive thy shepheard now, That fed the wolves and starv'd the lam, Forst them at Altars for to bow, The Custome of the Popish ramme. I well remember what I did To put the French and Dutch Churc A great mans fault may long lie hid, Till justice upon him doe frowne. I know good Protestants they are Good subjects to the King likewise Yet I ill will to them did beare And ever more did them despise. That Cardinall Wolsey by nam, Did build his honor on the sand, And brought himselfe at length to shame, That once had all at his command. I sometimes was almost as great, I only lackt a hat and staffe. But now I'me fallen from my seat, And every child at me doth laugh. So farewell world and glorious name, Vaine-glorious name without desert: Farewell vaine pompe and idle fame, Now I from you am forst to part.
