C5958 P198 11882944 50340
Numb. 2. A Continuation of News From that part of His Majesties Fleet That now lies at HIGH-LAKE near CHESTER: Giving an Impartial Account of all considerable Occurrences since its leaving Harwich, to this present time. Licensed, Aug. 20. 1689. J. F. From on Board the Hannibal, Aug. 14. 1689. SIR, IN continuance of my Advice, these are to in∣form you, That on Saturday the 3d of August, we weighed at three in the morning, and stood out from Ousely Bay, the Wind westerly. About Ten we got into the Downs; and discovered on to the Leeward, the High-Land of France, and the Good∣win. About Two in the afternoon we came to an Anchor before Deal, where we discovered off of the Foreland two small Vessels, which appear'd to be some that went before, and promis'd to meet us in Dover Road. The Captain of one of them came aboard about Three, and brought us News that a little Dutch Pri∣vateer had that same week brought Eleven Prizes into this place; some pretended Hamburgers, one Irish, but all freighted with French Goods. About Five the Purser went ashore for fresh pro∣visions. The Captain intended to sail again the same night for Dover, and toward the Isle of Wight: He fired the Gun accordingly, preparing to stand away, several of the Fleet being already under sail. But while we staid for the Purser, the Wind chopt about more to the westerly; on which he chang'd his Resolution, and moor'd in Deal Road. Saturday the 4th. the Wind continued still at the same points, or rather came about more southerly: So we were forc'd to stay here all day. After Evening Service, came up the brave Captain Pottinger, in his little Fantau, which we so long want∣ed; who came aboard us, and gave us an account that the Dragon Sloop lies yet about Gravesend or the Hope, and stays for Orders. Here we first heard the News that the Toulon Squa∣dron of French Men of War was got into Brest. And the pretty passage of the great Galeon, one of the richest Laden of all the Spanish Fleet, then homeward bound, which being separated from the rest, put into a little Creek just at that Instant that the French went by; and being just got in, discovered them; on which, you'll believe, she lay very close, till they all past by without seeing her, and so the prey got out of their clutches, and they got safe into their own Harbour. Monday morning August 5. at Two a Clock, we had a fair Easterly Wind came up, with which we set sail from the Downs. We hear here we are design'd, after we get to our Port at High-Lake by Chester, for Loughfoyl and Lon∣don Derry; whence I hope to give you an account of more material passages, our Men being all as resolv'd and chearful as so good a Cause can make 'em. August 14. High-Lake near Chester. Sir, You had heard sooner from me according to promise, but that we toucht no where after we left Deal, till we came to an Anchor at our Port of High-Lake, and the Boat went away before I had finished my last; so you've now two together. August 5. As I told you in my last, we set sail from the Downs about Two in the morning, but after Din∣ner, the Wind slackning, we were almost becalm'd, and so came to an Anchor in Dover Road over against Dover Castle. Between 3 and 4 we saw a Gale coming; so weigh'd again, and by 8 in the morning August 6. rais'd the Isle of Wight. About the same time we saw a Sail toward the Coast of France, and sent off the Navy Yacht, one of our Hoys, and the Fantau to speak with her, who about 10 came up with her, and found her an Ostender, but loaden from Bourdeaux for Bruges with French Wines & Brandy: They had been taken some days before off of the Lands end by a Dutch Privateer, who had put Four or Five of their Men aboard her. However, not knowing but 'twas a trick to get from us, we kept 'em till we came over against Plymouth, where meeting the
Privateer who took 'em, and they confirming what had before been said, we turn'd her off for Plymouth, having before taken her in a Tow; but this happen∣ed not till Friday August the 9th. Wednesday August 7. We rais'd the Beak of Port∣land, and the Shores of Dortsetshire. Thursday morning. August 8. About 4 in the morning we saw two Sail to the Leeward and sus∣pected 'em French-men, they still keeping off, and having no Colours out. About 7 Captain Pottinger, and Captain Pet. of the Navy Yacht came aboard, having the same apprehensions. At 8 we spread our Colours on our Ancient Staff, and they not answering with theirs, we concluded without more adoe they were Enemies. We saw they were men of War, and Stout Ships so prepared for an engagement in earnest. We gave the signal, and the Commanders came a∣board. We stay'd our Cabins, cut down our Ham∣macks, heav'd Chests over board, and the Seamen made all ready with the greatest briskness and courage imaginable. And after having cleared our Ship, shot∣ted all our Guns, nail'd down our Hatches, and done what's usual in such cases, bore up towards some of our Fleet, who were run a head of us, and being with∣out defence, would soon fall into the Enemies mouth. We hast just got up our small Arms, and every man to his Quarter, bearing away to 'em as fast as all the Sail we could make wou'd carry us when they both lowr'd their Top-Sails, and put out Orange Colours on which our Seamen were all very Melancholy having lost uch a fair occasion of trying their valour, when they ought they were now sure of it beyond disap∣pointnt. This happened about seven or eighth Leagurd to the Westward of Portland. The next morning we discovered another Sail a great way stern of us, after which we sent two of our Catches▪ but she out-sail'd 'em both, came under our Lee, and lowr'd her Top-Sail, but did not care to speak with us▪ On which we fir'd a Gun, and brought her under our Stern, with Trumpets sounding and Drums beatin  Which we answered with what Mu∣sick we had when they came up with us, they appear∣ed to be a D Privateer, with fourteen Guns, and six Petereero d eighty two men. They gave us three Guns and a cheer which we returned, and so parted they told us y were bound for the Sea, which was all the acco we could get of 'em. Saturday orning. August 10. One of our Catches took a small Boat bound from France to Galloway in Ireland, loaden with Salt. He had been taken by the same Flushinger we met on Thursday, who had taken the first, who had also some men aboard her. There were in her English, Dutch, and Irish. The Englishman (I think her Master) told us that he came from before Brest some few days past, where he saw the French Fleet ready to leave it, about twenty already being got out of the Harbour: And say they were about seventy Sail. We let him go again, and doubled▪ the Lizzard point, and got into Mountsbay, and discovered the Mount about twelve at Noon. In the afternoon as well as all the day before we heard several Broad-sides, and a great many hundred Guns to the Coast of France. About four a Clock we heard a great blow the same way, and immediately after saw a huge Pile of smoak rise from the place where we heard the blow. This was seen by most of our Fleet, and is concluded some Ship or other blown up. Sunday and Monday we made the best of our way towards our Port, with fair Winds, and fine Weather. Monday in the afternoon, about 3 a Clock, we saw the Welch Land, and two strange Ships ahead of us; on which we tackt, for the rest of our Fleet, and to get the Weathergage. About 6 we came up with 'em, and found 'em a Yacht and a Smack, who confirm'd the happy News we heard from Weymouth, of the Relief of Derry: They also told that Admiral Herbert and our Fleet, about Eighty Sail, were of off the old Head of Kingsale, whence they lately came, and were now again going to 'em. In the evening we came up with some little Islands; and about 12 at night past the Bishop and his Clerks, without any of all those Bugbears Hickeringall talks of. We found 'em very peaceable Rocks; they let us all go by without touching us, though had we had a fancy to try hard-heads with 'em, 'tis ten to one we had got the worst on 't. Thursday we saw Bardley Island, and the main Land of Wales, and a parcel of Mountains, one would think high enough to break the Goats necks that clamber to the tops of 'em. In the evening we came up with Anglesey, whither in the night most of our Fleet stole away from us, and got to an Anchor in Beaumarys Bay. Wednesday 14. We took a Pilot on board, got round the Sand-bank, and came to an Anchor in our Port of High-Lake. In working our Ship about to get her into the Harbour, the Wind being somewhat against us, one of our Men was beaten against the sides of the Ship with a Rope, and taken up for dead, but he recovered, and is like to do well; all the misfortunes we yet met with in our Voyage. They tell us here that Duke Schomberg went off for Ireland with a fair wind, on Munday last, with about 13000 men, and the rest we find Shipping to follow him as fast as possible. There is now with us at High∣lake the Dartmouth Frigot, which fired against Kilmore, while relief went into Derry, there is upon the shore just ready to embark for Ireland my Lord Lucas his Regiment, and other Soldiers. Advertisement. ☞ The Tragedies of Sin contemplated in the ruine of the Angels &c. [by Stephen Jay Rector of Chinner] in the County of Oxon., ☞ There is also now (in a large octavo) publisht The Bloody-Assizes or A compleat History of the Lives, Actions, Tryals, Suf∣ferings, Speeches, Deaths and Characters of all those Excellent persons who fell in the West of England and elsewhere from the Death of Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey to this present time; with the Pictures of several of the chief of them in Copper Plates. To which is added the Life, Death and Character of George Lord Jefferies [Written by a person of great learning and piety. Print∣ed by the order of several of their Relations, for John Dunton at the black Raven in the Poultrey. London, Printed for Iohn Dunton at the Black Raven in the Poultrey. 1689.
