E445A 15615483 104162
AN ELEGY, [SACRED] To the Immortall MEMORY of that most Renowned, Religious, Prudent, and Victorious Commander, HENRY IRETON, Late Lord Deputy of IRELAND, &c. There let the Thunder rowle then! And the Ayre In startling summons to the World, declare Heavn's righteous wrath! And be the growing Fate Of Grief more great, 'cause inarticulate! 'Twas not unknown, his early thoughts did take So much of glory, that he kept awake Honour and Justice, and revived Fame Bed-rid, and speechIess but for IRETONS Name; 'Twas He, whose courage warm'd her, when he stood The English Shield, and through a crimson Flood To Freedom march'd; when Death was onely seen In showrs of Bullets to come storming in, Untaught to cease, till Victory did rest Her weary wings upon his plumed Crest, The strength and safety to this State he brought, The many Townes he won, the Fields he fought Shall best express him, and sound alwayes forth The Height and Heat of his unequall'd Worth, And, making good his Tears with salter Brine, The fiercer Shanon with the Thames shall joyne: Ireland by wary Mariners eschew'd As Saints do Altars drench'd in humane bloud, By Him finds new Observance, and His Hand Began the way, to expiate that Land; So sure were all the Counsailes which he gave, As none but IRETON could sad IRELAND save, And yet the Land so wild, the Ayre so ill, That nought but IRELAND could our IRETON kill. What Art can reach his Verue, to set down With how much Courage he put off the Gown To unsheath his sword, when, like a Lion, Hee Fought to restore the English LIBERTIE? And still though active, yet no  Fate Could tax his Sword as undeliberate; For so discreet a Valour did command His Warres, that, He being present, Fate might stand, Or pass unknown, and we almost might be Secure, to say, That Providence was He; But Truth and safe Divinitie hath taught To give a check to th profaner thought; For GOD was alwayes with him, He aright, Did gidde his Heart, and taught his Hands to fight, So that in all his Warres there did appeare No fight of wrong, nor any sense of Feare; But in a perfect harmony 'twas showne, The Saint and Souldier could be both in one; And his brave Army did so strictly live, After the great Examples he did give, That forreign Nations might with wonder see How well Religion did with Armes agree; And now those Warres expiring, and the high And joyfull sound of Union drawing nigh, After he Truth and Freedom did restore To Earth, He, finding he could do no more, To Heav'n ascended: where He first is seen Next to his God, an armed Cherubin. HIS EPITAPH. Why weep you here? and take this Stone to be In vain the Prison of Eternitie? Let your translated Pietie and Love, Look high and joyfull on the roomes above, In those great IRETON lives, the Heav'ns enshrine, And court his glorious soul, which now doth shine More bright by Death: Yet weep! for yet this Tombe Holds Natures chiefest Treasurer: would you come, And all Perfections in one Volume see, Here every Dust would make a Historie, Which he that looks on, and not spares a groan, Adds but more marble to His Buriall-Stone. FINIS. LONDON, Printed by J.C. and T.W. 1652. 30.
