E725 99827017 31429
Encouragements to Builders and Planters OF LITTLE YARMOUTH. What Priviledges the Town of Little Yarmouth hath formerly enjoyed. THe Town of Little Yarmouth hath formerly enjoyed the priviledges of lading and unlading Herrings, and other Merchandize, and of ex∣porting and importing Goods, of all sorts, in Vessels of their own, for many years formerly; whereby it came to be in a very flourishing con∣dition. From what cause it is faln into Decay. The Town of Great Yarmouth having by their much greater power procured several Grants and Letters-Patents from the Kings and Queens of this Nation, upon many plausible and specious pretences, whereby they appropriated to themselves, and those who are Free-men of Great Yarmouth, the Monopoly of lading and unlading all sorts of Merchandize within seven miles of Great Yarmouth, whereby the Town of Little Yarmouth were necessitated to forsake their habitations for want of imploy∣ment; whereby the said Town in a short time fell into decay, and became almost for∣saken by the Inhabitants. By what Authority the Town of Little Yarmouth hath its former Rights and Pri∣viledges restored and enlarged. The Town of Little Yarmouth is not only incorporated with the Town of Great Yarmouth, to partake and enjoy equal Priviledges with them, by an Act of Parliament made in the sixteenth and seventeenth year of the Reign of our Soveraign Lord King Charles the Second, Entituled, An Act for setling of differences between the Towns of Great and Little Yarmouth, touching the lading and unlading Herrings, and other Mer∣chandize; but also by Letters-Patents from the King, bearing date the tenth of Fe∣bruary, in the twentieth year of this present King: and hath as well by the said Act, as Letters-Patents, this priviledge above any other Corporation in England, that the Inhabitants of this place, from their first habitation, are intituled to all the privi∣ledges of it, as much as if they had purchased their Freedome, for which in Great Yarmouth men pay thirty, forty, fifty pounds, or had served an Apprenticeship. The manner of the Scituation of Great Yarmouth, and of its Trade and Buildings. Within a mile on the East of the Town, lies the Main Ocean; on the North-west is the River called Brayden, where three Rivers (Wavenee, which parts the Counties of Norfolk and Suffolk; Yare, which runs through the City of Norwi the  which comes from the North-parts of Norfolk) meet; from whence this River falls East and by South; and before it runs into the Sea, continues its course on the Key of Yarmouth. By these three Rivers to the Landward, all sorts of the growths and Manufactures of these Countries are with great ease and little charge brought to Yar∣mouth: And up these streams, the Town of Yarmouth with like ease and small charge, furnishes those Countries with all sorts of Forreign and Domestick Commodities; and this done with much facility, by reason the Flux of the Sea doth make the Current into the Country, almost equal with the Current out of the Country. As the Town is naturally seated with these advantages for the Trade of these Countries above any other of the Eastern Coast, so it lies in the same Latitude as Amsterdam; and by consequence, more convenient then any other Town on the Ea∣stern Coast of England, for the trade of the Ʋnited Netherlands, and Flanders; and almost equal with Hull and Newcastle, for the trade of Hambrough, the Haunce-Towns, the Baltick and Norway. It is moreover inriched above any Town in Eng∣land, or perhaps in the world, with a yearly Revenue of the Fishing-trade; which if it were mannaged and improved to the best advantage, might equallize, if not be su∣periour to the Dutch Fishing-trade. But this for many years, by reason of this Towns appropriating this trade to a few hands, hath both rendred this trade useless to the rest of this Nation, besides the Free-men of Yarmouth, who have not Vessels enough to maintain the same; but hath also given the Dutch an opportunity of be∣ing the greatest gainers by it, who have for many years last past brought over their Busses, and other Fishing Vessels, and have taken the Herrings on this Coast, and brought the same into Yarmouth, and sold the same to them for ready money; which money might as well have been got by our selves, and kept at home. Though this place be thus naturally and advantagiously seated for trade, both a∣broad and at home, yet it is no way conveniently built for it: for the back-part thereof is so narrowly built in Lanes, or Rows, as no access can be made to it but by Barrows, used no where in England but in this place, and for this reason only: besides, the houses are built so low, as also being streightned for Ware-house-room, they cannot receive such quantities of Merchandize as their trades are capable of. And though the houses to the Key are fair and well built, yet they are not of suffici∣ent capacity to entertain the fourth part of such Merchants as might trade upon the account of this Harbour; neither have they the conveniencies of fresh water. Notwithstanding which, by reason of the advantages aforesaid, they have and do flourish and prosper in trade above any other Town in England, but London and Bri∣stow; which they are able to do upon their own account, without any dependency of any other place. The Scituation of Little Yarmouth. The Town of Little Yarmouth lies South and by West of Great Yarmouth, on Suffolk side, upon the same River, opposite to the said Town; and so is equally capable of all Forreign and Domestick trade, as Great Yarmouth; and capable of a farther improve∣ment in these following particulars. 1. That the building may be built more commodious and convenient for trade. 2. Secondly, These buildings may be continued further upon that River, then they can be in Great Yarmouth side. 3. The Channel runs deeper on this side then it doth on the other. 4. It hath the conveniency of fresh water. 5. The Priviledges are greater then the Town of Great Yarmouth: for if any Pro∣prietor in any house already built, or to be built, shall be willing to let out his house to any under-Tenant, he shall sooner have a Chapman for his house then those of Great Yarmouth side; such Tenant being by his Tenure a Free-man of Great Yar∣mouth, as well as Little Yarmouth. This Town to be built is contrived with all imaginable conveniencies as to the Key, for lading and unlading Merchandize, convenient Warehouse-room, Storehou∣ses and Cellerage, or any other conveniences whatsoever. The Proprietors of the said grounds of Little Yarmouth, do hereby publish and declare these Proposals follow∣ing, to such as shall accept thereof in convenient time. Proposals as to the houses which front the Key, and their conveniencies. THat such Undertakers may have from twenty to eighty foot front to the Key, or more, or less, as will suit his or their occasions, the Key being to be fifty foot wide; such Undertakers paying for every foot which he hath front, two shillings six pence per foot per annum, every foot front having one hundred foot deep: at which rate, a house twenty foot front, and a hundred foot deep, amounts unto two pound ten shillings per annum; and so in proportion, be the same more or less in front, on which he is to build a house suitable to the place, and uniform, according to the example of the houses there a building. And for his or their further direction, he shall, before he proceed in his building, have a printed paper directing him therein. There is no further Obligation on the Undertaker, then his building even with his Neighbours in the front, and no higher: he may build backward as he pleases. These Undertakers also have the advantage of the Key of fifty foot wide, only for Wharfing and repairing the same, where they may have liberty to lay their goods. Materials in this place for building are very reasonable: as, Brick eleven shillings or twelve shillings a thousand; Lyme made just upon the place; Oaken Timber brought down by the three Rivers at reasonable rates; Firr-timber and Deal very reasonable, being just against Denmark and Holland, Ships going daily from this Harbour thither. Any person by building according to the are that houses yield in the Town of Yarmouth, may have for every hundred pounds he shall expend, twelve or thirteen pounds in the hundred, besides his conveniencies and priviledges. The buildings here designed, and suitable to the place, are to be two Stories and a half high, besides Cellars: so one hundred, or one hundred and twenty pounds, will build an indifferent large and convenient habitation. The Proprietors in the ground will Lease out the same for the term of one hun∣dred and forty years, or for ninety nine years, determinable upon the death of any five persons as such Undertakers shall nominate. Proposals for Undertakers that build in the street next the Key, to be called New-street. The houses, whose back-sides joyn with the back-sides fronting the Key, are to have what front the Undertaker will, and one hundred foot in depth allowed to each foot front, the front to be built as the front next the Key; for which each Un∣dertaker is to pay two shillings per annum for every foot which he hath in the front, and a hundred foot in depth. It is contrived and proposed, that every eighty, or one hundred foot front, shall have a free Key belonging to those which build in this Street, as also a back-Row, or Lane, in every eighty or one hundred foot, which is to be ten foot wide; out of which Lane they may discharge their carriages of Mer∣chandize into their Warehouses, so that their houses need not to be troubled there∣with: by which means the greatest part of the Town will be as commodious, as if it were all to be built on the Key. The opposite buildings which are to front these on the other side, are to be built in this manner following: The Street to be thirty eight foot wide, and to be built as the other side. Those houses which have the same dimensions in front and depth, are to pay twenty pence per annum for every foot front, and a hundred foot deep. The Proprietors in the ground are willing to erect a convenient Market and Chap∣pel in the old place, at their own proper costs and charges. The place to be built so far as fronts the Town of Great Yarmouth to the Key, s near a mile in length, and near a quarter in depth. This place is convenient for Merchants of all sorts, Coopers, Fisher-men, Ship-Carpenters, Firkin-makers, Ship-Chandlers, Sail-makers, Curers of Red-Herrings, Curers of White-Herrings, Coal and Woodmongers, Pulley-makers, Cable-makers, Smiths, or any other Trades which do particularly belong to Navigation; as also for Drapers, Mercers, Grocers, and other Retailers, &c. Those persons who would be Undertakers, are to repair to Mr. Stephen Primatt, late of Cliffords-Inne, but removed from thence to a Ground-Chamber, at the second Stone-steps in Figg-tree-Court in the Inner Temple, who is authorized by the Proprie∣tors to draw their Conveyances with such suitable Covenants as are requisite: Or may give in a particular of their desires to Thomas Corry Esquire, or Mr. Austin Bridges Alderman, at their houses in the City of Norwich; or to Mr. Petitt, at the Griffen in Little Yarmouth; or to Mr. Joseph Waller in the New-brand Roe in Great Yarm Merchant, who will take an accompt, and return an answer thereof with consent speed. London, Printed for Samuel Speed at the Rain-bow in Fleet-street, 1668.
